Ah, it's good to see you, citizen! Oh yes, I know who you are. You've become something of a legend in these parts! 
Ha! I knew they couldn't stand up to us! 
Praise Akatosh! Praise the Nine! I'm Arentus Falvius, primate of Talos, High Priest of Bruma Chapel. 
I understand the Fighters Guild is hiring new members. Not bad work for some folks. 
Have you ever met anyone who got rich betting on the Arena? Didn't think so. 
Alright. I'll try to get out of here and let the Captain know what's going on. 
You're not getting in because you're not blessed by Sheogorath. You can try to get the keys. My Lord had them sewn into my child's body.  
What's this prisoner doing here? This cell is supposed to be off-limits. 
It's so good to see you again. I've spent a good deal of time speaking with Gilen and Grey-Throat. They agree that the Order should live on. 
What was it called again? Something... root. Agh. Sorry, I can't remember. I'm afraid unusual plants are not my area of expertise. 
Sure. Some folks here think horses are for riding. Then again, some of us are Orcs. Snak gra-Bura, she prefers eating stew to riding horses.  
Training? Oh, I'm afraid that's not my area of expertise. I'm very focused on wines right now, you see. 
You come speak with me, yet you do not bear Scar-Tail's heart. Please, you must slay that traitorous snake so Ocheeva and I can find peace! 
There is, of course, no chest of gold. The guests will find no key. After you arrive, the doors will be locked behind you, as everyone expects.  
We have had some livestock die recently, but not all of them, which is a relief. 
Ah... an excellent read, though it's been a while since I've read it myself. Let me know how you like it. 
Remember to keep the blindfold on. Your eyes must only be used to read the scrolls. 
In fact, the guests believe the key to the manor is inside the chest, and only by satisfying their greed will they be allowed to leave. Poor fools. 
You're in charge now. 
Nelrene caved in, finally, but we'll need something more to get to the bottom of this. Let's see if Ma'zaddha provides us with more evidence. 
No one tangles with Kurdan... remember that. 
Have you found anything interesting in the ruins? 
No! I will not betray him! I will not tell you! 
Martin showed himself a true son of the Dragon Blood. But where does that leave us, with no Emperor to serve? 
I heard there's an ancient ruin that lures adventurers into it, then it kills them. It's old, so those walls can't be safe. 
You must return any stolen items. I regret that I have no choice but to escort you to the dungeon, as you are short of the required reparations. 
I hope your feet are faster than your wits. 
Ha! They parade around in their fancy clothes and their expensive perfumes. What do they know? All fluff and no fiber. That's what I say. 
The time of Cleansing is almost here! 
If you want to make a name for yourself as a mage, you simply must join the guild. Talk to Falcar if you're interested. 
Oh my yes, I feel especially delighted this evening! Perhaps it's time I recited my latest soliloquy. 
If you want to sneak up on one of those Zealots, wear one of their robes. Fools them every time. 
Take this charm scroll. With it, you should find Varon more receptive to questioning. Don't come back without that staff. 
Syl's really suspicious of other people. I bet she's the one with something to hide. 
I'm Eilonwy. I'm only a conjurer, but Orintur is a full Magician. Isn't he wonderful? 
Any sign of Erthor lately? 
Just follow the Captain's orders. 
Martin is right. Declaring oneself Emperor is a delicate matter. In this case, however, I do not think there should be any dispute. 
Let me guess, it was Ocheeva, right? No, wait. Teinaava. Yes, he put you up to this, didn't he. Ocheeva was always too busy to even be bothered. 
This is one of our best Bay horses. Take good care of him. 
Theranis is dead? I grieve for him. But at least you have the book. The Gray Fox has sought this book for many years. 
Of course not. 
Soldiers of Cyrodiil! Do you stand with me? 
Ten of the evening watch, and all's well. Everything okay, ma'am?  
But, where are they? Please, bring me the sword and armor. The debtors aren't giving me much time. 
Quickly, quickly! There's no time! 
Had we brought a City Watch contingent, we might have taken the sigil stone with minimal losses. Instead, Farwil wanted to prove his point. 
One thing that is not in dispute is that the Tree has survived for eons and its branches are highly valued as components of magical artifacts. 
Look at this! How wonderful! 
He has failed to consider the risks of his plan. If the Mazken have prepared an ambush along that route, we would be slaughtered. 
The bastards! There was no battle. Azani must have made a deal with the Blackwood Company. My guess is that they paid him off.  
You should speak to Seridur first. He has your reward. 
Well, where is he? 
Prior Dreth has tasked me to pray for Vitharn's safety. 
I have received recommendations from all the local guild halls in Cyrodiil. You have done well for yourself. You may now enter the University. 
Good evening, sir. 
Boethia has opened a portal for you. Consider yourself lucky. You have the chance to die in Boethia's service. 
I have no more jobs for a thief of your skill. You have no need of the Doyen to provide you work. 
If Ma'zaddha has indeed been consulting with Nelrene of her Ladyship's guard, that would provide us with some excellent leverage. 
I'll feed on your entrails for dinner! 
Safe journey, milord. 
State your business. Cylarne is holy ground, unfit for mortals. 
You'll uplift the poor, suffering folk of Dementia with the Flame, then? 
I can get you started by telling you where the Ogres live. The rest is up to you. 
As such, it requires a vessel that has witnessed dark secrets. Ciirta has seen things with her eyes that no mortal has. 
She will suffer greatly at the hands of Lord Sheogorath. 
Do this for me, and I'll reward you with another one of my curios I picked up a few years ago... a valuable ring. Are you ready? 
Talk to Jensine. She can help you better than I can. 
Get the book and let's go. 
Your business with Vaermina is complete. Tremble should she visit you in your dreams. 
There's a wonderful room available. It's the best I have, and you can use it for the night for a mere 25 gold. Interested? 
And if I can do anything for you, I'd be happy to! Someday, maybe you could return the favor! 
You made it work? 
They must not pass! 
Do that, and you will receive your share of this Sanctuary's weekly earnings. 
Fine. But you better not take too long. I want that axe, and I want it now. 
What is it? You're supposed to find Maglir. 
You walk in the shadow of the Corrupter. Why do you come to this place? 
Get back here, you cowards! Something's not right.... 
Ironically, Shinji himself was killed, shortly after the Arena was completed. Even he could not survive the Thirty-Year Siege of Orsinium. 
Move along, friend. 
So, Martin wants you to recover the Armor of Tiber Septim? I wish there was another way. 
Certainly! Here you are. A nice mead will relax you. 
Good day, milord. 
Thank you for coming. I apologize for summoning you. The blame is mine. 
All right. I'm ready; keep your eyes peeled. They could come out at any moment. 
It is by the order of the Madgod. The residents don't like it, though. 
The... the lady Syl has fallen? Can this be? 
This is my ship, you see. The Serpent's Wake. I hired the crew to sail to Summerset Isle to retrieve a family heirloom, my mother's crystal ball. 
Although we can't go back and undo what's been done, I feel justice has been served, and Bradon's soul may rest with ease. 
Too bad. You won't find a better Chestnut horse anywhere in Cyrodill. 
What a horrible fate. I cannot imagine how they could do that to him. So many lives lost... 
It's so sad. Salomon was to compose a symphony for Uriel Septim, to be performed for the whole city in the Arena. 
Is something wrong with Luciana Galena? She rarely leaves home. 
But I never doubted you, my friend. Emperor Uriel, he had the vision of the Dragonborn. He saw something in you. And he was right. 
Morrowind is still living in the Second Era. I can't believe how they treat Khajiit and Argonians. Here, we are Imperial citizens, nothing less. 
Look! Keys! One of them must open the gate! We're rich! 
Amantius Allectus? I thought you said Amantus Leckis. Sorry. Never heard of him. 
Perhaps in the future, you can be trusted enough to deal with more serious matters. 
I've heard they hate the water. It certainly doesn't help them any. 
What is it you want? Come for a job? 
I offer no excuses, sire. But my life is yours. No assassin will take you while I draw breath. 
Did you tell the Count about Black Brugo? 
All right, but don't tarry too long. Until we receive the Night Mother's guidance, the Dark Brotherhood will remain in disarray. 
Remember, do not shed innocent blood. However, there is no bloodprice for slaying the stone's guardians, human or inhuman. 
You can count on the presence of the Golden Saints to defend his impressive store of Greenmote. 
The armies are restored, you say? My, what a smart little thing you are! 
The Amulet of Kings must get to Jauffre at Weynon Priory. He'll know what to do with it. 
The Heartlands and Nibenean Valley are the agricultural breadbaskets of Cyrodiil. 
It's good of you to say so. 
Well, well, if it isn't the Spellslinger! How's our new Grand Champion, huh? You ready to make me some money? Ha ha ha ha ha!  Ahem... 
But it doesn't matter anymore. The only thing that matters now is the Wellspring. We must reach it at once! 
Just looking at you reminds me of... Him. Why has He forsaken us? 
Good. It's always the settlements that adventurers get to first. 
By giving you this choice -- gift or battle -- I discharge my debt to you. 
As promised, I owe you a reward for your efforts. I present you with my first batch of Famous Potato Bread! More valuable than gold! Enjoy! 
Still, the architectural detail is distinctive enough, it may still be recognizable. 
Maybe he was busy looking for the chest of gold. Or maybe he was right next to the victim, with his hand on the hilt of a dagger. Think about it. 
With the whole Realm in jeopardy, my days of work may be at an end. How truly sad. 
Old Tamriel still has some fight left in her! 
Talking to yourself is not a sign of mental illness. It's not. 
My research shows there is likely a shrine in these caves. I'll need you to accompany me to the shrine, handle any... difficulties. 
The Resonator has been reactivated, and the Isles are no longer open to invasion. Arden-Sul works in mysterious ways. 
Greetings, clan-mate. 
Everything is gone. What a shame.  
Who did I lose to? Who is my great enemy? Well, don't laugh... it's a bunch of damn fish. 
The mighty Gatekeeper has fallen. Fallen like my heart on a cold winter's day. 
Back to work for poor old Orgnolf. 
If you're looking to join the guild, talk to Jeanne Frasoric. If nothing else, it means access to better services than most people enjoy. 
Meat with the desire to consume like Fire.... 
It was perfect for keeping lookouts warm on cold nights and helping them see better in the dark. Clever, eh? 
I knew you wouldn't be able to resist. Your target is a High Elf named Faelian. He lives somewhere in the Imperial City, and fancies long walks.  
Time to relax. 
Knick-knacks and bric-a-brac, once you go you're sure to go back. 
The two nearest are Timberscar Cave and Cracked Wood Cave. Here, I've marked them on your map. Unfortunately Cropsford is right in between them. 
Your Speaker should look for this person in the city of Blackrose, in the Argonian homeland of Black Marsh. 
I'm waiting. 
Men like a woman with pretty legs. These will keep your legs from getting all bruised up.  
Why are pirates, pirates? Because they just Arrrghhh! Oh ho ho ho! 
Sir, there's too many of them! We have to fall back! 
I'm sorry to hear that. Sooner or later, the contracts are going to dry up. Maybe then you'll reconsider. 
Boss uglies in Cheydinhal are the Orums. Don't mean nothing to you. You is the Outside. Just stay Outside, and everything's Mister Tinker. Got me? 
You have been told what you must do to speak with our Lady. What more do you ask of us? 
It would be perfect... if the Watch could just get rid of the damn Thieves Guild. You don't have this problem in Anvil or Bruma. 
Suppose, however, that the power of these stones had been hidden, but was revealed to certain holy men or prophets in the First Era. 
Thank goodness the gate is gone. I couldn't get a good night's sleep knowing it was out there! 
As for the rest: the weak shall be winnowed; the timid shall be cast down; the mighty shall tremble at my feet and pray for pardon. 
I am one of his guard dogs, no more, no less. He pays us well to guard his many treasures. This is enough for me. 
I'm just so tired of the way we've all been treated by Falcar! I was worried about you, and angry about Vidkun, so I confronted Falcar directly. 
If you want to help us do something about it, go talk to Gogan and Maelona. Let's just say Gogan is intimately involved and leave it at that. 
The book is safe. That is all you need to know. 
So you see, everything I want is right here in this beautiful place. 
I'll go to the Imperial City. Hannibal Traven can protect me. 
Yes, I am a member of the Knights of the Thorn. Or what's left of them anyway. 
I heard about your most recent contract. I just wanted to congratulate you on a job well done. You had quite the time of it, or so I hear!  
Are we not Blades, joined by battle and brotherhood? Need you even ask? 
Amber is a resin found in root system tunnels and on Gnarls. When treated properly, it is especially suited to lightweight weapons and armor. 
What? You want a tour? Can't you see I have a lot on my mind? Go bother a beggar or guard... they stand around and chatter all day. 
I hope it's comfortable enough for you. 
St. Alessia has blessed our city and all its people. Visit the Temple of the One, and renew your faith. 
Cast this spell upon the priests. Allow my beloved Forgotten to kill the interlopers. When this is done, I shall reward you for your efforts. 
Yes, just read the scroll in the middle of town. It should work... although... 
I've got your horse saddled and waiting for you. 
Very well. I confess to the crime. But please understand I only did it out of the great love I had in my heart for Count Valga. 
So good to see you. 
Get lost. 
I see Lord Sheogorath chose wisely when he selected you to liberate Xedilian. 
I'm Varnado. I handle the Heavy Armor at 'The Best Defense'. I'm also an Advanced Trainer in Heavy Armor, so I know what I'm talking about. 
You mean the shrine to Nocturnal? That's north of Leyawiin, east of the Lower Niben. 
Sure. That's cute. 
I wish I were qualified to have access to the Arcane University. Enchanting items whenever I want... ah, well. Maybe someday. 
You look like someone who's comfortable in heavy armor. 
All your thoughts, your skills and your talents travel there with you. Think of it as exploring a new land, but a land within your own mind. 
On through you go. 
Priests of Arkay have intruded upon their squalor. I want you to help my Forgotten kill these priests of the Light. 
Starting in the northeast, moving clockwise, you have the Market, Arena, Arboretum, Temple, Talos Plaza, and Elven Gardens districts.  
You know how it is. There are whispers in the halls of Cloud Ruler, as in any other place. But it matters not. The Blades stand united! 
You're a liar. The Count is a man. And you aren't a man. 
Oh, and one more thing, if you breathe a word of this to the city guard, you won't live long enough to get whatever reward they're offering. 
Have you reconsidered, child? Will you aid me? 
As I expected. I accept your challenge! Speak to Ysabel and let her know when you're ready, and I shall make for the Arena. Shinji be with us both! 
Your stars are not mine. Today the Lover shall sweeten your journey as you confront your fate. 
Well, only because I like you. Look for a man known only as the Stranger. He lives here in Anvil, down the road from the Chapel of Dibella. 
Oh, don't let me bother you. You just stay safe on the road. 
For example, why was Falcar -- who we know now to be part of this cult of Necromancers -- in possession of Black Soul Gems? 
I see. Sheogorath is too important to come on his own account? He sends his mortal lackey? 
He's dead, and one of you killed him! I hate you all! 
If you're looking to be the best in business, you need to learn from the best. Palonirya is one of the best, so you might try asking her. 
Here you are at last. I know exactly where the Throne Room lies. Your job is simply to get me there safely. 
The Fighters Guild is a brotherhood of warriors. We provide a service to Tamriel, lending steel and shield to those who need our help. 
But... perhaps you are an adventurer? Could you assist me in acquiring something for my crystal collection? 
In the Imperial City there lives a High Elf who must be removed from existence. Finding this person may prove... challenging. Are you interested? 
If we assume it means "Magicka Waxes," then a spell increasing magicka might be what we need. Something that fortifies it, perhaps. 
This place is a nightmare! Knights everywhere, these priests, and whatever they've done to Felas!  
The Council of Mages has been dissolved. Arch-Mage Traven has been deserted. He's all we have left. 
Zealots have dedicated themselves to the worship of Arden-Sul. 
Hmm. A trade is in order, don't you think? My services in exchange for... oh, let's say ten Welkynd Stones. I'd say that's fair. 
I am Wide-Eye, Steward to His Grace, the greatest Duke of Mania in all of history, Thadon. He is my reason for being. My purpose in life. 
The sewers run underneath the whole Imperial City. There are access points in every district. 
The Aureal stand at the ready, sire. 
However, because you've avenged his unjust death, I feel that Bradon would understand why I'm breaking that pact. 
The joined blood of kings and gods. The Amulet of Kings. The divine power of Akatosh. 
No doubt. 
We made it!... errr, I mean... victory is ours once again! Huzzah! 
Blessed we are. 
How can I serve you, brother? 
Well, what have we here? Another hopeful whose blessing hasn't fully taken root?  
Your efforts are futile. You'll get nothing from me! 
Who am I? How about a failure, a fraud, an utter sham. I'm a poet without merit, a slave to my own stupidity and will likely ruin your day. 
It would seem that the forces of Order have moved very quickly. 
Hrol Ulfgar and Nivan Dalvilu lead the community, and have done so for many years. 
You don't expect me to make that deal, do you? 
Your plan is madness. There must be another way for you to recover the Amulet without risking Bruma's destruction. 
Three Brothers have some good merchandise. Don't know if I've met all three brothers, though. 
Have you ever gone past a guard barracks? When are they NOT drunk and disorderly? What kind of a stupid fine is that? 
I won't be bullied! I'm not some pathetic book-worm you can just push around! I have friends, you know! 
Put that back, you worthless thief! 
I'll be waiting right here. 
We're a bit suspicious of strangers here. Don't give us anything to be suspicious about, will you, please? 
I was sitting in The Flowing Bowl, when the most fetching Nord woman you've ever seen walked in with an equally attractive Imperial woman following. 
No! 
One is physically harmful... usually lethal traps or creatures... something relished by the residents of Dementia. 
And then he... He goes and does... If I find out who she is, I'll tear her limb from limb! 
If you wish to bargain with Clavicus Vile, approach with an offering of 500 gold, and hope the Lord smiles on your offering. 
They have been upon us for hours. They have no interest in our surrender. Only our deaths. 
Oh, for the love of Akatosh, would everyone just please calm down! I'm fine. And I don't need anything. I just... I just wanted to talk. That's all. 
Ten of the morning watch, and all's well. How are you, ma'am? 
Eh? Oh... I'm sorry. I was just... nothing. Never mind. I am Ranarr-Jo. I work the fields here in Fellmoor. 
Not now, you fool! 
Please, just kill me! Can't you see? It's what I want! I can't live like this, knowing I'm something filthy, something evil! Kill me! 
You may pass into the Shrine. Harrow will take you to the Master for your initiation into the service of Lord Dagon. 
This is not a matter for levity. If you have truly found the book, I expect you to bring it here once you have possession of it. 
I understand Ida Vlinorman enjoys jumping off high things. Like buildings. 
Don't you understand me? You're trespassing, and must leave, or I'll call the guard! 
Approach, Duchess of Dementia. The time is near and I am fading... 
Baurus, good to see you. 
Typical. So typical. His stupid paranoia that everyone's a spy and out to get him. I don't know what to suggest. 
What? Haven't I said enough already? Just let it go. Once someone finally realizes what's going on here, maybe things will change. 
It's pretty obvious that Primo comes from a wealthy family. He would never be interested in a girl like me, I'm afraid. 
Hrmph... it seems that I made a miscalculation. Against all odds and all the knowledge that I possess, a new Sheogorath is risen. 
Yes I can. You are under arrest for the theft of the bust of Llathasa Indarys, Countess of Cheydinhal. Come with me. 
You've made a good bit of gold. 
Show me something. 
Anyone looking for work should consider the Fighters Guild. I hear they're always looking for recruits. 
Please. Help us. 
Along with your new rank, please take this amulet. May it help keep you safe in times of danger. 
In Bleaker's Way, two families, Nord and Dunmer, live in perfect harmony. But beneath the surface lurks the secret seed of strife. 
It seems I'm the first to discover them growing in a natural cave. That's about all I can say about it. 
You've killed my double? Good work. Now, please... just leave me alone. I taste terrible. 
When you're done boring me, why don't you go have a chat with the new Gatekeeper? Run along now! 
You can't imagine the fuss some people make. My rats are no problem for anyone. 
It's come to the Order's attention that Temple District resident Roland Jenseric is a vampire, and has already claimed one victim. 
That lout? Yes, he's a thorn in my side that never seems to go away! I'd have his heart on a plate if I could! 
I heard there's a new ruler in Bliss. Of course, I hear lots of things. Like that! Did you hear that? 
I'd tell you more, but frankly, I don't know who you are, so I'm not sure that I can trust you with that sort of information. 
Here's a Weak Elixir of Exploration. Not bad, eh? If you want more, you can buy them from me. I've discounted them for you, of course. 
Dammit, it's that prisoner again! Kill her, she might be working with the assassins. 
These invaders that everyone is afraid of don't even exist. I swear, why would someone start a rumor to create panic? 
Shame on you for polluting Crucible with the glaring light of Mania. 
I have good news! I've made some progress on deciphering the gate-opening ritual. 
It is how Sheogorath has made their world. They are very unhappy about it. 
I've got one more for you, meat. I assume you can handle it. I need you to investigate some disappearances at Harlun's Watch. 
Very well, Inquisitor. 
Good riddance! 
Last chamber... this should be entertaining. 
The stupid lizard hunts with the name Amusei. Find him, find my ring. Make him suffer! Kill him and I will be pleased. 
It's not even as if I was going to keep it forever. I was going to give it back to her, once I'd gotten what I wanted. That's not so wrong, is it? 
We now know the threat this group poses. Perhaps better than they themselves know it. We must take decisive action now. 
We look forward to returning to our family's ancestral home at Weatherleah, once the ogres are dead. 
They say our Lord just took off. Can you believe that? I need a drink. I need the Skooma. 
This may be the stupidest thing I've ever done, but I'll testify against Audens Avidius. I suppose someone has to stand up to him. 
There may be some... changes. I can't say for sure; you should talk to Deetsan. 
Have you heard Gruiand Garrana talking about herself again? 
Oh, all right. Very well then. If... um... if you need anything, please just ask. I'll be happy to take your bet if you change your mind. 
I'm still studying the Mysterium Xarxes. Its corrupting power is terrible. 
The only way to assault the Altar of Despair is down the main passage between the two altars. 
I heard about this new person in the Isles. There's one more person who'll come to hate my guts. I hope he kills me. 
Dagail's the only one who can write one. If she can remember who she is today, that is. 
You're back, good. Did you find the evidence? 
To think we'd end up here, after such a beginning! Sending an escaped prisoner off with the Amulet of Kings... 
I've never met tougher. She did offer to teach me some of her bargaining tricks, though. 
So Viranus is dead. Modryn Oreyn is gone. We are in real trouble. 
Tidings. 
Knights of Order have come to destroy the Realm! 
Hieronymus Lex must be eliminated once and for all. The Gray Fox has asked that you do this personally. It is a most delicate matter. 
Your return is most welcome, Your Grace. 
I'm glad he's doing it. Those things are disgusting, a menace to us all. 
Well met, old friend! 
Their answer to life's trials is viewed through the greenish haze of Greenmote and blurred by the taste of spirits. 
I'll be seeing you, then. 
So the Resonator is working. But who fixed it? Why was it broken in the first place? Why is no one asking these questions? 
Greetings, Master-Wizard. 
I can't imagine it. Still, it's better than not having a butler at all. 
Signy wants to talk to you. I think you'll like what she has to say. 
Well, if it was Ugak, you can be sure she had some good animals. 
I suppose if you're interested, you could head over there and ask Kud-Ei yourself. 
I stand by all my repair work. I test the blades personally. 
It made no sense then, it makes no sense now. But don't you worry. I vow to bring Dovesi's killer to justice! 
It's good to see you, serjo. 
Talk to the beggar! Talk to Bolwing! He knows secrets, but no one can hear them. No one but Big Head. 
Nivan Dalvilu and I lead the community, and have done so for many years. It is an excellent arrangement. 
If Madness Ore or Amber you should unearth, bring them to New Sheoth to discover their worth. 
The Surilie Brothers wine is some of the best in Tamriel, if you ask me. 
I'm afraid I don't have much in the way of coin, but allow me to present you with something that may help in your travels. 
I am unfamiliar with the "Shade of the Revenant" described within the book, but I was never one to dabble in the more, shall we say, amoral arts. 
Interested in training? I do the Conjuration courses, and Druja does the Mysticism. 
But the circumstances are not normal, are they? 
Is that so? But isn't that exactly the sort of thing you'd say if you were behind it all? You're in a position to deny it. 
You make Uungor go away faster. He won't leave without his lucky grapes. Can't eat them. I tried. Give back to him. 
Look, there isn't much more to say. Please... help me clear my husband's name. 
Then you will appreciate my new master's methods. 
Do the bones talk to you, too? 
If you can't pay the fine, they can take your property away or toss you in the castle dungeons. Nothing we can do about it really. 
If it isn't already too late, we would all be better off if you found a different Ayleid Crown for him. 
Good to see that you're looking for more work. There's certainly more to be done. I need you to help Elante of Alinor. 
This place makes me uneasy. Let's tread wisely and make our way quickly to the basement. 
Of course, Lord. 
If I thought I could make the trip safely, I'd go to Crucible and find out if the torture revealed anything about Them. 
Excuse me, may I have a moment of your time? 
I don't know much about the man, but I've heard he is an excellent warrior. 
Be well, milord. 
Behold the new hero of the people of Cyrodiil! Behold, your Arena Grand Champion, the Divine Avenger! 
Falcar gives out the strangest assignments sometimes. It's as if he doesn't really care about them. 
Count Skingrad has ruled here all my life. The county is quiet and prosperous. 
There is another predicament which I believe you can also help resolve, if you feel ready for it. 
In the meantime, as a member of the guild, you now have full access to the guild halls around Cyrodiil. Only the Arcane University is closed to you. 
Kalthar tried to ruin the Leyawiin guild. Just goes to show you can't trust a Necromancer, even if he claims to be "reformed." 
Oooh, you're good! He he he he he. 
Uncover the true traitor's identity, and then come see me. I'll be in hiding. Fort Farragut is no longer secure. It's under watch by the Black Hand. 
So, your first contract. No chance for a bonus, huh? That's all right, you're better off! Who needs magic items when you've got raw skill? 
Does my Champion summon me? Before I've even told you what to do? That's not very Champion-y. Not at all! 
Can't say for sure. Some say they've seen her nearby, near the Vindasel Ruins. Might just be wishful thinking, though. 
It's time for you to go. 
It contains instructions for acquiring a very special power. You'll want to read it carefully, and then return to Cloud Top. 
You may also summon entertainment to your throne room. Your predecessor found this most invigorating. Speak with me if you wish entertainment. 
Yes, sir? What can I do for you? 
The Countess has received word from Cloud Ruler Temple that grave matters are afoot. Nothing else concerns her at the moment. 
Or you could always eat off the floor... doesn't matter to me. 
Get to the Sigil Keep! 
Kalthar was talking about it recently. He seemed very agitated about it. Almost... happy. Strange, isn't that? 
To think that two innocent men were killed, and that I'm responsible for one of their deaths... I... I'm speechless. 
I'm not going anywhere until they're gone! Horrible things! 
So, the last guest finally arrives. I'll tell you what I told all the others. You go in, I lock the door. You don't come out 'til it's over. 
If only my other children had served me so well! You see, I have known of Mathieu Bellamont's intentions since he was just a boy.           
Golly, you're the best! I'm going to follow you and watch you and worship the ground you walk on! Let's go! 
Gwinas would be terribly disappointed if it was gone when he came to pick it up. So sorry I can't help you. 
He told me that the spirits of my people would remain bound here, replaying our cowardice, as a lesson to those that thwarted his will. 
I don't want to see it coming. Take me unaware. And, for your own good, it should probably look like an accident. 
I'm told you closed the Oblivion Gate. I'm amazed. Thank you, on behalf of all Kvatch's refugees. 
I hardly need to tell you how important my work is, Lord Sheogorath. 
The cities of Cyrodiil are finally rallying together to make a stand against the Oblivion invasion. 
The girl's either upset that those people were killed or she's an excellent actress. She's still a suspect as far as I'm concerned. 
Take everything, just spare me! 
The old woman? I'd put her in the same class as you, actually - a peasant.   
The women in the gang use their wiles to lure men out to some remote location and rob them blind. It's been going on for some time now. 
A prison cell is better than you deserve, mortal scum. 
I don't like talking to people much, but Kud-Ei's helping me get over that. That's why she put me in charge of selling alchemy supplies. 
On the second floor is a secret door leading to a crawlspace. Inside are the fastenings of a mounted head that hangs over Baenlin's favorite chair. 
Someone said the Bloated Float mysteriously departed from the docks and then returned. I didn't know she was even seaworthy! 
You will not stop us. The Order of the Black Worm will consume all in its path. 
We've been through too much together already for me to just abandon them to their fate. 
This town has stood on the edge of the Shivering Isles since they were borne from the mists of time. 
As the guildmaster, I am waiving bloodprice for anyone you kill during this heist. However, I can't stop the Watch from putting a price on your head. 
Very well. Spoken like a true son of the Demented. 
My guess is he buried it somewhere close to town or even in town itself. Believe me, I've looked. No luck so far. 
No rest for the weary Orgnolf. 
I turned up copies of the first two volumes from my colleagues, and I spent a little time rereading them. 
You'll be stopping the Greymarch. Altering the course of events, breaking the cycle. 
Saved you, did he? Well, that's a good sign. 
I'll tell you how you can help. 
I had hoped you would have it with you. Go get the stone and return at once. 
That Raiment's getting a little tight on you, Brawler! I think you need some exercise! What do you say? Ready for a match? 
Normally these missives are handled by my steward, Dairihill. Let me see that. 
I've got food and drink, if you need it. I haven't touched it much, so it should be safe. Might want to wipe it off first anyway. You never know. 
You have come to dedicate yourself to Lord Dagon's service. 
If Brithaur doesn't watch it, he may disappear one day. 
It was Muurine. She said she found a note from Thadon, that she would tell people it was written to me unless I paid her. It's not mine, I tell you! 
I'm afraid I have very little information to add to our follow-up investigation. 
I know what you would ask. You would bring light to that which is in darkness, bring silence to the voices so loud. I know where you must go. 
You haven't run home to momma yet, huh? That's a good sign. So, you ready for a match, or do you just need some information? 
There are still poor souls in this world that you have not spoken with. They wait for you. 
She moves really well in that armor, that's for sure. 
The battle is upon us. There is no time for conversation. 
From Dementia's own court, no less. Scandalous! Fatal, perhaps. But passion makes no accomodation for self-preservation. 
There are none in this city. You might want to try in Anvil. 
His speciality is setting the Great Forest to canvas. The paintings look so amazingly real that some say they can see the trees sway in the breeze. 
I would have done it myself, but well, ok... I fell for their trick. Thought I'd get lucky, turns out that they don't do anything. They just rob you. 
Hi there. You remind me of one of the characters from a story I've been reading. What can I do for you? 
Jena, always a pleasure. 
May the wind be on your back. 
If it weren't for me, you'd be mucking stables in Orsinium! 
While you were gone, I've made some progress in deciphering the Mysterium Xarxes ritual. The third item we need is a Great Welkynd Stone. 
As for what you have done... it does not matter. 
Inquisitor, I am surprised that you do not have a better grasp on the situation. This is most disappointing. 
We haven't seen him since that whole invisibility mess. I hope it stays that way! 
The Ritual is complete. Arden-Sul's will is done. 
You should stop by the Museum of Oddities. I understand Una is always looking for more items to display. 
Then you have arrived just in time to help us defend the Altar of Despair. 
Excuse me, but you have to leave now. I need to lock up. 
We hold on to fleeting things even as we slip. I knew, and yet I indulged myself anyway. I indulged her a fair bit, too. Hee hee! 
If you have to fight a Flesh Atronach, never use a shock spell. It won't hurt them. 
As I said, I'll meet you back in Anvil as soon as I can. I won't be traveling with you as I'm making my own arrangements. 
Dalvilu has been murdered, and we have been accused of the crime! Bastard elves! That they would dishonor us in this way.... 
Even if it was true, it's out in the forest somewhere. We need to keep what's inside the town walls safe, not go running around outside them. 
I'm going over to Northern Goods and Trade. There's always something I need at that place. 
 ... Yes, kynreeve. Sir. This prisoner was sent in by Kathutet for questioning. I was about to begin. 
I'm at a loss for words. You actually found six! 
Once I have all the ingredients I need, I'll fashion a cure for you. This is a delicate matter, and cannot be rushed. 
You are welcome to take my horse. I rarely travel, so I'm sure you will put her to better use than I. 
I've always been happy with the weapons I've bought there. 
I saw your match against the Breton. You're a Hero now! I... I'm still in training, but I'll get there too! Anyway, Congratulations! 
If you can get in there, find out what happened to them. If they're alive, help them finish the job. If not, see what you can do on your own. 
I summon thee, walker in Flesh! Flesh of true Flesh! From those waters of Oblivion which sire thy kind.  
Oh!!! Thank you so very much! Here's the key to Rythe's studio. You may come and go as you please. If you need me, I'll be around the house. 
You've already cleared that place of all the goblins? Go figure. Fine. Then I guess you don't need to deliver those weapons. 
I must be ready to run out at a moment's notice. Can't sleep. 
I saw that Pinarus Inventius was out hunting again. He can shoot a bird on the wing without really trying. 
Thank you for your cooperation in this unfortunate matter, Your Grace. 
Sickly Bernice is a funny nickname because she's dying, but thinks she's in perfect health. 
Bless you! Fathis Ules lives in the middle of the Elven Gardens district. 
Does anyone see City-Swimmer? Is he gliding beneath the silver water? Is he creeping 'round a corner, hugging a wall, silent as a shadow in the dark? 
I could swear I once had a Blind Watcher's Eye just like that.... I would like to replace it, but the funds just aren't available. 
Nothing warms the heart like the sound of rending flesh. Great choice! 
I used to be a priest of the Tribunal Temple in Kragenmoor. After the collapse, I drifted for a while, until I joined the Chapel. 
I think Adrienne Berene is the ranking mage at the Mages Guild in town. Typical snooty mage. 
Farewell, Your Grace. 
I've better things to do than waste time speaking with you. 
Dumag gro-Bonk at The Missing Pauldron is collecting that Amber you find in the root tunnels. 
Information must be paid for in coin, not advice. 
Don't go far. It's too dangerous to go wandering around this house. 
You're a lying bastard. You killed Ra'vindra. And now I'm going to kill you.  
The others are dust! You alone, Wood Elf, remain, First and Last! Go now! Beyond the next gate, your portal waits. 
The Baliwog is a dangerous little creature. Some say they grow up to be Scalons. 
You want me? You sure? I'm Vigge. I'm Mages Guild, but I don't train or anything. 
Ready to test dialogue? Great! This should be my first time speaking with you. 
Good for Thadon. Doesn't help us any. 
I can't make that deal. 
What's the story on Maglir and his contract? 
Good day to you, my lord. 
There's a most comfortable bed just downstairs. A wonderful room, and nicely priced at 25 gold a night, if you're interested. 
How do you do? I'm Tadrose Helas, Smith of the Bravil Fighters Guild chapter and trainer for Armorers. 
If you've done good deeds, the Nine will bless you and cure diseases when you visit their wayshrines. 
Where are my manners? I'm Ralsa Norvalo. My husband, Gilen, has requested that I find you and ask if you'd assist him. 
Drink up and eat something. You'll need your strength. 
You are removed from the guild. You must pay a fine to one of the guild Doyen to get back in. 
Work! Never. You're supposed to feel sorry for me and just give it to me. Oh! My legs are itching again. Time to run! 
What do people do here? In town, shopkeepers, smiths, priests... the usual. Fighters and Mages Guild. 
I'll get mine. Folks in this city got plenty of gold. Take from the rich and give to the poor, if you catch my drift. 
But, didn't he mention where it is? 
Not like anyone would notice. I mean, what are the chances a thief would choose that moment to try to break in? 
I guess it all depends on the size of the chest. The bigger the better, of course, but where would our mysterious host have hidden such a thing? 
I can hear them, calling to me from the other side. We need to kill the Gatekeeper! He has the keys. 
I don't know what I'll do if you don't get those scales for me. I've saved so much for my retirement, but it's just not enough... 
This place is cursed... we must not let its spoiled ichor spill into our fair lands. 
Good morning, my friend! 
When it was discovered that he did this, the Mages Guild called for a quick meeting to decide what to do. It only took minutes to decide. 
With this staff, you'll render others incapable of using magic against you. If you'd prefer something else, we can start over. 
Please, your Grace. Hurry to Pinnacle Rock while there's still time. 
Useless Fighters Guild. What do you want? 
You have been told to approach the shrine. Perhaps Namira will find favor in you. 
Drink. It is time to go. 
I don't have time for you. Get out of my way! 
Any luck? 
Blessed are you, who has spoken to the Corrupter. 
And he's coming here to see me, you say? Yes, I'd better sober up. 
I've heard many tales of Black Marsh. It sounds like a truly mysterious place. 
Vinivia Melissaeia takes all the merchant complaints in the city. 
Please, come back soon. No telling what oddities I may have for you next time. 
Ah, a stranger in town. But as I always say, a stranger is just a friend I haven't met yet! 
Sure, why not. I might even be able to ransom it back to the original owner. 
Victory is ours! I have already instructed my subordinates to kindle the Altar of Rapture. 
Oh, my! I'm so glad to have this back. People have been asking me what happened to my Ring of Disrobing, and I just didn't know what to tell them. 
Farewell, Sister. 
Come on! Run while there's still time! The Guard still holds the road, but it's only a matter of time before they're overwhelmed! 
Honditar is the name. I'm a hunter and mountain man. 
The Fountainhead leads down to the Pools of Dementia and Mania, where the insanity of the Realm's inhabitants settles. 
While I do not believe my identity has been compromised, I do not wish to take any chances, and so cannot act on either matter. 
You'll be hard pressed to find a nicer home for sale in Cyrodiil. 
We must escape! Do you understand? We're the only two left! We're next! If we don't find a way out of here, we're going to die!   
Dovesi is a Dark Elf. They call themselves Dunmer. When I was young, I spent some time stationed at Fort Moonmoth on their homeland of Morrowind. 
The general trader and clothier and armorer are on the terraces to the west. The smith is north, next to the wall. 
I tried to warn them. 
Reinforcements! There, by the doors to Bliss! 
I shall wait here for you, Arch-Mage. 
Please, don't continue speaking with me... time is of the essence. 
Hargh! 
How kind of you to grace the Sacellum with your presence, my lady. 
I heard you were the one that made it all happen. Everyone in the Thieves Guild is grateful! 
There's a room, if you need it. 10 gold for the night. 
Anything else I can help with? 
I would like to send help to Bruma, but I cannot risk weakening Anvil's defenses with that Oblivion Gate open outside the city. 
Aloys, Callia! She's cleared the goblins from Cropsford for us! It's safe for us to build the settlement! 
Move along please. 
Crime don't pay. My cells is full of fools thinkin' it did. I might just sees ya there soon. 
Very well. I have a feeling that we will not need to wait long for the next attack. 
Why did you come here? Why do you still do the bidding of that prattling fool? 
Do you have a death wish, girl? 
No, no. Too easy a fate for them. That's why you're going to help me. You're going to find them, force their hands. Put them to the screws. 
I'm getting out of here before it's too late! They'll be here any minute, I'm telling you. Run while you can! 
So what do you think? Is it safe to try to return to Cropsford? 
And I can't help you. 
So far, so good. 
I hear she makes armor and weapons out of it. For a price. 
Oh, my.... 
No money, no room. I'm running a business here. 
Steady! 
Excuse me. I need to sweep right where you're standing. 
So I better get started doing my good deeds. And maybe I'll see you at the White Stallion Lodge. 
I have been anxiously awaiting your return. 
Oh? We must? Well, last I saw, you didn't outrank me, Associate. I suggest you mind your manners... and your own business. 
You've probably figured that out by now. Let's hope so. Or we're in real trouble... and out come the intestines. And I skip rope with them! 
I'm just warming up, you pathetic worm! 
That should help you to get in there a bit easier. 
You look uneasy. I hope things are going well. 
I see you have some. I'll buy them in groups of five for 100 gold. Are you selling? 
My name is Methredhel. I've come to the Imperial City to make my fortunes. 
He sleeps here in the Priory House. 
What we need is for you to case his establishment, and figure out where he gets his inventory. Find some proof of his wrongdoing, and let us know. 
Where is the Count? Why is he not with you? 
No more, no more! 
I would hate to be on his bad side. He's really good with his fists. 
The Torch burns brightly again. Like my love for dear Sheer-Meedish. 
Come then, and I will show you that in the end, my light shall shine the brightest! 
If you're interested, you may want to see Gilgondorin at Silverhome-on-the-Water. When it comes to local legends, he's the best source in town. 
Duty calls. 
The hunter can pay his fines to the guards, serve his time, or pay this one half and they will all go away. 
Daedric shrines nearby? I know of two. North of the city, south of Bruma, east of the Silver Road, is a Mephala shrine. 
This old place is the one thing that gives me some sense of certainty in these uncertain times. 
Now unless you wish to attempt to impress me with your no doubt staggering intellect, I have actual work to attend to. 
Sorry. You want me? I'm Shum gro-Yarug, the Count's butler. 
Thank you for indulging an old man's whims. Now, you wanted to learn something about Heavy Armor, didn't you? I think I can help. 
Palonirya is one of the wealthiest traders in Cyrodiil. Her shop in the Imperial City is so successful. If anyone can teach you more, she can. 
The Gatekeeper dead. I didn't think it possible. 
I can only hope that putting your life at risk for the guild will put things in perspective for you, and help you to value the privileges it offers. 
Let's see if we can't teach you a thing or two. 
The Yellow Team ain't gonna fight itself, you lazy Pit Dog! You ready for a match, or what? 
We're being robbed! 
Good one. 
Wonderful! I'll put you on my list of Special Donors. It's a very exclusive list, you know. 
The doomstones are a mystery. Are they traces of the Mythic Times? Or creations of ancient beastfolk or lost races of mer or men? 
One more thing. You cannot kill each other during this trial. We may be thieves, but we're not murderers. 
Apparently, they've been giving the locals some trouble. Shouldn't be a problem for you four, though. 
Did you hear that? Oh boy... 
Oh, listen to you... a talking bird! How sweet. Did you know that Thadon's back to his old self? Fly away now! Be free! 
What luck! I seem to have misplaced the one I used to have on display. I really can't afford to buy it from you though. 
Very well. Head up the stairs, and it's the last door on your right. Sleep well. 
You were sent to acquire this gem so Mannimarco would not get his hands on it. With it, he would have marched on the University and come for me. 
Av Auri-El ye Tamri-El dellevoy an Arpen Aran tarnabye! 
This Sanctuary has been here since before even I joined the Dark Brotherhood, and that was two-hundred years ago. 
I don't care about the gold anymore. I just want to get out of here. I'm going to try all the windows and doors, and see if I can't get one open! 
My Lord, you honor me with your presence. 
There are rats and goblins down there... but from what I've seen of you, I'm guessing you are an experienced Warrior. Am I right? 
Welcome, honored cat burglar. 
If you're looking to join the Arena as a combatant, you need to head down to the Bloodworks and talk to Owyn, the Blademaster. 
I never would have guessed that Roland was a vampire. I could have sworn I saw him walk in daylight. 
You wear our robes, but I hear the darkness that you bring in your very breath. You do not know harmony... you do not see my light. 
You didn't leave, so I called the guards! Now you'll be arrested! 
What happened? Where's Martin? I must congratulate him! Mehrunes Dagon is defeated! Cast back into Oblivion! We've won! 
Jyggalag is coming. He cannot be stopped. He will rule this land, and all our delusions will be stripped away. 
When you've got the silver pitcher and the four glasses, let me know. I can't wait to see the look on her face. 
Of course, if you want more of them, I've whipped up a few. Expensive, but worth every coin. 
I certainly look forward to that interaction. 
Blade and bone. Speak to me. 
It's up to us now, don't you see? Dovesi did it! She murdered everyone! And now she wants to murder us too! We have to get her first!  
Horsey! Did you hear about the new ruler in Crucible? Did you? Good horsey. 
I'm using them to build my skyboat. Just between you and me, the hardest part has been getting the water to not fall out of the air. 
Kayleen's grave is outside if you wish to pay your respects. 
Well? What is it you need. Please, be quick about it... the seconds are ticking by as we speak. Ohhhh. There goes several more. 
Are you looking for him? 
Oh dear, whatever could you want? 
Make sure you show that shovel to Thoronir. It is the final bit of proof we need to possibly clear his name. 
By we, I mean you, of course. I have something that may help - it's a basic fireball spell, in case you need to defend yourself. 
I was mortified. We snatched up the gold and holed up in the mountains. He said if I breathed a word of the murder to anyone, he'd kill me. 
You've got to do something. You've got to tell Arch-Mage Traven! 
When Sheogorath discovered the library, He had it burned, insisting that it was an abomination and that personal choice defied logical prediction. 
Now you will release me at once! 
I smelled a strange odor coming from the Mages Guild yesterday. Erthor must have been doing another experiment. 
I'm not giving up anything for that offer. 
I've heard he's good with a lockpick. 
The Chalice has been returned to Thadon. He should use it while there is still time. 
He's not doing the job? The little vermin. It still needs to be done. You get back there and make sure that job is finished! Get moving! 
Please, see if you can't find our friends who have disappeared. 
Have you been near Rosentia Gallenus's house recently? Smells horrible... like she left some meat out to spoil. 
It is where the body of my child was grown, and the resting place of his less fortunate siblings. You have no business going there. 
This business with the Gatekeeper is appalling. Can no one maintain order around here?  
Be careful, Associate. 
I'm only allowing you to do this investigation, and I use that term very loosely, because Erline is so distraught. 
I hope you have found your stay here pleasant. 
Yes? Change of heart? Do tell. 
Heavenly Doomstones bear red runes, appear with stone circles, and are associated with cosmic features of the heavens like the moons Jone and Jode. 
The way he looked at me. It was flattering at first, and then... oh, who could have done this? Why would anyone kill Nels?    
That is, until last year. Jorundr started to take risks and began robbing more dangerous targets. Not just lone merchants, mind you. 
But my militia is no substitute for trained soldiers. Can we not wait for more help to arrive? 
You wasted it again, didn't you? It is truly pathetic that the fools in Aleswell actually trusted you to save them. 
These crystalline obelisks have existed throughout the Realm for all of eternity. You will find they become more active as the Greymarch progresses. 
Evening. 
I have disposed of all of my ill-gotten merchandise, and replaced it with more expensive, but carefully obtained items. 
Then Aleron may not be coming home from his... ahhh, journey, for a very long time. Like permanently. 
Regrettably I've no further use for you. If what I heard is true, you're the thief. If what you say is true, the Gray Fox knows you are my informant. 
Hang onto it for now. I must have six before I'll be truly satisfied. Then I'll have more than anyone else in Cyrodiil! 
Rumor has it he joined the priesthood to avoid military service. What a coward. 
Is there a more gracious host in Bruma than Hafid Hollowleg? 
Remember, I will be expecting you at Nenalata in three days time. 
Please forgive me, sir. The others and I, we're just... well, we're glad to have you here with us, sir. We just want to make sure you're safe. 
I cook here. And live here. With Shuravi and Shamada. We're sisters. Three. Shuravi - one. Shamada - two. And me - three. 
I'm sorry. Luronk gro-Glurzog is my name. I don't get about very much. For various reasons. 
My Lord. I have waited for your return. Why have you forsaken me? I am your most... adoring subject! I am yours to command, body and soul! 
I ran across a ghost once. Seemed to suck the energy right out of me. 
Did you hear? The Countess was robbed. Someone stole her family ring. 
When I swore allegiance to Jyggalag, my eyes were opened. 
Sorry, just doing my job. 
Yes, of course. What am I waiting for? 
If the target is old and weak, as you say, then his manservant is sure to be quite the opposite. Best stay out of his way. 
Contained within its walls were the formulaic predictions of every action ever taken by any creature, mortal or Daedric. 
Blades! Do homage to Martin's champion! 
She has darkened... what will we do now? 
You wish to learn? Hmm. You have potential, I see, but your equipment! 
Not to worry, we'll have your spoils to you in no time at all. 
What? Still here? 
Smells of prey.... 
Rumors? Oh! Well... Um... I... I heard you're the one who killed Adamus Phillida! The skill you must possess! 
My work is far too important to trust to you. 
However, no mortal may sit upon the throne without the staff. So here you are in my prison, seeking to supplant the one who placed me here. 
Strike me down and my father's power will raise me up again! 
Sing to Big Head. Sing to him. 
Have you ever spoken with Kud-Ei in the Mages Guild? 
Well then, you have work to do. You'd best be on your way. 
Nicely done. You want training from me, you've got it. 
Let me see that. Give it here. Where did you get this? This belongs to Kishashi! 
The current Doyen are Armand Christophe and S'krivva. 
Order has been defeated. I'm glad that's over. Mama always said, "The end of the world only happens once."  
What are you lookin' at? Get outta' my sight before I have you hacked off at the knees. 
Ma'zaddha is meeting Nelrene at night. How illicit! 
Leave! Right now! Or I call the guards! 
There are seven of them including Farwil. Even though they're a nuisance, I still hope they haven't been hurt... or worse. 
If you make your way to Skingrad, look up Sinderion. He's one of the foremost authorities on the alchemical properties of plants. 
A new arrival! A shame about my Gatekeeper. I'm so happy, I could just tear out your intestines and strangle you with them. 
I took over the inn when I got here. There wasn't anyone living here. Except for Shelden. He says he's Mayor. Don't believe it. 
Order is defeated, and Sheer-Meedish is safe. Praise Sheogorath! 
The Count needs more time. He will see you when he is ready. 
Instead, He has confined me to this place and forbidden me to die. 
Welcome to Earil's Mysteries. As you probably guessed, I'm Earil. 
If our new hard hand keeps closing contracts like the Rugdumph one, we'll be all right. 
Show mercy. 
I don't know how to thank you. You have a good heart to help get me back home. I'll never forget what you've done for me. 
You'd better go tell her you found me. That way you, at least, can get out of here. 
We are from Chorrol. 
May all my children serve you well, Lord Sheogorath. 
Most people consider Martin's... transformation... a religious or political event, but what interests me is its metaphysical implications. 
Well, for instance, you could give it to any other goblin tribe. 
Did you hear about Glarthir? Thank the Nine that the guard stopped him before he killed someone! 
Is the new ruler of Dementia lovely, I hope? 
Yes. I must let someone else know. That night, I decided to follow Relfina. I wanted to see where she went on her walks. 
I'm Logvaar. Hafid pays me to stand around and keep things quiet. 
I want you to go there and capture Ajum-Kajin, one of their leaders. Bring him back to me. I'd like to spend some time... talking to him. 
Here's a real Oddity for you -- an arm of one of the Gatekeepers! This one was killed by... oh, I forget now. A lovely specimen in any case. 
Well, sometimes I feel we're not welcome here. The Nords don't like Heartlanders very much. 
Such a pleasure to be in good company. 
Good-for-nothing louse of a husband. He's lucky I still love him. 
What? I didn't see a thing...  
That's great for the city, but what about the settlements? 
Hey there, pal! Need a room? 
Relan. It is I who kills. It is I who hunts. It is I who keeps the fields and farms clean for Cindanwe. 
You should take some time to admire his corpse. It really is a thing of beauty. The punctures and slashes are almost... poetic. 
I've got fresh sticks. Guaranteed no leaves. 
What?! 
Yes, yes. I'm sure I will. But for now, we still have the matter of the information you're withholding. Will you share it with us? 
Is there a problem, citizen? 
I'm Olfand, the Light Armor trainer. Skjorta and I run North Winds. Please excuse us. We had a little drink-up last night. Still a little muzzy. 
You'll be able to freeze opponents in their tracks for a short time with this staff. I can begin work now, or we can start over. 
Were you invited? I didn't invite you. 
You found it, huh? Good work, I guess. Well, take it back to Oreyn, then. He can pay you on the contract. Tell him what you want about me. 
Big-Head names you friend! Songs of friendship! Songs of ship-friends! Presents for you! Presents on Hatching Day! 
They.... they didn't make it? Oh god. They died out there all alone... 
Fortune and fame, friend. 
You have rented the only room I have for you. 
Night Mother grant me strength! 
It's already started, but you might be able to stop it. We're making you into a leader the people can trust. Someone to look up to. Someone to blame! 
Unfortunately, you were stupid enough to kill Rohssan in the process!  
Behold, the Iron Maiden! 
Please forgive me, but I'm afraid I haven't got time to talk right now. One of the other Blades should be able to assist you. Try Jena or Steffan. 
He is not coming with us? I think I understand, and it is better that he remain safe. Though I wonder why he has asked you to take his place. 
Perhaps you are the one? No, probably not. Never mind. But then again.. 
You'd better take whatever you can get in here, Khajiit. They don't feed the new prisoners. Didn't you know that? 
That's Dagail's responsibility. Speak with her. 
The flame stalks are particularly bright this year. 
Hey, you. Come over here. I got to ask you something. Something important. Shhhh. Just come over here. 
You s'wit! How dare you! Ulrich be damned! He can take his fine and stuff it up his backside! 
I often wonder what it'd be like, to fall to the ground so far below. I bet it'd be like flying -- then suddenly falling into a deep, blissful sleep. 
I am promoting you to Prowler. Congratulations. 
The Gatekeeper's been killed. This is only the first step; they'll be coming for me next. 
You thought your secrets could be hidden from the Lord of Destruction? 
There are still Knights of Order in the area. I fear that this occupation will not recede until the war is over. 
It just keeps getting worse, doesn't it? 
If you have done all that you can, are you prepared to face the enemy? 
A little busy here! I'm trying to decide what to have for dinner. Oh, how I love eating. One of my favorite things to do. 
You're in the guild, aren't you? You should be able to walk right in, find it, and take it. And if you can't, then break in. I want that book. 
These are people who have prayed to the Night Mother! They request a visit from a Speaker, to arrange someone's assassination. 
I need you to get over to the Mages Guild and talk to a good friend of mine, Alvis Uvenim. She's the only one in town that I trust. 
The room's yours for the night. It's just upstairs, the first door on the left. Sleep well. 
He has a wonderful collection of books. I don't know why he needs to act so tough all the time. 
My name is Alessia Ottus, and I'd like to talk about the Nine Divines. 
Good. I need a weapon. I'm looking forward to bashing some skulls in. 
... I can see you have bad news. You didn't recover the Amulet, did you? 
It is fashionable to make fun of Bravil and Regulus Terentius. Personally, I think it is poor sport to mock the poor and disadvantaged. 
Very well. You have three choices for what type of damage you'd like it to do: Fire, Frost, or Shock. 
I am Norbert Lelles. How may I help you? 
Aye. I know about those scum. Rotten bastards robbed me blind, they did. Stole a family heirloom. Bunch of Bosmer, if you can believe it! 
Are you trying to ruin me? That offer's no good. 
That's my horse.  Owned it for years.  Now either buy something or get out. 
Yes, I have heard that the painting of the Count was taken. I was unaware she hired an outsider to conduct the investigation. May luck be with you. 
The situation grows more dire with each passing day, it seems. I fear where this will end. 
Whoever invited us here must at least know us, don't you think? In any event, we're all stuck here together, so we might as well get acquainted. 
May your walls stand secure! 
I guess there's only one thing left for me to do. I'm going to find an axe and do my best to chop that damn door down and get us out of here! 
Take me there. Now. 
Make all possible haste in reaching Staada. She will be able to better inform you as to what happened, and what is required to secure Brellach. 
Walk with Our Lord. 
Top deck clear yet? 
Very well. Speak to me later if you change your mind. I fear the issue will remain unresolved unless you can help. 
I can't thank you enough for your help! You gave us another chance at a new life. 
Are you out of your mind? Did I not make it clear that Teekeeus was the one person I NEVER wanted to acquire that book? 
The Sintavs have always been one of the leading families in the City. We will refrain from contact with the Atius, unless provoked. 
Since you're working with Cloud Ruler Temple, I'm going to authorize you to search Jearl's house. I'll pass the word to my men. We won't interfere. 
My boys will take up the fight even if the guards won't. Doesn't matter if it's outside the town walls - it still affects us all. 
Got them all? Makes me tired just thinking about it. Good work, though. Here's the reward I promised. 
Orinthal, retired Assassin. Now I live here. Only Redguard here, incidentally. An interesting fact, isn't it? I do enjoy facts. 
I don't like to talk to her. All she wants to talk about is herself. 
I've been reassigned! This is outrageous! The Gray Fox had a hand in this, I know it. 
You seek training? If I were to aid you, you would first have to assist me. I would strip the Creators of their works... you will help with this. 
Where's Fisherman's Rock? 
I hear the legions have been recalled from Fort Swampmoth in Black Marsh, and many of the Argonian slaves have returned to their tribes. 
They're the worst of all. My own subjects, working for the Enemy! It's enough to make an old Daedric Prince get all weepy. 
Ooh, using poision is so deliciously evil! I once poisioned my aunt's stew, and she fell over dead with her face right in the bowl! Ha ha ha ha ha! 
May... May Sithis keep you safe, most revered Listener. If you ever need my help, you need only ask! 
You have made a long and perilous journey, but there is no time to rest. 
Arch-Mage Traven was right to ban Necromancy, and place restrictions on the addition of new members to the guild. He's served us well. 
Not my place to talk about it. You need to know, you talk to Wide-Eye. 
She was unable to acquire the book, and that shall be enough for me. It would be beneath me to continue this petty squabble. 
I've got this one! 
Yes, most revered Listener! My spells will serve Sithis until I lie cold and dead! 
Stay as long as you like. 
Come on. This is only the beginning of the battle for Kvatch. We can discuss the next phase once the civilians are safe. 
My Lord! Autkendo Jansa sent me to find you. She requests your immediate assistance. 
You're the boss. Whenever you're ready.... 
We will continue to hold the Fringe. 
Come to pay your respects, have you? You can find her tomb in the chapel undercroft. 
Bugs. Bugs! Everywhere. All over. Wonderful, tasty bugs. No time for you. Talk to Ravel. He doesn't like the bugs. Not even with mead. 
Twelve noon, and all's well. Everything all right, ma'am? 
I know she did. 
Someone has been killed. I don't suppose you know anything about that, now do you?  
Bring me Blood Liqueur, Osseous Marrow, Dermis Membrane, and the Essence of Breath. 
Were you acting for the gods? I don't know. But now it's my turn to act. 
I'm a Knight-Errant now, and I don't care who knows it. 
You are looking well. 
You think Nels might be the killer? He plays the buffoon, but it could all be an act. He is a Nord, and they're such a savage, uncivilized people. 
Congratulations on your buy! 
Syl likes torturing people. She's got nothing on the methods of Sorceress Verenim, though. She's a genius with pain. 
It isn't that I don't believe you. But I won't go with you until I know everyone can leave here safely. 
You can best know Anvil by walking its streets and speaking with its people. My favorite time is the harbor at sunset, the sun and sea to the west. 
I'll stay here and do a final sweep of the area. You're to report to the Count directly, as he wishes to speak with you. 
Okay, based on your abilities, here are your choices. Do you want to fight one Bear, two Minotaurs, or one Bear and two Minotaurs?    
Every time I look for a way out, I get twisted around and end up back here. But I'm too smart for them.  
I have a small problem that you may be able to help with. The guild will even pay a reward. 
What day is today? 
You got to be careful. You don't want people taking notice. Just keep quiet, keep your head down. 
Ah, but I believe I owe you something, eh? Here, let me show you these moves. Step like this... Now strike.... All right, now parry... That's it! 
Claudette does a good job. Still, she should rename the place. 
What would you have me tell you about it? 
Over here is the Pelvis of Pelagius, the greatest Emperor that Tamriel has ever seen, as well as being completely mad. 
I fear the Battlemages may mistreat Mucianus, if they do not mistake him for one of the many Necromancers no doubt present in the ruins.  
We need one more piece of evidence to make Agarmir's guilt complete. 
I have the best prices in town? Why? I'm smart, and you're smart. We know the right people, we get the best deals. 
Well, it's not surprising, really. This is Necromancy we're talking about, after all. Such a hideous discipline! All that blood and rotting flesh... 
I'm very fond of Cheydinhal. It's where I met my love, Eilonwy. Our lives are quite long, and choosing the right partner is very important. 
Our love has made me the happiest woman in the Isles. 
Are you going to take me to Fisherman's Rock? 
Travel to the Gutted Mine. The door will open to you. Bring the peace of death to my followers, and you shall earn my gratitude. 
Quite a list of things to do, wouldn't you say? Well, enough of my monologue. Time to feed! 
Welcome to my town! 
What is it, sera? 
It was an honor for me to help Prior Dreth. The pain of the stab wound was a small sacrifice to restore his magicka. 
Baurus. I want you to know... I don't blame you for what happened. You did everything you could. I'm glad to have you here by my side. 
Syl... my... Syl is dead? This can't be right. Is this right? What have you done? Have you done this? 
Everyone wants to know about the Gray Fox. Gray Fox this, Gray Fox that. He's just a man, not a Daedric lord.  
Greetings, my friend. You must be from the Fighters Guild. We appreciate your help. 
As do we all, dear friend. Do not fear. I have been assured that the medicine will restore our Roderick to full health. But it will take some time. 
Guess it was nothing. 
It's the city of Tiber Septim, youngest of the gods. Go to the Palace and the Temple of the One. Stand on the stones where Talos stood. 
That's 'Sir Mazoga' to you... 
It's very good to see you again. 
The Oak and Crosier is the place of choice for well-bred visitors to Chorrol. The Grey Mare is more suitable for... others. 
Sure would be nice to read something about the other Atrabhi. Like an epitaph. 
They say Alinor on Summerset Isle is more beautiful. I've never been. For the present, I must count the Imperial City the most glorious in Tamriel. 
I hope you're here to reconsider. 
You cannot pass through the door to the Forbidden Grotto unless you wear the Bands. 
So why do we build big chapels and sit around and mumble, and ask them to save us from this and that? 
What's become of Bjalfi? 
Well, have you found that imp gall for me yet? I've got some research I need to get to. 
If you think the Mazken will help you, you will be disappointed. We will destroy them with or without your help. 
Summon a Faded Wraith right here, before me. When I have seen it with my own eyes, you shall be worthy of my teachings. 
What is it, Barthel? 
A fool and his Chalice. Wonderful. 
The Priests of Order are the key. They summon the Knights at the obelisks. 
We have a responsibility to look after one another, don't we? I dare say we do, no matter what the costs. 
Impossible! This is impossible! 
Ha ha!  
Very well. The Brush showed up several years ago in the possession an artist who was serving in the Arnesian War of 396. 
Are you accusing me of taking the painting? 
I'm Amiable Fanriene. Sorry, can't talk. Got to move on. 
Gah! Horrid beast! What do you want? 
No question about it: Stonewall shields has the best pieces of steel to hide yourself behind. 
There isn't much more to say about these soulless creatures. No one knows why they invade or where they're from, but they aren't from the Isles. 
Please, don't let Anaxes loose! He torments us night and day! 
Oh, I don't know.  How could you tell, anyway? 
What can I do for you, my friend? 
Did you think to hide from Jyggalag's all-seeing gaze? 
Some people are frightened by this, or they despair, or even try to deny the truth of what I say. 
He uses the dungeons under Fort Grief as the hunting grounds. I was placed here because he knew someone would go looking for me. 
Syl is gone, and a new ruler presides over the House of Dementia. Perhaps they can cure my malady. 
I understand she'll pay for a "cure" for her malady. 
Stupid rogue, just when we needed him! 
Arden-Sul has heard our plea, and delivered the Gatekeeper back to us. We're saved! 
Welcome, brother. So good to finally meet you. I hope you're getting along all right. 
Ah, Assassin, I must speak with you. It is quite urgent. A sealed letter just arrived from a Dark Brotherhood courier.   
When we're done with all this, we'll talk. If we're still alive... 
I realize he was trying at times, and he spoke before he thought, but he was still my son, and I adored him greatly. 
Akatosh and the Dragon! 
He may help protect us. We can only hope. 
After a long day up at the castle, it's refreshing to spend a time with someone as charming and thoughtful as you. 
Oh, that's right. We've heard all about it. 
You there. I'm watching you. Not so close to the armory door. 
Many are dead in the land of the Dunmer. Even St. Jiub, who drove the cliffracers from Vvardenfell, has fallen to the daedra hordes.  
You idiot! How could you kill Kurdan before you got Aleron to safety? Get... get out of my sight! 
I suggest you deliver that book as soon as possible. Your recommendation depends on it. 
Oh... well... it would seem you don't have the 100 gold required to place a bet. Best come back when you've got enough coin. 
It is the Realm of Lord Sheogorath. It is what He wills it to be. The trees bloom according to His whim, and the wind blows at His command. 
Ha! That stupid s'wit! Throw me out of my home, will he? I'll show him a thing or two about messing with an Othran! 
Hrmph. Why all the fuss now? 
I thought I made it perfectly clear. I'm not interested in whatever you are selling, so if you don't mind... 
You again? Make it quick. I have work to do. 
I'll tell you what I tell anyone else who asks. Get rid of him for me and I'll make it worth your while. Do hurry... time's wasting! 
Relan is the only one around here worth a damn. And that's only because he loves to kill his pests. 
You're enjoying all of this, aren't you? You like seeing us squirm! What in blazes is going on here? Do you have something to do with this? 
If at Sickly Bernice's Taphouse you wish to drink, take a moment to stop and think. 
Nope, don't feel like it. Too bad for you. 
Well, that's not really any of your concern, now is it? 
With the Emperor dead and no new heir crowned, the Dragonfires in the Temple will be dark, for the first time in centuries. 
Oh, no. You can't join the guild with that bounty on your head. Get that taken care of, and then come see me again. 
Can't you see I'm busy? My house. So orderly. And now this! Where do I even begin? 
A new visitor to our home. How wonderful. Better stay away from my wife.... 
Did you hear what happened? Someone robbed the wizard's tower. Fathis Aren got what he deserved, if you ask me. 
Seed-Neeus is worried sick about her daughter Dar-Ma. If you think you can help, you'll find her at her shop, Northern Goods and Trade. 
Will you help me bring the Apostles to the light? And help yourself? 
Stop! Thief! 
Stop! You violated the law. Pay the court a fine or serve your sentence. Your stolen goods are now forfeit. 
Come across any more Nirnroot? 
2, 3... That big ol' torch in... 4, 5... New Sheoth is finally lit... 7, 8.  
I can remove them, but I will need time. The Dremora overseer will be here any minute to check up on me. You need to play along until he leaves. 
This whole business of being heir to the throne will take some getting used to.  Please bear with me. 
By following the Path of Dawn hidden in the writings of the Master, Mankar Camoran, you have earned a place among the Chosen. 
Huh? Where did you go? Come out where I can see you! 
The Honorblade has been returned to the Castle after all these years! This is certainly a good omen. 
May the Masque protect you. 
Good work, you fuzzy little rascal! We don't need another Urul around. Do we? Do we? 
You are here to see the Count, yes? He has been expecting you. Please, wait here. I shall inform him of your arrival. 
She may look old and weak, but that's never stopped a murderer before, has it? Don't doubt for a second that she couldn't be the killer. 
At this place though you may be, if you look you won't find me. 
There are few things scarier than an Orc with an axe, but you didn't even flinch! That victory brings you up to Warrior rank. Well done! 
Yes, I can understand your trepidation. For it is not everyday one is invited to join the ranks of the undead, eh? 
Do not test His patience. 
So I guess this is it then? 
Step aside! I'm going to win the right to join the guild. You can't beat me. 
You are honorable. Unlike that renrij Maric, may the moons never shine upon his path. This one will not forget. 
Greetings. 
The investigator the Countess hired failed to find the thief. I almost feel bad for her. 
I'm sorry. We've not met. I'm Janus Hassildor, Count Skingrad. 
Isn't Right-Wind an impressive swordsman? 
Head to Xeddefen, Your Grace. We will hold this position. 
Have any interest in learning to repair weapons and armor? Rohssan can help. 
Oh, I'll never get that crystal ball back. Not with those frightful spirits floating around... 
Well, look who's here! You! How about that? 
The long-reigning Duke of Mania. A Master of Merriment, if you will. Or if you won't; I suspect it wouldn't matter to him. 
I heard he learned about Alteration because he's too scared to fight. Pathetic. 
I have friends visiting soon, so I told them to stay at the King and Queen Tavern. 
Unleashed the swarm did we? Nothing like a little bloodlust to start the encounter off right. 
Hail, Savior of Bruma! 
Oh! Oh, well of course. You have your own concerns, I'm sure, and I should not have imposed. Please excuse my indiscretion. 
Go and speak with Christophe. Rent a room for the night. Once you have your room, I will meet you there. 
Yes? I assume you've spoken to that lout Maglir? 
What? Fake a death? And you can't even kill the enforcer? I don't envy you, friend. But a contract's a contract. Just do what you've got to do. 
No. That's not it. 
No need to go to the Imperial City. Bruma may look like a Skyrim town, but we've got all the comforts of the warm Nibenean south. 
Then leave, and forget you have ever seen this place. 
He... He's dead. And on my watch... I've failed... Failed everyone... 
They're saying that the Gatekeeper has been killed. Was it you? Did you do it? Did you get anything good from him? 
Cretin! Nincompoop! Halfwit! Now I have to start all over again. Happy? 
Foolish mortal! 
Mercenaries is what they are, and they've hung up a shingle here in Leyawiin. Vantus can tell you more. 
Back for more information? 
Amusei tried to sell it to Alessia Caro? Argh! Stupid lizard. 
Yes, powerful magic indeed. It is proper that you bid me kindly, lest I show you the meaning of pain and suffering. 
Come on, you've got to help me! Let old Valen out of this cell! You've got your freedom, now give me mine! What do you say, huh? Come on, friend! 
Father's not scared - don't you dare say that! You'll see when he gets here. I'll ask him, and then you'll see! 
6, 9... You're working for those Demented people! 7, 12... Go away! 
Excellent! Here's the key to the front door and the deed of ownership. I hope you enjoy your new home. 
If you tell anyone I said anything bad about Audens, I'll deny it. 
You're going to get arrested if you don't leave right away! 
Some dashing new hero has stolen into the Realm! 
I'm sorry to impose upon you like this, but I'm in need of assistance, and I don't know what to do. My husband, Aleron, is missing. 
Don't know why anyone would visit the other cities of Cyrodill. Chorrol has it all. And a fairly low murder rate! 
I know where Sheogorath is. He's hiding in my house. In a cupboard. But he's invisible. 
The "Commentaries" are contemporary with Tiber Septim, over 400 years ago. So he is unlikely to still be alive, although you never know. 
This will make it look like a simple murder, Phillida will be none the wiser, and you'll receive a nice bonus. Now go, and may Sithis go with you. 
Ma'zaddha is particularly reclusive, and may not respond well to questioning. Again, you may find Herdir's assistance necessary. 
Yes, well, I know how you feel. What words can really do justice to the terrible situation at hand? But we must stick together if we are to survive! 
Seems like you could handle trouble pretty well. Would you go see what's the matter? 
Just keep one hand on your hilt and both eyes on the crowd. There's something sinister lurking out there. I can feel it. 
Hurry, get to Weynon Priory. 
See Burz gro-Khash in Cheydinhal for contracts. 
It is a pleasure to meet you. I am Countess Valga of Chorrol. I wish I had time to chat, but I'm afraid I am in the middle of an investigation. 
Ma'am. 
I have nothing else to say to you. But my father wants to speak with you before we send you on your way. 
Yeah, right. 'Til next time. 
You've got to be kidding. 
Morrowind has always been a troubling place. It seems it is moreso now. 
Good. You're back. 
I try not to talk to him. I don't have that kind of time. 
If I were you, and thank Sheogorath that I'm not, I would begin with the people who spend their day closest to Thadon. 
Fools must be separated from their illusions before they will come to Him. 
What was it like, in the Temple, at the end? Did Martin really call down the power of Akatosh to smite Dagon? 
Good news from Kvatch for a change. The last of the daedra have been driven out. 
You have followed the path set for you by the Lord Hermaeus Mora. Approach his shrine and speak with him. 
Go away. Do not come back. 
Watch over them, and keep them safe. I couldn't bear to lose them to those monsters. 
I see you slept well. Welcome home. 
May you walk on warm sands. 
I don't know. Just take a walk around. Buy something. Plenty of stores. Why'd you come in the first place? 
Jyggalag's defeated. Took them long enough to get rid of him. 
When you've got the money for it, then maybe I'll consider letting you have a room. 
There are three things I can enchant the staff with: Soul Trap, Telekinesis, and Dispel. 
I'm sorry, no one except for Cheydinhal City Guard are allowed inside this home. 
I understand that the Blackwood Company works cheaper than the Fighters Guild. And they'll do any job. 
My duties rely on watching no more than the throne and attending to visitors. 
Money for wine? I think not. However, I will pay you to collect Hunger tongues. What do you think? 
How little you understand! You cannot stop Lord Dagon. 
Well, well, if it isn't Dragonheart! How's our new Grand Champion, huh? You ready to make me some money? Ha ha ha ha ha!  Ahem... 
Excellent! Go out to the corral. Antione will have your new Bay saddled and ready for you. 
Then why do you waste my time? Jollring! Show her the door, if you please! 
You're having a bit of fun with me. Very good. 
Your name will be hailed whenever we toast this day's victory in our halls at Pinnacle Rock. 
We must put an end to this travesty of justice. 
But how to use this power against Dagon? The Amulet was not intended as a weapon...  
We should get out of here. 
I haven't turned up anything new on my end yet. 
Chorrol appears to be clean, prosperous, and well-ordered. Countess Arriana, her staff and guard is to be praised. 
It's all moving faster than I'd expect. And I'm good at expecting. Things are getting a bit thin. 
I just thought of something funny. 
Many years ago, this town was settled by Ulf the Bleaker. Soon after, Rayno Dalvilu and his family arrived. 
A new ruler of Mania. It doesn't sound good to me. 
Let's find Menian and get out of here! 
By the way the guards tossed you in here, I can see you're no friend of theirs. 
A tavern! Ha ha ha ha ha! Oh, I should have known! Leave it to a barbarian to spend an entire chest full of gold on beer and mead. How pathetic. 
I see you have been speaking with Teinaava. What he says is true. All our lives we have lived together in the shadows. We are egg mates. Twins. 
You'll look absolutely stunning in this. Maybe you'd like to give me a little fashion show? 
I've lost a great deal of merchandise over the last few months. I keep replacing it, but they keep stealing it, new locks on the doors be damned! 
Well, if what you learned is accurate, then you must protect yourself. It sounds like the cold in the glade is so severe that it could harm you. 
Report, soldier. 
Well met, milord. 
Hestra Runestones are marked with green runes, appear as solitary monuments, and are believed to be named for the late First Era Empress Hestra. 
Our gracious Countess funds my research. I ward tame rats with resistance spells, then shower them with elemental attacks. 
Do you return triumphant? 
The Council requires more time. Please, be patient. I will have work for you soon enough. 
Oh, you're helping him? Why didn't you say so? 
Count Goldwine retreated to the castle, determined to hold on to it at any cost. He's still in there now, I'm sure. 
Don't worry about me, my friend. I know I'm in good hands here. 
You want to keep magic items charged at all times. The world could come crashing down at any moment, and you want to be prepared. 
I saw Ugak gra-Mogakh earlier. At least, I think it was her. Perhaps it was her sister. 
A victory beyond hope! You and Martin defeated Mehrunes Dagon in the very moment of his triumph! All hail the Champion of Tamriel! 
I can't believe it! The Gray Prince has been beaten! There's a new Arena Grand Champion now, someone called the Divine Avenger! 
No! We make our stand here, today, for the whole of Cyrodiil! 
Did that fetcher give you any information? 
Once Martin uses the Amulet of Kings to light the Dragonfires, the barriers between Oblivion and Tamriel will be restored. 
Syl has been slain. You need Syl's heart. I'll let you figure out the rest. 
I think Tertia Viducia has a good supply of light armor. 
Your Grace, the situation is grim. Passwall is under attack. We are outmatched and outnumbered. 
Oh, hello sweetie. So, no luck yet in finding the gold, I gather? I've been looking as well, but haven't found so much as a clue.  
One more room to go. 
Fight! Fight! Fight! 
Spare me your pleasantries, Herdir. Ask what you will and be done. 
Your humble servant, My Lord. 
...Someone like you! No need to thank me for letting you give me your power. I deserve it, after all. 
What do you say we drink a toast to the new Gatekeeper together? Hey, could you spot me, just this once? 
Enjoy your stay here. 
Keep quiet, and stay out of the way. 
Okay, so you're not a complete loser. Don't get cocky. Let me know when you're ready for a match and you can prove yourself to me some more. 
Hiding in that swamp you will find an Argonian Shadowscale named Scar-Tail. Kill this renegade, and bring me his heart as proof of the deed. 
Well done. 
Ranaline. I cook at the Lonely Suitor. 
I'm good, I suppose. I've got this sword. It's better than nothing. Let's go bash in some goblin skulls! 
Aren't you an ugly one. 
Don't give up. You're not alone. And the chapels and the Elder Council will help us. It just takes time. 
I shall do what I can in the meantime. Please, excuse me. I have matters to attend to. 
Hard to find an Orc girl in this city like Umog gra-Marad. Smart, tough, got a good trade. Nice-looking, too. So I got to make my intentions clear. 
Welcome to Renoit's Books. I'm the owner, Estelle Renoit. Look around. If you don't see what you want, please ask. 
I highly suggest that you make no effort to associate with her. 
This war has seemed hopeless to me, but what else was there to do but hold on and wait for a hero to arise to save us? 
It's at the bottom of the ruins, if you wish to try your luck. Be careful, though. It could be quite hazardous to your health. 
You're now the prey in Kurdan's insane hunt, just like I am. And here, we'll most likely die. 
Gods give me strength. 
The scroll will allow you to call upon Rufio's angry ghost for assistance. He will appear, unleash his anger upon your foes, and then disperse.       
But... I already have... or had.... How odd. It seems to be missing. I'm sorry I don't have the funds to purchase it from you. Again. 
My friends, we have a winner! Behold, the combatant from the Yellow Team! If you bet on the Yellow Team, see the Gatekeeper to collect your winnings! 
The place was pretty deserted when I got here. Of course, once I was here, others followed. Can't say I blame them. 
Do you have a death wish? Trust me, you don't want to try that again. 
You persecute genius when you find it, because we are able to see around the sharp corners of your simplified "morality." 
I am bound by duty and honor to obey this order. After all these years, he has finally won. 
Look now upon my Paradise. Gaiar Alata, in the old tongue. A vision of the past... and the future. 
Raynil was spotted heading west out of Bruma. The scout tried to follow, but lost him in the mountains. 
I'm leaving. I've got to find a way out of here. 
No, sir. 
I expect you to be taking care of the problem. I'm too tired to do it. 
I've never wanted to join up, but I understand Azzan is a good man. 
Unless you want to do things the hard way... 
You men are all alike. 
This reunion will be the happiest day of my life. 
Please, return soon. It's always a pleasure to see you. 
By the grace of Arden-Sul, the armies have returned. 
I'm worried about Martin. He does nothing but pore over that evil book all day. 
I'm afraid you lack the funds to rent a room. Perhaps you should consider resting somewhere else? 
When you are really angry, it feels good to hack into someone with a giant blade. 
This is true. Very little surprises me, but your successes against the advance of Order have left me astonished. Speechless. 
... But listen to me! Cawing and chattering like an old fishcrow... 
I've never shopped there, but I know she carries good alchemy equipment. 
Looking for other jobs? Don't look at me. 
Why did Sheogorath measure the Shivering Isles? Because he's the ruler! Ah ho ho ho! 
I go to my grave. A tongue shriller than all the music calls me. 
I am eager to peruse your haul. 
Run along now, little one. Go and play with the other godlings. 
The whole thing is a big shame. She's such a nice young girl. 
Training? From me? 
I think... I'll just rest my eyes for a moment. 
Not only does Shameer make a good wine at the Tamika Vineyards, but he's really good with his bow, too. I heard he'll train you, for a fee. 
Go tell Ulrich that I have some information that incriminates him. Tell him to come alone, or he won't get it. 
It would seem that your only course of action now is to extract information from Nelrene, Inquisitor. 
I take no responsibility for your stupidity. 
Usual mixup with the Watch, I ... 
That's a big chest you've got there. You need any help getting this thing on? 
Blessings of the Nine. My name is Tumindil. I'm the chapel priest. I'm sure you can find your way around the chapel by yourself. 
It must bleed. 
He's got to go. Before he eats me. 
The Great Torch burns with such vibrant color. I should try and incorporate the hues in my next work. 
Must have been the wind. 
Another one bites the dust. The Khajiit is done. 
May you find healing here for your wounds, and for your troubled spirit. There's a peace here in the Chapel for all who seek it.  
Can't this wait, huh? Someone's been murdered and I've got better things to do than gossip about an old woman. 
The book is entitled "Fingers of the Mountain" -- it is of no use to you; you won't be able to read it. I, however, can, and would very much like to. 
He's been ordered to evacuate the Waterfront? Excellent. 
Everyone is waiting to see if Farwil and his knights return from inside that dreadful Oblivion Gate. Such brave lads! 
After the Battle of Sancre Tor, Tiber Septim gave his armor to the Blades in honor of our role in his victory. 
Ah, I find your etiquette refreshing. Now please, listen carefully. On the Green Road to the north of Bravil lies the Inn of Ill Omen. 
Well... Caranya will want to talk to you. You should go see her. 
Haven't seen as many lately, what with the... well, you know. The murders. 
Seek more loot. Keep the fences busy with your profits. Then we can talk. 
Protect and serve. It's what we do. 
What's good for Thadon is good for all of Bliss. 
Orintur doesn't like to brag, but no one can match the Reflect spells he can cast. He might teach you one, if you're skilled enough. 
I can't believe the ridiculous new fines the guards are imposing. Ever since Ulrich took over as Captain of the Guard, this place is going downhill. 
There are rats and goblins down there... but from what I've seen of you, I'm guessing you are an experienced Scout. Am I right? 
Welcome, sister. You are one of the Chosen now. 
You went inside that Gate, huh? You saved our necks, so thanks. 
Wondering why I let her go, aren't you? I can see it in your face. Mostly in the eyes. I may take those from you when this is done. 
I've never read any of Quill-Weave's writings. I've heard they're fairly good, though. 
Nearly invincible, he has established himself somewhere in the north of Cyrodiil. This is all that I know. 
At first light, the spire at the center of town became active. Immediately, the area around it began to crystallize and change. 
The Great Torch is lit. A romantic symbol, isn't it? I always hoped my first kiss would be in the glow of a torch. 
Hmmm, wonder if it's too late to ask for less rat in tomorrow's dinner? 
Have you come to join us? Or simply to die? 
Wonderful. I do hope you didn't try to eat any of it. It can have very nasty effects on one such as yourself. 
Did you hear that? 
What they don't know is that they're being drawn to their doom, courtesy of the Resonator of Judgment. 
The old biddy seems flustered about the murder, but who isn't, right? 
Gives me the strangest looks, now that you mention it.  Almost like he hates me, although I have no idea why. 
Agh! Now it's my turn! 
There are guards at the top of the stairs. Be as quiet as you can. 
City-Swimmer is a bit odd, don't you think? 
Speak with her specifically about these Black Soul Gems. If she knows anything about their powers or creation. 
Unfortunately, Captain Dion was also in the Two Sisters Lodge. He arrested Theranis and hauled him off to the dungeons. 
My knowledge is at your disposal. 
All right then, I guess I'd better start looking. That gold's not going to find itself! 
Have you taken leave of your senses? We already covered this! Now go away! 
She likes jumping off things. That's because she's an idiot. 
You must be the cat burglar I've been told to expect. Follow me. 
You know who's responsible for killing the Gatekeeper, don't you? It's Them. 
I've done some scouting around while we've been camped here, and it looks like Cropsford is right in the middle of a goblin war. 
Hahaha! Isn't that rich? They think the things are stolen, but no! They are right there! They just don't know! 
The guild offers magical supplies to the citizens of Tamriel, but has far greater benefits for its members. Talk to Dagail if you'd like to join. 
Wonderful! You are indeed a treasure hunter of exceptional talents! Here is your reward as promised! 
I'm afraid you'll have to make up your own mind. Unfortunately, I'm just the hired help. I'm not paid to make the big decisions. 
All the furnishings were built inside the ship since they were too big to be carried on board. Spared no expense. 
Time's wasting. 
You! I remember you. You're the adventurer who slew my Gatekeeper, are you not? 
Thank you for listening. You're a good friend. I just hope my sweet Faelian can clean himself up, or that awful skooma will be the death of him! 
Hello there. 
Look, I know that you covered for me before, so I'll give you this one. Talk to Aryarie at the Mages Guild for the job. After this, we're done. 
I don't even know what a will-o-the-wisp is, much less how to kill one. I think they're just swamp gas, myself. 
It has always been so, and presumably always will be so. 
Please... if you don't want to buy something, then just leave. Your wild accusations are upsetting me. 
I was afraid we were gonna be ordered in there. Legion always ends up doing everybody's dirty work. 
Hmmm. Another comes to us. What is it? 
I'm good. I've got this hammer... to bash in some goblin skull! 
No fisherman is going into Tidewater Cave. It's full of trolls. We have to sneak past them, remember? 
We need more pressure on Lex. He's a stubborn fetcher. 
Please... 
She's been paying well for certain magic items that might protect her. 
Hello again, brother. 
Following each cycle of the Greymarch, Sheogorath has cast out or killed every aspect of Order found in the Shivering Isles. 
Yes? Well, out with it! 
Good move, kid. Some things are better left alone. Let's get back to the Shrine. I'll smooth things over with the big guy. I'm sure he'll understand. 
Join the Guild, and fight for gold. 
You're trespassing. Get out. 
I'm Gan Luseph, Castle Mage and Healer. 
As it happened so many years ago, my lord Arden-Sul suspected a traitor in his midst. 
So far the killer has claimed two victims. If they plan on adding Dovesi to that list, they can think again. I won't let any harm come to that girl. 
But... 
Hmmm... how do you do? I'd say, very well from the look of things. 
So strange this place. Far from the marsh. 
Ah, there you are! It's good to see you again! No, really, I mean it! 
Speak while the sands are warm. 
I keep telling them, I can't produce results if I'm not given any time! I'm not used to working under conditions like this! 
Well then. If you re-think your decision, I'll be around. 
I'm thinking a Scalon would complete the collection. Unfortunately, you are not powerful enough to handle them yet. Still, if you find one... 
If you have followed the path before you, speak with our Lord. 
He is a fool of a Captain in the Imperial Watch. He's a real law and order type. 
Very well. You may bring it to me at any time and receive your reward. 
Hail, Good Mage! Welcome to the Arcane University! Is there anything I can help you with? 
Your dead drops went unvisited, your targets ignored. Instead, you have been systematically killing off all the members of the Black Hand!            
Salutations. 
All right. It's your funeral. Welcome to the Arena, you filthy Pit Dog. You're free to fight, so long as you know the rules of competition.      
I love my work. Fire, frost, shock, poison... little presents for Kynareth's cute little woodland creatures. 
I'm not sure what to think of the kid anymore. All I know is that two of the guests have been murdered, and he's just dandy. Makes you wonder. 
But before you go, please accept this gift from your new family. A unique set of armor, lighter than normal leather and black as the Void.        
The manor belongs to Velwyn Benirus. He's the one to speak to. 
The Resonator is working again, I understand. I do hope it doesn't confuse any of my brood, returning to me after all these years. 
The others are dust! You alone, High Elf, remain, First and Last! Go now! Beyond the next gate, your portal waits. 
Then be on your way, lest you anger the Lady. 
Through my sources, I've learned that the last reported location of the Madstone was the ruins at Pale Pass. 
The fishing is best when it's raining like this. The fish all come right to the top. It's like they're waiting to be caught. 
This one's mine. 
Then why are you bothering me? 
Ah, my favorite patron! Anything Odd to show me? Ha ha ha. 
I just wish his heart was bigger than his hubris. 
We have it on good authority from officials in a neighboring city that Raynil is what he says he is. So I'm not sure what you're trying to prove. 
Yessir, no more fish for me. Just long peaceful days ahead for ol' Aelwin Merowald. 
Sickly Bernice, proprietor. Don't get too close now. You might catch what I have. 
We're here to serve. 
I'm sorry, but my studies keep me indoors for the most part. I know little of the rest of the city. 
If you find him or the rest of the Knights of the Thorn, get them out of there. I'm sure that the Count would also be pleased if the gate was closed. 
I snooped around. Apparently, they completed that contract for us. I went in there with twenty good men. I can't believe that bunch finished the job. 
It's all right. The Guild here, that is. That's what you meant, right? It's fine. I'm doing fine here. 
Ohhhh... what am I to do? They're gone... all gone. 
Need a bite to eat? Maybe something to wash it down with? 
Now you listen to me. I don't like you. Understand? So why don't we both just stay out of each other's way, and be done with it. 
He's a wizard who took up residence in the ruins of Fort Caractacus a couple of years ago. 
Bugok gro-Bol always seems ready for a fight. Seems odd for a bookseller. 
So many figures to compile. Would that I had your infinite wisdom, Lord. 
My pockets are a little light at the moment... if you know what I mean. 
Vampires? Why would you ask me about those filthy creatures? 
The Dark Brotherhood must seek out a Khajiit named Shavari. She has need of our services, and we are only too happy to oblige. 
To think, all the information I needed was in a simple tome. Ah well... 
Just exit the city through the North Gate. It isn't far from there. 
So I've heard. Still, best to avoid their camps entirely. 
Not while Kvatch is still in danger. Once we are all safe, perhaps I will reconsider. 
That's the last time you'll commit a crime in Bleaker's Way! 
Please, let me out of here! You must help me escape. I think these creatures plan to do something horrible to me tonight! 
I've heard that City-Swimmer has learned the value of not being seen. Quite impressive, and she'll teach it to others. 
Very well. We're anxious to return to Weatherleah, so be sure to let me know as soon as you're ready. 
Perhaps you would like to do a service for County Leyawiin? 
Have no fear, brother. It is only me. 
Well thank you! It's not only a fine assortment of goods, but a bit of a treasure trove; you never know what I'll have in stock. 
Jorundr and I have had a rocky relationship at best. Against my will, I've been dragged all over Cyrodiil helping him commit petty crimes. 
'mafre' seems to translate to frost. So a spell with frost damage should work for it. Anything else? 
Azzan at the Fighters Guild is a fine warrior. I understand he can sign you up, if you're interested. 
Since you're here, I was wondering... do you think you could assist me? I'm having a bit of a crisis. 
She never showed up.  How am I supposed to run a shop without any merchandise?  You tell her I want half off on my next delivery. 
By the way... do you happen to know what the fine is here in Cyrodiil for necrophilia? Just asking. 
He'll be here soon, and I'll be gone. Can't say I like the sound of that. I like the sound of other things, though. Like birds. And bones cracking. 
Well, I suppose I should congratulate you on returning the painting to the Countess. I won't. 
Hope to see you again soon. 
Nahsi is quite a character, and quite an impressive fighter. 
The petty worries of lords and dukes mean nothing to me. Syl could torture her entire court to death for all I care. 
I'm a Sintav, and we Sintavs stick together. Uncle Iniel got us swell jobs and a house. It's a family thing. 
Lord Sheogorath... as I expected. I will hear you and then ask for peace from your prattle. 
The stone is a fine bit of Akaviri craftsmanship. Worn like an amulet, this talisman is said to protect the wearer from poisons of any type. 
But he is certainly in a better place now. Lucien Lachance's soul now serves Sithis in the Void. It is an honor he earned, and deserves. 
Hey, can you help me? Suicide is bad. I'll just end up on the Hill. But, perhaps you can kill me? Stick me in the heart with something sharp? 
Normally the Fountainhead is a peaceful sanctuary. But there's no telling what changes the taint of Order may have wrought. 
Bonuses? Ha ha ha ha ha! Useless, I say! Gold and magical trinkets are no substitute for the freedom to slaughter anyone I please, at any time! 
There's a new person in the Isles. I wonder what his blood tastes like? 
What a fool you are. 
What reason could she have to turn on Lord Sheogorath Himself? She must know that He will find and punish her. 
He's the crowning achievement of Relmyna Verenim. She's my teacher. The Gatekeeper keeps out people who don't belong. 
So I said to her, "No, I am a messenger of death." You should have seen the look on her face! Ha ha ha ha! Anyway, she won't be seeing age six!  
I don't have time to talk to you! There's fighting to be done! When my father arrives, we're going back to the forest! 
A drink to the health of our Lord! 
Put that on, see if it fits okay. When you're ready for a match, I'll be waiting. You want to fight, you talk to me. All right then. 
Well, well, if it isn't Man o' War! How's our new Grand Champion, huh? You ready to make me some money? Ha ha ha ha ha!  Ahem... 
Meridia has spoken to you, and for that, you are blessed. 
I appreciate your business. 
Ah, sorry friend, but it would appear the opponent you bet on lost that last fight. Better luck next time!   
Ah! Our newest member. 
No heroics now, all right? Remember your training and do what you have to do, but don't take any unnecessary risks.  
I saw you enter Olav's Tap and Tack before I could get there, and I knew that I had to sneak out of Bruma somehow. 
I'd stay back from that door if I were you. Nothing that's gone in has come out right. 
I heard the Gatekeeper is dead. He didn't have any of my things on him, though, so it's no matter. 
Fall back! Mazken! Retreat! Fall back to the town center! Now! Now! MOVE! 
I've told you all I know. It was Ma'zaddha... I don't know anything more, I swear it! 
Oh, Faelian, dear Faelian... why must you ruin both our lives? 
Well met! Come, warm yourself by our fire. 
Say what you will, receive your answers, and leave me to my solitude. 
Here we are! 
All right, my friend. You've got 100 gold down on the Blue Team. Good luck, and enjoy the match! Oh, and if you win, come see me for your payout! 
Since the immediate threat to Cheydinhal is now eliminated, I will grant your request and send reinforcements to Bruma. 
I should have seen it sooner. 
I see Bolor was unsuccessful in delaying you. Very well; I shall reanimate him once we are done here. 
I saw him once. Then I didn't. How about that. 
If you'll excuse me, I'm off to Leyawiin Castle to check in and then the Imperial City for some rest and relaxation. 
Xeddefen has been silent, Your Grace. 
With the Pools cleansed, the Font of Madness will soon be restored. There's no time like the present to finish your journey towards godhood. 
Didn't we go over this already? Bring the Duke's heart to the Altar of Arden-Sul. It's quite simple. 
What is it that I can do for you? And be quick about it. Every second that passes brings us closer to our graves. 
Certainly. What do you need? 
When I want your opinion, I'll give it to you. 
But our life here is a nightmare. The creatures of the Garden torment us endlessly. When they kill us, we are soon reborn and the cycle begins again. 
No one would buy that thing once it's activated like it's been. The only chance is to return it to its original resting place, Darkfathom Cave. 
Let's teach those bastards a lesson! 
But remember, I don't want to see it coming. Take me unaware! 
If there is anything I can do, I am humbly at your service. 
So, you've managed to kill the Gatekeeper. Pity. Well, you'll now be able to enter the Realm proper. You'll notice there are two doors. 
I can't just jump. Don't want to end up on the Hill. But I hope that someday maybe a big gust of wind will come and push me off so I can end it all. 
When you've contributed enough to the guild coffers by selling stolen items to Ongar, I might have something for you. Come back then. 
There's one available for the night, if you're interested. It'll be 10 gold. What do you say? 
Greet the new day, brother. 
Has the new ruler of Crucible thought about setting up a city morgue? I'd keep track of all the bodies! 
Please, stay your hand. 
Capital! This may be the last piece of the puzzle. I need to spend more time with Savilla's Stone first. 
I'll hold onto this. You don't want to get caught by the authorities with it, do you? I suppose I should give you something in exchange. 
All right, it should be safe to speak here. 
I hope things get better. 
I wouldn't have any, that's what. So these arrows are staying right here in case someone needs them. 
Vengeance will be ours. 
We should not speak of this again until you can pay the blood price. 
Nothing unusual happens there. Nothing at all. 
No! I cannot even think such thoughts. How do I know I can trust you won't become just as tyrannical as she has? 
I'm glad to see you've returned. 
Once I'm gone, things usually get bad quickly. Lots of defections. Lots of carnage. But with you at the helm, things will be different! 
He is somewhere in the house. Flee thief, while you still have the chance! 
Leyawiin is beset by enemies. The Empire does nothing to help us. Even before this crisis, I did not have enough men to patrol my borders. 
You know as much as I do about the art of being a Marksman. There is only one person I know of that is more skilled. 
But if you're dead set on it, head to The Best Defense in the Imperial City. He's a smith there, and might be persuaded to train you. 
Been drinking from a lousy wooden tankard since. It's just not the same. If you can find it, you'd have the gratitude of Newheim the Portly! 
I suppose if I found out a loved-one was something as horrid as a vampire, I'd find any excuse not to believe it either. 
Many of these abilities, Lord, are rooted in the magicks of the Isles. Should you choose to leave this Realm, they will not likely function. 
There, there, my dear. Everything will be just fine. Don't worry. 
Yes. Yes, this whole thing has taken quite a bit out of me. I think I'll go to my room for a bit and get some sleep. Thanks for the talk. 
Farewell, and be careful, Kurdan is not to be trusted. 
God's blood! So she was the spy? It seems there's no one you can trust these days. 
I happen to have a copy of Volume Three on hand, but I'm afraid it is a ... special order. Already paid for by another customer. Sorry. 
Yeah, I'm ready. Let's go! 
You can only fight once a week, though. We'll need that much time to catch new creatures for you to fight against. 
My lord! Welcome to Cloud Ruler Temple! We have not had the honor of an Emperor's visit in many years! 
You're very skilled with Destruction magic; I just don't feel comfortable talking about this with you. 
I had no idea! 
Lord Dagon thirsts for red-drink. Sate him. 
Seridur? He comes in from time-to-time. Usually it's when he's out shopping. He always comes in with a large amount of travel food in his bag. 
So what if he's wearing armor! You think that Imperial Legion scrap can stop a well-forged claymore? Not bloody likely! Ha ha ha ha ha! 
Ah, now this is the type of contract I live for! You must become pure shadow. It's as if you were never there, and then Roderick simply... dies. 
Excellent! A pitiful sword with a pitiful soul in exchange for a Masque fit for a god. You've gotten the better of this bargain, mortal.  
It's really none of your business what I think about him, now is it? 
Good day. My name is Seridur. I don't believe we've met. 
That book requires a great deal of care and security. I hope I am making myself clear. 
Ah, yes. I hope you can help. The gate guards have reported seeing strangers on the road for the past several nights. 
I'd better go with you. We'll have to go through the Chapel Undercroft, and then through what's left of the city. 
You have them? Please, please! Hand them over! 
Heh. It's been too long since I've seen a good brawl. 
Sweet and juicy! You're the best! 
That's in the Talos Plaza District, here in the Imperial City. I'd ask around there, if I were you. 
The land of the Argonians is a strange place indeed. 
Ha! You'll never take me down! 
Every time I see the Torch shining with the flame of Dementia, I blame you. 
Only me left... fine. I'll show 'em. 
Do you think we're safe for a few minutes? 
Any news about the amulet? 
I'm on night watch here, in case someone needs the chapel, or wants to talk... or has mysterious business, like you. 
Excellent. You are now an Associate in the Fighters Guild. You should report to either Azzan in Anvil or Burz gro-Khash in Cheydinhal for contracts. 
Great show, great show! You really brought down the house! Here's your gold. Now get some rest, and I'll see you next week! 
A letter, eh? 
I'm Prior Maborel, head of our community, and responsible for all our religious and secular affairs. 
He's that thief that the Imperial Watch are always going on about. He likes to steal from rich folk. 
You must be the Gray Fox. Your reputation precedes you, as I'm sure you know. 
I've told you what we need. Until we've work, we'll stay here. 
Where has our Lord gone? I hope He returns soon. 
I knew it! I just knew he's gotten himself in hot water again. Please hurry and get him from that island. 
She seems frightened, like the rest of us. I bet now she's regretting ever stepping foot in this house, gold or no. 
I'll never forget this. 
You can only get Volume 4 directly from a member of the Mythic Dawn. I had set up a meeting with the Sponsor, as he called himself. 
Some other time maybe. 
I bet Sheogorath has killed millions of things! 
[Sigh.] Look at me, acting the paranoid fool. I apologize, my lord. I meant no disrespect. My nerves are taut as a bowstring! 
I didn't like you before. Now I really don't like you. What a mess. 
Okay, I'll head over there now. Let me know when everyone else is ready. 
She said when we got back to the safe house in Bravil, we would divide the loot after she fenced the damn thing. 
Capital! Bring me the Arrow of Extrication. It has a key shaped head. Bravil's court wizard, Fathis Aren, recently acquired this unique item. 
I'll keep studying the first two volumes of the "Commentaries." Who knows, I might turn up something before you do! 
You've already got a room. Nothin' more I can get for you. 
It's the smell, really. Smoke and fire. And something worse. In the ruins. 
Very well. Bring me 20 Vampire Dust and 20 Daedra Hearts, and your guild privileges shall be restored. 
Take a seat, or feel free to look around. We have a fine collection of cheeses here, some of the rarest in all Tamriel! 
I merely ask out of concern. If you're a merchant, you should be wary. There have been... problems recently. 
Hello! I'm Dumag gro-Bonk. Best and prettiest smith in town. I know the secret art of forging Amber. Here. Take this list. It explains what I need. 
Let's see what we've got here. 
Interesting. I could have sworn I used to have an arm like that in my museum. I have just the place for it, if only I could afford to buy it.... 
Here, let me remove them for you ... there. You are no longer a prisoner of the Forbidden Grotto. 
Millona Umbranox, Arriana Valga, and Narina Carvain seem to rule their counties perfectly well without male assistance. 
That which is lost can be found again. There is one being in the Shivering Isles who may be able to assist you in the construction of a new Staff. 
Some folks reported seeing strange lights near the old Swampy Cave. We sent folks to investigate them, but haven't seen them since. We need help. 
Patience. Caution. Slow and steady wins the race, my father always said. Careless fighters get one last white shirt and a box. Not me. 
Thanks for the rescue. I didn't think we would make it out of the Chapel alive. Perhaps Akatosh guided you to us. 
I assume you didn't risk your own life to come here to tell me something I already know. Who are you and what do you want? 
A genuine masterpiece comes from the heart, not the mind. 
Avoid the noxious Elytra, its stinger filled with bane. One dose of this in your blood, your life begins to wane. 
If Teekeeus says it's a myth, I have no reason to believe otherwise. Can you prove him wrong? 
All right then, I'm listening. 
I serve the Lord of Order! 
For Kvatch! 
The situation is this. An Obelisk of Order has activated in the Palace courtyard. My Aureals are engaging the Knights as we speak. 
Two days and nary a word. I fear the worst. 
Were up to me, I'd cut you open and show you just how uninspired your blood is. 
I thought we were done speaking. 
Barkeep! A refill! 
A pleasure to meet you again. 
Watch over these souls, who have strayed from the light of your love. 
I'll be here until I've finished my work. But please don't disturb me until I'm done; this is quite a delicate business, you see. 
I'm trying to train here, weakling. Why don't you go someplace more your speed, like the Mages Guild? 
Then perhaps you should go, lest Vaermina take interest in your dreams. 
Yes, yes. Our home, stolen by ogres. My head hurts something terrible right now - speak to Guilbert, will you? 
We will exact our revenge on the Mythic Dawn for the Emperor's murder. By the holy blood of Talos, Mankar Camoran will pay for his crimes! 
But, if we can get you into shape, we might stand a chance. You'll lead my forces, inspire my people! Hopefully, everyone won't end up dead. 
That's not surprising. Sometimes I wonder if she forgets to eat, being so focused on that research of hers. 
You will help replenish alchemical supplies for the guild. Deliver 20 Dragon's Tongue flowers, and 20 Redwort Flowers to me. 
I get by. But let's not change the subject. We're here to talk about you. About what you know. 
We don't like strangers meddling in our affairs. 
Care to donate? 
Another loony from that door! 
Let's talk after the battle is won. 
Her light shall show you the way. 
I've heard the same. Good reason to carry a Cure Disease potion. 
I'd love to shape a weapon for you, but you don't have enough Madness Ore. Have a look at the info I've posted in the shop. 
I've heard that you've been asking around about that corrupt guard. Just don't mention my name. I have enough problems. 
I know we are but lowly males, but we are at your service. Shall we follow you into battle? 
I'm pleased you've joined us. 
The Black Hand is the Dark Brotherhood's ruling council. That hand consists of four Speakers and one Listener. Four fingers and a thumb, as it were. 
Knowing how to use heavy armor isn't a bad idea. Kind of odd to learn it from a Bosmer, though. 
The stolen painting was of Count Valga. Whoever painted it could not do the man justice. 
Thanks for coming. We could use your help. 
Well done. You should have this, one of the artifacts of the Realm. Perhaps it should have been given to you sooner. 
Don't you have somewhere else to be? 
No deal. 
Now there's an army to protect us? Ugh, and I almost had begun to paint "The Gatekeeper in Repose." Oh well, time to start again. 
You come to me glowing with violence and death. Your light has no place here. We seek harmony for ourselves and the Shivering Isles. 
I will mark the location on your map. Look for it in the far northeast of Cyrodiil, beyond Cheydinhal. 
Alright. Lead the way. Let's find Menian and get out of here. 
I eagerly await your return. 
Perchance, dare I ask another favor? 
Dalvilus have lived here peacefully with Ulfgars for generations. As leaders, Hrol Ulfgar and I work hard to preserve that tradition. 
This wasn't part of the plan, was it? 
Good to see you again. 
But you're still going to stop the Greymarch. Stop Jyggalag... Me... from destroying My Realm. 
Get back to work 
If you're looking for books, First Edition is the only place in the city to find them. 
Bring me this creature's horn, mortal. If you dare. 
Why, have you already found another statue for me? 
What are you saying? That Neville is the killer? Why should I trust a low-born dog like you? Get away from me!   
Listen, I can help you. You need my help if you are ever to leave the Forbidden Grotto. 
A mortal! Wonderful. Always a pleasure. Perhaps you'll do a service for me, mortal. And I'll reward you. A fair bargain, don't you think? 
Luronk and I were shopping at Jensine's when he accused us of stealing. Even Jensine said we were innocent, but he didn't care. 
You're new to Gaiar Alata, aren't you? 
My Lord is looking sharp! 
It's all about the Yellow Team! Go Yellow Team! Yeah! Woo! Wait, you didn't bet on the Blue Team, did you? 'Cause that would just be plain stupid!    
That was quite a battle. I hope you are uninjured. 
You're going to have to do better than that. 
This has never happened before! The ruler of Mania turning traitor? Unprecedented! But different is good. A new act in this play. 
Here's a new addtion to the Museum, one of my favorites. A dagger that heals whomever it cuts! Isn't that deliciously Odd? 
Good evening, milord. 
Truth is, the Legion doesn't know who was behind the Emperor's murder. We've already ruled out the Dark Brotherhood. So is this something... worse? 
Good work locating the Shrine of Dagon. If you can retrieve the Amulet of Kings, we may yet prevail. 
How does Ita Rienus know so much about Tamriel? 
This is the Wildeye Stables. 
No worries. Whatever happened at Kvatch won't happen here. 
I don't answer to Traven. I heed only the word of Mannimarco. 
Welcome back. 
Thank you... 
Good thing I joined the Mages Guild when I did. There's nothing better than enchanting your own clothes. 
Someone needs to get Skjorta under control. You'd think Olfand would be the one to do it. 
It... it all happened so fast. It was all we could do to round up the survivors and try and get them to safety. We've failed them miserably. 
I've spoken with several individuals I cannot name at this time. Count Hassildor has also provided valuable information, as you well know. 
This is a secret remembered only by the Blades, passed down from one Grandmaster to the next. Jauffre should tell it to you himself. 
I can't concentrate on my reading with that other version of me walking around. It's terrible. A curse! 
He was very good at obtaining things from people who did not want to part with. A professional thief, to put it bluntly. 
I've come across your kind before. People get murdered, and you ask questions. It's a sure sign of a killer with a guilty conscience. Watch yourself. 
No no no no... It's all right... Everything's fine. There's no cause for alarm, really. I only wanted to share a few words. With a friend.  
I offer the finest goods and lowest prices in all Cyrodiil. 
It serves them right for opening shops in Bliss. 
Count Hassildor of Skingrad has done the most recent research on a cure, I believe. He has what you might call a vested interest in the subject. 
The covens are hidden to outsiders. The last I heard rumors of was a coven seen somewhere in Morrowind, years ago. 
I admit... I still have strong prejudices against necromancy, summoning, and illusion. 
Defeating an Arena Hero is one thing, but defeating a former member of the Blades? You must be blessed by the Divines or somethin', my friend. 
I heard what you did. So did the guild Doyens. You've been cast out of the Thieves Guild. 
A stranger in the Isles is interesting news. Perhaps this stranger has interesting things...? 
Anyway... there are those that have other ways into my Realm, and they're on the move. We don't want them here. Trust me. 
Because of the discretion you exercised, Captain Phillida will not suspect the Dark Brotherhood was involved, and will not meddle in our affairs. 
Remember our history. The Blades were here waiting for Tiber Septim, and we will be here still when the next Dragonborn appears. 
Why do you hesitate? Is it your destiny that you fear? Or perhaps your concern is that you will die before you gain the Throne of Madness. 
It seems that the Mythic Dawn are putting their plan to attack Bruma into motion. 
I don't believe you, but I'll have to check it out anyway. If you are right, there will be hell to pay. You will have to come along. 
That's the spirit! 
You've brought it! The holy Flame of Agnon, the fire of Inspiration and Rapture! 
I am Ri'zakar, Pakseech of the Blackwood Company. The Company provides expert jihatt for selected customers. Very discreet. 
My neighbor, Dro'shanji, is worried. He's seen creatures around the house lately. Why don't you talk to Dro'shanji, see if you can help? 
I trust that you'll handle things ... appropriately. The less I know about it, the better. 
Important things to do... so many important things to do. 
If you hear anything interesting, let me know. 
He is the bringer of pain and pleasure; the blade that cuts through our sins like a scythe through wheat. 
Oh, wonderful! This is going to be such fun! So, any ideas where we should begin searching first? 
To think, I actually had feelings for that wretched witch! Thank the gods she's dead. Now... Now we're safe. We are safe... aren't we? 
Dranas Llethro. I just got back from Solstheim. Boy, was that a mess. And now I'm out of work. 
Does that pain you, Kithlan? Unless you want to feel it again, you'd best tell us what you know. 
I am not certain. But do not lose heart, I have an idea. 
Our new recruit says Maglir completed the Fallen Rock Cave contract. Oreyn refuses to talk about it. 
Do you ever buy soul gems from Calindil? 
[Sigh.] Well, I suppose I should get going. So many contracts, so little time. 
Bliss is safer with the army's return. 
It didn't take long before I realized they were following me! I couldn't be seen in town with scamps following, so I decided to discard the staff. 
I don't really know what you're trying to accomplish, but questioning me about Primo with two people lying dead just makes me suspect you even more. 
The Amulet of Kings is ancient. Saint Alessia herself received it from the gods. It is a holy relic of great power. 
Aye, she's a beauty, isn't she? It's hard not to admire the stonework. That's some real craftsmanship, that is.  
A journal? Let me see that... Blackwood Company! Bastards! Rank amateurs!  
Not bad.... Not bad at all! Okay, you've definitely got some potential. I'll teach you what I know. 
I, too, want to see her dead. And others here have had enough of her, yes. We wish the light, and keep it from us, she does. 
Here is your horse. 
Uh... she left town. That's right! She... uh... went to visit her brother in Bruma. You should go there and look for her. 
Be nice to get another pretty face in the gang. Hope to see you there. 
I know he did. 
Well, look at you. A change for the better, or for the worst? We'll have to see, won't we? 
Don't try to slow me down. I'm going to get that diary before you. 
Behold the new hero of the people of Cyrodiil! Behold, your Arena Grand Champion, the Black Arrow! 
The hallucinogenic spore gas we release into the chamber will help lull the victims into believing the creature means to kill them. 
Ha! You've got to be kidding me. 
I'll wait for you at Applewatch, the farm where you killed the old Draconis woman. It should be empty, and safe. Now go! And may Sithis help us all!  
I'm ready to help you, if you're ready to accept my help. 
Do what you can to ensure the survival of your allies. They will be most helpful to you. 
Kithlan seems eager to help you. When you become sovereign of Dementia, I'd keep him around. 
So goes the life of a rider, hmm? Come what may, at least we're not rotting on the streets of some gods-forsaken city like Bravil, or Leyawiin!   
He's invisible, and you've about as much luck finding him as Jeanne does. Excuse me. 
You're too late, fool. 
I hope the work at Vahtacen goes well. 
It's none of your business how I feel about him. 
Can you defeat Mankar Camoran? And free all the souls of the poor fools who followed him? 
However, another thief in the guild picked up the cowl and assumed his identity and the curse. No-one in the guild knew it was a different person. 
You're working for the Manics. Now, I really don't like you. 
Every birth. Every death. The rise of Tiber Septim. The Numidium. Everything. All predicted with the formulae found within Jyggalag's library. 
Speak with the Mazken and tell them where you wish them to stand. Then speak to me when you are satisfied. 
Fantastic! 
Keep your distance, Associate. 
Rochelle Bantien. Samuel's wife. I'm glad he's settled down to training and the quiet life. 
Get the key! 
Thank you for your kind words. I never knew my father, but he must have been proud to call the Blades his protectors. I know I am. 
You should return to the Palace and speak with Sheogorath. Ask Him how He plans to defend this Realm. 
I'm so sorry. I already have a Ring of Disrobing. There's really no place in a Museum of Oddities for duplicates, as I'm sure you can understand. 
Your friend ain't sleeping, eh? You could buy one of me sticks - a dreamstick, yes! Hit him over the head. Knock him into dreamland. No? Hmmm.  
Make sure you address the Count properly. 
The domain of the Prince of Madness, Sheogorath. We Aureal are tasked with defending this realm against the lesser beings that would destroy it. 
I was a little ashamed afterwards, but didn't know how to apologize or give it back. I wish I could... 
I understand old Dovyn Aren can still teach a bit about Alteration. 
Mankar Camoran lives in his palace, Carac Agaialor, which overlooks the Savage Garden from the top of the mountain. 
Now go! Take some time to rest! When you're feeling up to it, come talk to me again and we'll discuss your future! 
You're a likely looking prospect. Thinking about the Fighters Guild? 
I... I can't believe he's dead. Such a strong, handsome man...  
Looking for action? Think about the Fighters Guild. 
Really. 
I find things to do. I manage the house, make sure Amantius doesn't starve or run out of ink. 
I don't know much about that ghost, but some say he died in a horrible shipwreck. I would stay away from him if I were you... bad omen. 
I am a priest in the Temple of the One in the Imperial City. Perhaps our paths will cross again one day. 
The third chamber of Xedilian is the Chamber of Anathema. Its contents are designed to make sure its the final encounter. 
On second thought, you keep it. You were the last to travel with him, and I feel you deserve it as a memento of your achievement. 
And, of course, please keep this just between us. 
May the Night Mother always watch over you, great Listener. 
The Countess is Heartland Nibenean, and so are most guildsmen and chapelmen, but most others are as Nordish as you'll find. 
The Earl is perhaps not well known in the city. He is a private man, and keeps to himself. 
Dawn is breaking. 
I believe that Mankar Camoran acts as the "anchor" for Paradise, just as a sigil stone anchors an Oblivion Gate in place. 
Well, hello there. Sabine Laul, guild smith -- real happy to meet you. So. What can I do for you? 
Madgod's blessings, Your Grace. 
Ten of the evening watch, and all's well. Everything okay, sir?  
Your target is the Arcane University. We've had our eye on Hrormir's Staff for some time, but have been waiting for the wizards to be distracted. 
Those Shambles are dangerous. Make sure to stand back if you kill one. 
That Danus Artellian is a little too full of himself. Sure, he's a Captain of the Guard, but I'm not impressed. 
Faelian used to have money... used to be quite a gentleman, too. But that was before he took a fancy to the... you know. The skooma. 
In your absence, Thoronir visited and we spoke at length about his role in this scheme. I believe him when he says he didn't know Agarmir's sources. 
The Army of Reman is at our doorstep, and our supplies have dwindled. 
We will not be able to hold this position for long, Your Grace.  
No understanding of the pitfalls of experimental magic! Finally, I decided that permanent invisibility was the only way to get some peace and quiet. 
Just look around. Is not Cheydinhal the model of civic rule? No... don't bow! I am just a humble servant of the people. 
No, I don't think so. You're an adventurer?  How disgusting. Why don't you go back the way you came? 
He's in hiding. I hear Methredhel is looking for you, though. 
You have your orders. Now carry them out. 
Time for you to see where the real power of the guild lies. Raminus Polus will want to speak with you; head to the Arcane University. 
All I know about them is that they're found in the many fort ruins scattered all over Cyrodiil. 
Soon, we will seek the light without her. 
Welcome back, milady. 
As you may know, I am somewhat of an enthusiast for Ayleid antiquities. In my own modest way, I have amassed a rather considerable collection. 
Wondering why I let him go, aren't you? I can see it in your face. Mostly in the eyes. I may take those from you when this is done. 
The Count went missing about ten years ago. No one knows what happened to him. Lady Millona rules County Anvil.  
They can aid you in defeating those that carry the gem. Once you have it, bring it here to me. 
Excuse me, I must have nodded off there. 
You have arrived at last! 
I've been doing some research in the Mystic Archives. What I discovered... It's more than we could have hoped for! 
You outrank me, now, so there's certainly no more I can do for you. You might check with an old friend of yours, though. 
You don't look strong enough to me, though. A bit inexperienced, perhaps. Still, maybe we will find work for you. You may join. For now. 
I'm very disappointed in you. The proper way to do this would have been my way, but you chose bloodshed. I should have you arrested.  
If he's smart, he'll keep out of my way. High elf and a mage to boot, the worst kind of arrogance. 
Please, hurry! Get rid of those things! 
Ah, the ghost effect; an excellent demonstration of Xedilian's true power. 
It's a regal name, from a rather regal family. Indeed, my father owns more property than the East Empire Company! 
This one is perhaps more unusual than truly Odd, but some people enjoy it. Truth be told, I only display it as a favor to the donor. 
Work hard! 
I have an idea of what this gem is for, and I want you to make sure it never reaches Mannimarco's hands. 
Poor Prior Maborel. He was dead when I came outside. Who could have done this? 
I might know of one. Can you spare a few coins? 
We honor you, Mace-Bearer. 
You don't find something soon, I'm gonna lose my temper. 
I've been bad, really bad. Perhaps the new leader of Dementia can sentence me to death for my crimes! Where do I sign up for that? 
There's a little settlement called Border Watch. It's a nice, peaceful place... and dull, dull, dull. You're going to make their lives interesting. 
Like all mortals, you talk when you should listen. You will have your chance for battle, if you wish it. 
Ever since Ulrich Leland took over the Captain of the Guard post, this city's gone downhill. It's getting almost scary to walk the streets. 
It's good to see you in the real world. I'm indebted to you for rescuing me from my nightmare. 
Thank you!  Hurry, we need to get out of here, quick! 
I realize it's in poor taste to celebrate anyone's demise, but Raelynn was evil through-and-through. You've done the right thing. 
Don't judge Farwil too harshly. Most of what he says is... fabricated. But he's young, and therefore quite brash and inexperienced. 
Hey, it's you. The one who found jobs. Whadda you need? 
I hope you enjoyed your reign, as it is almost at an end. 
This has been a concern of mine as well. And I take it the others, they're of the same mind? 
Look, I don't know what kind of information you're after, but I won't help you. Just go away.   
Indeed. Lord Sheogorath will be anxious to hear of your victory, I am sure. 
My daughter was killed, you see. A few years back, by bandits. I'm sorry, please forgive a father's heavy heart. 
It all happened tomorrow. I'm sure this conversation will all come back to you in a day or two. 
I believe they were hidden in various Ayleid settlements across Cyrodiil, although I do not know the exact location of any of them. 
Forgive me, Your Grace, but you are not permitted to pass within Brellach. 
I cannot arouse further suspicion by offering leniency to you, should you find yourself on the wrong side of the law. 
What? The very dead rise in this accursed place? Very well, you'll not slay me without a fight! Have at you! 
This noble deed will not go unrewarded. Look upon the ground in this prison. There you will find a map to my gratitude. 
Umm ... no time to talk. 
Simply wonderful. I'm hesitant to even open the bottles... oh, thank you for these. 
I've heard there's no one in the city better at opening locks. 
The one in Moslin's Inn is your best bet. Nearest where she's being held. The middle of the night, when everyone's at the Gathering. 
I have given you little more than a name. I can only pray that you'll wander the Imperial City aimlessly for days, and then eventually die of hunger. 
There's little more to discuss. If they bring me ogre teeth, I'll pay. 
Yeah? 
Thadon has passed the mantle. I heard he was in bad health, anyway, and I know how that is. 
A farmhouse? Hmmm, last time it was a cabin. They must be moving around. Just be cautious. 
Felldew is a poison, little one. A very dangerous drug. You'll feel good at first, but that wears off, and if you go long without it, you'll suffer. 
Would you like one of these? 
Can I ask you a favor? 
The Gatekeeper has been reborn. I wonder if there are pieces left over.... 
I think we're in for some hard times. The death of Uriel Septim and his heirs changes everything. 
Welcome, my friend! I am Isabeau Bienne, the ostler of Bay Roan Stables. And today I can sell you such a very fine bay horse! 
Here is your reward. Well done, and thank you. 
It seems that with each murder, Neville becomes that much more aware. If I didn't know better, I'd say he's planning on catching the killer himself. 
Get out of my way before I have you slapped in irons. 
Hello again. I hope your search for the painting goes well. 
My brother! It is wonderful to see you again. We will have much to talk about in the next days. 
Yes, he lives here near Chorrol, at Weynon Priory. Leave the town gate, look southeast down the Black Road. You can't miss it. 
Then you shall remain suspended from the guild. If this is your attitude, perhaps we are all better off for it. 
You're a Warrior now. That ain't no joke. They may not know your name, but the people out there, the spectators, they know you now.   
Are you ready to pay the blood price for the murders you committed in Cheydinhal's Chapel? 
... there. You're not a prisoner of the Forbidden Grotto any longer. 
I must go to the Temple of the One and perform the ceremony to relight the Dragonfires. 
It's possible. Or maybe she got out, and she's looking for you, too? 
Very good. Please follow me. 
Hold your tongue, little Duke, or I'll tear it from your mouth. 
Have you made any progress? Will Anya assist us? 
Ordinarily, we could clear this up with a token payment, but under the circumstances, the peace of the Realm requires that I escort you away. 
I've more important things to do than chat with you right now. 
Every mage carries a staff. It is crafted and enchanted by the guild, and is a symbol of status. You need such a staff. 
No time to talk. I've got a job to do. 
I've had some people out collecting your new combatants. The wilderness is full of 'em! Let me know when you're ready for a match, and it's showtime! 
All right, so I may have gotten a bit careless. But the contract was fulfilled, wasn't it? In the end, that's all that matters. 
I could use some good news right about now. 
I tell you what. I have some outstanding debts I need to pay off. You help me out with that, and I'll help you out with getting Erthor back. 
The bread's hot and fresh, with a nice crust, and butter and honey, just like you like it. 
Regroup! 
However, she knows everything about all of us, keeps notes about everything. EVERYTHING! 
It sounds like there are an awful lot of problems at the Bruma guild hall. Jeanne does a poor job of running that place. 
If I were you, I'd check with Thadon's Steward, Wide-Eye. 
Syl replaced. I wouldn't have guessed I'd see it. 
I made you an offer already. Two hundred gold, in exchange for the staff. 
I understand there's been strange activity near the obelisks around the Isles. 
I'm Rusia Bradus. My husband is General Silgor Bradus, one of County Anvil's commanders in the field.  
Apparently, some spells make them bigger and stronger.  
He'll train you in how to use heavy armor, if you can pay for his time. 
New faces in the Isles? That doesn't bode well. 
For you? Of course. 
If there are any discoveries to be made, you should be the one to make them. You deserve that much. 
Yes, little Duchess? I believe I sent you to rebuild my Gatekeeper. If you're too busy, I'm sure Jyggalag will wait.... 
Come. Your Blades are waiting to greet you. 
I overheard a guard mention the Countess is looking for a piece to add to her collection of Akaviri artifacts. Our taxpayer's drakes at work... 
If you aren't going to tell me where to find the Gray Fox, I'm not interested. 
Well met! 
Why do you insist on annoying me? 
It is unfortunate that we should meet for the first time under these circumstances, Associate. 
One of them will have the key to the door. That's Kurdan's rules. It's the only way we can win. 
Lorgren Benirus was a strange old man, always dabbling and experimenting with magic. 
It is simple... they are not gods at all. 
If you believe yourself worthy, present Molag Bal with an offering: the pelt of a lion.  
It's good to see you, friend. This inn has been cheerless for far too long. 
In truth, Ciirta is weak. She needs all the able bodies she can get. This is why you are able to walk in here wearing our robes and not be harmed. 
Please, I'm an old man! Just leave me be! 
So long as we breathe, the Fringe will hold. 
She heard his plea, and gifted him with the Brush. It's said the bristles of the Brush are woven from Dibella's own hair. 
Why are you so concerned with my feelings toward a young Dark Elf girl? You wouldn't be so stupid as to try and turn me against her... 
No talking. And, by the way, we execute escaping prisoners. Just a friendly reminder. 
Lead your fellow mages, and lead them well. The future rests on your shoulders. Farewell, my friend. 
Keep me informed. 
We were so focused on organizing quickly that by the time we realized he'd let Order in himself, it was too late. We were split up and picked off. 
I haven't always been a priest. In my youth, I followed a different path. 
It is a fairly common practice of these kinds of esoteric cults to put hidden messages within their sacred writings. 
My Lady! I am sorry, I did not realize... 
You say you took the head from the Timberscar Cave goblins? Where is it, then? 
She's looking for certain magic items that might protect her, but she's not willing to pay for them. 
Several traveling merchants have been found dead along the Gold Road recently, with even more missing. The Council has asked that I put a stop to it. 
She loves her dogs. No question about it. 
We drink because we're happy. We're Nords. It's just the thick tongue and fat head the day after that makes me unhappy. 
You... you're trying to turn me against that sweet boy. Make me think he's the murderer! Get away from me, you fiend!  
All that conjuring gives me the creeps. There are plenty of scary things in this world without bringing more around. 
Better, maybe, now that we've got the Dragon to watch over us. 
What happens is what always has happened -- what always will happen. I crumble, I fade, the Realm dies. And you with it.  
I see you haven't yet been able to drop the staff in Darkfathom Cave. 
This area is off limits to anyone except the Bruma City Watch. 
He's got to be in here somewhere. 
Well, I excelled in my studies in magic, especially large-scale spells. I'm pretty accurate with them, too. More accurate than swinging a sword. 
Must have just been rats. 
Jyggalag walks once more! 
I think that I would like to be tortured. Perhaps I should go see Syl. 
Call me 'Webspinner'. Pluck but a single thread, and the weave unravels. 
You want to do as much damage as possible with an axe or a hammer? Find Irene Metrick, and talk to her. 
Ah, I'm glad you came. So, are you interested in earning some loot? 
Where did you find that? I was sure I once had Din's Ashes on display here... I wish I had the funds to replace them, they were very popular.... 
I was lucky. I survived. My friends weren't so lucky. 
As the new Listener of the Black Hand, it is your task to speak with the statue of the Night Mother, and hear the words of our Unholy Matron. 
The Baliwog will return to the water to heal. 
Are you ready for it? If not, I understand. You've been through quite a bit lately. 
Oh thank you! I had a feeling buying that Daedric staff would be trouble. Now I'm paying for it with more than just some gold. 
You got some information out of him, which is good. We can use it. Here, take this. It might help you some time. 
Have you returned with the materials you were sent to collect? 
I hope I prove myself worthy of your loyalty in the coming days. That's it. Thank you. 
If you want to join the guild, you can ask any of the local guild leaders. Here in Chorrol, Teekeeus is the one you'll need to see. 
Yes, oh great and mighty Grand Champion? Is there something you need? Can I carry your weapon? Shine your boots? Backrub, perhaps? 
That's right. You're going to die in here. You hear me, Nord? You're going to die in here! 
Interesting, go on. 
There's no cook on board the Bloated Float! How dare you try and make a fool of me! After I deal with you, I'll feed your body to the slaughterfish! 
The Mad One has vanished from the Isles, fear sits heavy on the brow. All our hopes go with one, but can he save us now?  
Witseidutsei gives you her guarantee! Everything, clean, always, or you do not pay! 
Buzz, buzz, buzz. Go away, little fly. 
Get moving. You need to get rid of those thieves. 
I haven't spent time there, but if you're looking for light armor, Best Defense is the place to go. 
Please, listen to what I have to say; it could be lucrative for the both of us. 
I've picked up a few things in my travels. If you head out there and bring me back the twelve scales that I need, I can make it worth your time. 
Come on Bloodletter, don't lose your momentum now. Keep fighting! 
Skaleel is there now, working on investigating the ruins. 
I was too afraid. I just couldn't move. I could hear the screaming, but I just couldn't move! 
Yes? You need my help, don't you? 
It was just a harmless little prank, that's all. Why did you have to go and ruin it? 
We'll try to hold our ground, that's what. If we can't hold this barricade, those beasts could march right down and overrun the encampment. 
I heard there's a new shipment of weapons at Fire and Steel. Have you been recently? 
What's it worth to ya? 
I am one Doyen and S'krivva is the other. 
Thank you again for your kind words. Now please, don't let me keep you. We'll speak again later.   
The Count's unique nature is not public knowledge. The Council wishes to keep it that way. 
Our Lord is missing? Perhaps I should get his things. To keep them safe. 
I have a great respect for the Dunmer people. They are strong and noble, and generally understand the importance of law and discipline. 
Please leave me be... 
Now, take these special gifts. They will help you greatly. One is a poisoned apple. The other, a unique scroll of summoning. Good luck... Silencer. 
It does feel safer with a Gatekeeper guarding the Realm. 
I heard the screams! And... and the smells! I never should have rented out that cellar! Never! 
Ok, I feel normal. 
What makes this smell? 
You have work to do. Go on. Get out of here. 
Ah, well, thank you! The honor is mine. 
Well, well, if it isn't the Tamriel Terror! How's our new Grand Champion, huh? You ready to make me some money? Ha ha ha ha ha!  Ahem... 
[COUGH] 
I had a copy of Volume Three, but I am sorry to say that it was stolen recently. Gwinas was terribly upset when he found out, poor fellow. 
My sources tell me that Savilla's Stone has gone missing. Do you have it with you? 
You should track down Rusia Bradus in Anvil, and see if she can teach you anything more. 
Blessings of Akatosh upon you! 
I have heard that the Great Houses of Morrowind are in upheaval. Indoril is in ruins, and Redoran is besieged by the Nords of Skyrim. 
If your journey takes you to the settlement Hale be sure to speak with Pyke. He is a most unusual knight, whose story you might like. 
It's about time someone from the Fighters Guild showed up. I've got work for you to do. I need imp gall for my research. 
Not yet. Let me rest a moment longer. 
My mother? Oh, do you know her? She's such a sweet woman. I've been a terrible daughter I'm afraid. I simply must visit more often! 
Oh. It's you. 
Darn. They only train in blade and heavy armor at the Bruma hall. 
Cylarne was once the capital of the Shivering Isles. Perhaps the first capital. 
Aureals! Follow me! 
Paid her debt off yourself, did you? Not gonna get rich that way, meat. Still, the job's done. Here's your payment. 
I haven't really spent any time around him. I find him a little frightening, actually. 
To advance in the guild, you'll need recommendations from each local guild hall in Cyrodiil. A feat which I'm sure will elude you completely. 
If only Kaneh would listen to me. An attack down the main passage will end the same as it always does -- a glorious defeat. 
You think this is Nocturnal's cowl? Where did you hear about that? 
The time is almost here. 
I trust you have good reason for interrupting me? 
My disp just went up 
For your sake, you'd better be on your way to the door. 
Step forward, herald of madness. Speak with me if you would. 
Those fools in the Church and their so-called "Nine Divines." There is no divinity beyond the eternal and terrible rule of our Dread Father, Sithis.  
Too many voices, too loud in my head. How can I hear when all are shouting? 
We stable horses for folks in the Imperial City. We'd sell horses, too. Except... we can't seem to keep track of them. 
I heard you're working for those Demented freaks. Stay away from me! 
Fine. You are now an Associate in the Fighters Guild. For contracts, speak either with me or with Burz gro-Khash in Cheydinhal. Good luck to you. 
He should be kicked out of town before one of his experiments turns this place into a wasteland. 
The Elytra have wondrous poisons that can drain the very life from you. 
One less Nord in the world is something I'd normally cheer about, but the fact that he was murdered by a fellow guest does put a damper on things. 
That's just not reasonable. 
Well done! With that tree gone, the Blackwood Company is just another band of mercenaries. Cyrodiil is a safer place for what you've done. 
Faelian, you say? Why yes, I know who he is. Rather distasteful fellow, actually. I believe he lives right here, at the Tiber Septim Hotel. 
Syl always thinks someone is out to get her. 
Yes, Sister? 
Here's 50 gold to cover the costs; that should be more than enough. Come see me when you've got everything, and we'll talk more. 
Ugh. Not again. Whatever Syl accused me of, I'm innocent. Don't hurt me. Wow, I've never seen such a big wolf before! Scary. 
I wish I could have been at the battle. It sounds like you taught Mehrunes Dagon's boys a lesson they won't soon forget. 
They are called the Boots of Bloody Bounding, and carry a powerful enchantment. I'm sure you will find them most useful. 
Ever bought enchanting supplies from Calindil? 
As the head of the Elder Council, High Chancellor Ocato is the de facto ruler of the Empire for the time being. 
I hate to refuse you, my friend. But with the castle still in the hands of those daedra, I need every soldier I have left. 
Farewell, magister. May your spells never falter. 
Come. Your initiation awaits. 
For example, this one time, I had a contract to kill a little Nord girl at her birthday party. She asked me if I was the jester! 
His dog can be a terror. I once saw him sic it on a guy who tried to steal the dog's food. 
Hearth and fortune. Grey-Throat, I am called. You are not known to me. 
Thing is, this guy used to be a Blade. You know, those guys who protect the Emperor? He's a trained swordsman, so keep your damn head down! 
Place one foot in front of the other... you know how it goes. 
I haven't seen him in quite some time. But then, this isn't the first time he's been away, so I wasn't really that concerned. 
Once Phillida is dead, take the very finger from his corpse, the one that bears an Imperial Legion signet ring!  
No sign of him. 
I am Kishashi and Fellmoor is my domain. A queen, some would call me. But others will say that Cindanwe is in charge. Pah! Liars! 
If he's lucky, he's trapped in there with the rest of them, at least safe for the moment. If he's not... 
The old man? Ha! He's easy to protect. Every day's the same. He vists the Coast Guard station, goes for a swim... never puts himself in harm's way.  
I can't believe it! The Gray Prince has been beaten! There's a new Arena Grand Champion now, someone called the Butcher! 
I can't wait... finally I'm away from that horrid store. 
I don't see Sheogorath. He's not real. 
Could these runestones have served as waypoints and landmarks for military patrols of the nascent Imperial Legion? 
Someone's been killed, and as far as I'm concerned, you're one of the prime suspects. You watch your step.  
Bring me Jeanne's Manual of Spellcraft, and then we'll talk about helping you find J'skar. 
You must proceed to Sheogorath at once and tell him the Knights have returned! Quickly now... go! 
If you do what you need to, you'll get there one day. Just don't forget to help those who have aided you on your way. 
He was a young man and now he's dead, slaughtered like a lamb. I've got my eyes on you, stranger. Don't you forget that. 
Perhaps you should take it to him. If any other alchemist can help you, he certainly can. 
Greetings, Volendrung. 
Apparently the poor old woman thinks she is from a well-to-do family. Truth is, I have servants with more nobility in their blood than her.  
Hello there! I must say, I'm quite surprised to see anyone else here. 
Now you must pay her blood price to enter the guild. However, because you are not yet a member, it is only half of what it would normally be. 
Because of your actions, I am hereby stripping you of your rank of Champion. You were reckless, foolhardy, and dangerous to yourself and the Guild. 
Praise be to the Lord Molag Bal. 
Take this. It will increase your skills in battle. We use it often. It is a good, good thing. 
Can you tell me where Armand Christophe is hiding? 
Ha ha! There's the new Arena Grand Champion! By Shinji, you look good in that Raiment! The way it accentuates your physique... Spectacular!  
If you want to learn more about training Destruction magic, you'll have to find Bralsa Andaren. 
The Gatekeeper's dead. He won't stop us from coming and going now.  
Can I show you my latest trick, Lord Sheogorath? 
Ah, yes. Let's see if we can't recharge some items for you. 
Do you have my fee? 
Please. Go on. 
Vilena's gotten tentative since the Blackheart mission. She's worried about getting us killed. But we're just getting killed a little bit at a time. 
Who do the Grummites worship? Some say Sheogorath, but I'm not sure. 
So, the cycle begins anew and the Dutchess of Dementia has fallen. 
Well, fine. You go tell Jeanne you found me. You're the big hero. Whoopee. I'm going back to work. I was tired of being see-through, anyway. 
Pfft. Take it. It's worthless to me anyway. 
I can get your magic items working again. 
You have to find your own jobs now. Just keep selling stuff to the fences. 
You become more valuable to the guild with each passing day. The guild wishes to reward that, and so you are raised to the rank of Conjurer. 
I do think I've been taken advantage of. 
You see, in order to increase the efficacy of the spell, the radius was likely to approach the... never mind. I don't mean to bore you. 
Welcome to the Museum of Oddities! Let me know if you'd like a tour of our exhibits. 
That layabout? You can find him wasting time at The Count's Arms. 
Give those weapons to the men, and let's get moving. 
Have any success at The Flowing Bowl? 
I am Geel. Sergeant-of-Sharpshooters, Blackwood Company. 
I need a moment of your time. It's urgent. 
What are you getting at? Are you suggesting that Neville is the killer? Take your suspicions someplace else, you low-born worm.   
The situation is not good. We have to act now. 
Can you think of anyplace better to buy books than First Edition? 
But you look tired. Carrying all that gear will do that to you. I'd be glad to shoulder some of the burden... relieve you of that expensive stuff. 
The Gray Fox has asked me to take care of a problem, and I'm putting you on it. 
You have your task. Acquire wood for a staff from the grove outside Wellspring Cave. 
Well now, who do we have here? 
I'll feel better when you've eliminated those spies. There's no telling what they may be planning. 
Now the Legion pig's years of service have come to an end. He has retired. Phillida must not be allowed such a victory! His destiny is... darker. 
You've seen it! You've seen the first sign! Perhaps this is the beginning of the K'Sharra! 
Good to see you again, friend. I don't suppose you've noticed anything out of the ordinary around here? 
And no one gets in the room even after it's prepared, unless they're on the list. And even if they're on the list, they'd better be dressed for it. 
Separate the meat from bone, and they will die. When they do so, their crystalline hearts often remain intact.  
Don't you have a fight scheduled? I'm sorry, but I can't allow you to bet on your own match! You'd best get into the Arena! 
That's what we call ourselves. The most loyal and honorable servants of Sheogorath. 
Are you prepared to pay the blood price for unwarranted kills? 
Watch yourself while you're here. Cindanwe is out for us. She cares for nothing but work, and she keeps us as slaves!  
The Palace is cut off, sire. We were the last to make it through from the Legion Compound. 
At times, they served her well. She gained something of a reputation in the guild, and was highly valued by the Council. 
This isn't the work of some greedy house guest. There's an assassin among us, you mark my words. We must watch ourselves at every step. 
I can't part with anything for that price. 
Make a bargain or do not. You must choose. 
Why did I cross the road? To avoid the other J'zidzo. That's no joke. 
You need to find him at once and bring him safely back here. 
Yeah? Well, good luck. Let me know how it comes out. 
I hope that serves you well. 
Good. A little hard work will do you some good. Just get rid of those Demented freaks, and we'll all be happier. 
Yes, I must attend to him. Speaking to you has already cost me time. I must go. 
If you want to get close to the Heretics, try putting on their robes. 
I certainly can't teach you anything more. But if the rumors are true, and Alix Lencolia is passing through Cyrodiil, he might be able to teach you. 
Sure, the Fighters Guild is established and reliable. But they just aren't as aggressive as the Blackwood Company. 
Oh, my. Well, if you insist. 
The Fork for Big Head. Oh, where has Master put the Fork? It sings alone. Far from home. Sad, sad Fork. Sad, sad Big-Head. 
The Count made that Orc, Mazoga, into a knight? Well, well. Next thing, we'll be making horses into knights. 
Really, no need to trouble yourself with the details of that now. It would just cloud your little mind. 
Aren't you supposed to be going to see Tar-Meena? I have plenty of leads of my own to track down, don't worry. 
Tell me more. 
We are preparing to sweep the Mazken scum from Cylarne. Perhaps Sheogorath sent you to help us? 
I can't make that deal. Even for you. 
I bet you're a cat lover, too. 
Good day, sir, and welcome to Chorrol. You're under the watchful eye of the Chorrol Guard. We keep the peace, and keep it nice and pretty. 
So many forks. Not the True Fork. Only it sings. Have you the Fork for Big Head? Fork that sings? Fork that rings? 
There are too many of them! 
All right. I get it. 
We really taught those bastards a lesson, didn't we sir? 
I wish I had one, but I've never even seen a copy. 
Yes, Inquisitor? What may I do for you? 
Is there anywhere in Tamriel you can avoid rats? Disease spreading little nuisances. 
I have heard Sheogorath has called it back to the Isles. Perhaps he will find it one day. 
What do you think, friend? We've accomplished a lot since you last saw this place. 
Trespassing is against the law! Guards! 
She's a nut. Whatever's going on in that house, I don't want to know about it. 
Sir Slaughter, huh? I like it! Yeah, that'll do nicely. All right, it's time to see if you're crazy good or just plain crazy.  
The Gatekeeper was killed. Nobody asked me if I thought that was a good idea. Well, I do. 
Thank you for saving me, friend. I don't know who you are, but it is clear that Akatosh guides you. 
Please forgive my ignorance. Had we known about Seridur, we'd never have put you in harm's way. 
Yes. You've gotten rather proficient with your new ability. As I said, try not to abuse your power. 
We can play it that way if you like. 
Wait! Wait, no. Please. All I know is that on certain nights, Syl asked me to guard her chambers. She never said why. I think she went somewhere. 
Where is this note? Produce it immediately! 
I'm sure he was difficult to travel with, and I respect your patience. Whereas others would have left him to die, I'm sure you fought at his side. 
Yes, I have been working on a new invisibility spell. As you can see, it works quite well. Why? 
It's uncertain exactly what illness Roderick has contracted. But don't worry, it's probably not contagious. He he he he he. 
You beat all three, and you get named Champion! I know you can do this! Now get up there and show everyone why you're the best! 
I accept your surrender, my friend. 
Kvatch is finished. There's nothing left. 
Another sheep returns to the flock. 
I'm Erissare Arenim. Soris is my husband. 
If we attempt to assault Xeddefen, Passwall will be overrun and we will lose the Fringe.  
Since you managed to make a mess of the interrogation, we've got extra work to do if we're going to stop the Blackwood Company. 
Then I await your report. 
He was a valiant warrior in his day, and inspired us all to be our best. I heard he personally led one of the first retaliations to the attack. 
After speaking to the Count, and in light of the evidence you recovered, Ulrich has been removed from his post and arrested. 
I see. Let me know if you change your mind. I'm sure I could be helpful. 
I'm out of patience with you, prisoner! 
I can't help you if you don't show me what you're talking about. 
You again. What is it this time? 
At least there are a few less vampires in the world now. Well done. But there are more of these creatures that still roam Cyrodiil. 
Oh my poor Aleron... 
No wonder Narina Carvain is so cranky. If you had to live year-round in a cold, drafty, soot-stained castle like Bruma, you'd be cranky, too. 
I believe that the item Albert stole, which rightly belongs to me, was hidden at the Weatherleah settlement. 
The Plague of Fear. I will not speak of this. Not to any outsider. I'll answer anything else I can. Is there something more? 
Their presence has drawn a group of vampire hunters to town, following rumors of "vampires in Skingrad." 
The only piece of advice I can give you is to leave no stone unturned. Good luck! 
You don't have the diary. Stop wasting my time! 
Have you returned with a message from S'Krivva? 
Hey there. 
Thank you kind sir! 
I'm pleased that a Knight of the Thorn has received such a worthy gift. Even if you're just an honorary knight. 
Do you have the book this time? 
Oh. Well, hopefully I'll still be alive by the time you change your mind. 
They won't make armor and weapons, especially not magic ones. 
Please don't tell anyone. 
I now declare you Duke of Mania of the Shivering Isles! May your light shine upon all our happiest days. 
I am sorry, Lord. 
A shame he had to die. Before he turned, he was a fine man. 
We'll hold here until you're ready. Although I'd rather not sit around waiting to see what else comes out of that gate. 
Brother Piner is a fine young monk, zealous and energetic. In time, I hope he may add patience and prudence to his list of virtues. 
To think that I hold the very crown that once graced the brow of the last Ayleid king... 
Your staff will let you wield the power of lightning. If you want something else instead, we can start over. 
May I have a snippet of your hair for my museum? 
You've spoken with him? Really? What did he say? I beg you, tell me. 
Hello, citizen. I hope you're faring well in these difficult times. 
It looks to be a beautiful day here at Weynon Priory, don't you think? 
Pleasure and pain be with you. 
He's a raving lunatic.  I'm assuming you're asking because he's done something strange. 
Syl is as crafty as she is beautiful. I'd watch my back if I were you. Oh, this is so much fun! 
Though I'm happy that Ulrich has been removed from his post, I'm still saddened that there'll be no true retribution for Aldos. 
Then I guess you'll be walking. If your feet get sore, come see me. I'll sell you a proper horse. 
It's... it's you! I remember you. What are you doing down here? How did you get past the Knights? 
Don't leave before you hear what I have to tell you. You'll regret it. 
You are defiling this holy place! 
Well met, milady. 
They are overconfident, as usual. We have prepared many traps and ambushes. It will be a glorious slaughter. 
Easily done. 
He ruled the last Ayleid city in Cyrodiil during the First Era, three centuries after the Fall of White Gold Tower. 
Anyway, if you want to rile up a goblin tribe, steal their Tribal Head. Which is often what a rival tribe does, just to prove they're tougher. 
He didn't? Hmph. This doesn't sit well with me. Not well at all. Still, the job got done. Let's hope your friend Maglir has learned a lesson here. 
Good enough! 
Hmm. All right, then. You're not one for talking. I can respect that. Well, if you need anything, you just let me know. 
Shouldn't something be done about that abandoned house? 
She's a smart one. You could learn a lot from her. 
Yes, yes. Goodbye. 
Ooohhh... 
Go then. I will hold off on my attack to give you a chance to reconsider. But I will not wait forever. 
Now? Nothing has changed! You deal with this messenger. Make sure my army is secure. You'll need them. 
Bejeen? Bejeen knows nothing. Bejeen tells stories. Silly Bejeen. Shame on Bejeen to tell such silly, silly stories. 
Eight of the morning watch, and all's well. Good day, ma'am.  
You've brought back the horns. Your rank and responsibilities are restored. There will be no further chances given you. 
Hello. You're from the Fighters Guild, I presume. It's good that you've arrived. We need your help with some disappearances. 
The Colovians are proud of their reputation for being independent, rough, and rebellious. 
You've made short work of the intruders. Sheogorath should be proud to have such an efficient apprentice. 
There was a murder in the Chapel. It happened when a thief was caught trying to rob Llathasa's tomb. 
Fimmion hungry. Got food? Sweetcakes? Sausages? 
Thank Peryite we've been saved! 
Yes, honored Listener? Do you have orders for me? 
Awwww.... ain't it cute! 
Everyone's making fun of me because I fell for the siren's charms. Well, now I have the last laugh! 
You'd never know it by looking at her, but Rusia Bradus did a lot of traveling in her younger days. She must have been in pretty good shape. 
She couldn't cast her way out of a paper sack. It's insulting that we're here, working for her, when she knows nothing. 
Kneel before the Saints! 
Yes. I've been meaning to put something here, but it seems I haven't gotten around to it. Although I distinctly remember preparing an exhibit.... 
Something seems... amiss with you, milord. 
You bastard! How many more people are going to "pay the price"? How many more have to die just so you can earn another gold coin? 
Find the Fork! Bring it to Big-Head! Sing it to Big-Head! 
I see there are too many thieves in the city. 
No one will find us there. 
Something need charging? 
She certainly has a talent for speaking. Plus, she's willing to teach others this skill. 
Nothing is as important as a man's home. We must have ours back. 
I hope he hasn't gotten you wrapped up in some foolish errand. 
I suppose you'll do... 
I'm the only one left. The Necromancers retreated further in, but we've got to follow them. There's no time to waste! 
It's a horrible name for an inn, I know. But I just can't bring myself to change it. Besides, I like the sign. 
I must confess, you are the first person to speak of victory against these daedra. 
Like my people, I am doomed to repeat the actions of my cowardice. Alone, I cannot redress this wrong. However, you can. 
Whether that means ridding a town of an invading menace or protecting a helpless mage, we'll take the contract. 
Methredhel, you know the rules. However, for Amusei and the newcomer, let me state them clearly. 
There is no buyer. This is for glory, not for money. Our names will become legend. I also have a personal need for this particular scroll. 
Oh. It's Valga's errand boy! How goes the 'big important investigation'? 
Well done, My Lord. You should have this, as it is one of your artifacts. I don't know why I didn't think to give it to you sooner. 
Well, I don't know much about politics, but I think Lady Alessia's right. We've got to put a stop to all these bandits and rabble in the Trans-Niben. 
Three people... murdered. I know I shouldn't go wandering off alone right now, but for the love of Ysmir, I need a drink! 
If I can't fix it, it ain't broke. 
I can't stay long. Count Caro's orders were to return to Leyawiin as soon as Bruma was safe. 
I'm sure that was an accident. 
Army, eh? Ohhhh... that means it's time to play "interrogate the innocent female prisoner" again! Great. 
They say the Fighters Guild got all the trolls in Swampy Cave, but I'm still not going anywhere near Harlun's Watch. 
What a waste of time. 
Have you spoken to Valus Odiil recently? 
I don't know anything about a conspiracy. 
I find it odd that so many people have been killed, yet the two of you still live. Looks to me like you two are working together.  
I would congratulate you, but perhaps that should wait until after you've prevented Order from storming the Palace. 
They say that King Helseth has made an alliance with House Dres. Together they pick apart the carcass of ruined Indoril. 
Find those who plot against me. Bring them to me so I might make an example of them. 
I'm afraid there isn't much more I can tell you. Perhaps one of our books can answer any more questions you may have? 
I only do the training any more. None of the rigs and tricks. Rochelle and me just want the settled life nowadays. 
This Akaviri ring was found with the messenger's diary. It awards the wearer with increased agility and resistance to harmful magic. 
I understand. Accept this knowing that you have my thanks. And farewell. 
Forgive me, my master.... It is Ri'Zikar! He leads us! And he will have your head. He will kill you all! 
I'll get on it. We'll focus on both this month. 
I'm Petrine. This is Wildeye Stables. I look after folk's horses while they're here in Bruma. 
The important thing is he's been Grand Champion for nearly a decade. Why? Because nobody's had the guts to face him. The Gray Prince is unbeatable. 
Oh, and I see you have gained a new power. Relmyna's gift with summoning Flesh Atronachs has rubbed off on you, it seems.  
Maybe once you've done that, we can talk about how to better pace yourself. 
Please be generous, kind sir. 
Go go! There's no time to waste! 
What's that you have there? 
I know of the poor man. Did wonders for folks around here. There was no job too small for him. 
Hear it singing! Songs of home! It comes again. It brings presents! It is not present. Soon it will be! 
All shall crumble before Jyggalag! 
I've learned that the Mysterium Xarxes is both the gate and the key to Camoran's Paradise. In some sense, the book IS Camoran's Paradise. 
My head is still spinning from everything that has happened. I'll need some time to adjust. 
They were seen around the Swampy Cave. Strange, moving lights. I've never seen anything like it. Old-timers have tales about such things. 
I'm going to see Mazoga. Come along, if you like. 
The Gatekeeper walks again. This is good. Now maybe Relmyna will be in a better mood around here. 
Kill them when you see them. But don't touch the corpse until they're really dead. Which they aren't, until you deactivate the obelisk. 
By Sithis, what a night that was! Reminded me of the time you and I raided that traveling carnival! Ah, now that takes me back... 
It's... unbelievable. Order was defeated? All the old tales say that's impossible. 
You know that no matter what happens, no matter what fate befalls us, together we honor the memory of Uriel Septim. 
Moth's blessing upon you. 
Try not to worry so much, dear. 
What a surprise. I'm summoned. Your skill in repetition is truly astounding. 
The process of alchemy is much easier when the alchemist isn't being bothered. 
I don't think so. 
Chancellor Ocato isn't seeing any visitors. 
You... Your Grace. We did not expect you here. 
You know, Bongond has got some fine horses for sale over at the Grey Mare. Too bad he's such a pushy man. 
You've got it. I'll have the two Wolves and the Goblin Skirmisher brought out to the Arena. Now get up there and give the people what they paid for!  
Ugh. How messy. Well, now that you possess Thadon's drug-tainted blood, I'd make my way to the Sacellum as soon as possible. 
The ends justify the means, do they? You'll pay for that, one day. Now, by all means, come right in, walk in here as if you own the place.... 
We were also concerned that it might drive any Necromancers in the area underground, making them more difficult to root out. 
Now that the Gatekeeper lives again, I have to ask... is he there to keep others out, or to keep us in? Think about it. 
I welcome you to my humble home, stranger. What brings you to this place? 
Clever adversary isn't she? I bet your thinking that this was too easy, yes? 
You came up short? Well, I'm not going to haggle with you. 
Really? For free? That's so generous of you. I'll put this tomato right back where it belongs in a place of honor! 
Kill Phillida in any way, Rose or not, and the contract is complete. But to receive a bonus, you must go beyond murder. You must send a message! 
The latest Black Horse Courier is upsetting. Apparently, more and more people have been trying to contact the Dark Brotherhood. See for yourself. 
I have failed you, Arden-Sul... I am sorry. 
... and so she knows just how the county should be run.  Lady Alessia tells Count Marius exactly what to do... and he does as she says...  
Thank you for coming. I know I am asking for a great deal of trust. But this is the only way. I would not suggest it otherwise. 
You are like a dark gift from the Night Mother herself. Please, tell me how I can help. 
We've done good work, but this is no time to start patting each other on the back. There's still much to do. 
I understand that Vinicia takes a lot of complaints, but nothing ever comes of them. 
She may be young, but her heart is old and wise. It guides her well through these troubled times. 
With my blessing, he infiltrated the group, and has fed us information for quite some time, until recently.  
Blades who are too old for active service often join the Order as lay brothers. 
The Knights of Order are here to protect us. 
I am never too busy for good talk. 
The Count is a reclusive man, and sometimes difficult to see. Hopefully, your status as a representative of the Guild will aid you. 
Thank Talos you've returned safely! 
We've had travellers through recently that say it's turned into a ghost town. Everyone vanished without a trace.  
[yawns] 
We've got one. Let's hope this one will pay well. 
If you ask Barthel, it's the garden spot of Tamriel. See for yourself. It's just northwest of here. But watch out for the goblins. 
If you want to help, prisoner, keep alert and let us do our job. 
But all that's different now. I'm glad to be serving you instead. I can see we will get along just fine! 
I was once the man known as Grantham Blakeley. Look for me in the mouth of the panther. Please... release me. 
You go get 'em! And whip their asses for Newheim! 
Ha! It's your funeral. I'm just here to warn people, not keep them out. Go ahead in. I'll be here to clean up the mess when you come out. 
They say that I was selected as Dibella's Primate in large part because of my loving nature and my striking looks. 
Your lord will never prevail! 
You're trespassing! Leave now, or I'll arrest you! 
Nibenay is bordered on north and east by rugged mountains and to the south by marshes and rainforest. 
As I mentioned, I have no more contracts available. You'll need to speak with Ocheeva. But first you should go and sleep! Your dark gift awaits... 
If you must know, I am Cindanwe, foreperson. And don't let that liar Kishashi or that psycho Ranarr-Jo tell you any different.  
That injured man was my father. He passed the Brush on to me, and I intend to pass it along to my kin one day. Did you want to know how it works? 
You don't look very trustworthy. I have no idea what you are talking about. 
Thinks she's in charge, treats us as slaves. Do I look like a slave? No. I am a queen, rightful ruler of the Shivering Isles! 
I will feed the mistress your blood! 
Here, take this note they gave me. It tells you where to go. I don't want anything else to do with the Mythic Dawn. 
Sorry. Can't talk right now. 
Remember... this place is sacred. 
Welcome, Wood Elf, to the Tournament of Ten Bloods. To your right, through each of nine gates, another Chosen awaits you. 
I realize you risked your life to give me a chance, and Thoronir never forgets things like that. Accept this ring as a humble reward. 
You'll have to do better than that, you dust-dwelling goat-herder, pathetic remnant of infamous Yokuda. 
Help! A prisoner has escaped! 
A shrine to Azura lies in the Jerall Mountains, far to the north, towards the Skyrim border. 
Please... go get some rest. 
I really don't know anything about him, so you'd be better off asking someone else.   
He still teaches others, though. Of course, you have to try to avoid all the Old Man Dust. 
I saw Rimalus Bruiant walking his dogs today. And yesterday. And the day before. I swear that's all he does. 
Do you not recognize a Necromancer when you see one? 
Welcome to Kvatch. We've had a spot of trouble, as you can see. But I'm open for business. 
Don't you have work to do? Like getting rid of those Demented bastards? 
Maybe there really is no place left to hide. We are truly doomed if the attempts to find Him fail. 
I escaped from Lucien, and paid my father back for his treachery. Lucien came to me again that night with an offer I just couldn't refuse.  
Scar-Tail now lies with the worms of Bogwater, thanks to you. I am forever indebted to you, Sister. 
I know that daedric cults are not quite the thing socially, but that's just foolish prejudice and superstition. 
He's an Orcish noble. A fine man. Our families go back a bit. Anyway, his daughter is missing. 
Your champion has already explained the situation to me. I have agreed to it. We will not win this war through caution. 
Hmm... if you're serious, maybe I can put you to use. It'll likely mean your death, though. 
I saw someone running off to the west, but I'm too frightened to journey into the woods alone. Please... can you help me? I'll pay you well, I swear! 
I've told my men to keep a sharp eye out, but I've had no reports of any strangers in town. 
A perfect job for you, my newest and only Noble in the realm! If Order has entered my army's stronghold, things have taken a disturbing turn. 
You're trespassing! I already called the guards! 
I'm pleased you decided to find the Madstone. It will be the highlight of my collection. 
What I saw at Kvatch... everything I know about daedric magic says that such stable portals are impossible. 
He is gone, but hope is not lost. We have a rare opportunity here, but I hesitate to do what must be done.  
Oh, no! 
That seems like a fair exchange. 
I understand Hil the Tall will teach Alteration to anyone willing to pay. 
Here, you can have the library's copy of Volume 2. Treat it gently, if you please! 
He sold it, eh? Well, this just keeps getting worse. 
If you'll excuse me, I don't have time for you right now. Or ever. 
Celia Camoran, I present to you the Elder Scroll you requested. 
You better have a good reason for disturbing me. 
I'm the charwoman at Riverside. Tanasa Arano. I clean up after Voranil and his parties. 
Order approaches! It's taken the Fringe already! With Order clothes and Order hats! And you speak of "change"? 
Goddess! You have Rockshatter already? And what's become of Bjalfi? 
You will be included in my prayers forever. May the Divines smile upon you. 
Given the opportunity, I think Ulrich would have had me killed. I'm not sorry for what I've done, but I don't wish to be revered as a hero either. 
Humph. 
Farewell. May the roads carry you safely in your journeys. 
I grow weary of waiting. Where is my book? 
You've got a real bounce to your step. I'll bet you're quite the acrobat. 
I'll need something in exchange for my services. 
Today would be a good day to die. 
Stand aside in the name of Tiber Septim and the Blades! Hinder me at your peril! 
You'll need to speak to Raminus Polus at the Arcane University now. Look at you, moving up in the world... how wonderful! 
Excuse me... 
Keep up the... ummm... good work, I suppose. 
Raynil will pay for both crimes. Gelebourne was likely another innocent he's slain. I'll make sure Skingrad's city watch hears of this. 
Ushnar is deathly afraid of cats. He makes sure to keep dogs around because of it. 
And I see you've learned to summon Flesh Atronachs! Relmyna must like you, little Duke... but probably not in THAT way. 
I don't blame you. He's a menace to society. Let me know if you find out anything. 
You've done well, and here is the reward that I promised. 
I am overjoyed at your return. What may I assist you with? 
Ha! Those girls didn't stand a chance! Good job, Brawler. Here's your take. One more match and you'll advance again. 
Whew. That was scary. 
I'm Snar the Cook. We've got genuine Skyrim cuisine... fresh, simple, big helpings... just like Mom used to make. 
But to be honest, I don't know what will happen. The provinces have been restive for years, even before the latest crisis. 
He'll return. He must return. 
So good to be back in business! 
Search his body. I'll keep an eye out, in case any of his friends are nearby. 
Take care now! 
Only three of us left... only three...  
I always enjoy speaking with Nahsi. His views on the world are different than most. 
Good thinking. You want to keep your good looks, go talk to some nice pretty gods. 
I do. I did. And I won't say it again. But, that's enough about that. You're the ruler of Mania! Just look at you. You're positively beaming! 
I can't believe it's over... that giant demon... the Dragon... what happened? Have we won? 
He could not bring himself to destroy the knowledge that I represent, which is to say, precise predictions of all that is, has been, and will be. 
Vampires are clever, so watch your back. 
Any new books you've been reading? 
I've heard that the Fighters Guild has been having some problems with their contracts recently. That's not like them. 
What have we here? Another plaything? 
Look, keep the sword if you want. That's your decision. But don't give it back to Clavicus. He doesn't know what's good for him sometimes. 
Order is restored. 
Greetings, Brother. I do hope you are well. 
You know, my time's almost up. Pretty soon I'll be free, and you'll still be stuck in this rat hole, waiting for your execution. 
Perhaps she will understand what it is we have done. I believe our work is now finished. You are a fine soldier, my friend. You've made me proud. 
Good journey. 
A new person in town? Maybe someone to talk to on long, sleepless nights. 
But no one has visited the shrine and lived to tell the tale in centuries. 
While the Guard hid behind the walls, you took the fight to Oblivion itself! Maybe your example will inspire others. 
Cloud Ruler Temple was built long ago, by the founders of the Blades, back in the days of Reman Cyrodiil. 
Go ahead, I'm listening. 
Oh, yes. We're not done. Not even close. This was only the first step. If this town is to be ours again, we'll need to get inside the castle. 
At first I thought Matilde was just a cloying old hag, but now I realize she could be the killer! 
Could be. You know how it is. But not until I'm finished talking! 
The dead drop is a secret location where I will leave your orders, any rewards you may have earned, and the location of the next dead drop. 
It seems Lachance wanted revenge against the Dark Brotherhood for some reason, and used you to do his dirty work. 
Just a Gnarl, I suppose. Let them drink their fill of Order, ha ha ha! 
Let's keep that between us please... shhhhh. 
Hurry it up, swamprot! I'm thirsty over here. 
There's a new ship moored up in the Waterfront District. The Marie Elena. It's a galleon, I think. 
I bought some wine from Gaston Surilie a few days ago. I was very impressed by it. 
According to this, it translates to "From Fire, Life." Fire it is, then. Anything else? 
The Battle Raiment covers your entire body. You can use your own helmet, shield, and weapon, so choose those items wisely. 
Heh. Really, you're going to love this. 
I have met so many of his predecessors over the years. I developed a particular fondness for Galerion, ill-preserved though he may be. 
Maybe you haven't heard, but Seed-Neeus's daughter has disappeared. Very sad. 
What? What's going on? By the light, this man is dead! Brothers! Sisters! There is a killer among us! Find him! Bring him to justice! 
The Shivering Isles are a reflection of our Lord Sheogorath. Divided, yet perfect. 
What do you want now? I told you what I'm willing to do... now get away from me before someone hears us. 
So, if you will help me, I will help you. Ciirta will die and you will not need to lift a finger. Then you can take whatever you need and go. 
You know, offer her comfort and support during this difficult time. Besides, I want to watch over her, make sure she stays safe.   
I fear that anyone he knows won't be able to help him in there. Since I'm in his memories, he may dismiss me as a figment of his dreams. 
Hmm... not my favorite work, but many enjoy it. 
Reynald Jemane has a terrible memory. We've met many times, but when I saw him in Cheydinhal, he walked right past me like we were strangers. 
I accept your surrender. 
By the gods, how could you do such a thing? 
Bruma is a perfect town for a Nord man of leisure. Bracing mountain air, good food and drink, and lively Nord fellowship. 
Find the Stone, please! 
Very good! Your room is waiting. Upstairs, last door on the right. Thanks again, and have a wonderful stay! 
Come on. Let's get this mission done and get paid. 
Let's continue on to Cloud Ruler Temple. I haven't had a good night's sleep since Kvatch was attacked. 
You will find that history has been altered tonight. Such is the power of Nocturnal's curse that lifting it can alter time itself. 
I don't know him well. I've heard he's a nice enough fellow. 
Not sure what happened to him, but I certainly haven't seen him. 
The frost burns found on the victims in this case indicate a mage was responsible for their deaths. Likely nothing more than simple robbery.  
Thanks for the help. As soon as my lieutenant gets back, we'll be moving out. 
The Chestnut Handy Stables used to sell horses. But they're gone. Our horses. All gone. Big mystery. No idea where they went. [burp] 
And those big muscles? They're going to waste away. When the end comes, you won't even have the strength to cry for your mother. 
I... I ain't got nothing to say! Now leave me be! 
If it isn't the toast of Leyawiin! How can I help you? 
I am at your command, Arch-Mage. 
Others in the village are not so forgiving, though. I don't blame him for keeping to himself. 
But there is yet hope. Here is Martin Septim, true son of Uriel Septim! 
Big help you are.... All right. Maybe I'll wait here. And maybe not. 
You're in good company, friend. Welcome. 
Whoever the killer is would have to be strong, and quick. Now, I'm not saying Primo is our murderer, but you have to admit it's at least possible. 
You show unexpected mercy. For that I am thankful. My treasure is hidden in a hollowed-out rock near my campfire. It's yours. 
Wait... you're not one of them... no. You're fine. Cats. They're everywhere. But my babies protect me. 
Well done! This shovel will certainly confirm Agarmir's crimes. Along with the manifest, it should prove useful to the City Watch. 
It's all right... it's all right. I've come to give you peace at last. 
You should be proud of what you did here today, but remember, the war is not yet over. 
I really must thank the one who recommended you -- and the Grey Mare. Always a splendid feast for my spirits. And the food is good, too. 
Say, you look like someone that could help us out. Having a bit of trouble with another merchant in town who goes by the name Thoronir. 
An excellent choice. 
I don't feel comfortable talking about her with you anymore. 
It's impressive. I imagine he'd be a good person to talk to about it, if you wanted to learn the skill. 
Test your strength against me, mortal! 
It's ashame Farwil is gone. Although he was boastful and aloof, at least he treated me as an equal. I shall miss him. 
Have you spoken to Wilbur at the Count's Arms? He knows a lot about fine wines. 
Were you able to take care of my problem with break-ins? 
He's the court wizard. He has a room in the north wing. 
At your service. What do you need? 
I bind thee Atronach to this body, henceforth Gatekeeper of the Shivering Isles.  
How to decide... Do you prefer glorious, and pointless, battle? Or the poisoned arrow striking home from ambush? 
Nothing so far. 
I know very little about them. They operate outside the bounds of normal society. 
Brother Martin? Yes, he's right over there. He led a group of us here during the confusion of the attack. We owe him our lives. 
You might find it handy to cause confusion in your enemies. You know... when the time comes. 
Welcome to the guild, and good luck to you. 
Honmund is my live-in partner. No offense, but I don't want to hear about any 'Mara Mother Mild' and Chapel family business. 
You think I mock you? Not at all. 
Someone new is running Crucible. Can't say I care. 
You haven't guessed it yet? There never was any Axe of Dragol. It was just a ruse to lure you out here. 
Just to be perfectly clear, we're not prostitutes. We do everything on our own terms, and the men never, ever lay one hand on us. 
The Blackwood Company were taking bad hist from a sick tree. No wonder they fought blood-mad and fearless. 
A sword isn't the worst thing in the world. Too bad you don't have one! Come back when you have a weapon for me! 
Goodness. Well, I hope you don't say that to all the girls. 
Prisoner! Get in the cage! 
Ever broken out of jail? How do you feel about breaking into one? The Imperial Prison, to be exact. We need a prisoner... silenced. Can you do it? 
I don't know what goes on down there, but there's a horrible smell coming from underneath that door. It's like... something died inside! 
In her shadowy past, your friend Mazoga might have had contacts with outlaws. Ask her. 
Uh-huh. Whatever you say. 
And here is the Ring of Lordship, a symbol of your new station. Symbols are important. They carry weight in this Realm, and others. 
Tenet 3: Never disobey or refuse to carry out an order from a Dark Brotherhood superior. To do so is to invoke the Wrath of Sithis. 
Go back to the Chapel, and talk to Berich Inian. Ask him for the key to the North Tower, and he'll tell you what you need to do. 
He seemed to be such a likeable fellow. 
I'd say that with two people dead, it's time for everyone to pull together. We need to watch out for each other, stay in a group.  
By the gods, no! 
Glenroy! Over here! 
I have a message for you from the Gray Fox. 
You... you will? Oh thank you! Please be careful, I don't wish any harm to befall you either. 
But we have no choice. The only way to recover the Amulet of Kings is to allow the Mythic Dawn to proceed with their plan to attack Bruma. 
Hans Black-Nail, Castle Smith. It's a comfortable post. Gives me plenty of time to offer services to the public. 
Primo being here made no sense. Whoever our host is, why would he invite someone who didn't even need the money? 
This Fork he'll seek while he's still able, sadly the Fork is a flimsy fable. 
I don't care how bad I need the business. You ain't welcome here.  
Land ho! 
Oh, you're no fun at all! 
I understand he'll teach others to pick locks. If everyone knew how, we wouldn't have to carry around so many keys. 
Roderick may lie near death, but dead he is not. Until his soul has passed, our client -- and Sithis -- will not be satisfied. 
Oh, just get away from me! My relationship with Faelian is none of your business! 
Two people, dead. If anyone else drops, I swear I'm going to gather every drop of alcohol in this house and drink myself into a stupor. 
Plant the bust in her cupboard. Make sure she doesn't see you. Then go tell Hieronymous Lex that she is the thief.  
Of course you won't. Go on about your dreary existence. The Lord Sanguine has no interest in one such as yourself. 
Madgod's blessings, Duke of Mania. 
You'll just have to trust me. I now know what I was born to do. But I'll need your help. I have to get past Mehrunes Dagon, somehow. 
That's what Elante is studying. Make sure she's safe while she does it. 
Jena Sintav. I have a house with Jastia, my sister. 
You told her? What have you done? I'll be ruined! Thanks a lot. 
The Gilded Carafe, for all your alchemical needs. Claudette Perrick, service with a smile. 
Behold the new hero of the people of Cyrodiil! Behold, your Arena Grand Champion, the Iron Maiden! 
Goblins have their own reasons for doing things. Don't make sense to us, usually, but I've learned a lot about their ways over the years. 
Only one has a better mastery of locks than I. You need to speak to J'baana. You can find him imprisoned at the Imperial Legion headquarters. 
Caranya turned on the Guild? 
Yes, I am a Speaker, a representative of the Dark Brotherhood. My voice is the voice of the Black Hand, our organization's ruling body. 
Oh, I must say I was sorry to see Syl go. She always kept me busy, and when I'm busy, I'm ever so happy. 
Thadon and Syl gone. Strange times. 
Have you ever met anyone who barters better than Palonirya? 
Have you seen the Derics recently? They're always bickering with one another. 
Hurry to Dyus. Do as he asks. No danger is too great. 
You want to know what happened? I'll tell you. I was betrayed. Stabbed in the back. I'm in here, and Arnora's out there living in my house. 
What's happening? 
We found the way back blocked by more daedra. So we were stuck here until rescued by you. It's just like Farwil to leap before he looks. 
There's always intrigue in Crucible. 
To become ruler of Dementia, the current leader's heart must be cut out and brought to the Altar of Arden-Sul in the Sacellum. 
Oh. Did I say that out loud? Excuse me. I'm Weebam-Na, the hunter. You got to excuse me. I got rats on the mind. 
You now hold the physical component of the Staff of Sheogorath. Before it is complete however, it must be imbued with power. 
You and Nels... both still alive. One of you is a cold-blooded killer! I... I never did trust that Nord.... 
Have you found any new Oddities? 
May I present you with the perquisites of your rank... a key to White Stallion Lodge and a shield bearing the arms of County Leyawiin. 
You're talking to me, and I don't like you. Goodbye. 
He has disguised his nature from most, but cannot hide it from the Council of Mages. So, he approached us with an accord. 
The Blackwood Company is not popular, but they're still cheap and effective. 
Take my Amulet. Give it to Jauffre. I have a secret son, and Jauffre alone knows where to find him. 
Umbra. That's a name I haven't heard in a while. And it's not one you should be using around Pell's Gate, either. 
Warmest greetings to you. I trust you've already spoken with Ocheeva? I am Vicente Valtieri. I provide assignments for all new family members. 
Welcome, Dark Elf, to the Tournament of Ten Bloods. To your right, through each of nine gates, another Chosen awaits you. 
Well, don't take too long. I don't think they'll like it if they realize you didn't come alone. 
A sword? You don't even have one! 
What in blazes! You ain't one of me crew! Ye best start explainin' yerself, mate, if ye want to get off this ship alive! 
You see Khajiit always running through the City? You see Ra'Jiradh and his brothers! We bring the Black Horse Courier to the good citizens, yes? 
Well, well, if it isn't Lady Luck! How's our new Grand Champion, huh? You ready to make me some money? Ha ha ha ha ha!  Ahem... 
Urbul keeps a lot of axes and maces. He seems to like big weapons. 
I'm Roderic Pierrane.  
That's apparently why the guards trust him so readily. They had gotten word from Skingrad's city watch about Raynil and his so-called accomplishment. 
No, please! The lighthouse! Just outside the city walls! I think the robed man lives there! In... in the cellar! 
Well. That's your problem now. Off with you. I don't want to see you again until the Great Torch is lit. I wouldn't want to have to hurt you. Much. 
He isn't in right now, so you should be clear to check it out. Just don't tell anyone I gave the key to you. 
I'm telling you, They're behind all of this. All of it! No one is going to listen to me until it's too late! 
Oh, don't worry. You'll find something Odd if you keep at it! 
Do you have business with me? 
He told me to give this message to any member of the Thieves Guild that asked about him or a book. 
Far from it. His interest in the Ayleids is not that of a mere scholar. He hopes to unlock the secrets of their magical power. 
I can't believe it! The Gray Prince has been beaten! There's a new Arena Grand Champion now, someone called the Crimson Blade! 
To put it bluntly, you're stuck here for the moment. No disrespect intended. 
What do you want, treehugger? 
Once this is done, I will proclaim the successor a Duke or Duchess. Then, Sheogorath gives His blessing, and the cycle is completed. 
The sun and soil here are like my native Hammerfell, but the climate is milder, and the rainfall more reliable. 
I'd advise you to keep your distance from that accursed portal. 
And I fixed that maggot! The ogres own Drad! Make Drad eat dirt! Bwah-hah-hah! 
I'll see you back at Cloud Ruler Temple. Good luck. 
Silana Blandia, Healer of the Leyawiin Chapel. Bless the Nine, and all the faithful. 
Nobody likes the idea of going into that thing, but it's our job, and we're going to do it. 
I wish my father had given me a better description of its location, but for some reason all he told me was "South of Chorrol, north of Fort Carmala." 
You've calmed them down. That's good. Now go find out what the hell is going on down there! Look past the symptoms, fool! 
Erthor is causing trouble at the Mages Guild again. Seems his experiments are always blowing up. 
Can you help me, please? 
You might want to make sure she remembers. Especially the part about it being her idea. 
I hear the monks were most... hospitable. 
Hmmm... you look familiar. If only I could remember. 
You will seek the assistance of Relmyna Verenim in Xaselm to rebuild the Gatekeeper. You remember the creature you killed to get in here?  
They say the Gatekeeper's magical. I don't believe in magic. But I do believe in bones. 
Yes? Oh look, you have some pod pits! I need five of those myself.  
You're trespassing here. 
Watch your back, Baurus! 
I see so clearly now, what a fool I have been. A happy, heedless fool. 
Nothing we can do about it, either. There's a law about that here. Been to the Hill of Suicides? Not a nice place. But you might be able to help. 
Excuse me. I'm on duty. 
Hey, I was up in Cropsford the other day. It looks like they're really making a go of it. You did a good thing there, you know. 
Are you prepared to enter the Dreamworld? 
The poor of the Waterfront are kindred to the Gray Fox, and will not betray him. However, cubs soon get hungry. Soon someone will break. 
Far to the west there lives a fierce warlord and his company of loyal mercenaries. Your target is the warlord. Do you accept this contract?   
Henantier's never been one for rules, and so he's continued to perform his latest experiments in secret. If word gets out, he'll be dismissed. 
Oh, this is going to be funny! You're going to be the first assassin in Dark Brotherhood history who couldn't even kill an invalid! Ha ha ha ha ha! 
We believe the killings are the actions of a rogue mage. Battlemages have been sent to the Brina Cross Inn, the only common link between the victims. 
Do you want something from me? 
That's a shame. 
It seems all is peaceful in the Shivering Isles, My Lord. Will wonders never cease? 
I doubt that he's told Gilen and Grey-Throat anything, but you could always try. 
I hope you are here to tell me of Black Brugo's death. 
The Gatekeeper is dead? Who will keep out the cats? They'll be everywhere! 
Shouldn't tease me like that. I hope you trip and fall on a sword. 
Oh? We must? Well, last I saw, you didn't outrank me, Swordsman. I suggest you mind your manners... and your own business. 
They die quickly if you jejinak them. Jejinak! Jejinak! 
Shoo. Go. Begone. Things to do. 
Come, light the Great Torch for Dementia. Illuminate the conspiracies! Deepen the shadows! The people of Crucible await their Hero! 
If you want to find them, you'll need all four volumes of the "Commentaries." 
Time grows ever shorter. I implore you -- deliver your precious cargo to Dyus with haste.  
There is no other way. 
A pity. I was looking forward to this. Perhaps some other time, then. 
First, place the Gatekeeper's body into the Cistern of Substantiation. 
I'm sorry, but I don't feel comfortable telling you. 
Chalices? Who can think about chalices with the cat problem around here? Nasty beasts. 
1, 2... sad about Passwall. 3, 4... I wonder if they will rebuild it. ...5, 6. 
If you ever find yourself back in Anvil, stop by anytime and say hello. Oh, and please say nothing to anyone about our true identities. 
The Gatekeeper is no more. The Fork is missing. These are difficult times. 
Yes, you will now find the Blade of Woe a bit more... potent than it was. Now go. Leave this crypt, and serve our Dread Father til your dying breath! 
He was the only one left? 
He can be found at the Arcane University in the Imperial City. I'm very disappointed in you. 
If Bruma falls, the Empire falls with us. So be it. 
Best mage I've ever seen, but a bit eccentric. Last I heard, she had camped out at a shrine to Kynareth, and was killing wildlife for fun, I think. 
Fathis Aren's pockets are not for you, thief! 
Oh, my word! The Fringe, gone? Luckily, Sheogorath will protect us. He always does. 
She's lucky I didn't have her tossed overboard. 
The Argonian Big Head is always searching for the Fork of Horripilation. 
By the Nine Divines! Assault! Assault! 
Fort Sutch? It is an impregnable fortress surrounded by mountains. You'll never even get inside, let alone kill your target. Good luck. 
Our time has come, brethren. The die has been cast, and the Flame of the Demented blazes like the fire in our hearts! 
That cat beggar is following me! He's going to eat me, Lord Sheogorath, I just know it. Don't look! He's standing right over there. 
You seek the way? 
You may have heard that he's a bit touched in the head, and that may be true, but he's always been a quiet neighbor.  Never given us any trouble. 
That's it? There's no one else? 
A new ruler in Crucible? One more thing to keep me up at night. 
The lands of Mania are bright, vibrant, and full of color. You'll find its inhabitants reflect the land itself. 
Don't think you're getting away with something. 
An event. A movement. An apocalypse of sorts. Happens every era, at the end of every era. Which is to say, now. 
Sheogorath has tried to remove them, but they always return. While they cannot be destroyed, they can be rendered inert. 
I need your help. Please come with us. 
Let's continue on to the Elder Council Chambers. Delay is dangerous. 
I've heard that Renoit has a good selection, and at reasonable prices. 
Hello, Steward. Welcome to my little corner of the castle. 
Ready? Ready for what? You're a champion now! The Grand Championship is the only thing left!   
A torch is lit. The light is lighted. Or lit. It's a Great Torch. Much better than most. 
We have a new Brother who wishes to bind himself to the service of Lord Dagon. 
Place. Not place? Here. Not here? Welcome to the Grove of Madness, stranger. Or go away. Who knows? Time will tell. 
Crowhaven is a ruined fort far to the west of here. I'd go myself, but my training regiment doesn't allow for the luxury of such an excursion. 
I'll have it sent to the palace and placed in the main hall, if you wish to take a look at it. 
Didn't think so. I'm such a puddle of dog pittle that people can't even be bothered to end my miserable existence. Oh, well. Goodbye. 
Excellent! I accept! 
Welcome to my home underground. Hehe. 
It seems that these are turbulent times in the land of the Dunmer. 
Now go, before someone sees us. 
I never suspected that Kaneh had the audacity to try such a risky assault. 
I'll sleep better once this keepsake of Namira is gone from my possession. A good choice for our purpose, though. 
I'm Norbert Lelles. I let my merchandise speak for itself. Look around. If you see something you like, we'll talk about a price. 
Are you out of your mind? Take that robe off at once! 
Get a move on. 
As you are new to the guild, you are less likely to be recognized as a member. This may give you an advantage in getting to the root of the problem. 
Argh... Very well. I am part of the group that wishes to see Syl drowned in a pool of her own blood. But I am not in charge. 
You look tough. Want to join the Fighters Guild? 
You'd better get up to the Arena or you'll miss the match! Just head through those doors on my left. If you win, come see me to collect your gold. 
And I think there's a shrine to Boethia high in the Valus Mountains southeast of Cheydinhal. 
I must apologize. I don't have any more horses to sell. I sold our last Bay horse to you. 
But the mortal world is protected from the daedra of Oblivion by magical barriers. 
This will not do. 
Heh-heh. Just kidding. Everything is all perfectly safe. Tested it myself. Ungarion, retired adventurer. You may have heard of me? 
Ciirta brought us here with promises to show us the light, but always is about Sheogorath, is about revenge! 
Maybe you're the reason Sheogorath left. Probably are. You make me want to leave whenever I see you. 
There's too many of them! 
Greetings, My Lord. I am at your service. 
I think I need something to drink. 
I'm sorry. 
The old woman? She's quite a pest, really. I think she's gotten it into her head that I need mothering, or something. She is sorely mistaken.  
What could the harm be if while they were here, they bought a drink or two? My business has increased quite a bit since I leaked the story. 
Sheogorath's private sanctuary, where he would often meditate amidst the tame Gnarls that tend the roots. 
However, the secrets of its construction are lost. 
If you wait a day my "body" will be put on display in the Chorrol Chapel Undercroft. You can come to me then and administer the antidote. 
I can't believe Thadon is gone. He was a lovely man. 
I am Hrol Ulfgar. 
The blind monks in the catacombs guard the stone. It's said to have magical powers. 
We're afraid there may be retribution on Bradon's wife even though she had nothing to do with it. Vampires are a hated lot. 
Sire... we failed your father. The shame we all carry... But we will not fail you!  History will not repeat itself, of this you have my solemn vow! 
Seems you've made your choice. I suppose we'll have to do it your way. I don't know what else to say. 
We tremble beneath His eye. 
If you return, perhaps you'll have gained some measure of character. Perhaps, though, you'll die. Then you're no longer the guild's problem. 
Yeah!! 
Please speak to Amminus. He can tell you what you need to know. 
Time is wasting. We must move swiftly! 
I'm Honmund. I'm a prospector. Alga's my woman, Nord-style. None of that Chapel wedding nonsense. 
Kill those things. Every last one of them! They destroyed eveything I hold dear! 
Are you still here? 
I've told you, it'll kill you. Actually, now that I think about it, why don't you go eat some? Eat all you can find. I'd get a chuckle out of that. 
Many Argonians say they have been "called back" to Black Marsh. They disappear into the swamps and are never seen again. 
My poor Henantier. Help will be with you soon. 
When they are too old or too blind to work, they are sent to the Temple of the Ancestor Moths. 
Hello my friend. A word of advice. Watch for goblins if you're heading north. 
They've never been so bold before now. Always hiding in the shadows, staying away from the guild. What could have prompted this? 
My Disp to you is now over 70. 
I know I may be out of line by saying this, but I think the city guards may be wrong. It's hard to imagine Bradon was a vampire. 
For now, here is your reward. Let us leave Ganredhel's house and go our separate ways. We have overstayed our welcome. 
It will be difficult. The Mazken have fortified their position. But I am confident that with your help, we can defeat them. 
Move along, citizen. There's nothing to be done here. 
He is a priest in the Chapel of Akatosh in Kvatch. He never knew that he was Uriel Septim's son. 
Aware of the growing interest in the guild after the ban on Necromancy was put into place, he offered to help the Council track the cult's actions. 
You MUST leave! If you don't, I'll call the guards! 
I'm glad the Resonator is working. Keeps threats contained. 
I had a good feeling about you, friend. You should talk to Mirisa about the goblins. She's our guide and knows what needs to be done. 
Sheogorath gone? I'd check the bedchambers of every maiden in town... you'll find Him eventually. 
Hello, Conjurer. 
You can tell them not to worry, the effect is not actually permanent. It should wear off eventually. 
She is an interesting character indeed. She is one of the very few individuals in the Shivering Isles that is party to the secret of Sheogorath.  
I've had my fill of the place, that's for sure. And I've got the scars to prove it. 
What? Oh... err, no. I'm afraid not. No sign at all. 
You may request any of the Golden Saint or Dark Seducer Escorts at the castle to accompany you. They will defend you to the death. 
Perhaps Syl was right all along. 
Hurry, get that door open! 
Who do you think you are questioning me? I'd just assume ask a goblin maiden to a dance then to answer your stupid questions. 
The Staff may allow you to occupy the Throne of Madness, but understand that such a feat has never been attempted. 
He protects the Gates of Madness. He'll kill anyone who gets near... anyone except Relmyna Verenim. She's staying upstairs right now. 
The kitchens are a good place to start, but they are deep in his quarters guarded by more Saints. 
The day has finally arrived, a day of doom and despair. Whatever shall we do? 
You should speak to the rulers of Cyrodiil as soon as possible. The danger to Bruma is growing by the day. 
We need to go see if it is safe. 
Mogens Wind-Shifter had a gang. They robbed and killed travelers. But Ra'vindra saw, and told the guards. 
Well, here's a fine one! Speak freely. 
Whadda you want? 
All right, so I didn't like Neville. But the man was a trained soldier. He knew how to handle himself. Who could possibly have killed him?     
The poor girl! She's too young, too innocent to be exposed to these horrible murders. I hope she's holding up all right. 
Sheogorath has disappeared. This is worse than my nightmares. 
There are many people in the city who interest me, and you are not one of them. 
We'll hold this position as long as we can. 
Did you hear that someone broke into an Imperial Legion post and stole the taxes they collected from the Waterfront? 
Hahaha! That one never gets old! 
Nothing new to report on my end. Have you uncovered anything suspicious? 
This is a wondrous encounter. Welcome. 
I am pleased that Thoronir has decided to donate his inventory to the temple. At least he is trying to make amends. 
Is this making sense? Look, you eat the Felldew, then use the Chalice, and find the world a much brighter and happier place. Honest. 
My poor husband is getting no sleep. He's awake all night taking care of those stupid plants. 
You like dogs too? That's nice. 
The Aureals hold Rapture, and are massing to attack us. But never fear, they are no match for us. 
Tiber Septim is the god and patron saint of our order. And now his dynasty has come to an end. It's very painful. 
How may I serve you, Lord? 
Well, obviously, I was mistaken. It was a terrible idea. I'm just glad that no innocents were hurt; I wouldn't want to have their blood on my hands. 
You have the stink of Mania about you. Leave before I start vomiting. 
You've got the journal. Good. So, what happened in Skingrad? 
This ship doesn't move 'til I know that Ormil's safe. 
But...what if we're wrong? Bittneld has traveled the world, while I've spent my whole life in this tavern. 
Conviction can drive men mad. They will even kill to uphold the mistaken belief that only they see the world truly. Such is the story of Vitharn. 
Daedra cannot die, so your so-called gods cannot erase him from your minds completely. 
You're back. What have you found out? 
Filthy Orc! I smell you from here! 
What little I have discovered points to the witches of Glenmoril. In the past, they have been capable of creating a cure. 
Have you brought help? We've been trapped here since the daedra overran the city. 
Of course, Arch-Mage. 
What's that? 
You hear me? I TALK to him first. No smashing in his teeth or chopping off his head! Understand? 
The vampire you seek is powerful, so powerful that those who sought to destroy him were unsuccessful, no matter what they tried. 
Listen to me! The others, they're all dead! Someone has been coming in here and killing them! That means there must be a way out!    
The pillar has had us stumped for more than a week now, not to mention the injuries it's caused. 
The Knights are relentless. We are the only thing standing between them and the total destruction of the Fringe. 
Oh, I'm sorry. Perhaps I heard incorrectly. Excuse me. 
The room's already yours for the night. 
I don't like to talk about it much, as it's bad for business. At any rate, would you care for a bed for the night? 
Isn't it uncanny how Ida Vlinorman moves? 
You're new here in Skingrad? Fine. I'll make sure the captain knows we have a stranger in town. 
Bet you're glad it won't last long, huh? Oh, didn't you know? No one ever leaves this prison alive! You're going to die in here, Redguard! Die! 
The Imperials have the gold, houses, and top spots. Dark Elves like me left Morrowind and the whole priest-ridden Tribunal nightmare... 
A simple mission, nothing more. You should be fine. Please, head downstairs, and I'll brief you further. 
To obtain it, and then give it up ... I honor your dedication to our cause. 
The Aureals do not forget their friends. 
Now, you were telling me why you're interested in Glarthir. 
I appreciate your enthusiasm, but you've got a bit of a bad reputation. Make a better name for yourself, and perhaps we can accept your application. 
Perhaps Your Grace is more susceptible to our Lord's Blessings than at first it seemed. Interesting. 
They say the keys are sewn up in the Gatekeeper's body. Basically, that means you're not getting in. 
Health and fortune, traveler. I'm Dynari Amnis. May the Nine bless your dreams. 
But the Blades answer only to the Emperor, of course. We are not an arm of the government. 
We'd best get back to work now, hmm? Captain catches us gabbin', it'll be our heads.  
I don't see how we can do business if you don't have the gold for it.  
Of course you can't! Nobody ever wants to help! That's what's wrong with the world these days. Everybody's so damned selfish! 
Thadon has his Chalice back. Why won't anyone help me replace what I've lost? 
I've heard he can teach his skills to others, for a price. 
He was here a second ago... 
Only good goblin is a dead goblin. I like dead goblins. 
That has been undone. If you go to the Imperial City, you will find that the Thieves Guild has a guild hall on the site of the ruins of Dareloth. 
But a cure for vampirism... That's something I haven't thought about in quite some time. Very challenging, and potentially dangerous. 
The Thieves Guild refused to take me, so I came here. Leyawiin is my home. It is where I was raised. 
The castle's to the east, and the chapel near the west gate. 
You are a credit to the guild. 
We must purge Order from our home. 
Lord Sheogorath will, I'm sure, be quite interested to hear of your success. Return to Him once you've checked with the commander here. 
I've heard rumors about the Council of Mages consorting with outside sources. Why are outsiders interfering with our guild? 
I supply many fine city merchants with goods. All sorts of things. Whatever I can buy cheap and sell dear. 
Is everything all right, my lord? Has Cloud Ruler been breached? I told the others the Great Hall wasn't secure! Those damn high windows... 
Apparently, there are three or four of them. Real nasty, from what I hear. You take care of them. Maybe you'll get lucky and they'll surrender. 
Huzzah for the Emperor! 
I'm far too busy to speak to you right now. 
I've still got my eye on you, prisoner. 
What brings you to this neck of the woods, my lady? 
Ogier runs a good shop. His ingredient selection is excellent. 
I'm going to wait at the Flowing Bowl until this mess is settled. I know I can trust you to keep the place safe. 
Can't... Can't move... Body frozen... Must have been... the damn... Mead... 
Those who unlock this hidden path have proven themselves worthy to join the ranks of the Mythic Dawn cult. Finding the shrine is the first test. 
Thank you! It is a truly odd Tentacle. I'm so glad to have one back on display. 
Sheogorath victorious. Madness reigns! 
I could tell you our blacks are the fastest, toughest, most reliable horses in Cyrodiil. 
You will retrieve the book immediately, if you have any intention of ever receiving a recommendation from me! 
Can't you see that I'm very busy?! 
It pays to know about locks and lockpicks. It's just a hobby, of course, but the average citizen feels more secure when he understands his own locks. 
Must find the key! Must find the key! 
The Resonator sings again, drawing strangers near. Protecting us, our lives, our homes, and all that we hold dear. 
They should have listened to me! 
Hmmm... that gives me an idea. Since you already know what they look like, do you feel up to a bit of a collecting expedition? 
Even Sheogorath won't help me. 
No way. I'm not taking that. 
HYAH! 
Come closer. Taste the power of the Lord of Order! 
Very well. But do be quick about it! 
I wish to never speak of the Dreamworld again. Henantier's free of its grip, and I can't bear a reminder he was ever a prisoner in that dark place. 
Now, worship a Daedra Lord, and you get effects... bad ones, of course, but clear and measurable effects. 
Mysticism? Seems interesting, but not particularly useful. 
Is it so hard to leave me alone to get some work done? My wind and humidity measurements must be VERY precise! 
You are Conjurer no more. Guild members shall now address you as Magician. Congratulations. 
Mystery solved, eh? Reynald had a twin brother. Well, he had all of us fooled. 
Break-in at the Imperial Palace! A Black Horse Courier exclusive. Take a copy. 
Mephala tugs the strings of mortals for her pleasure. Are you sure you desire audience with the Webspinner? 
Dervera Romalen seems pleased that so many folks drink at the Newlands lodge. She takes great pride in it. 
I don't know where they're going. 
Those "beings" as you call them aren't beings at all. They are the soulless abominations known as the Knights of Order. 
You want my honest opinion? I think Nels is the killer. But I haven't yet ruled out that Dovesi may be working with him. 
I don't trust that Dumag, so I don't shop there. 
I've had many meals there. Olav is an excellent innkeeper. 
After that, we dance, we sing, or we do whatever else suits my lord's tastes. 
... But now, with the emperor dead, everything is at sixes and sevens. 
We try to honor these requests whenever possible. After all, the Dark Brotherhood's reputation has been built on providing... good service. 
You have no proof! You cannot hold me accountable for anything! 
Move faster, if you value your life. 
However, you will find that you can only sell stolen property to one of our guild fences. Most other merchants won't take hot merchandise. 
All I know is that word has gotten around about Anya Herrick. She looks more nervous than normal lately. People think she might be up to something! 
Come on! What's the hold-up? 
What a thoughtful gift! 
A glorious existence. Truly. 
Follow me. I know how to get to the part of the sewers where we need to meet the Sponsor. 
Wait! I need to speak with you! 
Of Tove in Bliss I tell you this, there's something that she desires. She builds and builds and builds all night until her weary bones retire. 
I await your return... if you return. 
I can promise you a night of fun you won't soon forget. 
Damn rats, always skirting around in the shadows. Making me jumpy... 
It's the Chapel of Akatosh. Four walls standing, and no fire. Can you think of a safer place? 
We were taken at birth, and given to the Dark Brotherhood. We returned to Black Marsh as Shadowscales, trained in the arts of stealth and murder.  
I hope you're not too angry with me. I... I never meant to do anything wrong, honest! 
The Night Mother will fall by my hand! Her spirit will haunt my nightmares no longer! 
The Council of Mages has been aware of the increased Necromancer activity in Cyrodiil for some time. 
It's a shame Farwil is gone. Although he was boastful and aloof, at least he treated me as an equal. I shall miss him. 
Ships sail from Anvil harbor for ports-of-call in Hammerfell, Summerset Isle, Yokuda, and the Western Isles. 
I think we should find your friend Jauffre at once. 
Blackheart has a fascination with these Ayleid ruins. There's one northeast of here, Atatar. My bet is that he moved his base there. I'll lead. 
Sidri-Ashak Runestones are single standing stones marked with green runes, thought to be named for an obscure Akaviri potentate, Sidri-Ashak. 
A thorn in our side is more like it! Those fools are nothing but a glorified club. They've never contributed to anything useful, and never will. 
I lost track of the number of times I looked at the sky, waiting for the world to end. 
Such good company. Welcome. 
Ugh! 
Ahh, magister. I just remembered, there's something I'd like to discuss with you. 
You better hope I never get out of here. 
Please, not now. I just want to be by myself for a bit. 
That could have gone smoother. Can't say I minded killing a few more of these bastards, though. Get the book and let's get out of here. 
No? Then I suggest you return to the world and gather them. We have nothing to discuss otherwise. 
Hello? Did you hear me? I asked if you needed anything. Well then, I've got duties to tend to, so if you'll excuse me. 
I don't know you. Just stay away from me. 
You're hungry, Myrmidon! I can see it in your eyes! You ready to feed that hunger? Huh? You ready for another match? 
Why did the Knights of Order cross the Fringe? No one knows. 
That's terrible. 
Never again. Never again. 
I wouldn't want an Orc butler, but apparently the Count doesn't mind. Shum gro-Yarug has been there for years. 
We've got to get out of here! You understand me? We're the only ones left! We need to find a way out of this house! Come on! 
Her song guides us. 
Lieutenant Gerich Senarel of the Bruma Guard. 
I don't know if Tumindil ever leaves the chapel. That man works day and night to take care of all of us. 
I thought so. You are a coward, as well as a bigot, and we will speak no more of this. 
There's a Malacath shrine west of Fort Sutch, west of the Gold Road to Hammerfell. But I stay away. I like my skin on the outside, in one piece. 
Strike me, will you? 
Have you talked to Ancotar yet? Can he make us visible again? 
That's so sad. 
Help an old fisherman out, won't you? 
Have you heard anything more about what the Council knows about these Necromancers? Something's not right. 
That's fine. Make sure you have everything you need. There's no telling what you'll find there. 
If she's around, she hasn't come into Pell's Gate. Nor should she. I fear that girl is long gone. 
Marana Rian. I am very fond of nice things. How fortunate that I can afford them. 
It doesn't help that they're the ones who make the obelisks work. A little chanting, a little ritual, and POOF! Knights of Order. Bad news. 
A master sorcerer like Janus Hassildor inevitably outlives all his peers. It must be a lonely existence. 
Those with blades and shields will hold the flank. When the enemy draws near, they will close in and attack. 
Which is to say, none. 
Leave me alone. I'm just trying to work here. 
Jollring, the butler. I've served Master Umbacano for many years. 
Yes! Yes! I can use this to charge my magicka. All I need is a source...someone nearby...someone with magicka. Someone on the list! 
That can't be. I don't have a brother. I mean, I never knew my real family. Who did you say you were again? 
I told you not to drop your shield! We're done here. 
Look, I'll find someone else to help me. Leave me alone. 
Stop! Don't let Anaxes out! 
I can't imagine someone like Primo has seen much death and suffering. This murder must be quite a shock to him. 
Please help me. 
You can call me a barbarian. It's true and I'm proud of the fact. But you call me pathetic again and I'm going to show you just how barbaric I am. 
Yes.  I mean ... I must go now.  But do accept my apologies for your loss. 
Any idea what Gromm will do now that old Baenlin is dead? 
No, you must have the wrong man. I am a priest of Akatosh. My father was a farmer. 
That's fine. This one will kill you for free. 
Let me see a fang. 
Hmm. A bowl that you mix potions in. Doesn't seem all that Odd to me... well, I can see you're trying, so I'll find somewhere to put it. 
The Emperor is dead, and so are his heirs. We're a Legion without a leader. The Blades were trusted with our Lord's protection... and they failed. 
Anytime now. 
No matter. I serve him, not you. Stand aside. 
Vampire nest in the city. Only in the Black Horse Courier. Take a copy. 
So, you've collected the pelts. I trust you've learned a lesson. Your rank is restored, along with all rights and responsibilities. 
It's no surprise Thadon killed himself. I'm more shocked about Syl. 
We have overlooked these questions because we are so focused on rooting out the Necromancers as quickly as possible. 
When we confronted Lachance he tried to defend himself, tried to declare his innocence! But we would not hear his treacherous lies!  
Antoine Branck. I just work here. If you want a horse, go inside and talk to Isabeau. 
If you ever find yourself in Highcross, to Mirili you should speak. It isn't treasure that she wants, it's knowledge that she seeks. 
Walk among them. There were four who failed to protect the gate lever. Find out what they did wrong and help them correct it. 
La la la, la la la la... 
As the Arch-Mage, you are entitled to certain privileges. In addition to the full use of all Guild facilities, there is one service available to you. 
Always glad to do a favor for you. She lives on the Waterfront. Wait 'til afternoon to find her. She sleeps from sunrise 'til noon. 
Okay, okay, I'll show you. But only because you are my dear friend. Follow me. 
Relan hears of this Reversal Chalice. It makes blood special, yes? Relan would like special blood. 
Your Speaker should look for this person in the village of Seyda Neen, on the Dark Elven isle of Vvardenfell. 
You're always welcome here. 
With the Oblivion Gate closed, I can now gladly send aid to Bruma. 
Let me know if you find anything unusual in Falcar's quarters. I'd look myself, but it's locked, and I don't have the key. 
I would prefer that you didn't disturb me at home. My research is exhausting and I don't like to be bothered here. 
My family was killed long, long ago. At least, that's what I'd been told... perhaps it's time for me to stop drinking. 
Excuse me, my lady. 
A she, you say? And she's dead? Well, Arielle and Roliand did what needed to be done. No more innocent deaths. At least, for now. 
As my Lord told you, it happens at the end of every era, and Jyggalag walks the Realm. 
You have found it. The holiest of holies within Cylarne, aside from the altar of the Flame of Agnon itself. 
Steady, Grommok... steady. You've been through worse before. What more could this place possibly throw at you? 
Beautiful countryside, don't you think? We're just doing a bit of hunting and sightseeing, not that it's any of your business. 
And a book, of all things. Your gullibility knows no bounds, it would seem. 
This is an unwelcome surprise. 
The Great God of All made a covenant with St. Alessia. So long as a true heir ruled the Empire, the Great God swore to protect the Empire. 
Oh, and as before, you can pick up your free Elixir in 24 hours. 
Pennus Mallius, adventurer-at-large. Just between adventures at present, I'm afraid. 
I'm gonna go get me some black bows. Tag along if you like. 
Greetings! Seeing you just makes me feel safer! 
Stupid guild rules! He is only an Argonian. He is less than human, and much less than Khajiit. If you must spare him, at least make him suffer. 
I've nothing else for you, and I don't believe Burz has any, either. I think perhaps you had better speak with our friend in Chorrol. Good luck. 
Leave her an offering of glow dust, and perhaps she will deign to speak with you. 
Hither to me, good varlet. 
You'll have to be very careful in there. If Henantier intended it as a training ground, there's no telling what you may encounter. 
Should you succeed, you will be the first mortal to have a dedicated Daedric artifact in your possession. This will be most interesting, indeed... 
I have a job to do, and nothing will stand in my way! 
Or, you can fill the chamber with hundreds of keys and watch them frantically search for the correct one. Always a crowd pleaser. 
If you're looking to buy cheap spells, Edgar's is the place to look. 
You must now go to the city of Cheydinhal, to the abandoned house near the eastern wall. Enter the basement, and attempt to open the Black Door. 
I've got something for you, but we're not going to talk about it here. I want you to meet me at my house after sundown. We'll talk more then. 
And with it, you'll do what? 
Return to your guild, and prepare yourself accordingly. 
Here's what I know. Theranis was drinking in the Two Sisters Lodge. He was bragging about stealing something from the castle. 
I need you in Leyawiin to take care of that Hist. What is it you need? 
We will not fail you, Your Grace. 
Very good. I hope you will succeed where I have so far failed. 
How glorious, a newcomer to the Isles! Perhaps they will see the ways of Arden-Sul and join us. 
You look like you've swung a mace or two in your time. 
I know more than I want to about the seductive power of daedric magic. Let's just leave it at that. 
Hey! Who in Oblivion are you? You don't look like one of the Blackwater Brigands! 
She and I have an unpleasant history. She does not care for Guild regulations, and errantly believes I am mis-using my powers. 
Here we are, safe indoors. Nothing to harm us here, is there? 
If you think me defenseless, you may be surprised. I'm more dangerous than I look. 
If I had my way, we'd go down there and burn him out. Let him find some other place for his little "experiments." 
So? Am I a knight? 
Or, if you're feeling merciful, we can have the group terrorized by a seemingly lowly Gnarl that instantly grows to twice their size! 
Oh my. Look at you. You're in the thick of it now, aren't you? 
Whatever. 
You... you're a cat! Get away from me! 
Carandial. Mage-trained. Scholar by inclination. Student of our Aldmeri ancestors, the Ayleids. 
Why are you here? What do you want? Get out of my house! 
The End is coming. You just wait, you'll see. Time to gather up your things while you can. 
I... What note are you talking about? I don't understand. 
Close up left! Protect the Emperor! 
I guess that depends on how much of my precious time you need.... 
Good. Good. Your face is known to me. One so famous as you cannot expect to walk around the Isles unrecognized, can you? 
May your Blade show the way. 
I was careless to leave my art supplies around the castle like I did. I suppose I was easy to discover. 
Now that I have my notes back, my research continues. 
I want to train my armoring skill, I go to Bravil. Right? 
I'll never forget him. He saved as many as he could that terrible night. If only they'd listened and stayed with us in the Chapel. 
And don't you forget about me once you've finished your training! I'm sure we can help each other out! 
How mercenary of you! You and I both know the Museum is the rightful home for such an Oddity. I hope you change your mind eventually. 
Actually, that's the way this one prefers it. 
Not every store is a member, but we're slowly trying to convince them to join. Everything was fine until Thoronir opened his shop nearby. 
Well then, you know what they're capable of producing. Although, nothing has come through ever since Farwil entered. 
Any sign of Armand Christophe? 
This is a particularly exciting turn of events, is it not? 
The Bosmer? I've seen him at the West Weald Tavern. Been there for days, from what I hear. Better go see him. 
I like it here. I really didn't think I would, but Cropsford feels like home now. Thanks for making this possible, my friend. 
Since then, the Imperial City has been Tamriel's foremost magical research center. 
There's nothing else to say. 
Greetings, traveller. What is your business here? 
No... no. I understand. It is my problem, and I should solve it myself. You're right. I should never have involved you. Good night. 
I'd almost feared that you'd never return. I'm glad to see I was incorrect. 
Once the Aureals are destroyed, I will light the Flame of Agnon for you. Will you help us defend the Altar of Despair? 
Well, if you're dead set on learning something from me, then how about you do a little something for me, first? Something for her, to be honest. 
And whatever you do, you can't tell Jeanne about it. All right? 
No. You won't be getting in. 
I hope nobody tries to get away with anything when Captain Dion is around. He's a tough customer. 
I return to work, Lord. Farewell. 
Have you heard? Adamus Phillida has been killed! Murdered by the Dark Brotherhood! 
I might as well have given it to you at that price, but it's worth it for my bestiary. 
However, by some trick, they trapped one of my agents, the Xivilai Anaxes, in a cave. 
Those Fanatics are so tiresome. Do they have to interrupt our feast? 
Go with Talos's blessings. Do not fail. 
I know you were supposed to bring the weapons, but it seems you don't have them. Quickly, get those weapons to us! 
Rufio lies dead. Well done. The family will now welcome you with open arms. 
Crucible will be safer with the armies intact. 
I would hope that any responsible citizen, if given the chance, would acquire the book and deliver it here, so that it may be properly looked after. 
And don't move until you have to. We don't want to lose our advantage. 
A few weeks ago, a spellsword was passing through Leyawiin and heard that I like to buy curiosities. He wanted to sell the staff you see me carrying. 
Well met, adventurer. A moment of your time if you please. 
We tried to eliminate Phillida, of course, but failed on three separate occassions. He's a powerful man, and was surrounded by powerful associates. 
You were expecting a book. An ancient tome filled with the secrets that you seek. But instead, you have found me. The last remnant. 
Training and spells, training and spells. It gets so boring after a while; maybe someday I'll be able to move to the Arcane University. 
Fathis Ules. I've got a nice house. I have a little income... quite comfortable. Time is light on my hands. 
Do you think we stand a chance? 
Adamus Phillida has been a thorn in the Dark Brotherhood's side for far too long. Kill the pig, so Sithis can enslave his soul for all eternity! 
Good. I shall expect a progress report soon. And keep your head down; the Inquisitor must not become involved. 
Talk to Helvius Cecia in Bruma. He's your best bet for learning more about hand to hand combat. 
Fine then. I'll find someone else. Someone who isn't too busy to help a desperate old man. 
They're all gone? I can leave the cave? Oh, thank you! I'm ever so grateful! 
I expected to lay low here for a while and then be on my way. So again, I underestimated you. 
Let's get moving. Head to Arpenia. 
Did you want to continue to the manor? 
Kud-Ei. I'm in charge here, and an Advanced Trainer in Illusion to boot, so I don't have a lot of time to stand around and chat. 
When you're ready to get eviscerated, just head up the ramp to the Arena. Good luck, and may Azura have mercy on your soul.  
Julienne Fanis has long served Arch-Mage Traven in collecting alchemical ingredients for his personal research. 
I'm sick of mutton and beer. Want to go out and get a decent meal later? 
Eleven of the morning watch, and all's well. Good day, sir.  
How can I make your life easier? It's what I live for. 
Stay focused! Watch your backs, and be careful. Antus, are you ready? 
Please accept this token from the Dark Brotherhood. It is a virgin blade, and thirsts for blood. May it serve you well, as does your silence.  
I'm sorry, but my master is not receiving visitors at this hour. If you come back in the morning, I'm sure he would be glad to see you. 
Come on, now. The room is only 10 gold. Surely you can afford that? 
This tree is the source of our problems. It is an abomination of nature, and it must be destroyed. 
So, it's Hero now, is it? I suppose the little urchin wants to be a Champion. Bah! You will never join our ranks! We are gods among mortals! 
No, no, don't come any closer. I have to finish my morning survey of the dewfall at four precise locations. 
So you said. That's very bad news. 
Good. But there may still be more spies out there. You should continue to search for their base of operations in Bruma. 
Hi! 
Adventurers are always causing problems. Good thing the Gatekeeper takes care of most of them. 
A new ruler in Crucible, and an empty throne in Bliss. Amazing. 
We've all agreed to let Diram be our spokesman. You'll find him in the inn, if you look very carefully. 
It's just up here! Follow me! 
I would start by searching his home. He hasn't been there for days, so it should be safe. Return to us here if you have questions. We meet at night. 
You were told to sit down. Are you incapable of following such simple instructions? 
Really? May I see it, please? 
I'm still working on the second item needed for the gate-opening ritual. I believe I'm close to deciphering the relevant passage. 
He's young, rich and handsome. That's way out of your league, tramp. 
I heard Fighters Guild got the Fallen Rock contract, but the guy is just sitting around drinking beer. 
Please, don't let him deceive you. You must return there and put an end to his masquerade. Quickly, before he has a chance to get away! 
You've never worked an honest day in your life, you stupid orc! 
Farewell, Spellbreaker. 
That's a bit excessive, don't you think? 
It is quite simple, really. No longer will you receive orders directly. Instead, you will visit dead drop locations scattered throughout Cyrodiil. 
Want to pick up a shield and go a few rounds later? Been a while since I saw real action. 
Ha ha! We beat them! We slaughtered them all! Did you see? Did you see how well I fought? 
The Autkendo merely wants you to know that matters of the gravest import to the Realm's security may be at stake. 
Can't say I know of any. 
There's a room, all right. And a fine room it is -- yours for the night for only 10 gold! 
I'm not used to giving speeches. But I wanted you to know that I appreciate your welcome here. 
Any luck taking down Lonavo? 
I'm Praxedes Afranius. My brothers and I share a house in the Temple District. 
Did you know that Kud-Ei also teaches at the Mages Guild here in Bravil? 
But I AM innocent. I've done nothing! 
Umbacano may not be able to tell the difference between the Crown of Lindai and the Crown of Nenalata. 
There she is! To arms! 
I... I received a note from Arch-Mage Traven. I know what he did for us, and that he selected you to take his place. 
The city isn't ruled by Dukes. It's ruled by elected representatives. And they wear funny hats. 
Here's the procedure. We go to the castle. First we search you, confiscate any stolen goods. Then you pay your fine, and we release you. 
Uh uh. 
He truly was the Dragonborn... the last, and perhaps the greatest of all the Septims. 
If I may be so bold... you are the true Dragonborn, sir, there's no one here that doubts it. Any one of us would gladly die so that you may live. 
I don't want that ring! It's too hot to sell. You are supposed to take it to Ahdarji. I swear, the new recruits are getting worse. 
These break-ins must stop. 
Fighters Guild has no accommodations in town. Mages Guild members have their own quarters at the Arcane University. 
So Argonians get this 'hist' stuff from licking hist trees, and the Blackwood Company got bad hist that made them crazy. 
Why are you talking to me? Go away. 
You need to make a better offer. 
Sire, Chancellor Ocato is expecting you. He had word of your arrival in the capital. 
In due time, dear child. In due time. First, an introduction. I am Lucien Lachance, Speaker for the Dark Brotherhood.  
There's one last contract. 
It's said that eating taproot can bring you good luck. 
Yes. Of course he can trust you. Give him this spoon. He'll know what it means. 
Perhaps not, but we both know it's something you've fantasized over. I'm surprised you can contain your excitement to speak. Get on with it. 
He's been fed and well rested for you. 
Very well. If you change your mind, I'll be here. 
I can't believe it! The Gray Prince has been beaten! There's a new Arena Grand Champion now, someone called the Iron Maiden! 
Hey stranger, can you spare a few coins? I've just been shaken down by that bastard watchman and he took my last septim. 
Then get away from me and get back to your duties, so I can do mine. 
It's a dead end. What's your call, sir? 
I thought that I was perfectly clear. 
I heard you know how to move in light armor. 
Yes, Master. You need me? 
Can't sleep at home. Can't sleep. The walls aren't safe. 
He lives alone now. Moved into a cabin not far outside of town. It's near where he buried Vena. I understand he visits her grave every day. 
The Great Torch burns again. That'll boost spirits around here. A shame, really. 
Syl is dead, but Thadon is missing! These are dark times. 
Keep working on obtaining the items Martin needs for the ritual. 
You wish to join the Thieves Guild too? Maybe we will soon be brothers in the shadow. Only Armand can say. 
Ah yes, the Mythic Dawn scholar. What else can I help you with? 
Ah, my dear friend. It is so good to see you. 
Were you able to stop Agarmir? 
I can't find Brother Jerrol. I need something out of the storeroom. Have you seen him? 
Francois is forever in your debt! Farewell! 
Thamriel of Tamriel. What are all those strange creatures in the garden? Where are all the white birds? 
...find it... yes... I must find the key... rich beyond all my dreams... hehehe 
You will take her place. Do not speak to the priests. They are blindfolded and will not realize it isn't her unless you speak. 
Has a day passed yet? No? 
Matilde is old, and frail. The shock of two people being murdered is surely too much for the poor woman. 
The Council seems very interested in this new group of Necromancers that has sprung up. I wonder how things will play out. 
I understand that Fathis Aren is quite the conjurer. 
I heard he became a priest to avoid becoming a soldier. 
We did not know that the Underking, who was Zurin Arctus, had arisen to take his first revenge upon his former lord. 
All of you. 
Go now, and bring word to me as soon as he has been escorted to safety. 
Prepare yourselves for battle! 
I've bought a few things at Mach-Na's, but he's always so surly. 
I don't answer questions about myself. Particularly when they come from a Shadowfoot. 
What? This is unacceptable! 
Make every effort to be present for this conversation. It may give us something to hold over Ma'zaddha and get him to talk. 
Have you spoken to S'drassa yet? I hear she eagerly awaits your return. 
I haven't done much betting, but I hear some folks have made a good bit of money. 
Anvil wouldn't be my choice for a refit. No proper yard, neither spars nor scantlings in good supply. But, it's ill-luck to complain. 
I've given you the message. There's nothing more I can do. 
It's a shame she doesn't know more about her craft, though. 
Why look at you!  
I saw him in Cheydinhal recently, and said 'Hi,' and he pretended he didn't know me. 
Stonewall Shields. We specialize in shields. Viator Accius, your servant. 
The Gatekeeper's dead. As soon as you get one of those doors unlocked, we can go in. They're calling to me from in there. 
Thanks. Until next time, ha ha ha. 
Found Rockshatter yet by chance? 
Watch for minotaurs in the forests. Aggressive beasts. They'll tear right through your armor, too. 
Any luck yet? 
When Ocheeva and I trained with the Dark Brotherhood as children, we befriended another initiate, a Shadowscale by the name of Scar-Tail. 
Why don't you come back when you actually have the amulet and stop wasting my time. 
There are rats and goblins down there... but from what I've seen of you, I'm guessing you are an experienced Agent. Am I right? 
So maybe I can appeal to your sense of good will, huh? Ha ha ha ha! You let me live, and I'll tell you where I stashed my treasure. Is it a deal? 
The Elder Scrolls are kept in the Imperial Palace behind a door that cannot be breached.  Savilla's Stone has revealed a path around this door. 
Sometimes I wonder how you survive at all without me being there to watch your back! He he he.  
Consider that combat is not your only option. Your Grace has already made use of the chimes found in Brellach, and they can be useful once more. 
We must hold fast until the Hero of Kvatch can destroy their Great Gate. We must kill whatever comes out of that gate! 
Oh, please! Save me! Save me from that savage! He'll kill me and then feast on my flesh! That's what Nords do! Please, I don't want to die! 
Surprised to see us? 
All right, my friend. You've got 25 gold down on the Blue Team. Good luck, and enjoy the match! Oh, and if you win, come see me for your payout! 
Behold the new hero of the people of Cyrodiil! Behold, your Arena Grand Champion, Sir Slaughter! 
Back again I see! 
So, you are here to kill Motierre, eh? Well he's mine, and nothing will stand in my way! 
Destroying the Great Gate was a deed worthy of the mightest heroes of song and legend! You dealt the daedra a heavy blow that day, my friend! 
It's all garbage. They never patrol, they never help fight off the ocassional bandit that slips into the city. Ah well. I've said too much already. 
I am so worried about her. Please find her. 
What? Who are you? Oh... who cares. I'm Druja. You want something? Or you just practicing your Cyrodilic? 
Of course I'm proud to do my duty. But... It's a waste of time. What are we guarding? Cold stone and shadow. That's it. 
My... my soul? Whoah. Wow. Yeah, okay... Yeah! That sounds... great! You can have my soul! Can I... Can I have your soul too? Ha ha ha ha. Oh... Wow. 
Sheogorath's pet! Her head will make a fitting ornament for our Lord Jyggalag's throne room! 
I'm afraid there's not much more to tell you. So, you can see we really don't need any help. But thanks for the offer. 
I can't say I'm prepared to speak to you about that. No telling who will end up finding out. 
The Staff is a tool of great vision and thus, requires the eye of one who has witnessed one of these unseen secrets firsthand.  
Ah yes, the sixth guest. I'm Neville. It's nice to make your acquaintance. 
You must get there before he acquires whatever artifact is being kept there and makes his escape. 
You? What are you doing here? 
Have you ever bought light armor at Best Defense? 
What is it you require? 
I am only a supplicant. Speak to the Dark Elf wearing the robes. 
Why... I ought to... 
He seldom kills things right away. It takes awhile. Sometimes he talks to them while cutting them open. But still, he gets the job done. 
Whatcha got? 
So you heard? Yes, yes, it was quite the debacle. The head just wouldn't sever! Cut, saw, hack... By Sithis, I swear her tendons were made of steel! 
That fetcher of a guard Tyrellius is always trying to be sneaky.  Well, you can forget it. Tell him it isn't going to work. 
Hello, Brother. How can I help you? 
Blessed are you, who walks his true path. Enlightened are you, who learns of himself. 
Ayleid ruins? The big thing is to watch out for the traps. Thousands of years old, and still working. Amazing. 
Danus Artellian, captain of the guard. The Count's Guard. Castle Guard. Dion's captain of the town guard. That's nothing to do with me. 
Can I help you, brother? 
Go find him yourself. 
Is there something that makes you think I want to talk to you? 
You've stolen from the Fighters Guild! Go speak with Vilena Donton. None of your brothers will deal with you until you atone for your actions. 
We couldn't have been any less prepared for this. Seems like they came out of nowhere. There were just so many of them... 
For you, Lord Sheogorath, I'll make time. I'm sure you want to ask me all about my research. 
I am Wumeek. Gods commend you. 
Very well. Go through that door up the stairs, and it'll be the first door on the right. Sleep well, if you can. 
The only way she can be rid of it is if someone willingly accepts it. It can't be discarded in any other manner. 
Everyone's talking about Duke Thadon and his Chalice. How tedious. Don't people understand I have important work to finish? 
Yes, I did. After you saved me in Castle Skingrad, I vowed to join. I was having no luck on my own. 
I can't believe it! 
I banish you! 
I have written it down for you in this book. I've chosen you because you are the best. Good luck. 
You're a fool as well as a criminal, it seems. 
So, a newcomer may arrive in the Isles? I hope it's a guy and I hope he's cute. It's slim pickings around here. 
Each heart will increase the power of the obelisk until it eventually overloads and shuts down, closing the portal. 
Well, you can kill me if you like. I'm afraid I won't make much of a challenge, though. The Argonian Royal Court already sent an Agent to do the job. 
It's true. Chorrol has almost everything you could need. 
I have need of a very special book, the Lost Histories of Tamriel. The cat burglar Theranis was sent hunting in Skingrad for this book. 
You continue to do the guild proud. As such, a new task awaits you. 
Mehrunes Dagon has no more love for my kind than for my mortal subjects. Less, perhaps, as we make poor slaves. 
Now that things are returning to normal, it's high time I prepare my chamber for some new visitors. 
Perhaps this journey with you has tought him a lesson. Only time will tell. 
You ... I've seen you ... 
You can PAY for a bed at the Grey Mare or the Oak and Crosier. But if you get a bed for free at a guild, why would you pay for one? 
You haven't seen that filthy cat beggar have you? 
Malacath, have mercy! 
Mankar Camoran certainly is a fascinating writer. Undoubtedly insane, but fascinating. 
You must... you must kill me. 
GEH! 
Fine. Thanks for asking. 
I'm so glad to see you, my dear child. How are you? 
I can't believe that Glistel would live with that Malintus Ancrus. Shameful, and her being such a lovely girl. 
Pinnacle Rock was given to us by our Lord Sheogorath as a sanctuary and place of restoration. 
Do this, and I will give you your share of the Sanctuary's weekly earnings. There is so much work to be done. So much work... 
There are rats and goblins down there... but from what I've seen of you, I'm guessing you are an experienced Sorcerer. Am I right? 
I'm not about to rent you a room if you can't pay for it. 
A good man who honors the Nine may visit the Wayshrines of Akatosh for Blessings of Speed and Magicka. 
Yeah, well, what's it been? Seven, eight years? We've had a good long run, you and me. I always knew it would end someday. 
I saw some mudcrabs by the water recently. I steered clear of them. 
OK. Pick one of the choices. The topics should've disappeared and you should only have two choices to pick from. 
Confused already? Very disappointing. 
It was so nice chatting with you. Be sure to let me know how your hunt for the Mythic Dawn turns out. 
My whole life has been nothing but a lie! I'm no "Gray Prince." I'm a vile, wretched spawn of evil! Please, leave me. I can't.... I... 
So I said. Where's the money in that? 
So believe me when I tell you we don't like it when people snoop around in our affairs. You get near that ship, and my men will run you through. 
Well now, what news do you have to report? 
You would join us, though you have no personal stake in this fight? An honorable deed... I gladly accept your help, then. 
Are they.... are they gone? 
The Amulet of Kings. It is the Empire's sacred emblem of rulership. 
Just killing time. 
Killed and ate a Bosmer there. But it made me sick. Saw Lord Sheogorath in the vomitus, so that's all right. Here to sacrifice? A limb would be nice. 
Olav's Tap and Tack is a good, inexpensive place for travelers. 
Time is against us, and our enemies grow stronger. There is much to do, and little time in which to do it. Your next task is essential. 
Then you are now an Associate of the Mages Guild. 
The castle is to the west, the chapel and houses to the south, and guilds and shops to the north. 
I think I can move this item for ya at that price. Got anything else? 
Make sure Varon hands over that staff. 
Sorry. I keep forgetting that most people don't remember when we'll meet in the future. 
You should complete your initiation before we speak any further of that. 
Before you begin, we must first discuss your advancement within the guild. 
Gaiar Alata is the Master's name for this place. We usually just call it Paradise. 
What do you require, Arch-Mage? 
Sheogorath sent for me and I have arrived. That's all I know. 
Forgo your feeding, and you will no longer be able to blend into "normal" society. You will be shunned as a monster. And let's not forget sunlight... 
That's privileged information. I'm sorry. 
You must be Umbacano's new plaything. Well met! I am Claude Maric, another pawn in Umbacano's game. 
I've made a few bets. Made some good money, actually! 
Me children will thank ya for yer help. 
Submitting to Sheogorath's justice is wise. Will you pay reparations, or serve your sentence? Either way, your stolen goods are forfeit. 
No. He always feared this day would come. He left me knowledge of that word in the event that he died and I came into possession of the keys. 
He's a bit crazy for dogs, from what I hear. He pays bets on time, though. 
Excellent. I'll just take them. 
Go tell him I want to see him. Here. Right now. 
You're a wanted criminal. The guild doesn't accept criminals. Understand? Clear things up, and then come back. 
Ready? 
All right, then, the Blue Team it is. How much do you want to bet? 
Halt, lawbreaker! Lord Sheogorath's justice demands reparations or it's the dungeon for you. Any stolen goods will be confiscated. 
Greetings, Evoker. 
For advanced training, seek out Oleta. She serves Akatosh at his temple in Kvatch. She can teach you all you need to know. 
I would never have allowed myself to do that. However, now that they are befouled, I can use them. You may grovel in gratitude at my feet later. 
Newcomers are entering the Shivering Isles. With new people comes new treasure! 
No trophies of my triumphs precede me. But I have lived well, and my ghost shall rest easy. 
She wants me to tip you! You add insult to injury. You cost my cousin a chance at that job. Take your money and get out of my sight! 
Blood! I need your blood! 
Think about that offer, friend. 
For that reason, I was unable to disclose more about his true identity to you. Clearly that judgment was in error. I apologize. 
Talk to Cirroc about that contract. Make me proud. 
Fort Sutch? I am familiar with that place. It is nestled deep in the mountains. It is naturally well defended, but there is a weakness. 
Only quality goods for sale here. What can I interest you in? 
You found a place for me to sleep? Outside under the stars too small to fall and hurt me? Excellent, excellent! Tell me more! 
It's the Gray Fox! I can't believe it's really you! 
Now go. Get some rest. I'll have another contract ready for you shortly. 
I have decided to stay here in the Shivering Isles. I've found peace here, and I see no reason to return. 
Please, visit me again anytime. I'm glad to help. Give S'drassa my regards. 
You're okay. 
So, Nord, if you find the gold, what will you spend it on? Wait, let me guess -- a sleazy whore and a nice new battleaxe. Am I right? 
I once slept in the Chorrol Chapel Undercroft. It's damp, cold... and cursed! Getting Motierre out of there may be a challenge. 
Now I can help you to improve those powers, to help make lives better. 
Hmm? Oh, Caenlin's my name. Maybe you knew my uncle, Baenlin? He died recently. It was all very tragic. I'm heartbroken, of course. Well, goodbye. 
Darkness take you! 
The Aureals are beginning their attack! Show them no mercy! Today, Cylarne shall finally belong to us! 
He's... well, he's an interesting fellow. Sulinus Vassinus can tell you more about him, if you wish to know. 
In darkness you bring us light. Arkay, guide me through these times, that I may once again see your light. 
He's a most mysterious fellow. In many ways I admire him. Most of the time I just feel sorry for him. 
Another of my brood finally returns to the Isles. Oh, I wonder what this one will be like! 
I'm Myvryna Arano. I... persuade people. 
It's a grand house, Riverside, and they have grand parties there. All the rich swongs and swells of the town come in. Leave a right mess, they do. 
I'm glad you were able to help them. I would have done it myself, but I like being invisible. 
Fellow Knight! I bid you welcome. 
He was assigned to obtain a very valuable item for me. He succeeded, but decided to keep this item for himself. An unfortunate decision. 
The last thing the Realm needs is one more vagabond sneaking in. 
The spark of life is within you, and you are welcome here at Meridia's shrine. It is possible she will speak to you, under certain conditions. 
Ah... you are from the Fighters Guild, I resume. Good show. I am Lord Rugdumph gro-Shurgak. Let us conversate on the Lady Rogbut. 
Mudcrabs. What's the point? Annoying buggers, though the meat isn't bad. 
And I promise you a bounty of 100 gold for each Black Bow you bring me. 
This just might be the break we've been looking for! Good work. 
We are one mind and one blade, of course. 
I don't know much about being a knight. But I'm gonna learn. Say. You did ME a good deed. You oughta be a real knight yourself. 
All my work on the Fringe... wasted. I'll have to begin my research all over again. 
Hello, Apprentice. 
Remember, trespassing in the Imperial Palace is a serious crime. Do not venture beyond the first and second floors. 
It would seem that Anya Herrick may know something. It could be nothing, but it's certainly worth following up on, don't you think? 
To be honest, I couldn't give you directions to any special room in the castle. Anyone in the castle can tell you though. 
I just wonder, will this affect the work that's already been done in the field of Illusion? Or jeopardize the new advances in Conjuration? 
It was last seen in the possession of Irlav Jarol. He was taking it to Fort Teleman; I can only assume he is still there. 
Remember Kvatch! 
Make haste. Mucianus is in danger. 
Ah, there you are. We need to talk. 
Dragonheart, huh? I like it! Yeah, that'll do nicely. All right, it's time to see if you're crazy good or just plain crazy.  
I'd like to return to my work, if that's alright with you. 
'The gods can turn anything to good', or so I piously told those who came to see me for advice. 
Ayisha minds Ayisha's business. Maybe you should try this, too. 
Alright, boys. Listen up. We've got to close that Gate over there. 
Such useless creatures. 
Since you seem eager to get started, follow me to the training area. We've got a mission you might want a piece of. 
Look, I like you and all, but I really don't want to get in the middle of this. 
Well done. I suppose you deserve your new post. Now, if only you stay alive long enough to enjoy it... 
No repeat offenders! That's my motto! 
If the old Gatekeeper were still around, those Knights wouldn't have caused such trouble. 
This must be what Menian was talking about! 
I am a Lord's son, yet I've been denied the noble privilege to which I am entitled. So I have become the Gray Prince, noble in my own right. 
I worked the Arena in the Imperial City for a while. Got up to Gladiator, then took a powder. A guy could get hurt, you know. 
Ah, we meet again. No hard feelings, I hope! 
Safe travels, muthsera. 
I have a good idea where that chest might be. That gold is as good as mine. 
I wouldn't. Not even with yours. 
Please, friend. Make haste! This waiting about is torture! I know in my heart who I am, but with evidence I can prove my claim to all of Tamriel! 
Get yer Black Horse Courier here! 
The Armor is in the Shrine of Tiber Septim, in the catacombs beneath the ruins of Sancre Tor. A holy place, once. 
I've granted you a new spell - the ability to summon Haskill, my Chamberlain, to aid you in your travels. He knows a lot. More than he knows. 
This has never happened before! The ruler of Dementia turning traitor? Unprecedented! I've seen others defect, but never a Duke! 
What orders would you give me, Your Grace? 
Are you prepared now? I have little time to waste. 
Good work! Now I can paint the portal home. After it's complete, you must go first or else you'd be stuck in here forever. 
What, you think the old woman is the killer, is that it? Is that what you'd have me believe? Trying to cover your tracks? 
Have you... done... what I asked? 
Die, faithless priest! 
I'm of course referring to The Draconian Madstone. 
Not that you'll get anyone else in town to admit it. "Oh, he's harmless, we're used to him." Harmless, ha!  One day he'll snap. Then watch out. 
I'll be here when you get back. Good luck! 
Don't speak to me again, unless you've gotten twenty minotaur horns. Then, perhaps we'll have something to discuss. 
Hush, child. This is serious. 
Please... please. The Grand Elixir of Exploration takes incredible concentration to create. So, shhhhhh. 
A friend of mine is a member of the Legion. He said some Altmer nobleman was murdered, right here in the city! Faelian, I think his name was. 
I think he was in the Chapel praying. I haven't seen him since they attacked. 
Not a chance. 
Good work. Captain Burd and his guardsmen should be able to handle any additional Gates, at least for now. 
You've killed all three? Wonderful! Now you must find the key. According to Kurdan, it should be on one of their bodies. 
Since you have led us to victory, I am hereby giving you the honorary title of a Knight of the Thorn. 
You're staring at me again. 
You don't need to worry about the daedra taking Bruma. You've got the best soldiers in Cyrodiil here now. 
You bastard! It's not like I killed her. I just roughed her up a bit. Nothin' the healers can't fix. 
Once this is done, I can pronounce the heart-bearer a Duke or Duchess. Then, all that is required is the blessing of our lord, Sheogorath. 
So, the mages send a foul daedra to deliver a simple note when an honest footman would have done. How typical. 
Hold the line! 
I'm sorry, but the guild doesn't accept criminals as members. Get rid of that bounty on your head, and we'll talk. 
Hrmph. You do the guard one little favor, and suddenly you think you're Matius' best friend? 
It was too much, too fast. We were overwhelmed. Couldn't even get everyone out. There are still people trapped in there. 
Well, we both have better things to do than stand here all day exchanging idle gossip. Good day to you, now. 
A stranger who knows about the K'Sharra Prophecy? It is one of our many prophecies. You should speak with Ri'Bassa, our shaman. 
I heard about how you helped the Guard drive the daedra back. Well done. 
But she is never to set foot in Chorrol again. I am a bit dismayed that you incorrectly accused Orgnolf, who was clearly innocent. 
Well, thanks for listening. I know I'm just being a silly little girl, but the heart wants what it wants, as they say. 
My memory fails me. 
It hurts, stop! 
From what he's told you, Mannimarco -- the King of Worms -- is here in Cyrodiil, and preying on our Guild. This is something I'd never have dreamed. 
I knew this little party was too good to be true... 
If it isn't the spitting image of Lord Sheogorath himself! So lifelike you can almost see his bad eye twitching! Perfect! 
There're walls and statues and all sorts of things that can fall on me. Can't have that. Nope.  
It would be much easier to make the Elixir if you weren't interrupting me. 
I don't know what else to say. Until we have some sort of reference for understanding these symbols, we'll never figure this thing out. 
Travel to the Arcane University, and speak with Martina Floria. 
I can't let you leave with that amulet. I need it, right now. 
Or rather, you did. Yes, that's it. *hic* Aren't you doing a job for me? You should be off, then. 
Volanaro has a twisted sense of humor, but he also has a few nice spells up his sleeve. If you want to summon a Bound sword, talk to him. 
If you wish, you can become a vampire. It will be slightly painful, but far easier on you than... other methods. 
Hello, my darling. Are you having a good day? 
You won! Congratulations! Here are your winnings, my friend -- 50 gold pieces. Come back and bet on the matches as often as you like! 
I'll have to update my encyclopedia. I had an entire volume devoted to the Gatekeeper, and now he's dead. 
I should speak to someone about the new Gatekeeper. Don't want him killing any of my little ones trying to return to me. 
Go Blue Team! Yeah, Blue Team! I always bet on the Blue Team! They never hold back! It's always crush, kill, maim, murder! Ha ha ha ha ha! 
And nobody will help me. Nobody! Not with those spirits roaming the decks. I don't suppose you'll help me? No, of course you won't...                 
Of course, Lord, though it may be difficult to prevent your Gatekeeper from intervening. I'm sure the residents of Passwall will be most grateful. 
The carving you recovered from Malada will be invaluable in my research on the Late Ayleid Period. 
I work hard. Folks like Skjorta and Olfand give us Nords a bad name, drinking and carrying on until all hours. 
I heard that Shum gro-Yarug is looking to hire. He's the butler for the Count. Go speak to him. 
Apparently, Arentus Falvius at the chapel is quite a conjurer. He'll even teach the skill to those he likes. 
You want to buy my Ayleid Crown? It isn't for sale, at any price. I would think Umbacano would know that by now. 
Yes, Rallus and Antus. They're going to fight off the creatures at our farm, but I fear for their safety. 
I am Alberic Litte of the Mages Guild. I am pleased to make your acquaintance. 
You're damn right you will! This is a training hall, not a nursery! Now get back up those stairs while you still have legs! Damned tourists.... 
Oh. I was hoping to see if I was on the right track. Well, if you bring them to me I may be able to help you with your puzzle. 
Marius Caro, by grace of the Nine, Count Leyawiin. You are a stranger to me, but well-met. 
Spill some blood for me, dear Brother. 
The only thing that matters is that gem. Do you understand? 
However, with you here now, we can take the sigil stone from that citadel and complete our quest for the good of all Cheydinhal! Huzzah! 
I'm sorry, there's nothing else you can assist with at this point. 
Who?  Nah, I haven't seen any young women around. 
...huge t-tree... going...going... to k-kill us all... 
I'll soon be unveiling an entirely new act. "Silence Over Brellach: A Juggling Epic." I think you'll agree it's my finest work. 
Good work, Bloodletter. Or should I say Myrmidon? That's right, you've risen in rank. You know how it works. More blood, more gold. Here. 
Smash the foe, Mace-Bearer. 
Good fortune to you. 
You got a good deal there. 
You will retrieve for me a sword, a very special sword. It contains the soul of Umbra, a hero I have had dealings with in the past.  
Precious order to you. 
We won't let you down, sir. The daedra will be sorry they messed with Bruma. 
Reman Runestones are solitary monuments marked with green runes, almost certainly named for Reman Cyrodiil, the First Era emperor. 
You're new here, or you'd know me. Toutius Sextius. My people have lived in Skingrad since the Dawn. Father and the Count were best of friends. 
This is the big one. This is the heist that will be written about and talked about for decades to come. 
It is said that the ruins are still haunted by the vengeful spirit of its last king. True or not, it is not a place to enter lightly. Be careful. 
Of course, you can always get more details from Haskill. He's a detail-oriented type of person. A big help. And a snappy dresser. 
Smart to keep your magic items charged. 
You should only have goodbye as your option. 
Perhaps I shall task you, mortal. Set you to hunt for my amusement.  
I'm Sontaire, spend one night with me and I'll remind you why they say "love hurts." 
Those guys that broke out of Bravil jail were tough customers. But the Fighters Guild got them, didn't they. 
Yeah, I've heard of her. I'm going to need a few coins first though. 
We'll talk more once I've finished getting Erthor back. For now, I have work to do. 
If you're looking for Amminus, he's resting in the Knights Lodge over there. 
Thank you. I'm afraid I can't offer you much help, but I'll do what I can. 
Chorrol is a wonderful town. 
He's not part of our community here, but a resident of Weynon Priory, the monastery southeast of town. 
You're wearing a Battle Raiment! Oh, isn't that cute. The wittle boy wants to pway dwess up. Go home, momma's boy, before you get yourself killed. 
Welcome to The Copious Coinpurse! 
All right, Erthor. You're safe now. 
While the Brotherhood maintains its ancient name, membership is always open to skilled women. For can we not draw blood as well as any man? 
May your blade always strike true! 
You were fortunate to have heard the Master read from its sacred pages. 
You've already got the use of the only beds I have. What more do you want? 
Ah, you are interested, then? Shall I pass along the terrible power of my Dark Gift? Do you wish to become a vampire? 
Now, leave before someone sees us talking. Go! Go go go! 
Civilians! It's time to move out! Let's go! 
Levitation is for fools. Why would we want to levitate? Once you are up high, there is nowhere to go but down. 
She would want me to die well. 
Some mischief of yours in Bleaker's Way has interfered with Mephala's plans. You're wasting your time here. 
Bring me 20 bear pelts, as proof that you have helped tear nature asunder. Then we shall speak of spells and teaching. 
Strike me down. My Lord Jyggalag has other servants. 
I'm Deetsan. Magician. Mages Guild, that is. 
Very well. Room number two, just near the entrance. If you need food or drink, let me know. 
You make them leave! 
What about my inventory? 
New around here? Well, we can start off by getting one thing straight. 
I'd be happy to forge Amber armor for you, but you don't have enough Amber. Consult the information I have posted. 
Are you ready to go to the manor? 
Get that Gatekeeper in place, and do it quickly. I'm not sure how much time I have left. 
I heard Tove the Unrestful is building something again. 
In the scales of testing, Redguard, you are tried and found wanting. 
Remember me, and remember my words. This burden is now yours alone. You hold our future in your hands. 
Walk always in the Shadow of Sithis. 
Your presence here will not be tolerated! 
I sense why you have come. I can hear it in your very breath. You came as a herald of the false god Sheogorath. 
If there's anything about Vahtacen you need explained, let me know. I'll help if I can. 
Farewell, my friend. May your blade always strike true. And first. He he. 
We should have a little chat with her as soon as possible. I look forward to it; I get the feeling she avoids me at times. 
Have you seen how upset Tsrava gets by all the dogs near her house? 
We should be on our way. 
Don't talk. Just follow my lead. 
Yes. I have them for sale. If you'd like to buy some, feel free. They're top quality... I refined them myself. 
Greetings, traveler. What do you seek? 
He's gone? Truly? Oh, thank you!  
Run headlong into the ruined city of Vitharn. There's nothing dangerous about that place at all. 
Our Lord has His armies restored. They carry such wonderfully sharp blades. 
I'm afraid you may have to be a little bit clever. 
You'll find it north of Anvil. Good luck, and give it to those bastards good. 
For Bruma! 
Much as I hate to admit it, Gin-Wulm knows more about smithing than I do. Says it's in his blood. 
Now, while the Shade of the Revenant blankets this world, I give these gems as an offering. May the power of the true god fill and change them. 
THIS is one of the "horrid guardians" of which the stories spoke? 
Get away from me! You're the last person I want to talk to about Primo!  
You've forsaken the Demented and insulted the name of Arden-Sul. We have nothing to discuss. 
Don't talk to me now! Kill the filthy creatures! 
Syl isn't dead. She's living on an island nearby. 
What's the matter, getting tired? 
Nothing escapes your vigilance, kynreeve. Kathutet wondered as well. This is why he sent her for questioning. 
Motierre! I know you're in there! My employers are most displeased. I'm coming in and you can beg for your life. Not that it will do any good! Ha ha! 
Gods! It's the Count! Run! 
Seems a fair bargain to me. 
We've met before, haven't we?...  I don't... owe you money, do I? 
He is the King of Thieves in Cyrodiil. You could think of him as our guildmaster, although he would deny that title. 
Come on! We can use your help to drive back the invaders! 
Be well, milady. 
Well, what are you waiting for. There's a party, and you're the guest of honor. All I get to do is lock the damn door. You get to have all the fun. 
You do? Perhaps you should. You are repulsive, displeasing to the eye. Namira might find favor in you. Approach. 
You've gotta like a store named Slash 'N Smash. 
Looking for a good book? I bet I have just what you need. 
Break the law on my watch, will ya? I'll be confiscating your stolen goods. Oh, and no gold to pay your fine, hmm? It's off to the lockup then! 
Certainly. Garridan was a knight who lorded over a small village of peaceful farmers. One harvest summer, there was a horrible drought. 
How are you today? 
Someone new is running Bliss. Can't say I care. 
The Master doesn't like visitors. Leave this house. Now. If you're still here in twenty seconds, I will be forced to crush you. 
Go take your break. 
I don't know where you got the impression that I want to talk with you.  You must be kinda slow, huh? 
Curb your tongue, Shadowfoot! I am the Gray Fox. If you ever want to become a Master Thief in the guild, you had better learn respect. 
Um... You're not wearing your Battle Raiment... You all right? You haven't taken too many blows to the head, have you? 
You're pathetic! 
I feel much better now that you're here. 
The apple has been treated with a most deadly poison. It will likely kill whomever eats it, probably instantly. 
Always nice to have a new Gatekeeper. I hope that when this one gets killed, someone thinks to bring me something for the Museum. 
Ohh! He's that wanted criminal. Isn't he a master thief? I hear he's dangerous, too. I've heard that the beggars spy for him. 
If you make it, we'll be waiting right outside the gate for you.  
It's in the Imperial City; perhaps some day you may be able to visit him there. He's done wonderful things for this guild. 
As far as Chanel and Orgnolf go, they seem fine to me. I only had a minor scrape with Orgnolf recently. 
That's TWICE you hit me! 
Hurry and find Berich Inian. He should be back in the Chapel, and should still have the key to the Guard House. 
This lady wants to study Daedra, so she buys a guild contract. You ever heard of anything so goofy? 
You will remember the day you met Farwil Indarys and treasure every moment after. 
Welcome to Jensine's "Good As New" Merchandise! 
I'm afraid I have nothing to offer you - what little money I have must now be spent on burials. Please, if you'll excuse me. 
Power changes hands in Crucible, which means even less stability for the Realm. Just what we needed. 
Long ago, I learned much of what I know from a man named Pranal. An excellent teacher, he was. You should consider learning from him. 
With all the trouble on the road recently, I expected to be the only one staying at the inn. It's a welcome surprise though, believe me. 
Umbra will feast on your soul. 
You made it to Bloodletter, which is more than I can say for most people who step into that Arena. Keep it up. 
Of course not when I sleep. I am a proper lady after all. 
You must find J'baana, and learn from him. 
My son, Farwil, has taken some knights and entered the gate bravely in hopes of meeting the enemy head-on. 
I would bet my life that the Great Torch isn't nearly as hot as I can get any man. 
Look, you're on your own as a thief. Go find a likely looking house. Case the joint to see when the owner is gone. 
Do I know you? 
Falcar was here some time ago, asking about just such a thing. Said it was for research. He had a large sheaf of notes with him about it. 
Greetings, Apprentice. 
From all accounts, there were four or five of them, and they've been seen heading east on the road. Please, find the Stone of St. Alessia. 
I expect results, Inquisitor, and I expect them soon. 
Exercise caution when approaching the ruins; the Necromancers control that area and you may inadvertently expose your allies' position. 
She's a bit obsessed with it. And with Me. Makes dealing with her difficult. You shouldn't have any problems, though. No one likes you that much. 
There's nothing I can do for you. You'll have to speak with Raminus Polus at the Arcane University. Only he can lift the suspension. 
And my eye is required to create an artifact, isn't it? Very well then. I have survived greater threats than you. 
I'm sure it's around here somewhere. 
But... this is amazing! 
Good. The room is on the second floor, right across from the stairs. Sleep soundly. 
I'm Baeralorn, Anvil's castle mage. Perhaps you've heard of my work on magical resistances. 
Very well. Return to me when you are ready, and the contract is yours. 
If the two meet regularly, you might have a chance to eavesdrop and learn more about what's going on. 
You decided to turn yourself in? Smart move. Pay your bounty, or serve your sentence... your choice... but your stolen goods are forfeit. 
I don't dare move a muscle until they're all dispatched! 
Properly timed, blocking can stagger your foe. That is the time to caress him with your blade. 
You also have the benefit of Sheogorath's Protection. Cast this upon yourself, and if your life is threatened, you will be returned to your castle. 
You're an anxious one. 
An excellent bargain. 
I'm afraid this area is restricted to Guild mages. You'll have to leave. 
You idiot! You complete piece of gutter trash! Two disqualifications? That's it! You are hereby stripped of all titles! Get out of my Bloodworks!   
The Count has agreed to see you, but not here. 
May Mara guide you in your travels. 
Brethren?  I got no brothers. 
You've got it. I'll have the Ogre brought out to the Arena. Now get up there and give the people what they paid for!  
Listen. You know the Nine? How They guide our fates with an invisible hand? 
Do what you can to ensure the survival of your allies. They will be useful to you. 
Are you mad? You killed Farwil, and now you casually speak to me as if nothing's happened? Begone from my sight before I kill you where you stand! 
Luciana lives in Bravil. She is a decent fence. Better than Ongar and Dar Jee at least. 
I've gone aground in ports all over the Abecean Sea, and Anvil's far from the worst. Got the Fo'c's'le for my hammock, and Mirabelle to keep it warm. 
Hello love. I'll have another bottle of wine if you please. And do hurry - the last 5 barmaids I've talked to never came back... 
Pardon me... 
Ew. You smell worse than that cat, Bhisha. Get away from me! 
1, 2, 3. I need my arrows. 5, 7, 11. I can't get them. 13, 17, 19. If I leave, who will keep up the count? 23, 29, 31. 
I'm not going to stand here and debate this all night. You give me that evidence, and I'll consider not having you executed. 
He must have given it to you for a reason. Did he say why? 
I was always perfectly loyal to the old Duchess. As I am to the new Duke, whoever it may be. 
If your journey takes you to Vitharn, beware its undead hosts. From what I hear the place is a tomb, and the only thing there are ghosts. 
I don't think you have the proof we need to lock this crime down and point the blame at Agarmir. You better go back and check. 
Sickly Bernice in Crucible believes she is dying. 
Bless you. 
Yes, yes, I know. They're all looking quite tiresome. A Scalon would sure spruce things up a bit, don't you think? 
I've sworn to die, have you? 
I used my piety to avoid joining the defense. Thus I earned my doom. 
Two people are dead, and for all I know you could have killed them! Just leave me alone, you worthless peasant! 
You would seek training from me? 
You stand now in our Sanctuary. May it serve as your new home, a place of comfort and security whenever the need arises. 
I told you to leave me alone! Go away! 
Bow to me! 
We don't go looking for new worshippers. If people are interested, they can find us. 
Can I help you? 
The only way to protect the Realm from the Greymarch is to place you in the Throne of Madness.  
The life of a sailor's wife isn't an easy one. Heinrich is at sea nine months out of ten. But Anvil's a friendly town, and the Nine console me. 
Go. You're not worth the trouble. 
I am Gemellus Axius, Earl Jakben's manservant. He did not inform me of your visit. 
Oh, my rats are so cute! 
With every unattainable contract my sister gives you, I find myself loving her more and more. 
Let me think for a moment... 
Shh.  The stranger is listening. 
Wish I had more to tell you about them, but I don't. 
The Altar of Rapture will be ours. 
Hello, dearest Sister. Is there something I can help you with? 
When we are done speaking, you will take this gem, you will then seek out Mannimarco, and destroy him. 
Your stars are not mine. Today the Thief shall guide your steps on the road to destiny. 
Not quite. The Army of Reman knew that the organized Akaviri forces were commanded from a hidden post in the mountains. 
I don't usually take bribes, but I'll look the other way just this once. If I see you again though, I'll have to arrest you. 
Perhaps a spell that damages Magicka is what you're looking for. 
So far, so good. If this world's a dream, I'm not waking up. 
M'aiq greets you. 
As you wish. 
I've just been arrested for corruption, so I'm not in the mood to talk. 
I don't have time to talk. 
I don't like you and don't want to talk to you. 
I heard the Dunmer identify himself as Raynil Dralas. He said he was a vampire hunter and that Bradon was his mark. 
Don't be silly. 
How are we supposed to live under this curfew? 
Hehe. Watching them run from the Giant Gnarl gets me every time. 
We've received reports that the Fringe has come under attack by the forces of Order. We've been commanded to hold our posts and be watchful. 
An old cleric with that name comes in now and then. Lives southeast of town on the Black Road at Weynon Priory. 
Torture in the House of Dementia? I'm constantly tortured! Cats everywhere. 
Belisarius, thank you. 
Smart answer. Here's the deal. 
It is hidden away. Yes. No one will find it.... 
You have been graced with the presence of Hircine. Do not fail him, lest you be hunted for the rest of your days. 
He is the best fence in the Thieves Guild. He operates from the Elven Gardens in the Imperial City. 
They're saying some cult murdered the Emperor and are opening the Oblivion Gates. Do you think any of it's true? 
I wish he'd simply disappear from the streets of New Sheoth forever! Oh look, just talking about it has given me another gray hair! 
I believe the note will give you all the details. 
It's good to see you again. 
It went away. But it will come back! It always comes back! It is close. Big-Head can hear it! The Fork of Horripilation! 
I've checked my sources, and no one knows this "Agarmir"; he's probably using a false name. 
You were Martin's friend, weren't you? You were fortunate to have known him. 
Cheers to the new ruler of Dementia! Drinks all around! 
Are you certain? I can't thank you enough. Please, though. If you decide to retrieve the sword and armor, keep them. At least until I can repay you. 
I'm sorry, sir, I've been rambling on like an excitable child! I can only imagine how busy you must be. With your blessing, I will now take my leave. 
Am I supposed to be impressed? 
Well, you've found the Three Sisters. Beds and food. Not cheap, but you get what you pay for. 
If you are trying to bargain with me, these horses are already the cheapest in Cyrodiil. Take it or leave it. 
I hope you're back with some good news, I could certainly use it. 
Thanks for the help. 
Never did say where it came from. She just showed up with it one day. Said it was called Umbra. But she was different.  
Ha! I expected as much from a Dark Brotherhood lapdog! I may not survive this fight, but I'll not make it easy for you! 
Well, things are bound to get worse before they get better. They always do. Keep your eyes peeled for trouble. 
The King and Queen is a nice place. The Marillins treat everyone well. 
Welcome, Nord, to the Tournament of Ten Bloods. To your right, through each of nine gates, another Chosen awaits you. 
I do have a bed available, for 10 gold a night. Would you like to rent it? 
You closed the gate? How did you do it? We can't thank you enough. 
Ma'am? 
I'm the reigning Grand Champion of the Arena, you see. Once you become a Champion, you'll need to challenge me for my title. 
If you're looking to join up, you should speak with Vilena Donton in Chorrol, Azzan in Anvil, or Burz gro-Khash in Cheydinhal. 
Then, as I told you, I don't have any new information for you, do I? 
I heard that the Fighters Guild botched a job. They lost a bunch of men in the raid. 
You want a horse? I can sell you one. There are no finer Bay horses than those sold by the Grateful Pass Stables. 
Chancellor Ocato is the head of the Elder Council. The Council rules in the Emperor's absence. 
Based on your abilities, here are your choices. Do you want to fight one Mountain Lion, two Mountain Lions, or two Mountain Lions and a Spriggan?     
You have skooma! Ha ha ha ha! Oh... Oh my friend! Yeah... You're my friend now! Thank you... Thank you! 
I ain't got much to say about the old lady, and even if I did, I wouldn't say it to you. 
I'm Curtis. I'm nobody special. 
He'll be truly famous one day. Word already spreads about his skill... I think someone saw him at Faregyl Inn not too long ago. You should try there. 
I know you're no killer. That means it's Neville! Oh, I'm so frightened! Please protect me from him! 
I'm starting to think this is going to work. Maybe Barthel wasn't crazy to bring us here after all. 
Disgusting creatures. I hope to never see another. 
What can you possibly see in her? She spends more time cutting herself than swinging a hammer. 
Err, look. If you're here for information, I'm afraid you'll have to find it on your own. I'm swamped right now; up to my ears in Necromancy. 
Who is Sithis, you ask? Some call him the Dread Father. It was his terrible love that gave birth to the Dark Brotherhood, so very long ago.  
Una Armina runs a museum in Crucible. 
... To face my apportioned fate, then fall. 
My potatoes are like my children. I care for and nurture each one individually. That way, they grow up to be big and strong. 
They captured our commander, Dylora, and have her imprisoned somewhere inside. Our first priority must be rescuing her. 
This is a stopgap hello because none of the other Hellos have blank LinkFrom lists. Mark will fix this soon, I bet. 
If the killer strikes again, maybe they'll do me a favor and take her out next.     
I let that go too cheaply. 
The Fighters Guild is good enough to encourage me in sharing the inner peace and spiritual harmony of the martial arts. 
Oh, you meant the Argonian wench.  Must've slipped my mind.  Yeah, she was here.  Then she left.  I don't know nothin' else about it. 
We praise our Unholy Matron. From her shadowed womb we were born, from her breast we suckle malice and pain. She loves her children, you see. 
2, 7, 1. You have arrows! 8, 2, 8.  Now let the battle be joined! 1, 8, 2. Why aren't you counting? 8, 4, 5. 
Excuse me, I have important things to do. 
Let us part now and see what we can come up with separately. We'll meet sometime later and compare notes. 
The Skull sees. 
I'm beginning to get a bad feeling about all of this. I'd leave right now, if I could. The money means nothing to me. I just thought it would be fun. 
Looks like you've reached your peak. Tell you what, from here on in, you can fight one, two or three Minotaur Lords. So what's it going to be?        
An honor, Lord. 
Dibella has shed her special blessings on Anvil. We greet travelers with hospitality, and the needy with an open hand. 
I doubt it will sell anytime soon. If you manage to raise that much, come see me again. 
I'll always remember what you've done for us. From the bottom of my heart I thank you. 
Blood price is for each person slain. You can pay any of the guild Doyen. 
I'm Otius Loran, Primate of Stendarr. You stand before Gods' servant, in the house of the Nine. Be humble, and show respect. 
Soon, very soon, the lines now blurred will be erased. Tamriel and Oblivion rejoined! The Mythic Age reborn! 
You don't? Oh... Well, all right. I'm sorry, it's just that I fully expected a challenge! It is your right. If you change your mind, I'll be ready. 
Okay... this has to be a joke. 
I've heard ghosts haunt the ruined city of Vitharn. 
Felas and I slipped down here thinking that we'd be safe. But, no! We landed right in the middle of them! 
You set my blood on fire. Come closer and burn me. 
Damn. Killed himself. Must have had some sort of magic item we didn't notice. 
I promise I'll make this quick. I'd like to have you mostly intact, so Mannimarco can suck the marrow from your bones. 
Keep yourself safe, my friend. 
You haven't heard of it, yet you know its name? What a strange creature you are. 
Don't say anything to her. I don't want to embarrass her further. Once this is all taken care of, I'll speak to her privately. 
I've heard a lot of stories about the Fo'c's'le. None of them good. 
The Lady has refused any and all appointments of late. You'd have to try and find her on your own, and I don't recommend that course of action. 
Since Umbacano has never laid eyes on the real Crown of the Ayleids, I doubt he could tell the difference. 
He leads the Ulfgar clan. He is slow to anger, but fierce with his axe. All the clan values his leadership and judgement. 
I am at your service. If you need Alteration training, I am here for you. 
No deal. Better I should steal it myself. 
Good. The Emperor's trust was well-placed. 
Let's get into the next Grotto. I'm sure we can find a quiet place to remove the Bands there. 
Awful. You? 
Thadon isn't really addicted to Felldew. Felldew is perfectly safe. There's nothing magical about his special cup either. 
Hmm. Body's still warm. Looks like there's a killer about. 
You would steal from your brothers? If you had a need for something, why would you not just ask? I will give you a chance, though. 
You're not looking yourself lately. 
I am promoting you to Cat Burglar, which means you can use Luciana Galena of Bravil as your fence. Congratulations on your new rank. 
We need to get through the Gates of Madness. Let's go kill the Gatekeeper! 
The Count appears for audiences in the County Hall near the throne weekdays between 8 AM and 4 PM. 
Our sister returns to the fold! 
I believe some people think of Anvil as a slow, sleepy place compared to eastern Cyrodiil, but there's plenty of trouble up north to be found. 
Blood Liqueur, Osseous Marrow, Dermis Membrane, and the Essence of Breath.  
I understand this may not seem the most important of tasks, but still... it needs doing, and you are one of the few available to do it. 
She's a bit strange, but I've heard she's rather good at not being seen, if you know what I mean. 
Ahjazda in Crucible believes the world is ending. She seeks all sorts of items to weather the storm portending. 
I wouldn't call him a friend. Still, if I wanted to learn more about illusions, he's the one I'd ask. 
Well, don't just stand there! Go and kill him! 
Welcome back! What can I do for you? 
You! You've ruined everything! Why? WHY? I had a job! I had a home! You've taken it all! I'll kill you for this! 
Hloval's treachery is second only to my cowardice. My curse will not allow me to help you with his need. 
On behalf of the people of Cheydinhal, I thank you. 
You make progress, but your work is not yet done. 
I hope I can help. 
Those who you designate as archers will head to the rear and keep their distance when the enemy draws close. 
May the Divines smile upon you. 
Please. Get her below like I asked so we can get underway. 
What is it? There is trouble here in Bleaker's Way. 
You owe S'razirr. Will you pay? 
Yes. My cousin is in line to take up the position. He is eminently qualified. 
Two Tibers are always better than one, I always say! We'll take good care of him here in the Museum, don't you worry. 
Are you prepared to begin your next task for the guild? 
You're living on borrowed time, thief! 
What do you want? Can't you see I'm in the middle of an investigation? 
You managed to kill the five house guests, yes. But your inability to remain undetected will cost you. Your bonus for this contract is forfeit. 
Looking, looking. Always looking, I am. 
Best prices? Right here at Gundalas' Best Goods and Guarantees! Never an unhappy customer! Huge discounts... to qualifying patrons! 
I'm sure you wish to hear the real story rather than Farwil's version. 
Since his wife, Vena, died, we haven't seen hide nor hair of the man. Gone off by himself.  
Perhaps my Lord will grant me my wish. 
By all that is holy, we must get out of this hellish place! 
The Purification is one of the most extreme measures we are forced to carry out. Indeed, it has only been carried out twice. Before now, that is. 
Farewell, Star-Bearer. 
I think you'd better leave here. 
The age of the Septims is over, fool. A new age is dawning! 
I believe I've made myself more than clear. I want that book, and I expect you to clean up this little mess you've made. 
Please, I'm in desperate need of help, and I think you're the only one that I can turn to! 
Could it be possible? Could an old lady be a murderer? She'd have the stomach for it, of that I'm sure.   
By the grace of Arden-Sul a new successor has been selected to rule. Joy to Arden-Sul and Maniacs! 
Only the immortal servants of Sheogorath can kindle the Altars of Despair and Rapture, which in turn feed the holy Flame of Agnon. 
Defaulted? That all you talk about? I'm Blackwood Company now. Plenty of work, the pay is good, and I don't have Oreyn on my back all the time. 
Disappointing. Well, let me know when you are ready. 
Their attraction to the Resonator isn't surprising; it was built from one of the obelisks that dot the Isles they seem to have an affinity for. 
Please, end this nightmare if you can. 
The farm is near. Stay close. 
Victory will be mine! 
I'm fairly certain that Suurootan at Novaroma here in Bruma can acquire the things you'll need to make it look like home. 
Oh, no! You believe trolls killed them? That's horrible. Good that you've killed all of the trolls, though. Please, take this, with our gratitude. 
Shops and guilds are mostly inside the north walls, while the chapel, homes, and one inn are inside the south walls. 
Have you reconsidered? Will you help me reach the Throne Room of Nenalata? 
Please, go. 
It's a small, round, gold medallion. On the back is the inscription "To Pyke, from Farwil." 
I've shopped there a few times. If you're looking for soul gems, that's the place to go. 
By freeing the Xivilai Anaxes, you restored the order to the Garden that the unmortals had upset by imprisoning him. 
Who? Faelian? I don't see how that's any business of yours at all. Really, the gall of some people! 
Perhaps she grew bored with studying nothing but enchantments and spells. I know I would. 
Not funny. Not even a little bit. 
Alright. The room with the table is just through this door. I always wondered who put it there. 
Well then, I suggest you get your affairs in order and return to me as soon as you're able. 
All's quiet, eh? Times like this I think the thieves are all away on holiday. 
Rufio? He was killed! Murdered! Right here in my inn! And I thought business was bad before. When this gets out, I'll never rent another room! 
I was quite irritated, and haven't spoken to him since. 
Well, I figured I would ransom it back to the Countess. Except she tricked me. I was arrested for theft, and she kept the ring. 
Smacking an idiot in the head a few times is the surest way to win an argument, my Mama used to say. 
Didn't we have this conversation already? Or was that someone else... No, it was me. And you. And so you know what you should be doing right now. 
I'm counting on you to eliminate those spies. We can't afford to let the Mythic Dawn operate out of Bruma with impunity. 
Lord Sheogorath, your presence alone makes me feel more healthy. 
I believe Your Grace knows the way? 
Many are their names and the names of their masters: the Coldharbour of Meridia, Peryrite's Quagmire, the ten Moonshadows of Mephala, and... 
Good evening, brother. 
Much obliged, my friend. 
I never said anything about the Mythic Dawn. In fact, I don't even know what you're talking about. 
I heard that some of the provinces were talking about seceding from the Empire. Probably just talk though. Everything's a bit unsettled now. 
Now where did I put that? 
I alone have survived. Sheogorath cannot bring himself to destroy the knowledge that I possess. 
Advance, initiate. 
What do you need, friend? Anything for you. 
All right, so I didn't care much for the man. That doesn't mean I wanted him dead.   
Yes, it seems that you do. The Count will be pleased. 
So much to gather, so little time. Perhaps you can help? You might help against the coming storm. 
Agata has heard the voices, though I speak for them all. It is to her you must now go. 
The Countess is in attendance. Proper etiquette is expected. 
Our Lord's armies will destroy these Knights. 
Take heed the knife that strikes from behind. 
My heart fills with joy that Lord Thadon has finally recovered from his doldrums. 
The Tamriel Terror, huh? I like it! Yeah, that'll do nicely. All right, it's time to see if you're crazy good or just plain crazy.  
Have you ever thought of joining the Fighters Guild? 
I heard Lazare Milvan challenged someone else to a duel. The man is ridiculous. 
Your failure angers Mephala. Leave here. 
Your story is ridiculous. This sounds like some lie created by Jensine and her damned "society" to have me run out of town. 
Eugal Belette is an odd one... and I swear I heard strange noises coming from his basement not long ago. 
The Nord has been murdered. Maybe I'll get lucky and the same thing will happen to you. Unless, of course, you're the one who did it.... 
Come out, come out wherever you are... 
Yes, brother? 
Wonderful! Go out front. Ernest will have the White saddled and ready for you. 
I'm sure there's an abundance of exotic ingredients to be gathered nearby. In Blackwood, for example, or along the Niben. 
Who are you? 
The invisibility is not actually permanent. You can tell the villagers not to worry, it will wear off eventually. 
Oh, Janus. Thank you... thank you for saving me. 
He also uses an enchanted shield called the Gray Aegis, which gives him some serious magic resistances. Your best bet is to just charge straight in! 
If you want to help, get back and protect the Emperor! 
You've spoken to the Madgod. Joy of joys! Are you elated? Excited? Aroused? Blessed are you. Blessed is He! 
Some of your brothers have been getting rowdy at the local tavern. I've got no problem with cutting loose, but I don't like it when we all look bad. 
My father will never be beaten by the likes of you. 
Hello there. Is there something with which I can assist you? Perhaps you're curious about joining the Mages Guild? 
The Wellspring is an essential link between the Golden Saints and the Shivering Isles. Thadon knows this, and is likely trying to break it. 
I know I sound desperate, but I know I'm right. 
I heard there were some goblins around here recently. Awful creatures. 
The Cheydinhal Black horse is the finest in Cyrodiil. Take good care of him. 
I apologize for doubting you, Your Grace. You are a most worthy leader, perhaps the greatest warrior to ever hold the Seat of Mania.  
You'll need to speak with Relmyna Verenim. She'll help you with your task. Strange woman. Has some unusual tastes. 
We need to get to safety. 
The Fringe gone. We're next. I'm sure of it. 
Yes! That's the least I can do. 
There isn't any more to say. Please, lay down and sleep. 
He read something about cheap land being offered by the government. Of course nobody said anything about the swarming goblins. 
The Fringe has been destroyed. Who knows what could happen next? I'll have to work quickly to get my affairs in order. 
My father's power sustains me! 
I see. 
Fate chose you well. 
Guard stays inside the city walls for the duration of the crisis. Count Caro's orders. We're not going to risk another Kvatch here. 
You gave HIM the book? What were you thinking? And here I thought one of you Guild mages might actually have a brain... 
The only way out of the Savage Garden. 
Any old Argonian will do, but the vampire must be very powerful indeed. If you succeed, I'll get you what you need. Any questions? 
Away with you dog, and fetch me those components. 
What can I do for you? 
Why, do you have something of interest to my master? 
If we cannot disable or destroy it somehow, I do not think that we can stop this invasion. 
Well done, little webspinner. Is there a prettier sight than friends at war? Take pleasure in the strife you have caused, mortal. 
I don't have time for you. 
I've heard that Skinned Hounds don't like fire. 
Whom did you accuse? 
Never heard the name Grantham Blakeley before. Means nothing to me, sorry. 
How may I help you, Arch-Mage? 
Lady Alessia frowns on her staff talking about her personal life. You understand, I'm sure. 
Faelian? He... he's my sweet. My true love. But I don't know why I'm telling this to you. I mean, we hardly know each other and all... 
Garrus may be our only hope. 
You ... how can you be here? 
She hated what she had become, and refused to feed to keep herself healthy. She eventually slipped into a coma from which she has not awoken. 
Here. Wear it proudly. And keep it in good condition, would you? That way I can give it to some other suicidal idiot after you're dead. 
I take much joy in giving you this contract. With so many targets come so many opportunities to fail. The chance of you surviving is slim at best. 
Good that it is only the Fringe that has been attacked. 
I hoped I had heard you correctly. Thank Talos! The Blades will protect Martin until he can claim his throne, don't worry. Or we will die trying. 
You have returned? 
Are you the Count? 
A lot of good men died. But it could have been worse. A lot worse. 
Good. Now, on to your responsibilities. 
Just give them to her; say they're from a friend. She doesn't need to know I'm the one responsible. 
Some of your Guild brothers found you and brought you to me. Good to see some of them think like we do. Now, what happened out there? 
My best friend wants me to leave? Okay, for you I will. I know a nice spot in Bliss I can use. 
Altmer. They act all high and mighty until you leave them in a pool of their own blood. Here's your gold. Go take a breather.  
The silk gardens are doing well, brother Hjar. 
True dreaming, Skull-Bearer. 
Have you seen the Bruiants and their dogs? 
Good people, we have a winner! All hail the combatant from the Blue Team! Victor from the Blue Team, leave the Arena now and rest! You've earned it! 
At that time, the Empire was broken into smaller factions. Reman Cyrodiil decided to unify them and form an army to repel the Akaviri raiders. 
I don't like you much. 
Don't be angry at us. This is the only way we could find the place. 
It's not the nicest bed in Cyrodiil, but it's cheap. 10 gold, and it's yours for the night. 
Some words should be shared only by friends. 
You are very close to earning the reward for completing the set of ten. I urge you to redouble your efforts! 
My belly is rumbling, so I must leave. It has been an honor to talk to you, Lord Sheogorath. 
The last report I received from Skaleel indicated there was some sort of problem. A blocked passage, or something, that they couldn't get past. 
Ha ha! There's the new Arena Grand Champion!  Now listen, I bet you're wondering what's next huh? Well I've been thinking... 
Here, take this key. It'll open any of the trapdoors down to the caves. Every house in town has one. 
Yeah, it's her camp. I don't know where she is, though. 
It seems that you've finally gotten Jyggalag's full attention. 
There are rats and goblins down there... but from what I've seen of you, I'm guessing you are an experienced Monk. Am I right? 
What can you possibly know that would help me make sense of this? 
Really? He's getting worse, then. Thanks for letting me know. If you think he's becoming dangerous, you come straight to me and I'll handle it. 
My life is drab and wretched by comparison. 
Have you discovered the truth? 
Keep your fingers to yourself, thief! 
Blasphemy! These words are the pillars upon which the teachings of Arden-Sul stand! 
He's the Captain of the Guard in Anvil now. He used to be in the Imperial Watch until Countess Umbranox had him reassigned. 
This is no time for talking! 
If you need money fast, try Jensine's. You can sell almost anything there. 
Feel free to question anyone in town, they shouldn't give you too much trouble. 
Capital! Now I can see past the palace defenses. It's a good thing the Emperor didn't know they had this stone. 
I think if I'm to create a strong version of the Elixir, I'm going to need an even greater number of Nirnroot samples than before. 
We'll give them a good fight. They'll know they tangled with the best Cyrodiil has to offer. 
Some contracts are straightforward. Find the target, eliminate them, then return to the Sanctuary. No time limits or complications.              
This Mazken must return to duty. 
I see you've done quite a bit of work to track me down. 
I'm Mandil. I'm a lady of leisure, but I do some Advanced Training in Security. Just a hobby, of course. 
Gaspar and I have learned a great many spells over the years. Once you''ve learned them, you can use the knowledge to create your own. 
I really hate those things. 
Nice doggy. Good doggy. Don't hurt me, doggy. Doggy want a bone? No no, not my bones, not my bones! Eeek! 
... But my real passion is alchemy. I love brewing up new and interesting potions... just for fun! 
We bow before the Ring. 
I don't like you. I don't like my double even more. 
I don't know you, and I don't care to know you. 
I heard that some cult called the Mythic Dawn is behind the Emperor's assassination. 
I do not wish them harmed, as I want the thief to face justice. 
If I liked you better, then I might tell you. 
That thing? Soris keeps it locked in a chest, down in the basement. I don't see why he's so careful with it. 
Those with blades and shields will hold the flank. When the enemy draws close, they will close in and attack. 
We feared Hassildor may have been involved with the Necromancers. Thanks to your involvement, it would seem that he is not. 
If you're on a road, you can usually outrun anything. If you're in good shape, and not wearing a tin suit. 
Wha'? You sellin' something? Go away, I'm broke! 
Suit yourself. Enjoy your stay. 
You might be ready, but the Arena ain't. Matches take place between 9:00 AM and 9:00 PM. Come back later, moron. 
Allow me to extend my congratulations on your daring victory over the evil forces of Oblivion. I am at your service. 
Hmmm. 
My heart is broken. 
Someone has to get inside that gatehouse, and raise the gate. We'll never make it into the castle otherwise. 
We're looking for recruits. Interested? 
From this moment forward, I renounce my life of crime forever. I am passing the Gray Cowl of the Thieves Guild to it's new guildmaster. 
We just get tired of Jeanne lording her position over us, when she barely knows anything about magic. Every now and then, we like to trick her. 
Tonight, the light will shine for us all. Tonight, Ciirta's time comes to an end. 
I hear she will pay for a "cure" for her latest disease. 
Are you all right? This murder has us all on edge, I know. 
I'm only the Captain of the Guard. The Countess makes the final decision, and I follow her orders, whatever I think of them. 
I like cities, and this is the biggest and the best. All races, cultures, cuisines, crafts... the City has them all. 
The Realm is a safe haven for all my hatchlings once more. If only I could get them to appreciate me. 
Tandilwe has a true mastery of the spoken word. She is the one you should speak with about more training. 
The Elves of the Imperial City are a fairly close-knit community. One of them will have at least heard of Faelian. You should ask around. 
Ah, wonderful! I'll just take this from you, and get to work translating it. I'll need some time with this; come and find me tomorrow. 
Good people of Cyrodiil, welcome to the Imperial City Arena! Believe it or not, someone has actually challenged the unbeatable Arena Grand Champion! 
Unfortunately I don't have any more horses to sell. I sold our last Paint horse to you. 
A fine model of an Orcish woman. Now go find her. And don't be rude, or she'll rip your ears off. 
Dear Brother, I do not spread rumors. I create them. 
Is there a problem. 
Voranil is such a fool. Have you seen how he treats his servants? 
This battle is not over! 
Is it necessary that you speak with me? 
Thadon finally did himself in. Good riddance. 
You did what had to be done. There should be no regrets or doubts in your mind about it. Raynil was an evil Dunmer, and he deserved that fate. 
I live... again! Hahahaha! 
I've heard he can't even sleep, he's so afraid. 
You look lost. 
The Gray Fox is waiting inside. 
The Gatekeeper is dead. Just great. Who's going to protect us now? I sure hope I don't have to move. I hate moving. It's depressing. 
You... you're asking me about the Night Mother? Well, I... I mean... she is our Unholy Matron! She... she speaks... to you! 
Her tears somehow agitate the daedra bound to the Gatekeeper's body. Her tears make it really restless. It strains harder against the warding magic. 
You have been told how to summon Sanguine. If you feel worthy, proceed. 
Greetings, favored of the Webspinner, Champion of Mephala. 
We'll follow your lead. 
Knifepoint Hollow is near the core of the Shivering Isles.  
Rythe Lythandas is one of the greatest painters in all Cyrodiil. Sadly, he's gone missing. His wife, Tivela, is beside herself with grief. 
Farewell. You've been a good friend, in the short time that I've known you. 
You shouldn't have done that. 
Only three of us left, and one of us is a murderer. Do you expect me to believe it's that sweet girl? You murdering scum! I'll kill you! 
Azani Blackheart is dead, and our brothers avenged. 
If you need anything else, you know where to find me. 
You want to know how I really feel about Neville's death? I'm afraid. I may hate the Imperial Legion, but its members are trained warriors. 
Okay, okay! I'll tell you! It is so great! I sneak into people's houses, take things off their tables and shelves, and put them into barrels! 
I'm Viranus Donton. What can I do for you? 
I think he's just playing around. I don't think he means anything by it. 
The master is... unavailable until nightfall. It would not be wise to disturb him. If you value your life, you should leave before he gets back. 
I hoped you would agree. I think you will be perfect for the task at hand. 
Your honor is restored. The Thieves Guild welcomes you back. This one may now pay you for finding the book. 
That's the last of them! Come on! 
Betto Plotius. I'm a faithful servant of Leyawiin and the Emperor... Gods rest his soul. 
It's a big town. Hell, it's a big county. You stick to your part, I stick to mine, all right? 
Do you know the best part about the end of a war? Picking the bodies clean of their treasure. 
As soon as you bought the place, he pretty much up and left. I hear tell he's making his way to the Imperial City. 
I've already made my decision. We attack down the main passage! 
I'm not sure the numbers you'll be dealing with, so I'm sending you with another new recruit. Maglir. I believe you two have already met. 
Bravil is perhaps not so nice. But Bravil Castle, and castle gardens, they are jewels, are they not? 
Any luck finding Erthor yet? I'll need to speak with him before I can feel your recommendation has been earned. 
I'm honored to speak to the Champion of Cyrodiil! What do you need? 
Blech! I would not feed on you if you were the last warm body in Tamriel! 
Anvil's a port town. That's why you'll see items here you won't find in the Imperial City. The captains keep an eye out for special items for me. 
A coin for an old beggar? 
Okay then. Room number one, right next to the entrance. Sleep well. 
They expect me to go with them, but...  I fear in my old age, I'm not the warrior I once was. Would you... would you go in my place? 
They're using Hist Sap? And they claim to have brought a tree into Cyrodiil? Amazing. I can't imagine what the sap might do to non-Argonians. 
They're a superstitious bunch. Everything is an omen or a portent. Let's make one come true. Find their shaman and ask about the K'Sharra prophecy. 
I'm afraid you've upset my husband. Please, leave before he loses his temper. I beg you. 
Good day. I'm Tolgan, herald to Countess Narina Carvain. 
What are you thinking, wearing something like that? Take it off at once! 
Is it midnight yet? 
Thadon is not so moody lately. Do you think that wall is about to fall on me? It seems awfully unstable. 
Help her to see that she should not use the weapons of the enemy, especially out of fear. 
I saw Ushnar try to give Bhisha some of her dog's food once. I told Bhisha not to take it. Ushnar just wanted his dog to attack Bhisha. 
Does Delphine Jend make you a bit nervous? 
Who could have done this? Who could have killed a sweet, innocent girl? Was it you? So help me, if I find out you're the one who did this.... 
Search near the North Panther River for Hindaril. If you can vanquish him, his ashes will be more than adequate for my needs. 
With Anvil safe for the moment, I will send some of my best soldiers to bolster the Bruma garrison. 
The Arch-Mage has other reports of these gems being associated with Necromancers, but we do not know why. We don't even know what they do. 
I hope you enjoy your stay. 
Steer clear of the Atronach whose skin is made of flesh. Just when you think they'll be dead, they end up nice and fresh. 
I don't know anything, not for certain. I hear that Ma'zaddha has been seen talking to Syl's Guard Captain, Nelrene, but I haven't seen them. 
I've suspected that as well. Still, it's not a bad place. 
I will confide something in you, my friend. I despise Neville and all his Imperial Legion ilk! They are useless, uncaring tools of corruption! 
Hello, fellow adventurer! 
Yes, it's all finished. It's in a cupboard, back at the Chironasium. I hope it serves you well! 
I share my good fortunes with the poor and needy. And you ain't neither. Life isn't easy on the waterfront. But we look out for each other. 
The invaders are breaking through! I danced for the rain, but it isn't helping. 
So, the Gatekeeper is back at its post... good. Now we all may be able to get things done around here. 
Is there a better bookseller in the city than Phintias? 
I'm not sure I like your line of questioning, friend. Someone's been killed. Show a little respect. 
14, 11. I must guard the lever that opens the gate. 9, 4. If the gate is opened, the Fanatics will overrun Vitharn. 
Those who earn the Master's favor are given the Bands of the Chosen and allowed to leave the Garden. 
An honor to serve you, my lord. 
Have you been to the Dark Fissure yet? We need to know all we can about the Necromancers. 
All I needed was that right pauldron, and my set would have been complete. 
You may as well make yourself useful. Here, carry this torch and stick close. 
You mean that stupid doll? I think he's been blessed a little too well by Lord Sheogorath. He's on the list. Not first though. Definitely not first. 
If I were in the Mages Guild, I think I'd study Mysticism. Druja was telling me a bit about it, and it sounds interesting. 
Stay back. Isn't safe here. 
If it wasn't for you, I never would have found Reynald. Thank you. 
When summoned, I can offer advice on your current endeavor. I imagine it's up to you what to do with my wisdom. 
The Argonian says it's north of Leyawiin, about six hours walk, on the east bank of the Niben. Let's get moving. 
I heard that you were coming, looking for Thadon. Yes, yes. Heard it all. Bored to tears by it. 
You are doing very well in your treasure hunt, my friend. Only one more statue remains to be discovered! 
Good question. I want you to spy on Hieronymus Lex. Make sure you stay close enough to overhear any conversations. 
In any case, we need the Amulet first. Maybe Jauffre will know where to start. 
Our hall doesn't offer much in the way of training. I can teach some basic Alteration skills, but that's about it. 
I shall be happy to impart to you the knowledge I've gained over the years... for a price, of course. I wouldn't have it any other way. 
Gold... gems... keys... all mine... find keys... 
Aldos's death is indeed a tragedy. We'll do what we can to put his soul at ease. 
Tertullian, Sergius, and Cicero... the Three Verus Brothers. I'm Sergius. 
What do you think, sir? Hold here or go in? 
That was a bad fix and no mistake. One of the worst I've ever been in. You saved us both, my friend. 
Fine. I'm sure my Lord will be most pleased, assuming you ever manage to see Him. 
I'm talking about the bigger scores. Like estates and tax shipments. I begged him to stop, as I knew that his capers would one day lead to violence. 
I'll give you this ring in trade. I have no use for it anymore, but I imagine that it would be very valuable to someone like you. 
Lady Lovidicus was a shrew of a woman. The Lord and my mother grew close, and ultimately fell in love. I was the result of their union.               
Even to gaze upon it would have been death to anyone of the lesser races in the old days... 
Welcome to the Museum of Oddities, Lord Sheogorath. I have collected all the wonders of your lands here. 
Isn't Irene Metrick graceful? 
Have you shopped for a shield at Stonewall? 
I saw them enter the sump and reservoir. I tried to warn the guards to bar the doors to the reservoir, but I wasn't in time. 
Everyone needs to buckle down and get the work done. And Vilena needs to get out and push guild contracts. 
Horsey! Did you hear about the new ruler in Bliss? Did you? Good horsey. 
Well, they're all taken care of now. It's a shame we lost Brag. I'll miss the ugly bastard. You should head back to gro-Khash now. Thanks. 
Pardon me, but did I hear you say that you're a traveling merchant? 
I can repair almost anything. 
Your efforts are starting to pay off. Just knowing we do not stand alone has raised the morale of the Bruma Guard. 
We always see them near the runestone at dusk. They aren't too woodcrafty, but Grandmaster Jauffre has forbidden us to range too far from the walls. 
Find out why she is here, and report to me, and you will earn a reward suitable for those who serve Leyawiin. 
It's upstairs, second door on the left. Don't say I didn't warn you. 
Excellent. I'm sure you'll be quite satisfied. 
The painting of the Count once again sits in its rightful place. 
You have words? 
I knew Captain Matius would get us through this. He'd be up for a commendation, if anyone were left to issue it. 
Other Bravil trainers? City-Swimmer teaches Sneak. Dro'shanji teaches Security. Varon Vamori teaches Speechcraft. 
As you know, the Black Hand is now in a state of disarray. Lachance ordered you to kill us off! We five, including you, are now all that remain.      
You again. I imagine I know why you're here, guild rat. 
The Altars can only be kindled by the willing sacrifice of a Mazken or an Aureal. 
Thanks for coming. Since we had the Hero of Kvatch available, I didn't think it made sense to try this on our own the first time. 
You have the Imperial Watch recommendation for my new guard captain? 
Naspia Cosma is really skilled with her blade. It's a shame she doesn't compete in the Arena. 
I believe I explained your task very clearly. Find the ring, which is somewhere down in the well behind the guild hall. Bring it to me. 
There isn't enough gold or enough jokes in the world that would convince me to tell you where the Greenmote is located. 
You've been speaking to Thadon. I can tell. He has a certain... effect on people. 
You have my thanks for freeing me, but... Just who are you? 
I am honored, Lord. 
You're the one that saved Cheydinhal from that Oblivion Gate, aren't you? 
Stop wasting time. Get to Harlun's Watch. Now. 
What shall I forge for you? 
Valus Odiil is down at the Grey Mare, and he seems upset. His boys are in some sort of trouble 
For Bruma and the Empire! 
Well, if you don't mind scruffy sailors smelling like bilge, it's a lovely town. The men are all the same, drunk and shiftless. 
You will?! I mean, good! Mind your manners in the castle. Stay out of Count Hassildor's quarters. And don't let me catch you in the wine cellar! 
You'll see the miasma begin to spread. Where Order appears, the Realm dies. I only hope you are up to Sheogorath's task. 
What can I do for you, sir? 
I run the North Country Stables. Are you interested in a horse? 
I can't help you until you advance further in the guild. You can use one of the other fences, like Ongar in Bruma. 
You do NOT belong in here! 
Martin! Martin! Martin! 
You must now go to the city of Cheydinhal, to the abandoned house near the eastern wall. Enter the basement, and attempt to open the black door. 
I told you to stay with the Emperor! 
My lord, I was wondering if I could speak with you. I understand that you have many more pressing concerns... 
I don't have any horses for sale right now. You bought our last Chestnut horse. 
Astinia Atius. I want no part of the Sintav-Atius squabbles. I mind my own business. 
I played Lord Vile's game, and lost my soul. Small loss, I think. 
Kill every last one of them! 
Yes. You have entered and now you are here. Amazing. Truly. 
Arch-Mage Traven feared that sending a high-ranking official with the guild might draw too much attention, and provoke a reaction from the Count. 
I went in there with twenty men. I left with five. Vitellus wasn't one of them. He died covering our retreat. 
Fool. Order cannot be stopped. Already the heart of this realm flows with my Lord's power. 
I've told the Watch that I don't know anything about the Gray Fox. 
Foolish woman! 
You are to travel to Bruma, enter the house of the Wood Elf Baenlin, and kill him. It should look like an accident. I'm sure you can handle it. 
Heck, I'll even go do the job for you for 300 gold. When Erthor gets back, you can take the credit. What do you say? 
Ah, how quaint. How do you do? 
The Blackwood Company is proud of our beastfolk heritage, and we are solely owned and operated by Khajiit and Argonians. 
Greetings, Star-Bearer. 
Primo was a young man, strong and full of life. Surely he would have been able to defend himself against an attacker. 
If you visit Highcross, speak with Mirili Ulven. She needs help with her project. 
You... You're not the one Lachance was talking about! Please... Please, don't kill me! You can take anything you like, then just leave! 
Glad you killed those things. I'd have done it myself, but apparently, that's not "ladylike." Hmmph. Let's get back to my father. 
A nest of vampires has sprung up in Bloodcrust Cavern, southeast of the town. They are a threat to the town, and must be eliminated. 
I beg your pardon. The city? Here's the city. All around us. A thousand stones, a thousand souls. 
I... I've lost a son? No! It can't be! 
I need someone to slop food to the prisoners. I'll pay you 2 gold a week, plus half a loaf of bread and a glass of mead each day. 
I accept this blood price and welcome you back into the Thieves Guild. I oughta break your neck though. Don't make this a habit. 
You shouldn't have. That's very kind of you. 
It would be a truly Demented act to light the Great Torch with a Flame purchased with the blood of the Golden Saints. 
There's no point in waiting here any longer. Follow me! 
Interesting. I didn't know that much history about the Tears. I suggest you go find that book Julienne mentioned. It sounds ideal. 
Stick the wickwheat until soft, add the marshwillow... 
No proof, no money. 
Do my eyes decieve me? You live? 
He thinks to use his position as head of the Elder Council to make himself Emperor. He will not succeed. 
I wish I could have helped you deal with the rest of those Mythic Dawn bastards. But it seems you did all right on your own. 
Don't get me wrong, some of my best friends are elves. But self-important jerks like Ancotar give them all a bad name. 
I am no match for Mankar Camoran, but perhaps together we can find a way to defeat him. Lead on. 
I'll be taking whatever you're carrying. After you're dead, of course. I do hope it's more than the last few had. They were most disappointing. 
At the risk of being rude, I must confess I don't like talking about the specifics of my routine. 
Dumania Jirich, Primate of Anvil. I speak with the voice of Dibella, and greet you with love. 
Casta Scribonia has finished a new book. Nothing that interests me, though. 
Pinnacle Rock will be cleansed! 
Please, join me. 
What a pleasant surprise. Previously, it was only poor Big Head who seemed to understand me. And he's always in such a lather about that Fork. 
Grandmaster, is this ... ? 
He must really know all the fighters by now. And, from what I've heard, he knows a good bit about alchemy as well. 
Welcome to the All-Saints Inn. I'm Willet, the publican. 
Yes, I've heard of the place, but I'm not sure where it is. I think your best bet would be to speak to Sabine Laul at the Fighters Guild. 
As a small token of my gratitude, please allow me to share with you some of my small store of knowledge of the healing arts. 
Are you ready to repent of your actions in Cylarne, and light the Great Torch for Mania? 
What is your wish, you who have been blessed by our Lady's voice? 
Primo was my chance, do you understand me? He was wealthy! He could take me away someplace! Whoever did this will pay!   
I am quite pleased with the ogre slaves in my Bleak Mine. No issues of slavery with brute beasts. Profitable. And legal. 
I'm surprised to see you here. Have you been to talk to Baurus in the Imperial City yet? 
Remember. Bernadette Peneles. 6 am. Don't let her see you watching! 
I'm a farmer, not a soldier! I don't know how to use this weapon. 
Kud-Ei is very protective of her sisters in the Mages Guild. And she's quite skilled at creating illusions. 
You're out late, sir. 
What do you think you're doing?! 
Pleasant dreams. 
If you're interested, you should head over to Jensine's "Good as New" Merchandise. She heads up a committee that is trying to investigate him. 
Lachance has given you a... a secret assignment? But I've been asking for this chance for so long.... Surely he doesn't doubt my abilities! 
You have a death wish, citizen? Put that weapon away. Now. 
When you mutter in your sleep, you speak to me. When you waken wet with sweat, you've just left my house. 
Have you recovered those taxes? 
Hmph. 
Some real hard cases got out of the Bravil prison. Been terrorizing the locals ever since. The Watch is useless, so we step in. Get to it. 
You've seen Lucien Lachance, then? Good, good. I know whatever task he has for you will be carried out with skill and discretion. 
Here. You will use this specially poisoned knife to stage Motierre's death, in the enforcer's presence. Motierre himself will provide more details. 
Greedy bastard, aren't you. I like that in a thief. You'll have to see S'krivva about that. I'm just running the scam. 
May Talos guide you, my friend. 
The last Associate that came in for training never came back. I guess Falcar really upset him. Deetsan seemed mad about it, too. 
Oh, no.  I had feared she might never return, but I had hoped for the best ... I ... thank you for your efforts ... please, excuse me ... 
Hissss! 
I'm glad you took my advice and killed him. I always knew it could be done. What would people do without me? 
I'm listening. 
Bothiel may know more about this "Shade of the Revenant" referred to in the book you've given me. Speak with her. 
Farewell, and may you find your way home safely each night to a warm fire. 
Beautiful, isn't she? The Marie Elena. Damn fine ship, with a damn fine crew. I should know, I'm her first mate. Malvulis is my name. 
What are your orders? 
I know he's a retired Imperial Legion officer. Apparently, he's been in campaigns all across the Empire, from Skyrim to Morrowind.  
I had hoped to avoid such an... irritation. Here is your reward, but the bonus is forfeit. Do try to be more careful next time, hmm? 
Very good, you won't be sorry.  I'll pay you well, did I say that already? 
Lord Sheogorath, here in Deepwallow? May Scalon blood flow at your feet, Lord! 
Out of deference to my Lord Sheogorath, I will allow this outburst. In fact, I will acquiesce to your request. 
This ends here! 
She's a very private person, but I've heard she has a lot of knowledge to share. 
You'll have to do better than that, you yellow-faced prig, inbred arrogant pretender to everything that the Mazken hold as our birthright. 
Capital! The monastery is called the Temple of the Ancestor Moths. It is where retired, blind Moth priests go to wait out the rest of their days. 
But you need not worry about that now. Maybe in a few centuries, hmm? Just remember, blood is your salvation!  
You'll have a staff capable of creating fireballs. If that's what you want, I'll get started right away. Otherwise, we can start over. 
Without the Council of Mages to guide us, how will we stand up to the King of Worms? 
You've got it. I'll have the Bear and the two Minotaurs brought out to the Arena. Now get up there and give the people what they paid for!  
You think you can stop the Greymarch? 
The Great Torch burning is a good sign for us all. 
This is a wonderful start for my new bestiary. Well worth the price. Here you go. 
The one bottom boot covered for the other, I hear. It's a tough situation. 
Get out of here or there's going to be trouble. 
It's Nels! He's the murderer! We have to get him before he gets us! Do you understand what I'm saying? We have to kill Nels! 
Were you in here last week? Wasn't there an exhibit in this case then? Oh well, I must just be going senile, hahaha! 
Simple. Wait until the adventurers are in position, and then press a button! 
The assassins who killed the Emperor were part of a daedric cult known as the Mythic Dawn. 
Wrong, fool. I've grown tired of this guessing game. I've much to do and you're in the way. I aim to rectify that! 
Well, the others and I have been talking.... Is it true? About the traitor? It's frightening to think he infiltrated the Brotherhood so easily. 
My dear, you shouldn't trust rumors. They can get you into horrible trouble. 
Such a thing is beyond our control. The body is so warped by vampirism, few would be able to revert its effects. Even fewer would care to try. 
And... Wait, I know you. You're that new Champion, right? Hmph. I guess I know why you're here. But let me tell you, you're making a big mistake. 
Hot out of the oven! Enjoy! Come back if you want more. 
I will not fight you, friend. I have taken a vow. My gods will protect me. 
I think I hear milady calling. 
Oh so sad. I hope he didn't die in his bedroll. Can't have that. Because that's where I'll be sleeping! 
The castle is north, on the hill. The guilds and shops are west of the river. The homes are east of the river. 
Good luck. 
You need something? A room maybe? 
I like that! A lot! 
Yes, the Oblivion Gate. No match for the Knights of the Thorn! 
She's an innocent young girl, and she doesn't need people like you asking questions about her.  
It's awful out there in the world, isn't it? Best to just stay at home, inside... where it's safe. 
I know when I'm beaten! Here, take the carving, if it means so much to you. I had no idea you would take things so personally. 
You mean other than at the Castle? Hmmm. He's around town at midday. Try the Colovian Trader and the West Weald Inn. 
The trolls that the thief painted seem to have turned on their creator and killed him. He didn't know the Brush had its risks. 
They say that Akatosh appeared and killed Mehrunes Dagon, right in the middle of the Temple of the One! Do you believe it? 
When you have seen the reality of the world, spoken with the poor and the suffering, then we shall talk of training. 
Fighting is fine with me, too, only the Guard objects, and they'll fine you or lock you up. Not my call. 
These gauntlets will keep your hands from being covered in blood and guts. 
Blasphemy! Never utter the name of the Dark Deceiver lightly! 
There's nothing new I can tell you about jobs for your guild. 
This is only the beginning. Worse is yet to come. 
Has Your Grace no interest in exploration and discovery?  
I told him to stop, but he didn't listen. He was certain he could win us a fortune and move us somewhere nicer, like the Imperial City. 
Right. I'm told it's a place where old priests care for moths that spin silk. 
I hope for your sake you are not accusing me of anything. 
What brings you to my little home underground? 
I know that he's defaulted. I need that job done. Don't come back here until you have Brenus Astis' journal in your little hands. 
Rallus knows why we have to be the ones to get rid of them. Antus... he's another story. 
Greetings, citizen. Is there something I can do for you? Are you perhaps interested in joining the Mages Guild? 
It's just one more way they try to get me to get all "special" in the head. Right? Make me sleep outside and everything. I don't belong here, really. 
I'm sorry you were not able to fulfill your part of our agreement, but I consider the matter closed. Please do not speak of it again. 
I will now gladly send soldiers to aid in the defense of Bruma. Consider it done. 
Idiot. 
Trouble? 
Bruma's Paint horses are the toughest in Cyrodiil. You can only buy them from me. 
Horrible, just horrible. Those poor people. 
My master has not returned from his expedition to Nenalata. 
Be quick please, I have a farm to run. It isn't going to run itself, now is it? 
He seems gifted with a blade. Can't blame the Fighters Guild for having him train others. 
In addition, accept this Bow. May your enemies fear you and never know from where or with what enchantment you shall strike. 
Of course. What troubles you? 
I heard no mention of a key either. It must have been removed by Raynil from Bradon's body before we arrived. 
No, no. 
I've heard of such a grand place. Ahhh... to imagine all that wonderful Greenmote under one roof. 
Isn't Olfand amazing? He's an excellent smith and good at teaching light armor skills. 
Of course, should you be caught murdering them in the streets, the guards will respond accordingly. 
You must locate Aldos. He's a danger to himself and others in his condition. 
Because of the curse, he was unable to operate in the normal world of business and society. He could only act as the guild's figurehead. 
I scour the land, seeking fortune for Gortwog and Orsinium. Someday all will recognize the true wealth of the Orcs! 
I hear that Audens Avidius is going to jail. Let's hope its a long sentence. 
The forces of Order have taken control. We must get back into the stronghold! 
It's a shame so many of the Knights fell. I suppose their intentions were good, even if they were a bit self-serving. 
I hope you covered your tracks. Last thing you want is a Scalon picking up on your scent, and catching you when you're not looking. 
So? You a living statue or are you gonna say something? 
Lord Rugdumph was going with the Blackwood Company, then thought better of it. We have to do something about them. 
Don't you have something to do? 
I will bathe in your blood! 
Perhaps you can help with that, however. I can't directly get involved, for fear of embarrassing the poor girl. 
As you command, Countess. 
I am in the Mage's Guild. 
Together we served our nation as spies and assassins, as all Shadowscales do. When we came of age we joined the family as one. And here we are. 
Okay, I'll just wait here until you tell me what to do. 
Morning, sir. 
Thank you. The funds go toward my home remedies. 
Whenever yer ready, and it better be soon, I'll have a boat waitin' for you to get to Fort Grief Island. 
Well go get it! What good is it doing if you're standing here? 
Even with the Blackwood Company gone, we still need to work hard to restore the reputation of the guild. 
Something the matter with your eyes? There will be if you keep gawkin' at me like that. 
Honestly, I'd never seen one before until recently, and now to have two turn up! That's Odd in itself, isn't it? But I really can't use it, sorry. 
Ask a commoner. 
You will have to track down one on your own. I don't know of any in Bravil. 
Therefore, I'll not be needing this anymore. Please, take it as a reward. 
Syl has been known to round up people for "questioning" from time to time. Torture devices are known to spread disease. 
Check back with me tomorrow after I've given this matter some thought. 
I've told you all I can. Seek out Alawen if you wish to train further with your bow. 
How long will Bruma need our help? Count Caro's orders were to return to Leyawiin as soon as Bruma was secure. 
Hieronymus Lex has left the Waterfront? Well done! Methredhel's report tells me that you have done well. You have earned your reward. 
As the new Arch-Mage, I'm sure she'll extend the service to you as well. At your convenience, consult her at the Lustratorium. 
7, 8... The same goes for everyone else in town. 9, 10... You should talk to Horkvir about it. 
I can't believe it! The Gray Prince has been beaten! There's a new Arena Grand Champion now, someone called the Black Arrow! 
Move to the training area, downstairs. We will speak more there. 
That's just stupid. 
But I do not advise you to go there. Read "The Cleansing of the Fane" first. Then decide. As I said, a very bad place. 
What was that? 
I can't do that. 
I am Ambroise Canne, grape-grower for Surilie Brothers. I'm also an advanced trainer for weapon and shield parries. 
I have nothing to say to someone of your manifest stupidity. 
Well, I guess we'll go back to the drawing board. Fine, go tell Jeanne you found me. I was getting tired of being invisible all the time, anyway. 
We won a great victory here today! We now have the means to recover the Amulet of Kings from Mankar Camoran. 
If this is your first time to the Museum, perhaps you would care for a tour. 
The old woman is dead! Murdered! Cut down in this very house! But why? Did she find the gold, and someone wanted it for their own? 
It's the finest place in the city. Simply an excellent inn. 
When you're ready to go and see him, let me know. But please, do hurry. 
If you were famous, perhaps... or infamous, I suppose... that might count for something. But, alas, you're not. 
I don't know. Anything that might help explain these inscriptions in the ruins. They're like nothing we've seen to date. 
God's goolies! Not just a Knight, but a... Knight-Errant! That's a real special kind of Knight, right? 
Not here. Not now. Garden of Dareloth. Waterfront District. Midnight. 
Help! Help! I'm being attacked! 
Argh! I'll fight you to the death! 
It's... It's finally over. The killer is dead. We just... We just need to get out of here... 
That's when I realized he was a vampire. The Order needs to you to track him and destroy him. 
If you are detected, the poisoning will fail, and Roderick must be killed in some other manner. That will, of course, forfeit your bonus.             
You shouldn't pass on golden opportunities. 
What do you want, Breton trash? 
The Count was once a tournament champion. Now he's a loafer and skirt-chaser. And his son, Gellius, is a spoiled good-for-nothing skooma-sucker. 
My lord Jyggalag has given me clarity, and purpose. 
What else can I answer for you? 
Well, the dead will be disposed of, have no fear. That's my job. 
Thirty-six. That's pretty impressive, actually. 
His body is around here somewhere. Present the Agent's heart to Teinaava as proof, and he'll be none the wiser. 
Thank you for returning Henantier to me. I don't know what I would have done without him. 
In their greed, the creatures grabbed a Jade Amulet off of Kayleen's... body. Bring me back that amulet, so I may use it to remember her by. 
Can't help you. I don't really know her. 
You're back. Did you bring help? 
Gruiand is a bit high and mighty. She does have a way with words, though. 
A lovely little treachery. The Golden Saints almost beg to be betrayed, true, but still, you took that little bit of extra time to think it through. 
As you have seen, that agreement is under a great deal of strain lately. The Count does not agree with certain policies the guild has established. 
Have you heard about the Fighters Guild? 
You shouldn't have come for us! 
Good to see you. 
Huh? You're not Gromm. Who are you? Why are you in my home? 
You know what would be a good sign? "Free Sweetrolls!" Who wouldn't like that? 
Be careful out there, friend. 
No! I've warned you before to keep your brooms out of my house! Just go away. I'll find someone else to help me. 
I'd never suggest you forfeit a bonus, of course, but killing Faelian indoors is so unappealing. Too bad you couldn't snipe him from a balcony. 
I'm having trouble understanding the gods right now. 
All of the other cities have sent aid! It's remarkable! I've never seen such unity of purpose. Your leadership has made all the difference. 
What can a humble Doyen do for a sly thief? 
Again, I thank you on behalf of all the citizens of Cheydinhal. May Arkay guide you. 
We need to fall back! 
Bought it maybe ten years ago when it was decommissioned. Had to gut the whole thing to make room, but kept it seaworthy. 
I can't speak to you right now. 
That is when Big-Head came here. Master brought me! Whispered shouts into my ear! Songs of Madgods! Songs of bad gods! Softly, Master. Softly. 
You're not one of us, are you? Are you here to destroy Gaiar Alata and end our nightmare? 
This dagger has been specially treated. All you need to do is stab an Argonian with it, and there'll be enough blood on it to use. 
Very well. Then I must find someone else who can. I will do nothing else until that painting is recovered. 
You are no longer a Thieves Guild member until you pay the blood price. Guild tradition holds that you must pay it for each person slain. 
I am shocked to hear of Chanel's crime, as she has always been such a nice member of our court, but I see that your evidence is without question. 
I suppose I have to. Keep your hands to yourself in there. I'll be right next to you the whole time. 
What do you desire? 
This task can wait, at least for a little while. Return when you are ready. 
Uravasa Othrelas is an excellent speaker, don't you think? 
Master... I'll never get used to saying that. What can I do for you? 
I'm right behind you. 
She's pretty amazing. Plus, she teaches others how to do it. 
It's been too long. Come here and hurt me a little. 
Man o' War, huh? I like it! Yeah, that'll do nicely. All right, it's time to see if you're crazy good or just plain crazy.  
He's an aggressive one, that's for sure. Has a good book selection, though. 
From what I've heard, Kvatch is gone. Completely. Burned to the ground. 
With the forged letter in hand, sneak into the Legion Commander's office in the Imperial City Prison and seal it with his seal. 
Do you long for a blade? To cut with? Yes? 
Go help Lord Rugdumph. And wipe that smile off your face! 
Got to go. Have things to see and people to do. 
Start talkin' already! 
He goes on and on. I'm not sure he's ever said anything useful, though. 
It is high in the mountains near Bruma... our ancient fortress, sanctuary, refuge of last resort. Martin will be as safe there as anywhere. 
Bless you! There's none in this town, but you could try Bravil. 
Will Thadon's Chalice make Deepwallow any safer for me? No? Then I don't care. 
Enough! I've made my decision. We will attack down the main passage, as planned. The Mazken will not withstand us! 
Hello, little one! I'm Urul gro-Agamph. All kinds of cute animals come to visit me. Just like you did! You're a pretty butterfly, aren't you? 
You know what they say -- home is where you hang your enemy's head.   
Oh, you think so? I mean, it is rather forward, but I like it! All right then, I'll wait for him in his room upstairs! Oh, thank you, thank you! 
Good morning, sir. 
You decided to turn yourself in? Good. You lack the gold to pay your bounty, so you must serve out your sentence. Your stolen goods are now forfeit. 
You're lucky I like you. Otherwise you'd be dead already. 
You will travel to the Gardens of Flesh and Bone. There, you will gather mystical components needed for the ceremony. 
Good work, good pay. Want to join the Guild? 
The Imperial City is densely urbanized, with a few large parks and waterside dock areas. 
Stay away. My tears, they burn you! Don't you remember? Stay back, child! 
We'd been contracted to clear the place of trolls. It was a tough job, but I felt the men I sent were up to it. I want to know what happened. 
Ow! These holes in my shoes are killing me. Well, gotta run! 
I knew the Gray Fox could count on you. The staff is in the Archmage's room. He sleeps between one and seven in the morning. 
Well met. I trust no great harm has befallen you. 
Beware of Ulrich. I wouldn't confront him at this time, as he'll surely have you thrown in jail. 
3, 1, 4. Without any arrows, I am useless in this battle. 1, 5, 9. But if I leave to get them, who will count? 2, 6, 5. 
That Rimalus Bruiant sure loves his dogs. A little too much, if you ask me. 
The Emperor's in danger! 
I'm sorry, I didn't hear what you said. Whatever it is you want, it will have to wait until I am holding audience in the Great Hall. 
Brokil gro-Shatur, Lord High Warden of the Taps, Gilgondorin's most prized customer. I taste everything. Over and over. And over again... 
I must apologize. It was never the Council's intention to put you in harm's way. 
Ok, girls! We got someone who doesn't want to cooperate! 
He has sworn an oath: never to raise a weapon against another man again. I want him to break that oath, and damn himself forever. 
Boots are useful. Though, sometimes, it's nice to wade barefoot through the blood of your fallen foes. 
I imagine it must be good, since it's been in business so long. 
Please, leave me be. 
Well, yes, my name.... Mivryna Arano. Excuse me, but I don't speak much. With people, that is. 
I wish to welcome you to this Sanctuary, my newest Sister. 
I came to Bravil because Mara called me. Bravil is not my home. I miss Black Marsh. But I shall serve here, so long as Mara needs me. 
Gogan may be able to give you more information beyond that. 
My name is Atraena. How do you do?  
Given our unusual circumstances, I have asked you to seek out his aid. He is all that remains of Jyggalag's great library. 
You want to join? Well, then either you'll  need to find Kud-Ei here in town, or go seek out one of the other local guild hall leaders. 
Strange creatures have appeared in the Fringe... perhaps you need a new blade? A Madness blade? 
In my capacity as Lord High Chancellor of the Elder Council, I hereby proclaim you Champion of Cyrodiil! 
I wish I could vanish like Sheogorath, right about now. Please don't hurt me. 
If I've told you once, I've told you a thousand times, I've NEVER been to Cheydinhal! I.... oh, hang on. You're someone else. 
Sheogorath has sent it away. It's definitely not back in the Isles. 
The world needs more folks like Marie. 
Ah... pure magic. Research. Knowledge. That's why I love the Mages Guild. 
They're getting into this house somehow, which means there must be a way out as well! We need to find the secret exit and escape this madhouse! 
The lowlands of the Great Forest rise to the upland plateau of the Colovian West. 
There's something strange about Ida Vlinorman. I heard she was climbing up the chapel, just so she could jump off. 
I don't think he's that impressive. There's no telling him that, though. 
Others felt it appropriate to fight fire with fire, as it were. The Council has shattered, and artifacts have been lost. 
We have been preparing for the coming of Lord Dagon for many years. You come to us at a fateful time. 
An archer needs strong arms. I bet you could hold back that bow for quite a long time, couldn't you, love? 
The only way you're going to learn anything new now is by doing it yourself, or talking to Gin-Wulm. I'd suggest doing it by yourself. 
Your best bet is to speak to residents of the castle. Once you have found out all you can, search for physical clues. 
Your Grace, has Relmyna sent you on an errand? Do you need help with your task? 
I'm used to dealing with drunken louts, not a gang of well-armed thieves. 
M'aiq believes the children are our future. But he doesn't want them ruining all of our fun. 
I'm Viera Lerus, captain of the Bravil Guard. 
Now we need only one more item, and we'll be ready to open a portal to Mankar Camoran's realm... 
The Great Torch burns once more! This is good news for Thadon, I hope. 
It must pay. 
I will never forget your brave rescue of my daughter.  What can I do for you today? 
I can hear them, calling to me from the other side. 
This IS my game, and I'm changin' the rules! 
The Nine Divines are boring. Daedra? They're never boring. 
Let's go, rookie. Drink up and we'll head out. 
Know, however, that you have only one more such chance available to you. The guild does not take these infractions lightly. 
Don't tell anyone else, but some day I'm going to have Ocheeva's position. Just you wait and see. Lucien Lachance knows real talent when he sees it. 
Maybe we can rebuild. But things will never be the same. 
Yield, slave! 
I can see you are a kind soul, gentle lady. 
How are you, pal? 
How generous of you! You'd just give it to me? You are a true lover of Oddities, aren't you? 
I saw Sulinus Vassinus at the Mages Guild conjure up some sort of creature, right there in the street. Guards took care of it. 
It's said he seeks nothing but calipers and tongs and builds all night whilst he sings silly songs. 
Please, spare me! I'll do anything! 
No! Not like this! 
Mannimarco himself is in Cyrodiil, hunting us down. None of us are safe! 
That is, if we could sober him up for five minutes. 
May you rest in peace. 
My arrows will cut them down. 
Gone now. Hmm. 
I need to head over to Colovian Traders and pick up a few things from Gunder. He's got a nice selection. 
Pleasure and pain, my lord. 
I'm only askin' for enough to feed me kids. 
Welcome to the Greenmote Silo. 
But if a god can die, how does his heart survive? 
It's good that you've joined one of our local organizations. It helps you make the right connections. 
Warm day to you, friend. 
You're at Bloodletter rank now, right? I caught your last match. Those were some pretty impressive moves! 
Well, you're dressed for it, and you seem like a really good person. You can go in. Sorry to have bothered you. 
You'll have to do better than that. 
By the Nine! Such a thing is dangerous even to handle! 
Sheogorath must have Skooma! 
The Colovian Highlands are barren wastelands along the border with Hammerfell. 
Everything was going well. We had set up camp at Cropsford, and it looked like a beautiful spot. Then the goblins attacked. 
I've slain Grummites tougher than you! 
Have you slain Roland? 
Herdir, you filth. You don't dare touch me. Syl will have your head! 
Now please go. Those children are so dear to me, and I'd really like you to get them something special. Thanks again! 
The Butcher, huh? I like it! Yeah, that'll do nicely. All right, it's time to see if you're crazy good or just plain crazy.  
Where is our blessing? Where is our protection? 
Nothing I ever heard about. But Jauffre would be the one to know. He's the Grandmaster of my Order. 
So much to remember. 
We're not fighters; you appear to have more skill than either of us. Would you go to Weatherleah, and see if it's still inhabited by ogres? 
The new adventurers! I've seen them! One is as tall as a mountain! Another is composed of pure sound and light! 
The guild turns its back on you until the blood price is paid. Until then, leave my sight. 
The castle is east. The chapel is northwest. The shops and guilds are mostly along the north wall and river. The port is over a bridge to the south. 
Just remember, we're in this together. You must learn to rely on me as I rely on you. But I've rambled on long enough. Akatosh be with you. 
Hail, my Brother! 
Any time, Champion. 
You are the only remaining Duchess, which is a situation quite unprecedented. Normally, you would never be permitted to pass within Brellach. 
All manner of creatures infest Bramblepoint Cave, you must remain vigilant. 
Can you think of a better use for the mindless beasts? Under my eye, they do some good in this world.  
Marc Gulitte, Mages Guild Evoker, Advanced Instructor in the Arts of Destruction. 
Strength through Order! 
It is our home, our sanctuary in the Shivering Isles. 
I already have one of... wait a moment, no, that's the one I can't find now. If only I had the money to buy it off you.... 
Yes, yes... That just might be true. Or I've not been waiting at all. Forever and nothing are almost the same thing, wouldn't you say? 
Did you find them? 
Do not speak to me of that place! It was another lifetime. It was before I became what I am now. 
Yes, I can take a moment to talk with you. 
The teams are evenly matched, so you've pretty much got a 50/50 chance of winning. So, which team would you like to bet on? 
It's been horrible. Horrible. 
Corvus! Is it really you? Ten years I've waited for word from you. Why did you hide from me? 
There once was hardy young lad of the sea... A Redguard of courage and honor was he... Sail on, my Cyrus, sail on... 
Honor, huh? I prefer feeding my family. I figure I owe you one for covering for me, so I'll let you leave. Get moving, before I forget myself. 
I suppose you got sent down here to stop them. Good. We've tried, but they won't listen. Head over to the Five Claws. You can't miss them. 
Surius Afranius. I'm a guard for Umbacano. 
Then what would you propose? What more can we do? That medicine is keeping Roderick alive. For now, that's the best we can hope for. 
[Gasp!] What's going on? 
No mortal may enter the halls of Pinnacle Rock. 
Let's go. I know that part of the sewers well. 
It's said that the bite of a vampire has the chance of infecting the victim. If this occurs, they'll become a vampire in a few days. Be cautious. 
Die, unholy monster! 
It is quite nice to see you again. I hope you are faring well. 
Captain Lex blames the Gray Fox for stealing the tax collection. He wants a bounty put on the Gray Fox, but the Legion Commander has refused. 
Ha! You're mad! Syl has yet to be bested in any combat! 
Has Tadrose Helas ever fixed a weapon for you? 
Faith? Are you telling me we're supposed to rely on the good graces of the Divines to keep Roderick alive? Even he would laugh at such nonsense! 
Have you SEEN all the rats around here? It's making me CRAZY. First, this guy decides he's gonna make a million, opens a fancy restaurant. 
You... You're kind of weird. You know that? But... That's okay. I... I like crazy people. I like crazy people... and skooma! Ssshhh! Ha ha ha ha ha! 
You know, they kick you out of the guild if you get caught doing some incarceration. How many? I forget. But I did a lot. 
Chapterhouses of the Order, like Weynon Priory, provide safehouses for travelling Blades as well as our more public religious functions. 
Let me know if you need something killed. 
Very good. Let me explain what is at stake. 
I'm going to level with you, as you seem like you wish to help. 
I can see now what you were saying was no story at all, but the truth, and I'm a fool. I had no idea that the amulet could hold such power over me. 
Sometimes I wonder why she hasn't just retired, and gone someplace to rest. 
Some say that Traven is mis-using the power of the Arch-Mage's position to further his personal agendas. 
It's good to see you. 
Come. We have much to discuss. 
The Fork! The precious, precious fork! Hear how it sings to Big-Head! Beautiful, perfect Fork of Horripilation! 
I think that was all of them. Let me take a look around. 
I like Ushnar's dog. 
Talk to Maelona. She runs the council. Judge, jury and executioner. 
The four mightiest Blades of Tiber Septim's day, Alain, Valdemar, Rielus, and Casnar, went to Sancre Tor and never returned. 
YES! Now that's what I'm talking about. 
I plan to gather up every drop of drink in this house and keep it to myself, if things get any worse around here. I find comfort there, you see. 
My betrothed must be worried sick about me. 
I really need your help. 
I should've been with them! It should've been me, not them! 
Hello, friend! What can I do for you? 
The Amulet of Kings will be mine. 
Does the air seem thicker than normal? 
Nothing now. Not at your rank. Go see Azzan. In Anvil. Maybe he's got something. 
Capital! The Earl of Imbel is the only descendant of his line that I have been able to locate. 
Nothing more! I choose death!  Long live the Blackwood Company! 
I would assume she's travelled extensively. Must have been some time ago, though, since she never seems to leave the guild hall now. 
Of Hirrus I can only say this, he wouldn't feel that way if he lived in Bliss. 
So much to do. 
They say that slavery has been abolished in Morrowind. House Dres and Hlaalu have renounced the slave trade, and freed the beastfolk from servitude. 
You've come to Divine Elegance because you care about what you wear. And Palonirya has what you want... or no one has. 
Your first contract requires the killing of a pirate captain, on his ship. Are you ready to accept? 
Do it! End my misery! 
We have much to speak of, and very little time. A new task awaits you, and it is by far the most important you have been entrusted with. 
Then bugger off. 
After all, he has ruled over Skingrad for quite some time without incident. 
So, the enforcer Hides-His-Heart has been killed. He was to bear witness to Motierre's death, and report back to his superiors.   
The trees and branches of this Realm feed from a deep font of madness and mystery.  
My pardon, Your Grace, but Lord Sheogorath's justice applies to all within His Realm. 
I know where Sheogorath has gone! Of course, I'm not going to tell you. 
I should have known after I fenced that stupid ring and discovered it was a fake. Worthless! All part of the guards' plan I suppose. 
Hear me out before you make your decision. 
So you are looking for the Thieves Guild as well. Armand Christophe will decide who is worthy and who is not. 
Greetings, Magister. I trust you are serving the guild well. 
Don't worry. Anvil's soldiers are worth two from anywhere else. Bruma will not fall! 
I have no time for idle chatter with dilettantes. When I'm finished with the Encyclopedia Sheothia, you may study it to your heart's content. 
I suspect that the secret of how to open a portal to Camoran's Paradise lies within these pages. 
This is not your affair. 
Such violence! 
Herminia Cinna. Amateur scholar of the ancient Elves, dabbler in the arcane arts. How can I help you? 
Clavicus Vile has offered you a bargain. Serve him well. 
Hello. I hope the goblins along the Yellow Road didn't give you any trouble. 
You've got a contract. Shouldn't you be in Bruma? 
I have been waiting for you, Your Grace. This day, as all days before and after, is well known to me. There are no surprises to Dyus of Mytheria. 
What do you mean you need another one? I believe the instructions were very clear: stand in the middle of Aleswell and read the scroll. 
You must be the one. 
People are all excited about the Great Torch being relit. Personally, I don't pay any attention to politics. 
That's right! They managed to close the castle gates just before we were forced in here. 
The lands surrounding Lake Rumare are studded with small settlements, farms, and woodland game reserves.  
I hope the new ruler of Crucible is a good one. 
Fine greetings to you. 
I know he's gone. As the Chancellor of the Elder Council, my concern now is how to choose his successor. 
Hello. I'm not really in the mood to chat right now. 
Well, sometimes the guild gets a special commission. You know. Guaranteed pay to 'acquire' certain items for special clients. 
We heard tell that vampires have infiltrated the town. Came here to root them out. 
I'm not sure what to make of it. 
I saw some strangers heading up there earlier. If they're still alive, you can see the Gatekeeper in action. It's glorious. 
Welcome to Pell's Gate, friend. 
Make me a better offer. 
I'm Beelei. You... you came from out there? And you survived? Then how do I know you're not one of THEM? 
Odd noises? No, I haven't. That sounds a bit troublesome. 
Good choice. I mean, look at the thing! No sane person would go through there. And none have come out, that's for certain. 
Well, you managed to get Llathasa's bust, and you got Hieronymus Lex off my back. However, you broke the code of the Thieves Guild. 
The Crimson Blade, huh? I like it! Yeah, that'll do nicely. All right, it's time to see if you're crazy good or just plain crazy.  
I thank you for your efforts, but I am sure you understand that I cannot pay you for a task that you did not complete. 
My, but it has been busy here lately. I do so enjoy a good conspiracy. 
We should get Martin to Cloud Ruler Temple immediately. 
He flew into a rage! I didn't even understand some of his ranting, but he said that our days are numbered, and then he stormed out! 
She's got terrible manners. Being her friend may be a lot of work. But my sniffer says she might be worth it. 
I am Melus Petilius. Leave me in peace to mourn my wife, Vena. 
Just follow Savlian's orders, and everything will be fine. 
The Mazken do not even allow us free passage to worship there, which is one of the many reasons why they are unfit to continue to guard it. 
Yes, I see that now. I regret that Traven has involved you in this way. At least you've survived... for now. 
Thadon's back to his old self, I hear. He gets moody when he's not on the Felldew. He had two people killed. I know. I counted them. 
See you at eleven. I hope. 
Begone, stranger! I have business with Kynareth's shrine, and I will not be disturbed. 
It's common knowledge that the jailors can be bribed to allow visitors to see prisoners. 
Oh! Most honorable Listener! I... I am so pleased to see you! Sorry, I don't mean to be nervous, it's just that, well... I am awed by your presence! 
For each fight, you can bet 25, 50 or 100 gold pieces. You can bet as many times as you want per day, within the hours of 9:00 AM and 9:00 PM. 
They say a thief actually stole one of the Elder Scrolls from the Imperial Library. Who would have thought it was even possible? 
My methods were vindicated. Apparently Maric was more capable than you. I'm sure you will try harder the next time. 
This time, however, you've heard correctly. I might know a thing or two about it. 
I had a copy of Volume Three, but Gwinas has already picked it up. So sorry. 
I'll do it... Guildmaster. Just come to me when you want to assign duties to the Guild. I'll make sure they get done. 
All I can say for sure is that it reacts to magic. Badly, most of the time. Several mages were hurt attempting to cast spells at it. 
Excuse me, the Empire doesn't run itself, you know. Submit a complaint to the usual department and I'm sure someone will take care of it. 
Not only did this make the Akaviri fight on two fronts, it also cut off access to reinforcements and supplies from the sea. 
Take a seat. 
Hello, I'm Dredhwen. No one was running this place when I got here. They left plenty of things behind, though. What do you need? 
Fight well. 
Lord Sheogorath! I apologize for the intrusion, but you must help us! Order has attacked Pinnacle Rock and routed us! 
The hunter has performed foul deeds upon other members of the pride. The Thieves Guild prohibits murder, assault and theft against fellow members. 
I always liked Bradon and Erline. They were a nice couple. I hope you get to the bottom of this, cause I don't believe he was a vampire either. 
Pleasant, as always. 
The Marie Elena, you say? I've seen that ship. There's a unique balcony at the stern. My guess is it leads to the captain's cabin. Could be useful. 
No? Are you quite sure? I would hate to think that you do, in fact, have the book, and simply have no intention of turning it over. 
I have opened a portal for your return to the world of men. Go now, Chosen One, and claim your prize. 
Don't come back here without him! 
Greetings. I am Raminus Polus, Consul for the Mages Guild. Welcome to the Arcane University. 
What a wonderful compliment. 
Really, do come in. It's lovely in the Isles right now. Perfect time for a visit. 
Vilena Donton hasn't been very aggressive as head of the Fighters Guild. Maybe her son Viranus will show a bit more spunk. 
Good luck with Mazoga. 
Hurry back, my Lord. There's so much I want to show you. So much, indeed! 
I'd so enjoy that.... 
Thadon's not dead. He lives underground. In a house made of cheese. 
Here's some money. 
But I don't have it. So I can't eat Felldew, because that would just be bad. I mean, really bad. Damn her! 
Excellent. I'm sure things will go better this time. Good seeing you, Milord. 
Martina Floria at the Arcane University has a much better mastery of Illusion spells than I. You should travel there and speak with her. 
Fine. I have it waitin' for you at the dock next to the magic shop. Now get outta my sight. 
Ever needed cash in a hurry? You should try Jensine's. 
Too much to do. No time to talk about the Great Torch being relighted. 
I'm sorry. I'm new in town, and don't know anyone. 
I've spoken to him a number of times about inner peace and spiritual harmony. I'm not sure I understood it all. 
He's good with his fists, no doubt about it. He'll teach you something, for the right price. 
I'll need to speak to the council about this. Thank you for relaying the information. Now, tend to your staff, and your wounds, if necessary. 
I'm Eitar. Say. Did you hear what that Argonian said? What's-his-name? You know who I'm talking about... 
With that done, the Fringe should be secure. For now. I can feel things start to get a little hairy. And, not in the good way, like on your head. 
By all means, travel to the Imperial City and get stopped at the gates. You should get used to that sort of rejection. 
Only a select few, such as myself, know the Silo's location. However, we are sworn to secrecy. 
We're busted. Get her! 
We were all expecting to become the next Kvatch, you know? 
There are intruders at the Gates of Madness. Perhaps you'd care to intervene? I'm sure the Gatekeeper can handle it otherwise. 
The Emperor's elite knights. They dedicate themselves to Talos above and the Septims here on earth. 
Really? With your own eyes? Damn. So we've got real trouble. And no emperor. That's real bad. 
Syl has spies everywhere. We are all at risk. 
I try not to burden myself with news of the current goings-on. It gets to be rather distasteful at times. Don't you think? 
First, never steal from another member of the guild. 
At least, not for the moment. We will continue to monitor the situation, but I assure you we will make no further attempts to mislead you. 
Art has triumphed! I plan to dedicate my next juggling epic to Sheogorath's glorious victory! 
May your sword always strike true. 
Brellach was given to us by our Lord Sheogorath as a sanctuary and place of restoration. 
Sorry, no time to talk! I have to deliver these copies of the Black Horse Courier! Here, take a copy! It's free! 
Then seek Agata, child. She will see the path, and set you on it. I must rest. 
So this Lord Drad, he puts my little brothers in chains, working in the mines, and it makes me mad. 
You're pathetic. 
You'll never leave this Arena alive! 
Take this. It's from a friend. 
Defend yourselves! Here they come! 
Aaah! 
Of course, now that you have the head, you could create all sorts of mischief. 
Hello my friend.  I will never forget your daring rescue.  What can I do for you? 
Shut them down where you can. And make sure to kill the Priests you see around them. If you don't, they can reactivate the obelisk. 
But.... oh, no. Poor Rallus. 
You cut back now, and I'm going to take my business elsewhere. Or maybe pay a visit to that Jensine and tell her about your little scheme. 
Best not to talk about it here. Meet me after dark at the sewer grate northeast of the Sheogorath statue. 
Mankar Camoran's chattels, the unmortals that swarm here in the Savage Garden, their proper role is to test themselves in unceasing combat. 
I was with the Count when he was young, and a shining star on the tournament path. I only wish he'd straighten his son out. 
Yes. It is a fair price. Atahba will have your Paint horse saddled and ready outside. 
Hmmm. Not surprising. Well, if you change your mind, and the position is still available, come speak with me again. 
Huh-what? 
I will take my leave, and you will remain here, mortal. Mortal...? King? God? It seems uncertain. 
Let's put an end to Mankar Camoran and his evil Paradise. 
I've read it. Terribly written, sensationalistic tripe, if you ask me. 
Yes? Is there something I can help you with, Associate? 
Go talk to Uungor. He's always talking about leaving, anyway. Your friend can sleep where Uungor does now. 
Ah, you're back. You may have noticed that we have a... bit of a problem. 
Perhaps you are capable of being a decent trader one day. Well, with that kind of money, anyone can be, after all. 
It's supposed to be a secret. I'm not talking. But everyone knows who's responsible. 
The priory is a chapterhouse of the Order of Talos. And with the last Septim emperor dead, and all his heirs... 
These trees. So perfect. Almost seems like home. 
I look forward to fighting these daedra side by side with the Hero of Kvatch. 
You must be downright determined to get yourself killed, huh? Okay then, head back up to the Arena and try not to die before the gate opens. 
Truthfully? I've never really understood who or what Sithis really is. As long as I obey the Tenets and fulfill my contracts, I guess he's happy.  
She fancies herself a student of the Ayleids, although she sadly lacks any aesthetic instinct whatsover. 
And you, you are a cold-blooded killer, capable of taking life without mercy or remorse. The Night Mother has been watching, and she is most pleased. 
You must break one of the Tenets you have sworn to uphold. I know this is an unexpected turn of events, but drastic measures must be taken.   
Forgive me for saying so, Your Grace, but I find taking orders from the Duke of Dementia to be... unsettling. 
Take them down! 
We tried to gather the townsfolk into the keep, but it was too late. I barely had time to find my betrothed and get us inside. 
Ciirta's light has been darkened. Now is the time for another to rise and stand in her place. 
So, you've decided to light the Torch for Mania? 
She can help us. She must help us. 
I'm afraid that's not possible, since you don't seem to have the money for it. We'll be happy to accomodate you, when you can afford it. 
How interesting. I'm sure the curio shops in the Market District would be glad to give you a fair price for this. 
So, you come to me for assistance. How interesting. I think I'd much rather you die in the field. 
Your first priority now should be to find Martin and bring him back here. 
I suggest you make your way to the Imperial City. Can't make money by standing here. 
It must pass to the last of the Dragon's Blood. Keep it safe from the pawns of the Destroyer. 
The Council of Mages has this Necromancer situation under control. They must, or else we'd know about it, right? 
I do not know. The catacombs of Sancre Tor were sealed by the first Grandmaster of the Blades. 
Aren't you supposed to be on a quest for the Gray Fox? 
The lesser creatures of the Eternal Garden still torment us, but Anaxes was the worst. He toyed with us, prolonging our deaths for his pleasure. 
The Great Torch is on fire again. I wonder if someone might accidentally knock me into it. Do I look flammable to you? I hope I'm flammable. 
I have given you the help you asked for. Bruma's fate is out of my hands. 
The Great Torch burning again is a sign that things aren't completely hopeless. Means someone is doing something right. 
Go kill something, so I can count its corpse. 
I've told you too much for now. Listen to me prattle on. I can see your mortal brain straining. We'll talk more later. 
Our Lord is too scared to face the Greymarch, is he? Coward! Good riddance. 
Your Speaker should look for this person on the small island in the Illiac Bay, in the Breton homeland of High Rock. 
You are most gracious. The Earl of Imbel has a home in the Talos Plaza, facing the center plaza. 
Jyggalag will reward me well for your death! 
There are rats and goblins down there... but from what I've seen of you, I'm guessing you are an experienced Mage. Am I right? 
Safe journey, serjo. 
If you try to announce yourself as Corvus, I will deny you. I will deny you before the Emperor if I have to. 
I welcome you, if you truly are the agent of Fate. 
Good. You're here. We've got duties to attend to. 
Ten years ago I inherited this cowl from the former guildmaster of the Thieves Guild. I became the new guildmaster, but I also received it's curse. 
Now, is there something I can help you with? 
Ah, my savior. Back again for a visit are we? 
How many J'zidzos can you fit in a breadbox? One! There's only one! 
Hello there. I'm Hirrus Clutumnus, not that it should matter to you, or anyone else for that matter. I'm worthless. I should die. Will you kill me? 
Sheogorath. What trouble brings you out this way? 
People are just ignorant around here... 
Do you know Dul gro-Shug? I understand he's good with light armor. 
I borrowed quite a bit of gold from some underworld types.  I... I missed a payment. Now they don't even want the money. They say I insulted them! 
This victory is not without cost. We've lost Martin Septim. What an emperor he might have made. 
No! Please! 
You would summon me? Wait... why are YOU summoning me? You've got things to do. Things I told you to do. This makes me frown. 
I don't like the look of you. Pay your respects and get out. 
I think I'll head down to the basement and get something to eat. I think there's some cheese down there. 
Just please, help me get that ring back. I want to save what's left of my marriage. 
Stronger than ever, and ever before. The new Gatekeeper is the ultimate ward. 
The Covenant is broken. The Enemy has won.  
Her eye is upon you. 
Training, beds, and good hard work. Can't beat it. 
He hired a guard! Attack! 
Oh my. I feel terrible that I even suspected anyone within my court. I was hoping to recover the painting, so I might look upon it again. 
Cats. Everywhere. 
You actually did it! 
I didn't come here to chat, Blue Team scum! Crawl home while you still can! 
She believed it so strongly that she led a revolt against Sheogorath when He returned. She was imprisoned in the Howling Halls for her trouble. 
Ha ha! We did it, my friend! The killer is dead, and this nightmare is just about over. All we have to do now is find a way out of here! 
The Doyen are the eyes and claws of the guildmaster. As a hunter, you take orders from them, and you get your favors from them. 
Save me, Lord! 
If you're looking for hard-to-find ingredients, try Lelles' Quality Merchandise, outside the walls facing the harbor. 
You're beyond what I can teach. You might think about consulting Sinderion; he knows more about Alchemy than I do. 
I have an idea how we might be able to stop them, but for now we must survive.  
Chorrol's got plenty to eat, and good, thick walls, and that suits me fine. I don't know what's going on out there in the woods, and I don't need to. 
Allow me to serve you, my Lord. 
The details aren't important. At least not right now. Eternity is on a rather tight deadline. We'll get back to that later. 
You have proven yourself a loyal servant of the Empire, as worthy as any of the Blades to stand by Martin's side during this crisis. 
Regulus Terentius, Count Bravil. Good of you to introduce yourself, stranger, but no point, really. 
Welcome, dear Sister! So good to finally meet you! I hope you're getting along all right. If you need anything, anything at all, you need only ask. 
Well, I know he's a bit odd, but I've always thought he was kind of sweet.  Lately, though, he has been stranger than usual. 
Yes, my older brother. He was lost on a mission. Vitellus died valiantly, as we all knew he would. He was the best of us. 
Have you brought reinforcements? 
So, you're the famous Hero of Kvatch. 
Ah-Malz of the Fighters Guild. Welcome to Skingrad County. Come hunting goblins, have you? 
If you get Selene safely locked up, I can tell you all I know. I won't feel safe until you do that. 
I'm Caelia Draconis, Captain of the Leyawiin Guard. I hope we will not meet in my official capacity... ha-ha. 
Good luck with your field work for Sinderion. 
I'd have a few choice words for him, but he won't let me get near him. I know exactly why he's so threatened by me. 
You must return any property that does not belong to you. Now, will you serve your sentence in the dungeon, or pay reparations? 
Stay outta my business! 
Motierre! I am here to exact payment, in blood! You will... eh? Who is this? 
You are always welcome at Harm's Folly. 
Now, who might you be? Please, tell us a little bit about yourself. 
We're better off storming the main passage, where our superior strength and bladework can come into play. 
I'm so happy for you, milady. I'm just so sorry he damaged it. Your finger swells up so when you wear it too long. 
Honmund and I live together in the old Nord way. Good enough for my Fa and Ma, and good enough for me. 
Good people, I give you the Blue Team's latest Champion, a warrior of skill, strength, and determination! 
Ri'Bassa is our shaman. You will find him in his house most of the time. 
You've already rented the room.... Not much more to say, is there? 
That Adventurer-Attractor-Thingy is working again. You know what's attracting me? The Skooma! 
Hello there! Can I cut you a deal? 
He never tells us anything, though. Just between the two of us, this one thinks Maric is cheating him. In fact, this one is sure of it. 
No, it should be me. I have a blood debt to repay these Mythic Dawn assassins. Besides, I've trained for this kind of thing my whole life. 
There's an Argonian named Weebam-Na in town. Go get him for me. 
Causing trouble, yes. Causing much trouble. Scaring customers. Breaking furniture. Bad, bad men. 
You will advance through the ranks of the Fighters Guild when you have proven your merit. 
Good cheer and jubilant welcome, lord. 
The Dark Brotherhood must seek out a Redguard named Rhiannon. She has need of our services, and we are only too happy to oblige. 
What do you think about our new home? It's smaller than our old house back in High Rock, but we built it with our own hands. 
I was afraid you wouldn't come back. 
This is an important match, for the winner will advance to the esteemed rank of Gladiator! So without further ado, let the battle begin! 
Jayred Ice-Veins wants to kill the Gatekeeper. Sounds like suicide to me. 
A word of advice here. You've made a bad deal. This Umbra -- bad business. Things always end badly where that one's concerned. 
If he isn't in the castle, he may be at the Northern Goods and Trade buying food to stock our larder. 
The beastly little creatures are nasty, smelly, noisy and wrecking my beautiful house! I must be rid of them! 
Have you found "Necromancer's Moon"? 
I'm trying to find Itius Hayn. 
I'm Newheim, Anvil harbormaster. I'm responsible for all harbor traffic, docks, duties and fees in Anvil harbor. 
Leave now! You are trespassing! 
But I am sure you will reconsider. You have proven yourself worthy and dedicated to have come this far. 
The youngest Donton? Probably at home. I hear his mother doesn't let him do too much. 
Go upstairs, and look for the door on the right at the end of the hall. Sleep well! 
I'll be glad to get this over with and get back to the Imperial City. 
Then it's finally done. The Goblins have paid with their blood, and my wife's brutal slaying is avenged. 
The Knights of the Thorn triumph once again! 
No! This is all wrong! This isn't how it's supposed to be! 
I can create the physical shell of the Staff, but the divine essence must be gathered elsewhere. 
You fool!  You'll ruin everything!  We can't be seen talking together! 
A new Gatekeeper, eh? I'll bet he'd be willing to kill me! 
You took care of the goblin menace? That's great news, my friend! 
We are, for lack of a better word, defenders. We guard this city from an infestation that plagues it. We are vampire hunters. 
In accordance with guild rules, you now qualify for the rank of Journeyman. May you wear your rank well. 
You want to find J'skar?  
That a false heir might be crowned... that the test of the Great God might have failed... My heart fails me. It is unthinkable.  
Grommok! No! 
No, thanks. Walking around in the wilderness waiting for something to eat me, looking for gold in a hole? You think I'm a dope? 
None of yer damn business. I'd tell you if I liked you... and I don't. 
Return to me when you are prepared. 
Please, look. Buy. Something here might save you when the end comes. 
I take my duties as chapter head very seriously... unlike SOME guild mages. It infuriates me how casual some guild heads are about common civility. 
So much dirt, and so little time... pause but a moment, and you'll be drowned in the tide... Trash! Mud! Dust! 
Dead. I can't believe it. So much death. 
Blessings, brother. 
<sobbing in pain> 
The Knights are sure to attack again.  
Time is short, Your Grace. We cannot know when the next attack will come. 
In Crucible you'll find a place, a museum with all manner of things. A reward you'll get if to this place something strange and new you bring. 
Every goblin tribe is led by a shaman, but she mostly stays hidden in the heart of the lair. Well protected. 
When I know more, I'll come find you. 
I am currently employed at the Count's Arms, but I'm working on a piece I hope will gain me the patronage of a certain countess. 
Bless you! There's none in this town, but you could try Bruma. 
Sent you in to try your hand at the thing, have they? 
[Gasp!] Can this be? The Blue Team combatant is not wearing an Arena Battle Raiment! The Blue Team is hereby disqualified! 
I can't read them all. They make no sense. 
I can't believe it! The Gray Prince has been beaten! There's a new Arena Grand Champion now, someone called the Messenger of Death! 
For one thing, he's a thief, but what irks me the most is that he's a BAD thief. 
It's been too long since I've seen a corpse. 
I've heard he'll teach his skills, for the right price. 
I must not be interrupted! My work requires the highest degree of concentration. I hope I won't have to repeat myself. 
Remember, the only way to get rid of the staff is to leave it in that cave. 
Yes, yes, Count of Bravil. Are you a foreigner? Do yourself a favor. Learn the basics about the places you visit. There. Problem solved. 
Heard you went over to the other side. Get out of my face. 
My advice is take your time, walk around the Market District, see what's on offer. Don't buy until you've seen it all. Take your time. 
Normally I make the deliveries, but I wasn't feeling well so Dar-Ma insisted on going this time.  I do hope nothing has happened to her! 
Thanks again for helping us. I'm sure Ormil will reward you appropriately. 
For the love of Sithis, you have to kill a feeble old man. Is that too much for you to handle? 
I'm Gelephor, the watchman. I keep an eye on things. 
The shipmaster, Heinrich Oaken-Hull, has a wood elf for a wife. I'd rather sleep with my horse. 
Welcome to Pell's Gate. What brings you around here? 
The Fanatics caught us by surprise, attacking out of the Reservoir, killing the rear guard and opening the main gates. Now I do the dance of death. 
But I will need time. Tampering with dark secrets, even just reading them, can be very dangerous. I'll have to proceed carefully. 
You've made a big mistake! 
You don't understand. This isn't just about the Chalice. This is about you. We must discuss Dunroot Burrow. 
You don't? Oh... Well I can only hope you'll change your mind. In the Arena... Yes, in the Arena anything could happen. Anything... 
Don't worry. The Elder Council can govern the Empire perfectly well until a new heir can be found. 
Blessed are you who wields the Goldbrand. 
Dairihill cannot be trusted. You must deliver the letter to Lady Umbranox in person. Will you accept this commission? 
Are you implying that my merchandise comes from the deceased? 
I can't believe this is happening. 
Follow the road west out of Skingrad, through the High Pasture. The mine entrance is south of the road. The Count will meet you just outside it. 
I'm sure Thadon will celebrate appropriately. 
I'm Mazoga. You killed my friend, Ra'vindra.  
Thank you! Let's get out of here! 
Dead? Me? There... there must be some mistake.... I'm just an old man! Just an old man! 
You'll have to get me a new one if it dies! 
Beg pardon. It is a word from the Ta'agra, meaning 'warrior for hire'.  
Have you ever shopped at Edgar's Discount Spells? 
There's no way I can fight those ferocious beasts off on my own. If you could thin the population a bit, they would probably leave the area. 
Hallowed ground, home of the Forgotten Ones. A deep hole of shadow and despair. A truly wondrous place. 
Here is what you must do. Go now to your next dead drop, lie in wait, and confront whomever drops off the false contract! 
Your swift retribution earned you much respect among my people. We had not expected that a mortal would act with such resolution and honor. 
Wonderful! Weatherleah is ours! 
His sacrifice was necessary, but it leaves the Empire without an emperor. 
As you wish, My Lord. I will be honored to test myself in battle against You! 
The guards are coming to arrest you for trespassing! 
Things are still quiet at Xeddefen, Your Grace. However, we are still finding the smaller Obelisks. 
Oh, come on. 
Are you willing to help me? 
I'd like to just believe you, but I can't send these people back to Cropsford unless I'm sure the goblin war is over. 
The Torch alight! There's hope for us all. 
You're back! You must tell me everything! 
[GS/DS Power Attack] 
Please. I'm embarrassed. But thank you. 
She was a very powerful mage once, from what I understand. Hard to imagine that, honestly. 
Nice try. 
Yes, in fact, up in the Imperial Reserve, a long way north-north-west of Skingrad, I came upon a Sanguine shrine. 
Sheogorath is gone. Maybe I kidnapped him. That would merit a death sentence! 
You would violate a direct order? I should expel you now! But... this does not all fall on your shoulders. Much of the fault is mine. 
Mornings she is at the town chapel. At the castle, she hosts the evening meal at eight. She retires sometime after eleven. 
Shall we go? 
What do you think you're doing? 
I'm trying to concentrate. If you don't mind...? 
This one's mine! 
I expected you back sooner. 
Walk where your road must take you. 
At long last ... you have freed me. Now I can finally complete my lord's last request. 
We appreciate your interest, but you've got quite a nasty reputation. Do something about that, and perhaps we'll consider your application. 
This is not quite in your usual line of work, but I hope you can help me just the same. 
Captain Burd is waiting for you outside the Bruma city gate. He'll show you the Oblivion Gate. Although I doubt it will be hard to find. 
The Gatekeeper is dead. One more sign that the Realm is being run into the ground. This never should've happened. 
Let's talk. 
The ruins of Xeddefen run under Passwall. The entrance to the south of the town has been sealed for centuries.   
What the Emperor told you implies that the Amulet is the key to the preservation of that barrier. 
Finally, a chance for revenge. 
I like Skingrad just fine. Folks are a little quiet by Skyrim standards, but they're friendly and loyal when they get to know you. 
They hope to learn enough from it to find some way to fight Mannimarco. I tried to dissuade them, but it was no use. 
And, what better way to learn the many uses of Restoration? Practical application is often the best educator. Even in life and death situations. 
It is a place of celebration for us. We dance, we make love. Would you speak with Sanguine? 
I'm Jair. I'm a dip... 
What can I do to help you? 
Yes, I know who Faelian is. Know quite a bit about him, actually. But... I probably shouldn't gossip. I mean, we hardly know each other... 
A bed you seek? There is one here for you, if you have the 10 gold to rent it. 
Still, I don't think he's the murderer. No, quite the contrary. I think he takes the murders personally, feels he should have protected the victims. 
Greetings, sister Bosmer. 
The Master is preaching in the Shrine as we speak! Hurry, you should not miss the chance to hear the Master's words! 
You showed that cat whose claws are sharper, eh? I would expect no less. Here's your gold. Now go wash up. You look awful. 
It's squalid little shack, I'm sorry to say. 
Arrgh! 
Leave me to my work, stranger. 
Hello again! Have you had any luck finding the sword and armor? 
I'm sure the Elder Council will find some way to hold the Empire together. At least the Oblivion invasion is over! 
He's a fine man, and an honored brother. 
Did that just happen? 
I'm sorry, but I don't feel much like talking right now. Someone has been killed! Don't you even care?   
The Duchess of Dementia. Ever wary, ever worried. A prisoner in her own House, in a way. And a delightful conversationalist, really. 
Are you ready to go to the boat? 
They should have listened to me. 
Welcome to the Arcane University. 
Do not give up hope! 
I've heard the Great Torch is lit once more. City dwellers. Such useless folk. I've got no use for them. A giant torch? Really? 
Is that so? 
Now, you'll need to decide what sort of staff you're looking for. Something that fits you, and your abilities. Shall we begin? 
Are you not the exalted Duke? Slayer of the great Gatekeeper? Champion of our mighty Lord Sheogorath? 
A note of caution: Skingrad is an... unusual place. Be prepared for the unexpected. 
We are vigilant. 
The formula looked sound, except it required an extremely rare ingredient. Yes, you guessed it, the Nirnroot. 
I used to have a Great Torch. Where did I put it? That one is relit, which is a good thing. Mine's still missing. 
Why did the bandit take a bath? To get a clean getaway! Ahaha! 
As for your compensation, I ask you to trust me. If my plan works, you will get a reward worth far more than mere money. Will you do it? 
Have you completed your task? 
I don't see Rythe with you. I hope you're not here to give me bad news. 
Hmm. Yes, it can be done. I can change it to give Lex the highest recommendation. I'll need a full day to properly forge this letter. Return then. 
I can't sell you any horseflesh. You'll have to go inside and talk to Cat Face. 
Come back if you change your mind. We are the only place in Cyrodiil where you can get the magnificent White horse. 
I swear that Ulrich will pay for this. We must handle this carefully and prove to the Count that he needs to be arrested. 
Yes, the Float is quite a vessel, don't you think? The only functioning tavern and inn on the water in all of Cyrodiil. 
Can't you see I was in the middle of my daily dewfall survey? Now I have to start all over again. 
No, no! The pain! 
She is the Grakedrig -- commander -- of the Mazken here at Cylarne. She has never yet been defeated by the Aureals, despite their strength. 
Okay, great. I was starting to worry. There's a... a simple task. Yes, a simple task that you must perform 
Well done! Not only did you kill the five guests, you acted as an agent of terror and grief. You have earned your reward and bonus, Assassin.    
If you're looking to learn a bit about potion-making, you should speak to Felen Ralas at the Mages Guild. 
I've been losing Mazken with each attack, and I'm down to nothing but men. We are pinned down here. If we lose, the Gates of Madness will fall. 
She thinks the Underdeep is a trap. It's true, if the Mazken knew we were coming that way, we wouldn't stand a chance. 
It all feels good. It's all fun. Why not? 
I thank you for your sympathy. You're truly a noble individual. Were you able to retrieve anything from him before Oblivion took him? 
Hmmm. Maybe he lives in the Elven Gardens district. 
I hope you've been successful? 
I might have something for you, but we can't talk about it here. Meet me at the usual place, and at the usual time. 
You've got it. I'll have the Boar brought out to the Arena. Now get up there and give the people what they paid for!  
A fair bargain. 
We have nothing to discuss. 
The Gatekeeper is slain. Congratulations. The honor of taking the keys from his corpse is yours. 
Move along, citizen. I won't abide loitering. 
The Saints and Seducers will protect us. 
Neville has a strong sense of justice, I can tell. If we find out who the killer is, he'll take care of things, if you know what I mean.  
Between my shop and a few others in Crucible, he's been caught stealing maybe a dozen times last month. 
Now, to find another drink... 
Very well... you have doomed a frail woman to certain death.... 
Greetings. I see you've been keeping yourself busy. This is good. I believe it's time for you to perform some duties for your Guild. 
I'm Otumeel. But I didn't do anything. Really. It wasn't me. 
I saw Earana leaving town. She looked very excited. 
In truth, I was Jyggalag's trusted chamberlain and the keeper of the great library. 
The Great Torch is lit once more. Maybe we might be safe here after all. 
As you wish. That is a better price than you will get from anyone else. I expect you will reconsider eventually. 
I'll turn over her body and the bodies of her compatriots when we arrive at the Imperial City. Don't let it trouble you, friend. 
Why not? Something has to work. Once, I dug a pit and filled it with clouds. Or was it clowns? Doesn't matter. It didn't slow him down. 
Frankly, the smell gave you away. You must have stepped in... well, let's just say something that isn't pleasant. 
Hey! What'd I ever do to you? 
I'm honored by your presence. 
We'll see who gets to cut you, Motierre! Let me show you how a real killer operates, you Dark Brotherhood mongrel! Defend yourself! 
While I do not doubt that she was right, I question whether her motives were genuine. She seemed all too eager to explore its power. 
Look, I don't know who is responsible for this madness, so stop trying to taint my opinion of Nels.  
I can fix whatever you break. 
Indeed, it is your very success that must have led Jyggalag to this unexpected avenue of attack. His usual approach is much less imaginative. 
Through my research, I have learned that they were removed from the temple before its sack by Men. 
Go there and bring me a branch of this tree, but be warned -- the tree will not surrender its secrets to one who has not earned them. 
Nowhere is truly safe against the power arrayed against us. But we must play for time, at least... 
Well, well, look at the elegant Altmer maiden. Where's your dignity now, huh? Where's that famous High Elf poise and bearing? 
I don't know how to make this request any simpler, but to put it bluntly, Raelynn the Gravefinder must die. 
I don't suppose you've heard all of the details about the gang of harlots running their little charade here in Anvil have you? 
Well... some is better than none. But more is always better. Honestly, I'd be happier if we had more men. 
Have you been following me? Leave me alone! That book is mine! 
You're more fearsome than the new Gatekeeper. Look at the teeth on you! 
As I said, I've never even seen the third and fourth volumes. You should try First Edition, over in the Market District. 
Be patient. 
I don't know much about it. The "Commentaries on the Mysterium Xarxes" are the only source we have for its existence. 
This is an unusual contract. Motierre had to make a special arrangement with us before it was approved. I trust in your professionalism.           
The well is locked, so you'll need the key. Deetsan should have a copy of it. Now get moving. 
A fair question. You won't, really. At least I don't think so. But you'll have power. My power. Try not to lose it. It's a pain to replace. 
The Count will not see you now. Not now, not ever. He sees no one. I'm Mercator Hosidus, his steward. I believe that's all you need to know. 
J'Ghasta, Shaleez, Alval Uvani, Havilstein Hoar-Blood -- Speakers and Silencers all. And Ungolim... the Listener himself!  
Have you ever bought a magic staff at Rindir's? 
You've returned! So, have you been to Crowhaven? Have you... Oh, I see you have not yet recovered any proof of my birth... 
A wise choice. I have spilled too much blood already, and though I hunger for more, spilling yours would not please me. Go now. Do not return. 
But what if a fisherman uses the cave? 
Your light will shine no more. 
Gladly, m'Lord. 
This day will be remembered. 
Suit yourself. I thought you might have an interest in self-improvement, but perhaps not. Let me know if you ever change your mind. 
I can't be dead. I just can't be! 
Well I'm certainly not about to lower the price. 
I'm afraid your journey ends here, traveler. 
It's essential. Simply essential! If only it were essentially simple... but it's not. 
Spriggans. "Nature's guardians" my foot! Mean things. They'll curse you, or they might call a bear to tear you apart. 
How I loathe the idea of personal choice. It makes things so... imprecise. 
I'm afraid the settlement of Split has been the victim of recent attacks. Your aid would be appreciated, I'm sure. 
Go to, bold fighterperson. 
Some Elytra there are... different. You'll need to get Felldew from them, and eat it. Can't get in without it. But once you do... 
Bastard. 
Mogens Wind-Shifter is dead. Ra'vindra is avenged. Now I return to Castle Leyawiin. Come visit me there some day. 
Many years ago, when the Count was still alive, a daring thief stole the ancient Honorblade of Chorrol from out of this castle. Why? 
You've got quite the silver tongue. 
I want you to go check it out. I don't need to tell you how sensitive a matter this is. Get moving, and report back to me as soon as possible. 
I'll enjoy putting you down, scum. 
My first responsibility is to the people of Cheydinhal. They look to me for protection in these dark times.  
I seem to have forgotten where she lives. 
Send me a drink, barkeep. And make it quick. 
I come to relieve you of your torment, dear Ciirta. No more lost memories. No more pain. No more misleading us. 
Pinarus Inventius is quite the hunter. He can track about anything, and he's deadly with his bow. 
Is the book safe? Do you have it? 
I shall open a portal for you to one of my realms in Oblivion. Go, and take your place in my Tournament of Ten Bloods. 
Go get him. 
I got the door open. The rest is up to you. 
My interest was in recovering the carving from Malada, and Maric has already delivered it to me. 
I heard the Fringe was attacked. I don't yet know exactly how many were lost, but I'll have to find out. 
Don't leave me! 
What are you doing in here? Wander in by mistake? This is the Mages Guild. You want a barn or sheep pen or something. 
People in the city, they get stuff and forget to pay. So I help 'em remember. You talk to 'em, lean on 'em a bit, and they remember right away. 
He will not be forgotten. He goes to Aetherius to join the other fallen heroes of the Blades. 
You're talking to Algot the Northerner. Guess you've got nothing better to do. 
Your courage is admirable, but now is not the time. Once Kvatch is safe from these attackers, then we might speak of training. 
Armies can only mean one thing... more sorrow and more death. 
Madness always yields to the march of Order! 
Typical Altmer. Thinks the whole world is made for his convenience. 
Three of the night watch, and all's well. Good night, ma'am.  
Either you have it, or you don't. Don't play games with me. 
Oh! Well in that case, um... Here you go! 
Oreyn has a plan. Just keep your mouth shut, and stay away from Vilena. 
I am disappointed. When you are better prepared, return to me. 
Ah, Mirel's beloved surprise attack. A perfect example of why males do not hold command positions. 
I am all that is left. The others were struck down by Order. How did this happen? 
I'm supposed to meet them at Weynon Priory. You'd best get whatever supplies you need now, so you can get there in time. 
Thank you, thank you! I can't tell you how good it feels to be able to see myself again. 
Quill-Weave does a lot of traveling to research her books. She must have a lot of experience to share. 
If you learn anything, you can find me at Luther Broad's. May Talos guide you. 
There are only three of us left. All those people... dead. And the killer had to be either Primo... or you!  
Welcome to 'The Main Ingredient'. Ogier Georick. If you're an alchemist, then you've come to the right place. 
Oh my! You better find him and see what he's doing! Hurry! 
When I saw the fiery clouds and the daedra in the streets, I was sure we were all dead... but you saved us. 
It is quite nice to see you again. I hope you are fairing well. 
There our brethren destroyed the vampire Dratik, but all were infected by the abomination, and were doomed to turn themselves. 
Don't interrupt me. 
Yes. His agents must have found a way to poison the Font with Order. 
I came here because I love nature. And because I didn't want to serve as a boot wizard in a mountain legion in Skyrim. 
The Emperor! I must get to the Emperor! 
Can't do better than that. 
I suppose thanks are only a small token of my appreciation. Allow me to reward you for your bravery. 
You look familiar. Do I know you? 
Sontaire may sell a lot of books, but that's not why the men visit her. 
Outta my way. 
Traven sent you? Just you? 
It's your loss. There is no finer horse in Cyrodiil than the Black horses of Cheydinhal. 
Hey, lizard! It must break your heart, huh? Being so close to the water, knowing you'll never get to swim again... 
Ha! Members of the Thieves Guild in our fair town? What makes you think that? Never! Absurd! Such fine law-abiding citizens are we all! 
Martin made some progress on the Mysterium Xarxes while you were gone. You should speak to him about it. 
Here. Perhaps you will find this useful. One of the books I saved from my Blades training. 
She's either a frightened old woman or a cold-blooded killer! I don't know whether I should comfort her or hit her over the head with a rock! 
Hey, have you heard about that pirate captain, the one who was murdered in his ship? 
You're always welcome in Border Watch! 
I'll take Llathasa's statue off of your cold, dead body! 
Count Goldwine is the embodiment of nobility. He's always ruled Kvatch with a fair hand, and listened to the needs of his people. 
Good work. But you must locate their base and make sure you've eliminated all of them. 
Not enough corpses around here... but there should be. Those stupid Manics. They ruin everything. 
I just love talking to you, really. 
Yes, Renoit does have a fine assortment of books. 
Before you go, I have this for you. Aleron told me that if he ever got in trouble, this could be used to bail him out of jail. 
Blackwood Company's getting all the contracts around Leyawiin. No wonder the boys there are getting restless. 
The Gatekeeper protects us once again. But, can he protect us from the coming horror? 
Ahhh, you mean that vampire hunter. He's staying over at Olav's Tap and Tack. It's near the city gates; you can't miss it. 
Hi there, Sparkles. 
Whatever you did overloaded it and brought the whole thing down. It collapsed Xeddefen itself. I'm amazed that you were not killed. 
You came here for a fight, and a fight you shall have! But talk is for the weak! You want blood! Lower the gates!  
No luck yet, hmm? Please, don't give up. That crystal ball means so much to me. It was my mother's, you see...  
They will not realize that you are the same person that just took off the cowl. To them, the Gray Fox just vanished into thin air. 
Speak, sister. 
No chance to defend myself? No chance for battle? Why? 
Suit yourself. 
There was something on the canvas of my painting that I hadn't put there. It looked somewhat like a troll but it was badly done. Then it hit me. 
Perhaps it would interest you to know that Eronor's sister, Dagail, in Leyawiin, is an accomplished spellcrafter. 
I've always gotten along with the big bugs. 
If you were one of the fortunate few, you would one day understand and accept this. However, you are not and you will not. 
I never believed in the Gray Fox anyway. I think the Imperium just made him up as an excuse to raise our taxes. 
Spill some blood for me, dear Sister. 
Command them if you will, or leave it to me. Either way, make haste. Our time is short. 
You can never be too good with a bow. I know I'm not. 
Aye, Blademaiden. What's on your mind? 
Fine... just get out... I can take care of myself! 
Here's a translation of the passages we could still read. It was quite damaged. I've also included a rough map that was drawn in the diary as well. 
It is good to see you again, friend! 
By the Divines... I can't believe this! They would dare defile the dead to make a profit? The City Watch will hear of this. 
Okay, you lead from here. Hopefully we can make it to the basement without too much fighting. 
You walk a dangerous path. Keep the secret of the guild... or else. If you change your mind, I'll be here. 
The Madgod is gone. Can he die?  
Training, child? You would know more about the mystic energies of the world around us? 
I'm disappointed in your choice. You'll find Mania to be a fickle friend. 
He's somewhere around here. Why don't you stop wasting my time and go ask him yourself. 
The Torch extinguished and relit? This does not bode well. 
To know the right things, you have to know the right people. Ida Vlinorman, Mandil, Samuel Bantien, and Othrelos are the right people. 
I thank you for recovering his sword. I will set it in a place of honor in the Great Hall of Cloud Ruler Temple. 
Whatever I can do... 
Visit me during store hours. These are private moments. 
The Gatekeeper has been slain. That calls for a bit of Skooma, don't you think? I need a fix of Skooma! Please! You got some Skooma? 
You don't follow orders well, do you? You were supposed to find me before you spoke to anyone else here. 
If you want to train further, you'll have to seek out someone else. There's nothing I can teach you. 
Get moving! We can't do a thing until you get those gates opened! 
Evade the horrid Hunger, the Madgod's favorite pet. If your strength lies in your use of shock, you've just increased its threat. 
Passwall has served as an outpost for our defense of the Realm for millennia. 
I'm rather busy on a... I'm busy. What do you need? 
As you know, the vampire can't remain in sunlight. I'd wager that you'll never see Seridur outside during that time of day. 
I can't believe we lost another to that bunch. Well done taking care of the contract, though. We can't afford to lose any of them, these days. 
You're cutting through the Yellow Team like a knife through scrib jelly! One more fight and you'll advance to Warrior rank! 
You made it! Not that I was worried about you. 
Good tidings, citizen. 
I've seen this next one fight before. She's a Nord, very quick, very strong. She favors a longsword and knows how to use it. Don't underestimate her. 
And that's not going to happen here! Not while I'm Captain of the Guard! 
You mean the thief? He was in the big cell with that Argonian. They were always whispering to each other. The Pale Lady took him days ago. 
This certainly seems like one of the signs. It is unnatural to have this many rats gather in one place. 
I can grant the guilty the cleansing fire of retribution, so they may die purified of soul. And, I can grant the worthy everlasting life! 
I'm not disagreeing with you, believe me. Those assassins got what they wanted. The Emperor is dead. They've got not reason to come back. 
What have you been up to? 
You will be perfectly preserved. Taken out of time. Beautiful forever. I will display you with the rest in my collection. 
I'm proud of what we've built here. You should be, too. Cropsford wouldn't exist without the help you gave us. 
Oh, you are a sweetie. The museum hasn't been the same since this went missing. It's so nice of you to donate it to the cause of Oddity. 
Yeah, whatever. This whole conversation has worn me out. Just stay away from the other Horkvir. 
If this goes on for too long, and I get bored, I'll stop you. Now show me what you've got! 
That cat beggar is following me! He's going to eat me, I just know it. Don't look! He's standing right over there. 
I'm glad that you were on board to help rid me of them. If you hadn't been here... I don't even want to think about it... 
I learned quite a bit about how to use a shield from Ambrose Canne. Cost me a bit, but it was worth it. 
You do realize this raises quite a few questions? The overall impact on Alchemy is a complete unknown. And what of Spellmaking? 
Well, come on, let's get movin'. 
It seems it is a dire situation throughout all of Tamriel. 
I don't know who you are, friend, but you've got about ten seconds to tell me what you're doing in my Bloodworks before I lop your arms off. 
Sorry, that's all I had. The refining process is quite costly, and very tedious. 
Again the Resonator pulls men to it. But cats? No! Why? It should draw them far from here! 
This I cannot say. I have refrained from expressing too much interest, lest their attention be turned towards the castle. 
But then again, I stayed in my quarters most of the night. There was no point in going on my usual walk with all of the rain falling. 
You notice all the Nords around here? It's partly because Nords like ships and sailing. Mostly, we're sick of freezing our asses off in Skyrim. 
Your shield arm looks strong. 
So the new duke turns to him and says, "Wrecked him? Damn near killed him!"  
I don't think I like that question. Are you planning something nefarious? Why don't you just go away. 
Hmm? Oh, Jeanne has you looking for him, does she? 
Wow. Palonirya is a tough negotiator. Hard to get her prices down. 
We can all sleep better with the armies at full strength. 
What's the matter? You can't kill an old man? Want Gogron to hold your hand? You make me sick! 
A bit harder to meet than Thadon. Consider making an appointment. 
Yes, I've heard of Brithaur's "exploits" in Crucible. Up until now, I thought he was harmless. 
Not now. Just do as I say until the dremora leaves. 
Yes, a small village south of Chorrol.  Used to be a prosperous mining town, but it has been nearly deserted for years. 
I will always think of Lucien Lachance as my savior. When he found me, I was living in a gutter, an inch away from death. I owe him everything. 
Now you get a present. Keep up the good work. And be nice to my little brothers! 
Have you given Malene the gift yet? 
The barriers between planes are weak. Do more to strengthen them; seal the portals to Oblivion. Then we shall speak of training. 
She was an evil, evil woman. 
I heard that Velwyn Benirus is trying to sell off Benirus Manor. Hopefully the new owners will clean that eyesore up. 
I shouldn't say any more... but you have treated me so well. Perhaps I can trust you. 
Ah, yes. Thought so. We get many of them traveling through here. Well, we used to. 
We greet you, Spellbreaker. 
Ma'zaddha and Nelrene... They meet in the street during the night. No one knows what they talk about. 
Stand back, civilian! 
Perhaps it seems silly, but our love is the most important thing in all creation. Orintur and I spend all our time together, in the High Elf way. 
The Blades are as touchy as priests about relics of Tiber Septim, it seems! 
It's not a bad place. Clearly the finest in New Sheoth. 
I see... Please, wait here one moment. I shall speak with the Count. 
Passwall has been destroyed. Can the rest of the Isles be far behind? 
The messenger's diary will make a nice companion to the Madstone in my collection. 
You thought the last Septim heir was safe from us? 
Like what?  Oh, like shouting obscenties at you, or wearing only fur for an entire year, or waiting outside your house every morning. 
Me? There's not much to say. 
I'm not sure. Only the Emperors truly understand the meaning behind the rituals of coronation. 
What a fool. I hope he's happy with himself. 
Normal weapons won't harm a vampire, they must be enchanted. Make sure you're equipped with such an item. 
Here you see the Blind Watcher's Eye. A most unusual specimen collected at great peril by... some intrepid adventurer! 
Parwen has really got a thing for goblins. I think she and Ah-Malz keep a running tally of who has killed more. 
You've piqued my curiousity about this puzzle. I will think on it myself and let you know if I have any ideas. 
Hurry! Pick that lock open. I can hear them in there! 
Bruma certainly was fortunate to have Martin and his champion on the battlefield that day. 
You should consult her; I'm sure she can give you more training. 
Daedra overran Kvatch last night! There were glowing portals outside the walls! Gates to Oblivion itself! 
Oreyn is pretty steamed up about Maglir. He can get expelled for that, can't he? 
The Gray Fox has led our guild for over 300 years now. He has always guaranteed protection to the poor of the waterfront. 
No? The Night Mother seems to think otherwise. Allow me to grant you a gift, in case you reconsider. It is a virgin blade, and thirsts for blood.   
They hate water. They hate the land, too. 
Oh, the big tough slayer has returned... tremble in fear! Ahahaha! 
If you wish to seek audience with her, please return at these times. You are also welcome to wait in the seating area near the entrance. Good day. 
I won't take no for an answer. I want you to keep it. 
Western Cyrodiil is called 'Colovia,' and includes the Gold Coast, West Weald, and Colovian Highlands regions. 
Hello there.  
You should talk to Horkvir. He knows what to do. Not their Horkvir... our Horkvir. I don't like the other one. Or any of them. 
I have a special contract that needs fulfillment. In truth, I don't wish to offer it to any other family member. I've come to rely on your abilities. 
All we can do is prepare for them to come out. Once they do, it'll be our best chance to get the drop on them. 
Excellent. It's a simple task, really - all you need to do is fetch a book for me. 
Know this. Every Dark Brother and Sister is a child of Sithis. He whom we call Sithis has many other names. Chaos. Doom. Discord. Sithis is the Void. 
Aren't you a cute little caterpillar! The Gatekeeper is dead. But he won't turn into a butterfly. No, he won't. Will he? 
His ring. Have you pried it from the coward's corpse? 
Mages Guild members have said that Kud-Ei is an excellent teacher, as well as a very loyal guildmember. 
Sure. Fine. I'm tired of sleeping outside. Tell him I'll sleep in his bed and he can sleep in mine. 
Where's Weebam-Na? 
It's a fine place, but I miss the personal attention I got at the smaller bookstores. 
Anyway, enough of my banter. So, will you please help me get back my Medallion? 
I hope you bring good news. 
You seem to have no trouble, though. Look at you, barely a scratch! You'd be the perfect person to protect me! 
You'll find it at an old ruin called Cloud Top. It's north of Chorrol, up in the mountains. I'm afraid I don't have an exact location. 
The lighthouse is mostly for show. You'd have to be an idiot to try to navigate here by night. 
Aureals! To me! 
It isn't widely known, but many brothers of the Order of Talos are also members of the Blades. 
I am truly indebted to you. If all goes well, I may call upon you for one last task. The danger will be great, but the reward will be greater. 
You must open these sealed orders immediately and follow their instructions to the letter. It would seem the Black Hand itself has a task for you. 
Ah, I'm sure you've come to pay homage to the greatest fighting force to grace the lands of Cyrodiil! 
Very well, Your Grace. Will there be anything else? 
What is it, boot? 
The guild frowns on freelance thieves. Are you willing to go to Leyawiin, find the ring, and get it back to Ahdarji? 
Yes, I think ... no.  Wait.  Never mind.  I must go now. 
It hardly seems appropriate for a priest of the Nine Divines, but they put up with it. 
It's a fairly typical Cheydinhal home. It's in decent shape, although largely unfurnished. 
Sometimes, a sharp blade is the best way to kill a Flesh Atronach. 
Go away, stranger. You frighten the animals, and make my work more difficult. 
The Dark Brotherhood must seek out an Imperial named Haderus. He has need of our services, and we are only too happy to oblige. 
I've told you the location of the gold. You did your part, so have at it. As far as the amulets are concerned... keep 'em. 
Shouldn't you be talking to anyone but me? 
I could spare a moment. What did you need? 
It is good to see you again, my friend. 
The Underking defeated and ensnared us in his evil enchantment, and bound us here to guard forever the defiled Shrine of Tiber Septim. 
Let's look around. 
The most important piece of armor. "Always keep your heart safe," Mama always said. 
Don't be concerned. I always return the worthy ones to life. Besides, Lord Sheogorath has sanctioned my studies and my methods.  
Payday! Let's roll! 
Better keep an eye on him. 
Affirmative. They will fall before my arrows. 
Are you deaf? Didn't I already tell you that she is in Bravil? 
Still no news out of Aleswell since everybody vanished. Strange business. 
Wonderful! Remember, I will be happy to give you the same price for any others that you find. 
Really? I would never have guessed. Still, I don't think you'll have any trouble with rats and goblins. 
By the gods! When will it stop? It could devour us whole! 
Will O' the Wisps? I've never heard of them killing a man! Please, find out what happened to our friends. We're counting on your help. 
Thank you for all your help. My rats appreciate it. 
So, the pirate has been eliminated. Excellent. No one will mourn his passing, and Sithis has been appeased.  
We can't open that gate from out here. The only mechanism for raising it is inside the gatehouse. 
I'm very good at sharpening blades, but I can do all sorts of repair work. 
Hail, friend! Good to see you again. So tell me, what brings you back to the Imperial City? 
The curse has been broken. Of course the thieves will only recognize you as their guildmaster when you wear the cowl. 
All right. It's up the stairs; the last door on your right. Sleep well. 
My master, Umbacano, lives in the Talos Plaza District of the Imperial City. He is known across Cyrodiil as a collector of Ayleid antiquities. 
Bring it to me once you have it. I'll even still give you the reward I promised, despite your incompetence. Now go! 
Hello there. I hear you've been looking for me. 
You wouldn't really know how long it's been, since you weren't here. If you'd been here, it would've been no time at all, so who's to say? 
I'll Kalicrak the Findoo. I will. You Terratet it! 
What are you looking at? Keep pouring drinks! 
I am Olava the Fair, Mara's Living Saint. It is my responsibility not to preach, but to live Mara's commands as an example to others. 
Nine of the morning watch, and all's well. Good morning to you, sir.  
Sure, I know about them. Look, you didn't hear it from me, but rumor is they're hiding out in Bloodmayne Cave. Four of them. Bad news. 
This rendered the Resonator inert and Xedilian completely useless. Luckily, you came along and placed Xedilian back into operation. 
But we have our ways of coping with the situation. 
Seeing you in this Sanctuary makes me wish I were back on the streets. 
Another Daedric Prince. Not a nice one. I don't think ANY of the other Princes like him, actually. I mean, Malacath is more popular at parties. 
I think he's around here somewhere. 
Will you let me clean and organize your house? 
Nels killed those people and pretty soon he'll come for the rest of it. Don't you worry, when I gather more evidence, I'll take that scum down! 
You seem quite intriguing. Please, share your thoughts. 
Keep looking boys. Armand Christophe has to be here somewhere. 
Have you returned with the ingredients you were sent to find? 
Have you heard about Kvatch? They say that daedra came from Oblivion and burned the whole city to the ground! 
We shall raise our goblets to the great Sheogorath, may he rule the Isles for another thousand years. 
It's been twenty years or more since the Count married Llathasa. She was a beautiful Elven bride. 
Perhaps you do understand. Perhaps I can help you. A little. 
The king of Nenalata was the "last" simply because all the other kings had been destroyed or driven out of Cyrodiil. 
A local woman, Ursanne Loche, has a missing husband. She might appreciate some help from someone like you. 
Leave me alone. I'm busy. 
I am proud of my family's tradition of service to Leyawiin and its people. We face many challenges, but Gods willing, we shall prevail. 
Just unlock the door. A couple of hours after you're gone, it will be quiet again and I can sneak out. 
I see you've made it even more painful. You do enjoy your work, don't you Herdir? 
How would you like to get my husband, Gogan, out of hot water? 
Thinking you know how to use a shield is one thing. Actually using one is quite another.  
Hit me once more, and I'll kill you! 
The Wellspring is a cynosure, a place where the Animus of lost Mazken can return to this realm from the Waters of Oblivion. 
I don't know what else to say. 
My heart is lighter thanks to your words. You've given me kinship, and that is worth more than a thousand swords. Until later, friend. 
Instead of drawing Traven out, I have received you instead. Perhaps I shall personally go and collect him when we are done here. 
You don't even have the money! Why are you wasting my time? Is this some sort of joke to you? 
I have food and drink for sale. I'm sure something will interest you. 
Well, I'm afraid all of this was my fault. They hijacked the Bloated Float because of me. Business has been waning of late, so I invented a story. 
Go down! 
Ohtesse works constantly. Don't you worry about her sometimes? 
If you find the painting, and bring the culprit to justice, you shall be justly rewarded. What say you? 
As you wish. That's a very fair price. I guarantee you won't find volume three of Mankar Camoran's Commentaries anywhere else, for any price. 
I assume you've dealt with Raelynn appropriately. 
Harrow awaits within. You should not linger here. 
I like the Flowing Bowl. Maenlorn and his brother are excellent hosts. 
I suspect this whole Greymarch fiasco is a cover-up for something more sinister. I can't prove it just yet, though. 
You know the drill. Stick close, and keep your eyes open. Let's move out! 
Oh, go away! Shoo, shoo! 
The people have a simple faith in the Nine, and the clerics do their part to heal and comfort them in adversity. 
The second chamber of Xedilian is the Chamber of Avarice. 
Yes, yes. I tend to ramble; you'll have to forgive me. If you have the Attenuator, then Sheogorath must have sent you. 
How may I assist you, my lord? 
Get out! Now! Or I call the guards! 
They come to this Arena to see you, so go out there and give the people what they want! 
The city's in flames, and we've got nothing but a bunch of greenhorns. I doubt the situation could be much worse. 
Where are our gods? The Enemy triumphs, and we die alone. 
Splendid... just splendid! 
If you need to get rid of something quickly, check out the Copious Coinpurse. 
Seek out Julienne Fanis at the Arcane University in the Imperial City. She oversees the Alchemy Headquaters there. 
I've never laid a hand on her. Either in anger or... I've never hurt her, okay? 
I haven't spent too much time there. I hear it's the place to go for enchanting supplies, though. 
How very arrogant of you. To think that I would aid you out of the kindness of my heart? 
So far Mankar Camoran's books are our best lead. You should keep working on getting copies of all four. 
How is it that the Daedra forthrightly proclaim themselves to man, while the gods cower behind statues and the faithless words of traitor-priests? 
I am here to serve you, Arch-Mage. 
Ah! Magnificent! This is my greatest prize yet! 
Well I'll be a spotted Snow Bear -- a customer! 
Have you found me ectoplasm? 
We plan to call it Cropsford. My daugher Callia, her husband Aloys, and I, came all the way from High Rock to start a new life here. 
Dunroot Burrow is your goal, my friend. And what a goal it is. 
Why are you here talking to me? I need you to go investigate the Forsaken Mine. And now! 
Have you seen the way that Voranil treats his servants? What a lout. 
Please leave. You shouldn't be here now. 
Your Speaker should look for this person in the Ogres Tooth Mountains, on the Redguard isle of Stros M'kai. 
Break before the March of Order! 
Please, sire. We can't stay here. We have to go. 
You've got yourself a deal, idiot. Now I can sell it for 5 times its worth. 
The Knights of the Thorn are a bunch of rabble who fancy themselves true knights. Farwil formed the group around two years ago. 
You'll be but another notch in my hammer! 
All right. But don't take too long. The other guests are already assembled, and they're waiting on you. 
Now, get out of here. I'm going to head back to Chorrol. When there's more to do, I'll let you know. 
It's good to know that valuable research is still going on, even though things seem to be a bit more tense lately. 
Return it to me immediately when you have it. Make no mention of it to Teekeeus or anyone else in your guild. I will make it well worth your effort. 
We have to get him to tell us about the gold. Use any trick you can. 
All things speak with the voice of life... even the bones of the earth. 
But, apotheosis is no simple matter and the creation of the staff is no simple task. I will require two sacred items in order to complete it. 
You've been warned. You are now under arrest. Please, come with me. 
Much blood has come and gone. Relan is sad. Relan was stuck in Fellmoor for all the war... no blood... no war... poor Relan. 
At least Anaxes isn't here to torment us anymore. 
I would be happy to take this statue off your hands right now. I assume that's why you came to see me? 
Work on him until he talks. Try not to kill him. 
They call me 'Hauls-Ropes-Faster'. I don't care. They can't pronounce my Black Marsh name, anyway. 
Heathen! 
The statue, as you know, is located in the city of Bravil. You may speak with the Night Mother once a week, and then pass that information on to me. 
That's great! 
Knowing how to use your armor can save your life. Perhaps I should talk to her. 
Yes, let's see what she thinks of your plan. 
We meet again. 
You can stay at the Choosy Beggar in Bliss, but I wouldn't. 
Arctus, High Priest of Dementia. I'm here to guide those that wish to serve themselves. What did you require? 
I have no reports of any such conspiracy at the present time, despite my Lady's repeated insistence that one exists. There is no danger. 
Ah, very good. Your predecessor left everything in place for the final sign. You'll want to head to the center of town. Good day. 
Mind your own business. 
So she's dead. What do you want from me? Flowers? A eulogy? I think not. 
What? You filthy little maggot! When I get out of here you're dead! You hear me? Dead! 
Rats in a Cream Sauce. Rat Flambe. Rat Necrom, with Bone Meal Gravy. Deep Fried Rat. Lemon Rat and Wild Rice. Rat Ragu, with Powdered Deer Penis! 
We've been waiting for you. 
You have been set on a path. Follow it. 
Rumor has it that Edla Dark-Heart left Skyrim with the law right behind her. 
Get that artifact back to Irlav at the Arcane University. He's in a better position to study it than I am. Or to assign someone else to do it... 
Please, I must speak. 
It seems you got carried away and killed someone. We do not condone murder in the Thieves Guild. 
Sorry, but as it stands now, the place is fairly bare. Enjoy! 
Right! You'll have to go upstairs to the second floor. Your room is the second door on the right before the staircase. Thank you for your patronage. 
Down with the Madgod! 
You're new here, so I'll try to be patient with you. 
I don't know any Dar-Ma.  If you're talking about that cursed Argonian swindler from Chorrol, I'd like to know where she is, too. 
Nahsi, your humble servant, and humble servant of the Nine. I offer training in the marital arts of Hand-to-Hand fighting. 
I'd like to read Scribonia's work. I just wish I had more time to do it. 
I'm disappointed. But you'll be back. 
Ooh! I found a dead Gnarl, don't get to count those every day. Here, take this. 
The Three Sisters Inn is a nice place, but that Shuravi sure is grumpy. I don't think she likes anyone. 
It's ashame that there will be no retribution for Bradon and Gelebourne's deaths, but such is the way of things. I know you did your best. 
The secret to sneaking is not to be seen. Empty rooms. Empty tombs! Sneak in the dark, though the blind man can see you. 
Thank you, thank you! You are too kind. I shall bring you names, I promise. 
Oh, look. You again. 
He's kind of like a guildmaster for the Thieves Guild. All I know is that the Doyen and other senior guild members do his bidding like trained dogs. 
Do you ever do any shopping at Northern Goods? 
Be careful, some say the gate leads to the realm of Oblivion itself! 
Fear the woody Gnarl, the tree that walks and creeps. If you strike them with a spell, the magic it will keep. 
Isn't that a hoot? I love it, myself. Best part of being a Daedric Prince, really. Go ahead, try it again. He loves it! 
Hieronymus Lex has vowed not to leave until the Gray Fox is in custody. The Fox is safe, but the Thieves Guild cannot do business like this. 
Please! Get on with it! 
No. You'd just spill on yourself anyway. Well, I have to go sweep my house. It's been over an hour. Goodbye. 
Ah, I do appreciate an assertive leader. I look forward to working with you on this assignment. Lead the way, Grand Inquisitor! 
Anyway, I digress. I'm sure you wish to hear of your reward. 
I'm going to make arrangements for removal of the bodies and then I'll probably stay on guard here for a bit. 
I've been trying to figure out who our host might be. With two people dead, it almost seems like he set this party up just to kill us all!  
Do we really have to go into that thing? 
We'd all best get back to our duties, eh, Captain? 
You've more than earned your reward. I believe a bit of a bonus is in order. Well done. 
If Volanaro and J'skar want to have their fun, fine. I'm not going to participate, and I'm not saying another word about it. Take it up with them. 
I won't fight you. 
Later. 
What? 
Malacath likes Orcs... when He likes anything. So you can approach the shrine. He won't hurt you. Really. Go ahead. 
Then go, Thadon. Have your Greenmote. Take a bath. But leave. Before I decorate my throne with your insides. 
Here is your reward and bonus. Both have been well earned. In addition, you have been advanced to the rank of Eliminator.  
Now, if you'll excuse me, I must attend to those pressing matters I spoke of earlier. Good day. 
Astia Inventius. Wife of the woodsman, Pinarus Inventius. Always out hunting. Anything to avoid doing a little work around the house. 
I can't prove it yet, but just you wait. You try to hurt that poor old woman and I'll cut you in two! 
The realm is dead! 
I've heard she's quite skilled in Destruction, and is a favorite of Kud-Ei's. 
Rumor has it that the Fighters Guild is losing members to the Blackwood Company. 
It is said that the tree feeds from waters of the Grove of Reflection. The grove can show men who they truly are.  
Late at night, while we were all asleep, a door to Oblivion opened. 
And now look at us. Living like slaves for that cursed Cindanwe! 
Order has been destroyed and we still stand! Joy and tidings to all! 
I didn't think Manheim allowed dogs in here. 
Right, then. We should probably get back to our duties, eh? 
Their advance can be slowed. By destroying the obelisks, the Knights lose their conduits into the Isles. 
Only mages who have gotten recommendations from all the local guild halls can enter the Arcane University. It's a good policy, I think. 
She gives good prices for your old equipment. 
The second item is the counterpart to the first: the blood of a Divine. This was a terrible puzzle to me.  
I can see the bones of a dead Gatekeeper in the courtyard of the Gardens. The door's locked, though. 
Let me know when you have the money and the tax records 
I'm surprised to see you all the way out here in the Imperial City. 
Again the Resonator draws men near. Screw 'em! I drink to their health. Healths. Whatever. 
If I still had it, I'd gladly give it back. You'll have to talk to Soris Arenim if you want it. 
Many of our citizens are... delicate. They can't cope with the prospect, and they defect to the forces of Jyggalag, becoming Priests of Order. 
That's why females command and males take orders. Come. Let us surrender to the madness of battle! 
I've told you, it'll kill you. While I don't care if it does, I don't think you want that. 
Alas, we are but 3 old men, not able to match the fighting prowess of the vampire. We lack the strength to defeat them in battle. 
You've convinced me. If I don't stand up to him, who will? I just hope I'm not committing suicide. 
I can't get over the dragon statue in the Temple ruins. Tell me again how you and Martin defeated Mehrunes Dagon! 
Thank Talos he lives! Martin Septim, you say ... We will restore him to the throne! It is the sworn duty of all Blades. 
Feeding time is over, vampire! Go back to the grave that spawned you! 
I once met Herdir after a misunderstanding about some candlesticks in Syl's great hall. He's not a bad fellow, actually.  
Hey! You don't see me stealing your things! 
Sorry, friend, no time to talk! My friend Saliith and I are training to be combatants in the Arena! It takes a lot of dedication to do what we do.  
The Torch once again casts its light on Crucible. 
Oh, and one more thing. Get into the habit of asking your fellow family members about any current contract. Their insight may prove invaluable. 
What? What is it? Very busy. Things to do. Or see. Or something. 
Neither one sounds like a picnic to me. 
Approach then, and bring Sanguine a gift. Some Cyrodilic Brandy is an appropriate gift for your host. 
As you wish. We shall attempt to hold this area until you return. 
And have a nice day! 
Count Indarys is waiting. 
You should talk to Martin. He'll want to see the Mysterium Xarxes right away. 
As you wish. I shall attempt to hold this area until you return. 
Your next opponent is the most savage, blood-crazed Orc I've ever seen, and believe me I've seen a lot of 'em! This will not be fun! 
The pleasure you get from this hasn't escaped me, Herdir. So this time, I'm going to deny you that pleasure. I'll tell you what you want to know. 
I suppose that's it, then. Odd that there weren't creatures around the body, though, and that it hadn't been eaten. 
If I may be so bold, Inquisitor, I believe this person has nothing to contribute to our investigation. Perhaps we should move on. 
Every little bit helps. 
Good. Just get rid of all those Manics in town, and we'll all be happier. Don't kill any Demented, though, or no reward for you. 
Return to me in three weeks, and I'll have a special painting for you. It is the least I can do for you. 
I enjoy a good bottle of wine, and Wilbur always has a nice selection. 
I knew I saw the glint of true Mania in your eyes, my child. Go now and let the holy Flame inspire the people of Bliss to new heights of madness. 
Since we rarely get three potential recuits at the same time, I'll give you one more shot. Amusei is a bungler and won't get this offer. 
Honored Listener! I offer myself as your humble servant and guide. Please, allow me to mentor you in your new role.  
You've done it! I can't even begin to thank you enough. 
It's you again! I'm so pleased to see you! Look at what you have! Is this new? Let me get a closer look! Exquisite! 
Can you believe that fool even bothered to collect this paltry sum? You can keep it. I merely wanted the Watch know they went too far. 
The Dragonfires of Akatosh remain lit until the death of the Emperor. His successor then lights them anew upon ascending to the throne. 
As the ice enveloped him, some of his tears were frozen as well. Some even say that the Divine, Mara, took pity on the poor knight. 
Ahdarji uses ring much more wisely. I use it to collect and sell information. That ring can be used to read private messages the Count writes. 
An Elytra! They're tricky. I'll make sure to magically bind this one to me. Let's go to the house to get your reward. 
Keep this fair! 
You should be on your way by now. 
It's her! Don't you see? She's the only one left! The only one left alive! We've got to get her before she can get us! Do you understand?   
Quit playing around. Hand it over! 
These are dark times, and people's minds are poisoned by rumors and superstition. 
Oh, you're still alive! I was worried! 
It's said the Stone was blessed by Alessia herself, and while it remains in our possession, no harm may come to our church. 
The vampire cannot exist in the daylight for long. As the sun's rays strike his flesh, it will burn as if on fire. 
Stand fast, this isn't going to be pleasant. 
He's just a name on a wanted poster. I don't trust you enough to say more than that. 
A mortal faces me? 
Why not spice things up a bit, give the people of Cyrodiil what they really want? We revise the rules of competiton, offer a new kind of match...  
That's amazing! 
Thadon gone.... I wonder if his quarters are still guarded. 
There's no point in talking about it. Action must be taken. You must... I need you to kill me. 
I have not eaten in decades! You will be my feast! Aggghhh! 
Ha! The great assassin needs help fulfilling a contract. You'll get no aid from me. 
Adrienne is in charge. You'll need to speak to her about it, if you can tear her away from her latest book. 
Baurus. Good to see you. 
But, if we can get you into shape, we might stand a chance. You'll lead My forces, inspire My people! Hopefully, everyone won't end up dead. 
My Lord! To what do I owe the honor? 
No one's more surprised than me that I'm sending an escaped prisoner off with the Amulet of Kings! 
My friend, in talking to you, it's become clear what must be done. I have no doubts in my mind that Nels is the killer. We must take him down! 
I hear Cutter collects the Madness Ore to turn into armor. 
If you want to help, you need to get Aldos to agree to become a witness. Nothing else can be done. 
And now you're here to kill me, right? Well, let's get this over with. 
Vampires are nasty creatures. They drink the blood of others to conceal their true nature. Such trickery makes them difficult to find. 
I know that you are on an important mission for the Blades. Please, if you need a horse, take mine from the Priory stables. 
This is the only book store in the city. There's also Renoit's Books in Chorrol, Mach-Na's in Cheydinhal, and Southern Books in Leyawiin. 
You're work never ceases to amaze me, noble Scholar. I... I can't tell you how much it means to me that you'd share your findings. 
Tidings, citizen. 
You're back! How nice for you. Does that mean you've made a decision? Or are you lost? Suicidal? Just let me know. 
Not a nice place to visit.  Those that remember still tell stories about the bad old days. 
They cleared out the Desolate Mine, and everybody got out alive. Pretty slick, eh? 
Okay, based on your abilities, here are your choices. Do you want to fight one Ogre, two Ogres, or two Ogres and a Land Dreugh?    
I'm here because I'm a loafer. And the city's an easy place for a loafer to get by. I do odd jobs, a little adventuring, build up a little pile.... 
Well, not all the time. I mean, she puts it in her jewelry box for baths and at night. No proper lady would wear her jewelry to bed. 
Thadon's in a much better mood lately. If he weren't so in love with the Felldew, I might invite him over to inspect my "wares" some time. 
The Paranoid Duchess is at it again, from what I hear. If you ask me, we could do for a little more law and order around here, too. 
Good luck, Sister! I hope you don't get killed! I mean, um... well, you know! 
Indeed? I am at your service. 
I fear we're in over our heads. 
Back again, friend?  
It is a very fashionable address, of course, but we live simply. 
I'm here for Jorundr's gold, and you're my only loose end. I'd been hoping to get someone in his cell and loosen his lips, and then you showed up. 
Could be the Blades. They've always feared me. 
Ever spent a night in the Tiber Septim? 
Liar! We never met yesterday! You're an intruder! 
At once, m'Lord. 
My own research into the Late Ayleid Period suggests that there was not a single Ayleid ruler, but many. 
Sire, we have to go now. 
You really shouldn't have done that. Enjoy the view. 
Well, you've talked to one side. Perhaps a visit to the Dark Seducers is in order? 
I hear we have another new recruit. Things are looking up. What's his name... Maglir? 
New adventurers? New slaves for Cindanwe, you mean. If you see them, tell them to steer clear of Fellmoor. 
Well, if you MUST have Heavy Armor, see Varnado. So heavy, so ugly... but it's your choice. 
What are you doing? We can't talk in front of him! 
I got nothing to say to you, stranger.  Outsiders have always tried to destroy us, but we've always survived. 
Please, by all means. 
Of course. I understand. Well then, I must be on my way. Perhaps someone else will come along who can assist me. 
As you wish. I'll stay here until you get back. 
I made quite a lot of gold from my last expedition. I bought this house, invested the rest, and now I'm just living the life of the city gentleman. 
I was praying for your swift return. 
It seems an errant fireball had exploded next to him, and he lost the use of both arms. He was a stubborn man who didn't want to give up his talent. 
What do you want? A job? If you want it from me, you'll have to join the Fighters Guild. Not that I'm sure you can cut it. 
Your Speaker should look for this person in the city of Falinesti, in the Wood Elven homeland of Valenwood. 
The Count's Arms is next to the north gate. 
I understand the Fighters Guild is looking for new members. Seems a bit odd, but that's what I hear. 
There he is! To arms! 
He is the head of our family. He works powerful magic, but his true gift is compromise. He is a wise, wise leader. 
Don't waste your flattery on me. 
Oh, my sons. My poor sons. Who will help them now? 
That means the killer has been inside with us all along. You and I aren't murderers, so that leaves one person! We must prepare to defend ourselves!  
Restless folks like you don't much like town life. Too slow and easy. For you, the life of the rover... gold and glory, blood and treasure. 
Have you spoken with him already? Please, say you have. 
Stop it? Oh, no. Can't do it. Believe me, I've tried. It never ends well. 
Um, no, I don't know the way to the Imperial City.  You'll have to ask someone else. 
You have helped ensure that this book will remain safe from those who would misuse it. You have the Guild's thanks. Now, if you'll excuse me... 
I heard you made contact with the gang. Beauties, aren't they? 
Kud-Ei seems upset about something lately. I'd stay away from the Mages Guild if I were you. 
You can't see me. You can't see me. Neither can He. No one can see me. 
You stay here, prisoner. Don't try to follow us. 
Then leave me alone until you do. 
Lord! How may I serve You? Do You require a sharp blade to bleed your enemies? 
But, sir! I want to help fight! 
I'm very happy to make your acquaintance. 
Blessings of the Nine. I'm Ohtesse the Healer. By the grace of Mara, I offer Advanced Training in the Restoration Arts. 
Grrrrr.... 
Have a look at my wares. I'm sure there's something to suit you. 
That mission was the start of it. That was when Vitellus was killed. We were contracted by a wizard, Argoth, to recover an artifact from Blackheart.  
Do you know anything about Edla Dark-Heart's past? 
Damn Watchmen! 
You have been unfaithful. His blades are dull and uninspired. Mine are sharp and exquisite. 
You have shown yourself worthy of the guild, and for that I thank you. You shall have the recommendation you need. 
So many greenskins here... they smell, do they not? Ahdarji won't drink the water, no. The Argonians SWIM in it. 
We all profit by your lawful pursuit of the unlawful, and we encourage you to attack, burn, loot, and destroy them wherever you can. 
If you need ingredients, it's a great place to shop. 
Where has Sheogorath gone? Does he not realize the danger Sheer-Meedish is in? 
Irlav Jarol is in charge of the project, and is apparently in need of some help. 
With such an Empire at his disposal, he conquered most of Tamriel, except Morrowind of course, and was crowned Emperor. 
The guild needs you more than ever. 
They worship me from the dark, basking in their misery and filth. Now, though, some would seek to bring light to their darkness. 
Don't bother me again. 
Sure, sounds good. See you around. 
It's a good place to stay. Hafid is quite a good proprietor. 
How will I ever finish the Encylopedia Sheothia with these constant interruptions!? 
As I said, I believe I have something that will interest you. More in your usual line of work. And, of course, your reward will be generous. 
Greetings, friend! 
Here they come again! 
Thank you. You are truly worthy of all the praise being given to you. I salute you. I'll keep the ring as a reminder of... hmmm... 
All right. You're not hopeless. You want training, I'll train you. 
I'm not normally a bitter person, but you are not welcome here. 
Myrmidon! Good to see you! 
The Mythic Dawn won't dare try anything now that the best soldiers in Cyrodiil are defending Bruma! 
Wish I could help you out, but the locals aren't talking. You might try asking around, butter them up a bit. Good luck. 
You can reassure Jauffre that I will not destroy the armor. All I need is a scraping of Talos's divine blood.  
You have again performed admirably. You have my thanks, and that of the Council as well. 
Roderick's fever is in check, unlike your tongue! How can you think such things, after all he has done for us? For you? Have a little faith. 
We watch and wait. 
You've got it. I'll have the Minotaur Lord brought out to the Arena. Now get up there and give the people what they paid for!  
It's good that Resonator of Judgment is working again, what with the Gatekeeper dead and everything. Did you hear that noise? 
Thadon is in high spirits now? I'm glad someone is. 
I've ridden horses with better sense than you. 
Good night. 
Talk to the mages here, and see what you can find out. If you can make J'skar re-appear, you'll have your recommendation. 
I'll admit, it's my doing. I couldn't leave well enough alone, and after you'd left to go after that ring, well... 
My Lord, it seems there has been some misunderstanding. 
A rather isolated village, south of Chorrol.  We do some business with the trader there.  Small volume, but she pays well. 
Don't you think Hafid Hollowleg does a good job at Jerall View? 
Oh, you again. What do you want? 
Dark-dark. We've been yinging a zeffle. 
I hope the investigation goes well. Return to me when you have found the culprit.  
It's a scandal that the Mages Guild has tolerated practice of the Black Arts among its members for so long. 
I knew you had a good eye for horses! Go out to the stables. Nardhil will have the Chestnut saddled and ready for you. 
One more match is all you need to advance again, up to Gladiator rank. Most combatants never make it that far. But you are the exception, aren't you? 
Dovesi's upset by the murder but she'll be okay. I get the sense she's seen worse things in her life. 
If you mean the priest, I don't think he made it out of the city. Very few of us did. 
What? I must warn you, no one leaves this place who does not bind himself to the service of Lord Dagon. 
Now please, make sure my gifts get to the children. I'm counting on you! 
I don't see how... mortal weapons may hurt him, but now that he is physically here in Tamriel, they have no power to actually destroy him. 
I don't mean to point out the obvious... but isn't that Jyggalag right over there? He doesn't look very pleased to find you here, does he? 
Now that you have faced the truth, the Tree has given its branches to you. 
Stay with it. 
As you wish. My preparations for the ritual will be different, depending on the artifact we use, so I'll need it as soon as possible. 
It's a shame Syl's gone. She didn't pay a lot of attention to what was going on. 
The Night Mo.... No! No! Guards! Guards! Help me! Somebody help! Assassin! 
Gotta run. 
Here. Volume 3 is yours. What you do with it is your business. 
With a possible attack looming, I must be free to make preparations. Good luck. 
So, you finally showed up. It's about time. People of my station are not accustomed to waiting. 
East of the city, at the head of the Red River, is a shrine to Vaermina. 
I see the flask is still empty. Nothing to do now but await my cold, lonely death. 
Your insight is impressive. While we draw their attention here, you should be able to slip inside Xeddefen. 
Also accept this gift of armor. It is the least I can do to show thanks for your help. 
You know what they say about the size of a man's forehead, right?  
Captain Burd in Bruma may also be able to help. I've asked the Countess to have the guard keep an eye out for strangers. 
You can speak to the Count near the throne weekdays between eight in the morning and four in the afternoon. 
How am I ever going to get scamp smell out of my fine linens? 
She and Thadon... they've been meeting in secret. They've been doing things together. Consorting. You understand me? 
You must enter the portal to Camoran's Paradise and reclaim the Amulet of Kings! 
The Gray Fox has always guaranteed protection to the poor of the waterfront. He doesn't want to let this injustice stand. It's a matter of principle. 
She's managed to butter up the right people just enough to keep her position, and there's little we can do about it. 
Mogens Wind-Shifter! He killed Ra'vindra, my best friend. So I swore a knight's oath of vengeance... and you've spoiled it! 
I'll tell you what. We have a cozy farmhouse not far from here where we could... well... get to know each other much, much better. 
Is this an attempt at humor? If so, I am not amused. Produce that book immediately. 
I do what I must do. I cannot stay to rebuild Tamriel. That task falls to others. 
Right, mister. We know who's been naughty and nice. And you've been naughty. So watch yourself. 
I hear there's a new Gatekeeper. What if They tamper with him, and send him after me? 
If Syl helps Order sever that link... my kind will be annihilated. The realm will be lost to us. We must get to the Wellspring and stop them! 
He knows a lot about running his store. Of course, he's not the easiest person to talk to. 
He's the best fighter you'll ever meet, and as soon as he gets here, we'll be off. Just wait; you'll see. 
The formula describes many magnitudes of the brew. If you're interested, I wrote a short missive about it for the Imperial Alchemy Symposium. 
This should be easy. 
You're familiar with it, aren't you? Often used in cooking. It should be quite easy to find. 
Tell me, how does this feel? 
I know this place ... the prison? 
I have a new task for you, and I assure you there are no Necromancers involved. 
I guess that leaves you, doesn't it? 
When you find enough evidence, confront the person whom you believe to be the villain, and see if they will confess. 
I understand her parents are against her competing. Quite a shame. 
The Chalice has altered the effects that Felldew has on you. You'll find that it now provides minor benefits, without any of the withdrawal. 
Goodbye. Hope to see you again very soon. 
Now to the meat of your endeavor. The crux of the situation. The reason for your being here, and the likely cause of your death. 
As his forces fought their way across the Jerall Mountains, the Akaviri suddenly surrendered. It was assumed they were overwhelmed and gave up. 
I would love to put you in some of my fine garments. 
Do you have the Amulet? 
Greetings, Bosmer. 
Send over a drink. And make it quick! 
Of course you will. Do whatever you must; I require that book as soon as possible. 
You must be the reinforcement from the guild. Good. I hope you brought weapons for us. 
Please, do what you can to protect Antus. He's just a kid. 
Very well. This might hurt a little. 
Have you looked around? Bravil is Tamriel's cloaca. Silverhome is the only decent place in town. Don't know why I stay here. 
Namira is pleased, foul one. May your days be filled with the hurtful stares of others. Dwell joyously in filth and squalor. 
They follow the teachings of Mankar Camoran, who calls for the return of the Mythic Age when Oblivion and the mortal world were not separate. 
The Howling Halls are home to Ciirta's "Apostles of the Light," or whatever it is that they're calling themselves these days. 
There are rats and goblins down there... but from what I've seen of you, I'm guessing you are an experienced Crusader. Am I right? 
Last but not least, he's officially joined the Society.  I am taken aback by his honest intentions. 
The Wellspring of the Aureal. It's what links us to this realm, where we return to the world from the Waters of Oblivion. 
Well, I'm not standin' for this any more. You come with me and I'll show you what the Othrans can do when their backs are to the wall. 
The Gatekeeper dead. Can the rest of us be far behind? 
I assume you're having fun? 
I can't explain it, but somehow I can't compel myself to actually let it go. This staff is obviously cursed! Now I'm stuck with it! 
This? Why, it is a gift from the swamps of Argonia. Sap of the Hist. A present from my homeland. The Hist are generous to us. So generous. 
Do you ever buy ingredients from The Main Ingredient? 
Yes, the gold that you value so highly. I wonder, what price betrayal ... never mind that. We shall see ... I do have one more name for you. 
They've reactivated an Obelisk! 
Some of the Leyawiin boys are cutting up pretty bad. Oreyn is not happy. 
Rats? They've got Fighters Guild people out killing rats? You're kidding, right? 
There was a particular ring of Burden I was testing some time ago. Another stupid Associate somehow got his hands on it, and managed to misplace it. 
Okay. Just being friendly... 
Yes, I've heard the Fighters Guild offers some wonderful opportunities. 
Any progress yet? You should be working on getting the book for me. 
Who're you...? 
Fine. You've got me. I figured if I left some rotten meat outside, the nasty little things would come out, and the guards would take care of them. 
Now that she's surrendered, please escort her to the last room on the inn deck. We'll lock her in there until we arrive at port. 
I thought I heard something the other night. It's none of my business, though. 
You know as much about Mysticism as I do. If you wish to learn more, Dagail can teach you. 
It may also be that they are magical, but only for certain individuals or under certain circumstances, or that their magics are secret. 
Unfortunately, the Torch has gone out. For eternity, this has heralded the start of the Greymarch. 
Don't take this sojourn lightly. The recesses of the mind can be the darkest place of all. 
 I will follow. 
The Elytra in Dunroot Burrow, the ones that secrete it are immune, but they're the only ones. 
I wouldn't say we're thieves. I mean, we've stolen things... sure. But we've never stolen that much at one time. Just enough to keep us going. 
The destruction was worse than I had feared. So many dead... it was almost better not knowing. Then at least I had hope. 
Excellent. Curiosity should never be denied, is it not so? And who knows, my story may prove profitable to both of us once it has come to its end. 
Make it quick. I've work to do. I need five pod pits. 
Join the Fighters Guild? Fight, and get paid for it. 
Marie Palielle seems very happy working at the chapel. She's always working, but she's always got a smile on her face. 
His new dog though, it can be mean. He's trained it to attack cats and anyone that tries to take its food. 
You are truly Demented, as I always suspected. Release yourself to your secret fears and desires. Let them rule you, as they must in the end! 
Run while you can, guild rat! 
We've arrived. 
Maybe I just don't like you very much. So I'm not going. 
Oh! Oh... No... Not here! Not in the hotel! My lady friend... Atraena. She'll get mad! Wait 'til I'm away from... here. Outside the hotel... Yeah... 
You're not very good at this are you? 
You'll find Baurus at Luther Broad's Boarding House in the Elven Gardens district of the Imperial City. 
[Snort!] 
Fear not, our paths may cross again. 
Tell the daen! Tell the daen! Karn sky is relfing. 
That's what the calipers and tongs are for. I need them to keep the water airborne. 
I'm shocked the Gatekeeper is dead. 
Your next opponent is a Khajiit. Not one of the quick, jumpy ones either. This cat goes in heavy, usually with an axe! Now go get 'em! 
Beware. The Redguard Valley Ogres are not known for their... hospitality. 
All he thinks about, all he cares about, is skooma! He was a fine young man once. But he's lost everything. His looks, his money... his self-respect. 
Since then, it has served the Blades as a headquarters, fortress, and sanctuary. We can protect Martin here until you recover the Amulet of Kings. 
I've grown quite fond of him and can't stand seeing him this way. 
These boots will keep your toes from getting smashed. 
Seems like a nice enough kid. A little too rich for his own good, maybe, but I've met worse. 
What would be the sport in me just telling you? I'm not that drunk yet! No, you must earn your pay. 
The Realm of Madness is mine! 
Follow Wide-Eye. I think she mentioned an errand she runs? That would be your best bet. 
What I mean to say is, before you arrived, we all just sort of glanced around a bit. Now that we're all officially here, we can look in earnest! 
I am Harrow, Warden of the Shrine of Dagon. 
Of course I know what's going on. What intrigues me is that you had the nerve to threaten me. I'm just curious to see what you've come up with. 
Such adventures! How I envy you! 
You've caught me a Baliwog! I can't wait to study it. Let's go inside and I'll pay you. 
Ranarr-Jo is dead. What am I to do now? 
I'm Sulinus Vassinus of the Mages Guild, and I'm so pleased to make your acquaintance. 
Have you brought me the Crown of the Ayleids? 
You look like one of the low lifes that infest this place. 
Summon the Brethren! 
Each tribe guards a head in its lair. Whose head, I don't know. A sacred tribal totem or something like that. 
Oh no. You don't want to do that. Don't believe their lies. They are no true friends. Don't you see it? How they whisper behind your back? 
Carahil supported Arch-Mage Traven's appointment from the beginning, and I don't believe the rumors that she just wanted his job at this hall. 
Hurry back. 
I'm sure Sheogorath's armies can handle it. 
That's exactly what they'd be expecting. They'll have replacements lined up, and then there could be even more of them surrounding me. 
I read the thing once in a while. Mostly, I use it for kindling. There's no telling whether anything in it is actually true. 
Certainly so. Captain Dione knows her business. And no enemy has ever made it over Skingrad's walls. 
The jail guards in the dungeon will unlock the cell block door if you ask them. Feed the prisoners once a day. I don't care when. 
I sure am glad that other Atrabhi is around! I sure don't want her dead! 
Power, my dear friend. I seek power, and so I acquire and study those who have some degree of it. 
Be careful, and watch your step. 
Well, well, if it isn't Skullcrusher! How's our new Grand Champion, huh? You ready to make me some money? Ha ha ha ha ha!  Ahem... 
Get on that boat and get out of here. Yer wastin' yer own time. 
I didn't know what to do. Turning on Syl could cost me my life, but if I don't help, what will Ma'zaddha do to me? You must do something! 
You bring the Fork! Happy day! The blind shall see! The lame shall walk! The short shall tall! Forks for all! 
It's a quaint little house conveniently located just off the main gate. 
I just feel safe living here in Chorrol. I mean, we have the head of the Fighters Guild right here in town! 
Once again, the Lady Syl strikes hard among her own. Her paranoia hasn't faded, in fact it's greatly grown. 
Now you make excuses? Pathetic. On what authority have you weaseled into my sanctum and disturbed my work, hmm? 
The Oak and Crosier and the Grey Mare are near the gate and fountain. 
Don't forget: be down here at 10 PM. I'll see you then. 
You're the Gray Fox! You're under arrest for... for... for all kinds of stuff! You're wanted dead or alive. I'm choosing dead. 
Ah, yes. The Fork of Horripilation. I have heard rumors about it. It appears that Lord Sheogorath has returned it to the Isles. 
Good work. I am glad to see you, by the way. You just caught me at a bad time. 
May the light and your mother's grace guide you to Xeddefen and the means to topple this menace. 
I have one last task for you. As a sign of good faith, the Thieves Guild needs to return Hrormir's Icestaff to the Arcane University. 
Yes, it must have been an amazing sight. I know I'm taking my faith more seriously than I used to. 
Without my amulet, my stone to lock the voices away, the words will never come and stay. 
Olav makes everyone feel welcome. 
By Sithis, I don't have all day! Hurry it up! 
No messy bodies left behind, no evidence. I was sloppy last time with Roland's lover, and I won't make the same mistake twice. 
Can't say I've spent much time there. I hear it's nice, though. 
Take care. 
There's no doubt she tipped 'em off. But I was one step ahead. I had moved the loot while she was away. Hahaha. My final revenge. Or was it? 
I heard you're working for those Manics. Leave me alone. I don't want trouble. 
I can't thank you enough for your kindness!  She was supposed to make a delivery to Etira Moslin in Hackdirt, so I would start there. 
Speak, Imperial dog. 
One of my favorite toys. Does wonders for creativity. Well, not by itself, but it helps. Those Elytra, clever little bugs that they are. 
I think you should leave. 
Hello there! You're a cute little thing, aren't you? A little baby bear. Did you get lost? 
Fall before me, Breton! 
He believes that by you ruling either Mania or Dementia, you'll be able to effectively inspire his people and lead His forces. I hope He's right. 
Oh, the poor little rats! 
Wait... you don't work here, do you? But you do work for me. At least, you're supposed to be working for me. Off you go, then. 
The pain redeems me! 
Now let me see what this Journal says! Hmm... Interesting... But... I... I... Wait... Can this be? But... By Shinji, I'm the son of a vampire! 
No sign of the Gray Fox, sir. 
Salomon Geonette. I'm a musician. I had a commission from the Emperor to compose a symphony... 
Very good! And so it begins, the Black Hand's journey into a darkness few can imagine. Let us be off! The Night Mother awaits! 
You brought a present. Good. That's smart. 
Get yourself to Vahtacen, and see if you can help Skaleel with whatever is holding up her progress. 
You're a pal. 
As the Grandmaster of the Blades, I would be honored to accept you into our order. Will you join us? 
Neville may not be in the Legion anymore, but who knows what atrocities he committed.   
Another day, another septim. 
You have been suspended from the guild for the death of a guild member. Are you willing to do what is necessary to make amends? 
Hey, baby? You fancy some training? Sherina's the name, and blades are the game. 
He's what??? That little lump of guar dung! You get back to Bravil and take care of that contract. I need to think about this. 
Ah! The Gray Fox will be very pleased. We will make sure this gets back to the people. 
What of your mission to Kvatch? 
Fellow magister, may I speak with you? 
I trust you've had time to get settled? The contract is available whenever you are. 
Greetings, brother Bosmer. 
Reliable as usual. Here's your gold. 
When the city is quiet, everybody is happy. Right? If you like noise, maybe you're in the wrong place. 
Now, if you'll excuse me, I must get back to things. Shoo! Scoot! 
Syl once again tortures her courtiers. Soon, we will all suffer. 
When we formed the Brigands three months ago, I was told no more than a four way split on all the profits! 
Sigh. How many times do I have to tell you? No proof, no accusation! 
Instead, I want you to put Hrormir's Icestaff into Ontus Vanin's safe chest. He keeps one in his home. Ontus is a former University researcher. 
Another Pelvis of Pelagius? I don't think that's possible, honestly. It must be a fake. 
What? Not only does it exist, but she knows where it is? Well, this is unacceptable. That book needs to be in the safe-keeping of the Guild. 
Sound crazy? Well these are crazy times, my friend. 
Well look at this, I found the easy road. How are things going over there? 
I'd investigate it further, but I'm needed here with the Council. Raminus says you've got a good head on your shoulders. 
Is it safe to continue? 
They took myself and Ormil, the Float's owner, hostage and put the ship to sea. I have no idea what they're after. 
The Gray Fox has a task for you. Meet him at Helvius Cecia's house in Bruma. 
Did you hear that Necromancers attacked the grove at Wellspring Cave? 
It hasn't worked very well so far, but I have no doubt that you will persevere, Inquisitor. 
Seek her out at the Temple of the One in the Imperial City. 
It was Ma'zaddha. He said he was working on behalf of someone else. He told me I needed to help him, or there would be repercussions. 
I'd love to bring him to task in front of Count Indarys, but I dare not without a solid witness that will speak against him. 
This is indeed a dark day for all of us left. But I thank you for risking your own life to help us. 
Decided to mend your ways? It's the dungeon for you, then, since you lack the gold for reparations. Your stolen goods are forfeit, of course. 
Go to it. 
Where is the Count's ring? Do you have it? 
But stay away from Ysabel, the Battle Matron. She doesn't deal with combatants, unless they want to challenge the Grand Champion. 
Amantius Allectus was killed during a burglary. They say the house was ransacked. 
The Dark Brotherhood must seek out an Imperial named Camilla. She has need of our services, and we are only too happy to oblige. 
In the meantime, you should speak to Jauffre. He was concerned about reports of spies in Bruma. 
The court of Dementia is in disarray once more. Good that Thadon is such a better ruler than Syl. 
Through the gate, my Wood Elf waits! Hurry, and do not disappoint me. 
With the Gatekeeper dead, there's one less line of defense against these damnable Scalons. 
Can't say I like tomatoes. I'm sure Undena's are good, though. 
Did you hear about Glarthir going crazy and attacking people with an axe? 
The Count's been asking questions about some Orc named Mazoga at the castle... she claims she's a knight. 
I hope I'm not dreaming. 
Heh, heh. 
How nice to see you again. 
The Arena is the bloody jewel of the Imperial City. It's where all the best fighters from all over the Empire come to test their skills. 
I have potions, and everything you need to make your own. What will it be? 
Would you believe Owyn once asked for my hand in marriage? It's true! Poor bastard was heart-broken when I turned him down. I'm old, not desperate. 
What is it? Shouldn't you be taking care of Maglir's contract? 
Shh! There's someone here! Wait until they leave! 
Don't get any ideas about wandering off alone. I'm keeping my eye on everyone, including you. 
The boots of Springheel Jak will allow you to leap to an unreachable place. They will also protect you from a long fall. 
Just outside the Imperial Prison is a grating that leads to the sewers. It has recently been tightly locked, but I will provide a key.           
Syl or Thadon? Which will it be? 
The appearance of the Knights of Order heralds the beginning of the Greymarch. As Lord Sheogorath feared, our time grows ever shorter. 
Mogens and his dogs must die! 
What is it? You try my patience! 
What can I do for you, ma'am? 
Just before I arrived here, I received a report from one of our scouts watching the roads. 
Over the uncounted years of our slavery here, we have brooded over our defeat. I believe that we can undo the Underking's evil magic. 
Bugak gro-Bol has some good books at Southern Books. He's an odd one, though. Always seems ready for a fight. 
Welcome, brother. You are one of the Chosen now. 
He's a Nord. Mead-swilling barbarians, all of them. 
The others are dust! You alone, Dark Elf, remain, First and Last! Go now! Beyond the next gate, your portal waits. 
What news do you bring me from Exhausted Mine?  
Have you seen the selection at Stonewall Shields? 
Read it, and gain knowledge of yourself. Go now. Learn, and remember. 
Have you reconsidered? I'd still be willing to do that job for you, if you want. It'd only cost you 300 gold. 
It's magical - we know that much. Enchanted somehow. We think it's a lock of some sort, but haven't been able to figure out how it works. 
Thank you for your business. 
Four people failed in their duties that day, allowing the Fanatics to open the main gate. In the end, I failed with them. 
Not yet. Until we light the Dragonfires, the Gates are open, and Mehrunes Dagon's invasion continues. 
You're smarter than you look. 
Don't you see? Our Dread Father foresaw your defeat of the traitor, here in this very crypt! You have been chosen! You are to be my new Listener! 
It is my honor to serve you. 
I wondered how long it would take before you needed my help. And here I am, at your service. 
Mina? You don't want to go asking about her. She... um... interviews prisoners. She isn't one to be crossed. 
Good people of the Imperial City, welcome to the Arena! 
The Saints stand strong, Your Grace. 
You want to speak to me? 
What may I do for you, Arch-Mage? 
Five of the afternoon watch, and all's well. No problems, sir.  
What news about Earana? 
I knew they would make contact with you. Be careful, there's no telling what they're up to. 
The others are dust! You alone, Orc, remain, First and Last! Go now! Beyond the next gate, your portal waits. 
Your Speaker should look for this person in the Halls of Collosus, in the Khajiit homeland of Elsweyr. 
If you wish to find out more about Roland, try asking Gilen or Grey-Throat, they knew him. 
Behold the new hero of the people of Cyrodiil! Behold, your Arena Grand Champion, Lady Luck! 
Yes. I've seen them before. Don't really know anything about them, as I don't specialize in plant samples. However, I know someone who does. 
So you're supposed to go out and rescue Erthor, eh?  I'd love to help out. I just don't quite feel comfortable doing that, though. 
Stay for a while. And stay away from my wife. 
The Daedric Prince of Order, and the leader of the Greymarch. As I'm sure my Lord told you, Jyggalag has always been a threat to this Realm. 
Nothing to worry about, I guess. Just my eyes playing tricks on me. 
Maybe the ruler of Dementia will fix all these walls that threaten to fall on top of us all the time. 
Anything else I can help with, you just let me know. 
The only chance is for a total stranger to enter his dreams. 
The four of you here will go. I believe it should suffice, given our record of success. Take this. It will help you in battle. 
They want an Emperor to tell them what to do. And I haven't the faintest idea... 
She can likely be found in the Archives now, poring through materials on Necromancy. She stops only to sleep, at the Arch-Mage's request. 
Maybe the Mythic Dawn, or the Ayleid Revivalists? 
You'll find smiths, alchemists, booksellers, mage shops, clothiers, armorers, and general traders in the Market District. 
Did you hear? Hieronymus Lex was reassigned to Anvil. 
Anything for my savior. 
Oh my goodness! You found them! Ohhhh! I could kiss you! 
Damn. I was afraid this might happen. Poor Dunmer. Please, go tell Llevana the sad news. I must ponder the situation. 
Use your time well, to consider my Lord Sheogorath's merciful justice. 
my current disp is between 30 and 70.  
The Night Mother must be awakened, so that we may seek her guidance. Are you ready to travel now to her resting place? 
Oh! Sorry! Please, I'm sorry! See, when Hides-His-Heart gets here, I'll put on a little act. Then you cut me with the knife, and it looks like I die! 
Be vigilant. Lonavo is a snake. 
How about mixing up some potions? You look like quite the alchemist. 
Do you ever spend time in the Oak and Crosier? 
You have your task. Perform it as well as you would any other. 
I understand Marz wants to return to Black Marsh. She only stays because she feels needed here. 
It was an honor to serve with you, ma'am. Now that I've seen how it's done, I think my guardsmen and I can handle any new Gates that open near Bruma. 
No choice is without consequence. Each of the pieces is woven with magic, and will become a part of the new Gatekeeper. 
I am Kishashi, great hero of the northlands. I once single handedly held off an entire horde of Grummites.  
I've heard there's someone in Highcross trying to catalogue every living thing in the Isles. 
I don't know what to say! You're such a dear! I'm going to put this dagger right back where it belongs. 
Come back in a few weeks. You may be surprised at what we can accomplish. 
Lorkmir ain't... he ain't around no more. He he he... I use his house. Here's a key! For... for you! You come whenever you... you want! Okay then... 
If he still no go, make Uungor crispy with fire spell. Then glaze. Then eat him like a giant sweetroll. Saa-WEET-ROOOOOLL! 
Thanks. I'm not trying to shirk my duty, but it used to be two or three men would be on this. I like the Guild, but I've got a family to consider. 
I've been trying to finish "Brief History of the Empire." It's a lot to take in. 
Oh, very well. If you change your mind, let me know. It could prove quite lucrative for both of us. 
I don't want to learn how to conjure things. I want to learn how to get rid of things. 
You will get what you desire. But first, meditate upon all that has transpired. Perhaps you covet treasure? Take all my crypt has to offer! 
The Gatekeeper's dead. I hope I get to help rebuild a new one. 
Selling all sorts of merchandise, he undercuts prices like you wouldn't believe. He doesn't always sell what we sell, but it is still a problem. 
I'm sure the lure of my reward will have you back sooner than you think. 
All right, I'll teach you what I know about Athletics. Maybe we can swap stories about life on the road. 
If only my other children had offered such reverence. You see, I have known of Mathieu Bellamont's intentions since he was just a boy.           
I don't know where she keeps the ring, but I know who does. Talk to Hlidara Mothril, the Countess' handmaiden. 
Did you find the Count's ring, by any chance? 
Must be nice to be Duke of Mania, and have your biggest problem surround some missing cup. 
I'm sure you'll put that to good use. 
I've been pleading for troops for Cyrodiil for weeks, but the generals assure me that the entire Imperial Army is already fully committed. 
Master Thadon has his Chalice again. Happy days for us all. 
So, the cat's-paw of the Septims arrives at last. 
Go ahead. 
Been better. How about you? 
Find me one of these matrices and enough Amber, and I will craft you a magical item.  
What is the meaning of this interruption? 
Greetings, Imperial. 
How many times have I told you to leave me alone? 
We should just kill this stupid tree and move on. 
I'm here in the city for access to the Temple libraries, and for the bookstores... especially the First Edition in the Market District. 
Bring me a champion! Rend the flesh of my foes! A mortal champion to wade through the entrails of my enemies! 
I know what you need. You need a dog. I happen to have one of my old ones still lying around. I'll send it to you. 
You'll have to tell father what you've done. 
It's all about who you know. My sources are good, but they are secret. 
So, are you ready to mingle with the doomed house guests? The contract is waiting. 
We'll hold them off as long as we can. Return quickly. 
Have you heard? Someone's been murdered! One of us! 
Researching the Elixir has been exhausting, but well worth the time. 
If you need something, better talk to me. 
How is Dagail today? Is she well? 
I did, and she did not return. I can only assume that she was caught and killed. 
Be that as it may. She has come into possession of an ancient relic known as the Crown of the Ayleids. Your job is to acquire it for me. 
The Blackwood Company people are more hard-core than the fighters from the Guild. 
Where is Martin? I was told that he had arrived in the capital. 
That works for me. 
The King of Worms has obviously targeted the guild, but we have no idea why. No demands have been made. 
This will help to erase the stain on the Thieves Guild. Here is the reward the Gray Fox promised you for fetching those boots. 
Milchar. Home to the Tree of Shades -- one of my favorite features of this Realm. 
Behold the new hero of the people of Cyrodiil! Behold, your Arena Grand Champion, the Butcher! 
So I blow things up. And burn them. And frost them. And shock the living daylights out of them. 
Five of the afternoon watch, and all's well. No problems, ma'am.  
Sickly Bernice, proprietor. Talk to me while you can. I don't think I've got too long. 
There is much work to be done. When you are back in the Sanctuary, speak with Arquen. She will serve as your humble servant and guide.   
Welcome, Khajiit, to the Tournament of Ten Bloods. To your right, through each of nine gates, another Chosen awaits you. 
So, you remember S'razirr after all. This one was as good as his word. Are you? 
We stole the stones from Cyrodiil and reassembled the temple here in the Shivering Isles. 
I feel I owe you something for your efforts. Hmmm, yes. I feel it only appropriate that you have my dowry. I would consider it an honor. 
Additionally, our forces are dangerously thin. We have no idea what opposition may await us inside. A frontal assault is not an option. 
Gilen and his silly games... 
Well, what have you found? Did you take care of my babies? What was going on down there? 
I believe the Count may want to handle this matter personally. 
An impressive feat of arms, closing that Oblivion Gate outside Leyawiin. What can I do for you? 
The great guardian is dead and gone, his spirit passed away. I wonder if the stranger and I shall cross paths soon some day. 
Blah, blah, blah. What a bore. 
It's not wise to interrupt us in the middle of our discussion. 
Right-Wind certainly can handle a blade. No wonder he trains other Fighters Guild members. 
It's as if we were invited for another reason altogether. Think about it. We're trapped in this house, with no way out. And now people start dying. 
We Dalvilus are good neighbors to the Ulfgars, and our leaders, Hrol Ulfgar and Nivan Dalvilu, work hard to keep it that way. 
You're a big, fat liar. 
Gilgondorin. Silverhome-on-the-Water has beds and food. What's your pleasure? 
Won't you help me... please? 
Did you wreck Cindanwe's place yet? You know, move her stuff around. She hates when things aren't in their place. 
Isn't there something you should be doing right now? You know, for example, the things you were specifically told to do? 
So wonderful to see you again. I don't know what I would have done without your help. 
Should he accept the position, you would be well-served. Rely on his wisdom and experience more than I did, my friend. Good luck. 
What do you wish to know about it? 
Don't try to cheat me you misbegotten whelp! 
There isn't much else I can do to equip you for this journey. Only to wish you luck. 
Excellent. 
Enough! I go to Jyggalag. I give myself to him, as a Priest of Order! This isn't done, Madgod. I think it's just started. 
For the glory of Sithis! 
I don't know this Springheel you are asking about. However, the entrance to the family crypt is in the cellar. Take what you want, just spare me! 
Now that you're here, that changes things. 
Absolutely not. 
What time is it when a Minotaur sits on your fence? Time to get a new fence! Ahaha! 
Really? How thoughtful. 
Combined with the Eye of Ciirta, the shell of the Staff can be remade. 
If you get this, my disp to you should be 70 or higher. use Angry and Happy to raise and lower my disp. 
I hope you've enjoyed the tour! Feel free to stay and browse for as long as you like. 
No. I can't do this. There has to be a way out. A way to escape. 
I expect this will end in disaster, but nonetheless, I will grant your request. 
I hear that the Nords of Skyrim have been warring with the Redoran of Morrowind. 
Very well, Your Grace. I hope for all of our sakes that your experience is greater than my own. 
Just speak to Tolgan... you'll see. 
To represent that night, when the ruler of Mania is to be replaced, he partakes of the Greenmote and allows his lifeblood to flow upon the Altar. 
The Greymarch is coming. And you're going to stop it. 
Have you heard? Someone desecrated the tomb of Llathasa. No wonder her ghost haunts that place. 
In Crucible, a man named Hirrus Clutumnus has been trying to convince people to kill him. 
Somewhere else meaning somewhere far away. 
Of course, kynreeve. 
I want you to go back there. Make sure the Company hasn't ousted the residents. Lay low. I don't want them finding you there. 
I wouldn't cross him. I've heard he's very skilled. 
I'm sorry child, it's just too much for me. I must leave now! 
Each person's pain threshold is different, isn't it? 
When you're ready to do this, I'll give you the amulet. Only I know the secret way it can be removed from his neck. 
And let's just keep this little deal between us, shall we? 
What can I do for you, stranger? 
Well, it sounds fishy, but I suppose I can trust you. I'm sure I'll regret this later, but... yeah.  
I bear responsibility for much of the evil that was done in Mankar Camoran's name. I would undo it if I could. 
Greetings, Khajiit. 
My friend, it is with great honor that I advance you to the rank of Champion! You've done it! You've shown them all you're the best!   
When Gogan was, uh... with the women, they took something quite valuable from him. No... it's not what you're thinking. 
I must say, this is quite a surprise! I certainly didn't expect to see you down here, Nelrene. 
Sounds like they were in it with Blackheart. As folks learn more about the Blackwood Company's methods, they aren't so eager to hire them. 
Do you think the attack will come soon, ma'am? 
We just need to keep our heads down and try to do our jobs. Oreyn's doing what he can from the outside. 
The Skingrad city watch informed us that Gelebourne was killed by Raynil not too long ago. Gelebourne was a vampire as well, obviously. 
Arch-Mage Traven is the first to take such a hard stance on Necromancy. It upset more than a few people. 
Ah. It seems you have stumbled over a bit of history that few in the Thieves Guild ever discover. I am not the first Gray Fox. 
I've eaten many meals there, and I've always been satisfied. 
Look what has been done to Passwall. This is what Order brings. I gladly bend my knee to Sheogorath. 
Ancestor, guide my hands! 
Let's get this over with! 
How dare you address me that way, soldier! Your insolence will not be tolerated! 
Dead? Damn! What got him? 
During this, the exiting regent imbibes three doses of the potent drug. This causes his heart to burst... and his lifeblood flows from his body. 
This is a lovely little Oddity -- a two-headed Septim! Take your time, there's no rush. 
You have helped me by closing the Oblivion Gate near Skingrad. I will likewise help you by sending aid to Bruma. 
Soon, Jyggalag will come to this Realm, bringing destruction in his wake. With the Throne of Madness empty, the Realm is doomed. Lovely. 
... But it just so happens I've run into some Sanguine worshippers up in the Imperial Reserve, a long way north-north-west of Skingrad. 
I don't know why adventurers feel the need to disturb our home. 
It comes near. What does it want? 
Renald Viernis. I'm the Practice Room Proctor. No horseplay or foolishness. This is for serious exercises. 
Yes, the vampire hunter. As far as I know, he just showed up recently here in Bruma. Not only that, but he already found a vampire among us. 
The Mephala shrine is northeast of the junction of the Red Ring Road and the Silver Road. 
She has taken up control of what little force we have left. She waits for you outside Brellach. Please hurry. There's not much time. 
I'm Carmen Litte. Perhaps you know my husband? Alberic Litte, the Mages Guild sorcerer? What can I do for you? 
...and he says, "Eat the Greenmote, drag Thadon. Eat the Greenmote, drag Thadon." Ha! 
And if you're one of those idiots who thinks they have something to prove in the Arena, go over and talk to Owyn.  
You know what they say about the size of a man's hands.... 
If that's the case then the killer got what he was after, and the rest of us needn't worry about our own safety.   
I love this one. It's a Screaming Maw that can't scream! Isn't that just the Oddest thing you've ever seen? 
I'm sorry, but I'm late for an appointment. I've no time to talk now. 
Get back there at once! We need to know if anyone survived! 
Hold. Who goes? 
Goodbye. And thank you. 
We're too late... Mehrunes Dagon is here! 
Oh, you poor dear. 
Hello. I'm Roxanne Brigette. I help the boys. They get a little squirrelly sometimes, find it hard to cope. So I help out. 
If possible, do away with Faelian someplace out of the way. Definitely indoors, with no other people around. A secure location, with no witnesses. 
The Gray Fox sounds like a dangerous thief. 
My Eye is returned, and I once again see into the darkness that is your world. 
Don't just stand there -- get rid of those ogres! Stab them! Burn them! Tear their throats out! 
As you wish. I'm sure you'll have no problem finding it on your own. 
Afternoon, ma'am. 
All right, then. You're all set. Remember, first door on your left. 
Henantier once told me that if he's killed in his dreams, anyone that's in there with him will die as well. So, do be careful. 
Blessings upon you Lord.... Bring the Skooma next time. 
We, of course, have no use for the specialized skills of assassination. It is my task, instead, to train our agents in various aspects of stealth. 
I don't know how much Skaleel told you. We know that it reacts to magic, but every time we've tried, the thing shocks whomever cast the spell. 
Please let us know when it is safe to travel there. We're anxious to return. 
Speak with Arielle Jurard when you arrive. She will be, let's say, "assisting" you with your task. 
Yer next! 
This is no time to talk! Keep your guard up, and watch your back! We've got to kill all of them! 
He pays his debts, but his love of dogs is just odd. I've heard he leaves meat in his backyard to attract them. 
An honor as always, Your Grace. 
Welcome to Chorrol Castle. I am Chanel, the court mage. What brings you to me today? 
You must go to Kvatch and find him at once. If the enemy is aware of his existence, as seems likely, he is in terrible danger. 
Who is this Savilla? A former lover perhaps? I don't know anyone by that name. 
No luck, huh? Well, I have to get back to my research.  
You need his blood, so take it!  
I can't thank you enough for helping to reunite me with Reynald. I never would have guessed he was still alive. 
You'll find him at the barricade at the top of the road. He's still trying to hold what's left of the Guard together. 
They weren't always a threat. Small scale mercenary band, until Ri'Zakar took over. Then came the fat Imperial contracts. 
She won't figure this out for weeks! 
You have earned the highest rank possible in the Order of the Dragon, the illustrious order of Imperial knights founded by Tiber Septim himself. 
Never mind, then. 
This is impossible! 
Then I am at your service. The Grakedrig Ulfri commands here. You will wish to speak to her at once, no doubt. 
I'm ready for them! 
So the Great Torch has been lit again. If it doesn't kill Scalons, it doesn't mean much to me. 
You can never know too much about how to handle a sword. 
Honor the guild, friend. 
I enjoy being in the Fighters Guild, though there haven't been quite as many contracts lately. 
Very well. Come see me when you're ready, and we'll get started. 
Last night, as dusk fell, the spire at the center of town became active. Soon after, the area around it began to crystallize and change. 
I really must thank you. Chapters 23 and 48 of my taxonomy are now complete thanks to your effort. Please, take this as a token of my gratitude. 
Contrary to your goals, you remain here with me. If you seek the recreation of the staff, then you must bring the eye and the branch. 
No real question what Urbul is going for there. He's got weapons. Big weapons. 
Greetings, blood of Orsinium. 
Please, return quickly. 
I still say steer clear of that door. Nothing good to be found on the other side of it. Of that, I'm certain. 
That name sounds familiar. Something to do with the Arcane University. Most wizards live somewhere in the Imperial City. 
Victory over Order! That calls for a grand celebration. Break out the casks of Skooma! 
The question is, who gains from the Torch being relit? And who loses? That's what you should be asking yourself. 
Did you get Cindanwe's notebook? The one with all our secrets in it? 
Please, hurry. The Battlemages will arrive there soon, if they have not already, and time is of the essence.  
Unlike typical invaders, the Knights do not arrive by conventional means. Instead, they enter the Shivering Isles through conduits into this Realm. 
What? Look, pal, no talkie right now, okay? I'm here to watch people get mutilated, not blab like an old woman. 
Can't be too careful. Please, friend. I'm begging you. Help me out. 
I keep to myself around here. If you want to join the guild, go find Teekeeus. He's in charge of that sort of stuff here in Chorrol. 
I'd love a hammer. Too bad you don't have one! Come back when you have a weapon for me! 
You. I hoped Sithis would have claimed you by now. 
That's really funny. 
I heard the same thing. I'm not sure I believe it though. I mean, who would be crazy enough to help the daedra invade Tamriel? 
Was that supposed to be a compliment? 
My dearest, how are you feeling tonight, child? 
Once more the Isles are protected by the will of Arden-Sul. 
I have said all that there is to say. If you wish to continue, you must proceed to the palace. 
Can you believe that a thief broke into the Imperial Palace itself! 
Pleasure doing business with you. 
Foolish little girl. Lucien Lachance served Sithis til his dying breath. The Black Hand remains tainted by betrayal. Restoration is impossible. 
So, Claudette sent you, eh? Well then, she usually sizes up people well, so you may be just what we're looking for. 
We can do them any time of the day. You kidding? The citizens of the Imperial City would love some late-night entertainment! 
Oh, hello there. Were you standing there for very long? I didn't notice you. 
Capital! I hearby reinstate you into the Thieves Guild. 
Happy times and happy days, my lady! 
Allow me to introduce myself. My name is Jollring. I come on behalf of my master, Umbacano. 
It's gone... all of it, gone! Have you seen any of it? Any of my things? The others... they think I'm stealing, but I just want my things back. 
I swear, I know nothing about a conspiracy! 
I've heard. But he's not afraid of Khajiit. 
The Count? Then I can talk to you. I'm Mazoga. 
Are you ready to take us there now? 
Could you please get some more aquanostrum from Knotty Bramble for me? 
It's of no consequence. I'll just have to remember to remove it every night. It's your job to make sure my jewelry box is locked each night. 
In the meantime, the other party in that conversation may be of use to you as well. 
Are you not feeling well? 
We must allow the Mythic Dawn to proceed with their plan to open three lesser Gates outside Bruma. 
Some of the new ones say that the war is going badly. The attack on Bruma failed completely. 
What do you call a Golden Saint who has his fingers stuck in his ears? Anything you like, he can't hear you. Ahahaha! 
The guards have to clear the ruins first. That won't be easy. 
I've heard that she's always wanted to compete, but her parents are against it. 
The best thing to do is avoid the vile things. 
I hope you have a plan to get us out of here. 
My trusted servants have cared for her all this time, but I wish for her to at last find peace. The cure is for her. 
Even in its ruined state, it is magnificent, isn't it? In the days of its power, Nenalata must have been glorious indeed. 
Please! You'll make me blush! 
No doubt about it, the man loves cheese. And sheep. Just cheese and sheep. 
Bow before the power of Order! 
On your belly, nikyn! 
I was given "The Legendary Scourge." I don't know what to think about it yet. 
The last item for the ritual still eludes me, I'm afraid. The Mysterium Xarxes gives up its secrets reluctantly. 
I don't know if she has it in for me or not. I think she is in constant fear of being replaced. 
Now you will know pain! 
Look, I like you, but not enough to tell you that. 
These will hold an honored place in my collection! I don't know what else to say but thank you. 
Henantier constructed a magical device he called the Dreamworld Amulet. With this device, one can enter his own mind and experience dreams. 
I cannot say, as I do not know. Only Kithlan has access to certain areas of the palace aside from Lady Syl. Perhaps it was him. 
I don't understand... the world was supposed to end.... Order was supposed to destroy everything. It has always happened that way. 
That's a good deal. 
Do I have to tell you everything? 
Can't talk now. That door has been making noises again. No telling what's coming out. 
2, 3... Good that there are no more doubles. 4, 5.... 
I honestly don't know how to repay you. I'm not a wealthy man by any means, but perhaps I could assist you in other ways. 
Ra'jhan has a fine house in Elven Gardens. Yes? It costs Ra'jhan many golds. But it is very fine, yes? 
You again. Have you reconsidered? The offer still stands. Say the word, and I'll tell you all about it. 
Ah, yes! Now I remember! 
Back in the Merethic, he charted the sea lanes and explored the River Niben. Torval sailed all the way from Topal Bay up the Niben Valley. 
No talk, no talk! Only train! Branwen and Saliith, we become combatants in Arena! We fight, we be champions, we be famous! 
Damn! I've lost them! 
They say Thadon is addicted to some drug. I can understand what that's like. The bones call to me like his drug calls to him. 
Words are... difficult. They come and go. The voices, though. So loud they are, they drown out the words. 
Hail! What can Newheim the Portly do for you? 
Don't really know him. He lives across the way from Seridur I think. 
Dar Jee lives in Leyawiin. He doesn't have much money, but he's got more than Ongar. 
Goodbye. 
What fools we are! 
No. The entire town... I realize you must be disgusted with yourself. I'm sorry for that. It was the Hist Sap, though, not you.  
Will you help us retake the Altar of Despair, and drive the Mazken out of Cylarne once and for all? 
We're all talking about the emperor's murder. We have no emperor. And no heir. That's never happened before. I suppose we should all be worried. 
Go on and lau... Wait. Help? Oh. Well, then... I'm a fisherman. Or at least, I was. Until one of those slaughterfish damn near took my leg off. 
That newcomer... I know I heard his name the other day, but I can't seem to remember.... 
I'm going to head back and meet up with the rest of the troops. 
The guild is contracted to recover the ring. It matters not that Amusei does not have it. You must get the ring where ever it may be. 
With the Gatekeeper dead, it's good to have the Resonator working again. 
All glory, mistress. 
Yes, good sir? How may I help you? 
Rythe Lythandas seems to be back in town. Wonder where he was off to? 
I'm J'zidzo. What has four legs, a tail, and is red in Cyrodiil? 
So, the infamous criminal surrenders? This calls for a celebration! So... pay the fine or serve your sentence. Your stolen goods are forfeit. 
E'Tah Aureal! 
Only Fathis can open the door to the tower, but there is supposed to be a secret passage somewhere in the castle that takes him to his tower. 
I... I never trusted her. But I never wanted to see her dead. Have you no compassion at all?  
In the cage! Over here! 
I hope the accomodations are satisfactory. 
Ah! One of the Ten Ancestors! Hold it up to the light ... yes! Exquisite! You did the right thing by bringing this to me. 
Looks like you found work for us. Good. Need some money. 
Your Purification of the Cheydinhal Sanctuary. You, a mere underling, even managed to single-handedly eliminate half of my Black Hand!  
You would be well served to remember that. 
Please be discreet and don't bother the other monks. 
Now, daedra are pouring out of an Oblivion Gate on our very doorstep! No, I don't have any men to spare. Bruma will have to look to its own defense. 
Odiil boys say creatures of some sort are attacking their farm. Went off on their own to stop them. Poor father's worried sick.  
By Sithis, what have you done? What madness has claimed you? You have betrayed me, you have betrayed the Dark Brotherhood! Why? 
We will defend this land until we are dead. 
Do you really think I could afford to let you leave here? The key you found is a fake. No prey has ever left this island alive. 
Those bracers you're wearing ... that's what we put on the prisoners here. It prevents them from escaping, and makes them easy to control. 
Aside from the fact that I'll kick your ass... it's against the law, and you'll rot in jail for it. 
Blessings of Arkay upon ye. 
Go hurt something. 
Let's charge it back up. 
Very well. Bring me 20 Dragon's Tongues and 20 Redwort flowers, and your guild privileges shall be restored. 
Dralora Athram. I came here with Ulen fifteen years ago. Best thing we ever did. 
The Hunger is one of Lord Sheogorath's favorite pets. 
My attention is focused on the Council right now. I will need you soon enough; I need more time. 
Take this trinket of mine. Perhaps it will serve you well. Or look lovely on your corpse. 
Rumor has it there's another adventurer trying to get into the Realm. One more person to take up arms against me! 
The Great Torch is out again! I bet you didn't know that! 
Any luck talking with Varon Vamori yet? It should be no trouble at all once you use that scroll. 
Come on. Drink up. 
What can I do for you, Blade? 
Can I be honest with you? Nels won't stop looking at me. At first I was flattered. But now he's scaring me! He could be the killer! I could be next! 
Thank you, stranger. You've shown me kindness and I will think of you in the long comfortable days ahead. 
1, 2...  the Greymarch is over. 4, 5... Thank Sheogorath... 6, 7. 
I'm Urul gro-Agamph. You shouldn't scare people like that. I don't care if you are a mean nasty wolf. It isn't nice. Okay, okay. Just don't hurt me! 
Where can you find a bed in the City? I hear the Tiber Septim Hotel in Talos Plaza is very nice. 
Will you help us destroy the Mazken or not? 
I still can hardly believe she wasn't watching me. But it is a relief to be able to finally stop worrying about her. 
I understand Dementia has a new leader. Not my area of interest, honestly. 
I've got the sharpest blades in the Isles. Maybe anywhere. Take a look. 
I've always liked the Oak and Crosier. I don't know Talasma that well, though. 
For Anvil! 
You have strong evidence, but I do not trust you enough to speak true my motivations. 
Hello again.  
You've survived! It is a miracle! Hail the warrior Duke of Mania! 
I can't thank you enough for doing this for me. 
2,1. He does the best he can, but he never seems to have enough magicka. 5, 6. 
The Duke of Mania has been assassinated? Well, no need to finish his portrait, then.... 
S'razirr will not be cheated again. The question is asked again: will you pay what was promised? 
Those wretched beasts killed her! Filthy animals! Had I only been there to stop them! 
We've got work to do. 
I'm just lucky to be alive. 
Come, you must need food and rest. 
You got the weapons there and cleared the mine with no casualties. Better than I expected from you. Here's your reward, and a little bonus. 
I don't give refunds. 
I understand that the Hearts of Order you find on the Knights can be used to unlock special chests. 
You're too kind! Here is the empty flask again. 
Good to see you again. What can I do for you? 
Maybe you should go see him about it. I don't feel like talking about it with you. 
You may also want to speak to Bittneld, the Captain of the Guard. He can be found on patrol in Chorrol or in the Barracks. 
I'm so proud of you, my child. You crush our Lord's enemies into dust. 
That's Hannibal Traven. You'll find him in the Arch-Mage's Tower, in the center of the University. For your sake, he'd better be expecting you... 
Welcome back, my lord. 
Run along and let him know I haven't changed my mind, will you? 
Can you help me? 
Your actions are duly noted, and your reward will be in gold. 
But it's our only hope to get the Great Sigil Stone we need to complete the ritual. You'll have to act swiftly when the Great Gate opens. 
The time of Preparation is almost over. 
I suggest you petition to see Count Hassildor in Skingrad. He will be interested in your condition. 
There's a new Duke in the city? Who cares? Go kiss his ass, for all I care. Go on! Go! 
I'm ready when you are... 
Keld of the Isles. Guardian of the Fighters Guild. And how did I achieve that high rank, you ask? 
I hear something is amiss again in the House of Dementia. I wonder what it is. I love a good scandal. Don't you? 
Ah, a fellow mage! Please excuse my rudeness earlier. I find most people extremely tedious. Completely ignorant of the arcane. 
They captured our commander, Staada, and have her imprisoned somewhere inside. Our first priority must be rescuing her. 
What can I interest you in? 
Ummmm... 
You've found them? Fantastic! I can't tell you what this means to me. 
The Felldew is ours! You can't have it! 
I'm just doing my job. You got a problem with it, you go talk to Eridor. 
You'll most likely find him in the library. 
Welcome back, Muurine. It's been an unusually long while since I've seen you here. 
Gods are my witness! I give that man the simplest list of things to do, and somehow he forgets half of it and gets the rest wrong. 
But you need Agronak's Raiment! That's right, just go back to the Arena and take it right from his body! Go get it, and bring it back to me! 
What do you want from me? For all I know, you could be the killer!    
I'm afraid I can't tell you that. 
Isn't Cirroc an excellent healer? 
She might know something more than I do. 
So, have you bet on any Arena matches lately? 
I'll buy sweetrolls from Salmo the Baker any day. Once, I was carrying a sweetroll when three thugs attacked me. So, I took the sweetroll.... 
Oh, can it really be true? Can the killer really be dead? This has been such a nightmare! I just want to find a way out of this house and go home. 
Ah, fresh bread tonight! The Moth Priests live in the Imperial Palace. I don't know exactly what they do. Something to do with the Elder Scrolls. 
Who would want an entire army destroyed, and for what purpose? I know there's something big going on. 
At least this is safe. Thank you; I shall make sure it is protected, for the time when a new Count is crowned. 
Find the fugitives. Make yourself useful. 
Stay back! Where'd you come from? The big torch in the city? Back away, I say. Back! 
The Emperor... that's an idea that will take some getting used to. 
Cylarne is ours at last, thanks to you. 
You've killed another of your brothers! During other times, I'd have you killed for this. One chance. Bring me twenty minotaur horns. 
How can you do that to me? Of all the nerve! 
Hmm. It's a pity you don't have the right sort of friends. Friends that would be willing to help out with a task like that. 
Good day.  
You have to believe me, I didn't know what they were planning. 
Until you reclaim the Amulet and Martin lights the Dragonfires, the enemy will not be truly defeated. 
Oh, how cute! Look how it tries and tries to scream but no sound comes out! This is perfect for my museum! 
Oh, my heavens! Primo must be the killer! I... I never thought it could be him. Please... please! You've got to protect me from him!  
The docks, harbor, lighthouse, and castle are outside the walls to the south. 
You've got to take care of those mountain lions! 
Knifepoint Hollow is my prison. As the Great Library, it once contained all the knowledge in creation. 
I've heard of him. What's it worth to ya? 
You should drop out now. You know I'm going to win. 
I'm afraid that I can't rent you the room if you can't afford it. Sorry. 
What do you wish? 
I've heard some strange stories about Count Hassildor. I'm sure they couldn't be true, though. 
What did Sheogorath say to the man who refused to wear pants? "Come to the Shivering Isles, I can clearly see you're nuts!" Ahahahaha! 
Have you ever made any bets with J'bari? 
I'm merely a man. How could I resist? What a mess I've gotten myself into. 
You'd be better off not asking such questions around here. 
You and Maglir need to catch those thieves. 
That's a fair deal. 
How's the fishing trip going? 
Dead, you say? ... you mean you ... did it really have to come to that? Well, if that was the only solution ... I suppose I should thank you. 
Here, have a copy. It's free! Always free! We're funded by the Elder Council, so I don't mind, really. He he he he. 
I wonder how long we've been here? There's no way to keep track of time. 
But, being no true immortals, they are without honor or courage, and shy from battle. 
Any loyal servant of the Madgod would respect His decision in this matter. 
Blasted thief. I hope they string him up when they catch him. He's a slippery one, though. The beggars are his eyes and ears. 
How dare you try and best me! 
Just remember it was I that assisted you. I expect that will carry some favor under your rule. 
If only I could make Kaneh see that. 
Phintias has a good selection, and he'll find some rare books as well. 
Don't talk to Horkvir about it. He won't know anything. Especially not our Horkvir. 
Order has attacked Passwall. Probably brought horrible disease with them, as well. 
I will call out my militia if necessary, but must we truly stand alone? I don't think we can survive the daedric onslaught. 
Imps. I hate 'em. Little buggers flitting around, tossing fireballs at you! 
Are you looking for a fence? 
Welcome back to the University. It's good to see you again. 
Forgive me for saying so, Your Grace, but I find taking orders from the Duchess of Mania to be... unsettling. 
Stop following me! I'll beat both of you... if I can just figure out where Amantius Allectus lives. 
I can't say I've done a lot of shopping there, but I've heard good things. 
What do you think? Does that new Arena combatant even stand a chance? 
You wish to see Lady Syl, do you? 
Oh... I see. How brilliant of him. This is for you as much as it is for him. Oh, very good Thadon! 
He's like everyone else in the Imperial Legion. Someone needs help, someone is getting killed, and they're nowhere to be found. Worthless.  
My soldiers are brave and capable. They will do their duty. 
Of course. It's none of my business, is it? 
You should continue with your research. Consult some of the older tomes in the Mystic Archives. We'll talk again later after you learn more. 
You can compete in the Arena any day from 9:00 AM to 9:00 PM. Just come to me, tell me you're ready for a match, and away you'll go. Got it? Good. 
It will be glorious when the smoke of the burning cities rises to blind the eyes of the false gods! Their reign over Tamriel is almost over. 
I heard the Resonator of Judgment is working again. Can't say that it affects me much, so I'll just go about my business. 
Protect the Emperor! 
It may be that the Dragonfires protected us from a threat that only the Emperor was aware of. 
Take care! Come back for a chat whenever you have the chance. 
If you wish to meet Dementia's citizens, seek them out in Deepwallow or Fellmoor. I'm sure they'll welcome one such as you with open arms. 
Provide what aid you can, but I beg you to make haste. The enemy does not wait long between attacks. 
It's your choice, of course. If you should change your mind, feel free to speak to me again about it. 
Justice has been done. Go tell Garrus what's transpired here. I await my fate. 
Doesn't the hunter have prey to follow? 
Carahil's a good leader. She's been a staunch supporter of the Council of Mages for as long as I've known her. 
Of course, great Listener! Your word is law! 
I work as a guard at Umbacano Manor. My name is Usheeja. 
I have called you here because from our previous encounter, I believe you can be trusted. 
Four of the afternoon watch, and all's well. Have a nice day, ma'am.  
I exist to serve, Your Grace. 
The night that the painting was stolen, I was in the courtyard of the castle taking star readings. 
An all-female gang of thieves has been recently plaguing Anvil with a very unique method of robbing. They pick on only the men. 
Wonderful. People are dropping dead and I'm trapped here looking for gold I don't even need! I'll be happy just to find the key and get out of here! 
My orders didn't include leading my men into Oblivion. We'll hold here for now. 
There are smiths in New Sheoth that collect Amber and Madness Ore. 
The Gilded Carafe. A fine store with a terrible name. 
New to these parts, eh? 
How kind of you to grace the Sacellum with your presence, my lord. 
Nice and crunchy! Thanks! 
Aleron never mentioned it to me before. 
A good healer makes for a happy town. And Cirroc almost seems like another Nord to me! 
It's the best place in the city for alchemical ingredients. 
Are you sure you're up to it? You seem a little... slow. 
That Gatekeeper is tough. He's still alive. He killed that adventurer trying to get in. So, we're all still perfectly safe. 
Glad they got the Resonator of Judgment turned back on. Was getting less done with all the hubbub about adventurers running amok. 
Fjotreid. You need armor or weapons, new or repair, come to Hammer and Axe. 
Shh. We can't talk here. They'll get suspicious. The girl is in danger. 
Why does it still hurt, after all these years? Why? 
Don't be stupid. We have returned with the Hist itself. One beautiful Hist, who gives her gifts to all the Company. 
You're going to kill Adamus Phillida? You? Ha ha ha ha ha! Oh, it'll be a retirement, all right. Yours! 
The Bloated Float rents beds. Only place on the waterfront. Cheap. And it's safe.  
She travels to Chorrol on the Ides of every month. Don't even try to find her between the 15th and 17th. 
Two of the night watch, and all's well. Rest easy, sir.  
He works them in Bleak Mine. It's terrible. The guards beat the creatures mercilessly. That's all I can tell you. Now please, go. 
Lord Sheogorath will, I'm sure, be quite interested to hear of your success. Return to him once you've checked with the commander here. 
My boat is coming along swimmingly. 
In Ta'agra, the word is vaguely disreputable.  Such a fighter fights for gold rather than for clan or Mane. 
You are Argonian, yes, but you are no Shadowscale! What chaos you must have known as a hatchling! Thank Sithis you have come home at last. Welcome. 
Orders? Selene didn't tell me about this, and I don't remember her taking on someone else to help us find the Golden Galleon. 
Have you brought me some Madness Ore? 
He is the greatest of all thieves. I have heard it said that he stole his gray cowl from Nocturnal herself. 
Not really. I was all set to paint the waters of the coast and I'm all out of azure. 
I will make you another in a long tradition of Worm Thralls, and take my time in studying you. Your very soul will be forfeit to me. 
Ashame he wasn't there. I thought that you'd be able to put an end to this madness. 
She also has the finest collection of cheeses in the Empire! Her prized cheese has such a powerful aroma, she keeps it sealed in a case! 
That's enough. 
Hello. I'm Casta Scribonia. The writer. Author of 'Woman Gone Wild'. 
I trust the room is satisfactory. 
Right, sister. We know who's been naughty and nice. And you've been naughty. So watch yourself. 
Of course, the introduction of spore gas with the Mania choices helps as well. 
Now, how about that reward I promised? 
Everyone in town knows about my hobby... collecting unusual examples of the arcane crafts. My husband left me quite comfortable, bless his cinders. 
We must get out of here! Come on! 
Brodras of the Fighters Guild. I don't do contracts much. Mostly I'm a trainer. Heavy Armor. 
Very true. You can find almost anything you need there. 
Can the Blue Team's Brawler possibly hope to defeat the Yellow Team's Wood Elf twin sisters? Let's find out!  
Here's one you haven't heard, I bet. The Duke's got his Chalice back. Hmm? See what I mean? Now, what can you do for me? 
You'll.... You'll pay for this, Herdir. Make no mistake... 
They're massing as if bracing for an attack. The portal is just outside the city walls through the west gates if you want to see for yourself. 
Does Your Grace wish to be crushed to death, or do you merely find difficulty in locating the buttons and switches in these old ruins?  
I'd research my own spells before I'd buy them from Earil's Mysteries. 
By poisoning the sacramental wine, Arden-Sul was able to suppress any such conspiracy in one fell swoop. 
I see no reason to talk to you. 
It's what's used to light the Great Torch. Haven't we covered this? You'll find it in Cylarne, guarded by my Saints and Seducers. 
You have her notebook? I'm too important to read that. In fact, I've never read a book in my life. I pluck knowledge straight from the minds of gods. 
I'm listening. Go ahead. 
Can it speak? Can it make words? 
You dare to attack Fathis Aren? 
Besides you and me, he's the only one left! By Ysmir, that boy will pay for what he's done! Come, we must kill Primo before he kills us! 
Go out, kick some robber knight's ass, take his stuff, and get the smith to fix it. That's the way to get armor or weapons. 
I'll keep an eye out for trouble while you're gone. 
The guild is still powerful in Cyrodiil, but poor decisions in the recent past have weakened it. Perhaps killed it. We shall see. 
Buy a drink and watch the fight. 
Looks like this is your lucky day. Just stay out of our way. 
Perhaps he thinks it's amusing; I don't know. But it needs to stop. It's making her miserable. 
Ah, me... Friend, you are welcome at the Aleswell Inn anytime. Free of charge. 
Once again has the Ritual of Accession come full circle! 
We shall raise our goblets to the Demented. Though misguided they are, we are all children of Arden-Sul's teachings and therefore equal. 
What news do you bring? 
Yes, well... I'm a very busy man. Enjoying my retirement, don't you know. So why don't you just... go away. 
Stand aside, prisoner! 
Ciirta is a fool, and a liar! She allows her hatred for Sheogorath to interfere with our journey toward the light! She must be stopped! 
That's just terrible. 
I've heard Tadrose Helas does excellent work. Perhaps that's why she's always so busy. 
You should get back to work. 
Hloval healed my betrothed once. Then he ran out of magic. He said he needed to find someone to lend him some before he could help her more. 
Good. Remember, you may not kill anyone while doing this. If you need any lock picks, I can sell you some. 
There must be something down there worth locking up. Would you mind taking a look, as long as you're here? 
You don't appear well, milord. Perhaps you should rest. 
Well, if you must know, I've been studying the Welkynd Stones. Yes, the aquamarine colored crystals usually native to Ayleid ruins. 
This rat thing sounds fishy to me. Well. 'Ratty', I guess. You think the rookie can handle it? 
Can ya spare a coin? 
Let the Resonator draw the adventurers. Better it, than my dear Sheer-Meedish. 
If more knowledge is what you seek, you must consult J'baana. He is wise in the way of locks. 
Oh Bradon, you fool... 
There would be more corpses to count if someone would get rid of all the doubles around here. 
You new here? I'm Servatius Quintilius, Officer of the Watch. Just stay out of trouble, and we'll get along just fine. 
Yes, let's investigate! And keep on your toes! 
Oh-ho! 
There was an amulet, a family heirloom, that she wore to suppress, and sometimes focus, the visions. She's lost the amulet, and so has lost control. 
Well, with the Oblivion Gate near Leyawiin closed, I suppose the immediate threat is lessened. 
Why should I get up to greet the day when every living thing mocks me? 
But, sometimes you need to break a few eggs. Or skulls. There are rules, though. Even in the Isles. Rituals and rules. You need to follow them. 
I see. So an Orc named Mazoga wants to see me? And she expects me to come to her? 
Shall we try again? 
I hear there's someone new in the Isles... they should have stayed away. This whole place is coming down on our heads! 
I dwell in your dreams; I savor your nightmares. Now, you will serve me. 
The Count used to be a great man, but power and idleness have spoilt him. However, we remain loyal in memory of past kindnesses, and to serve Bravil. 
Welcome to The King and Queen Tavern. We treat all our patrons like royalty! I'm Pista Marillin, your faithful lady-in-waiting.  
If you wish to speak to the Lady, visit her shrine at dawn or dusk. 
You're heading back to Skingrad, aren't you? Could I... maybe come with you? It'd be safer, I think. So, what do you say? 
Let me know when everyone is ready. 
The best daughter a mother could ask for, kind-hearted and a friend to everyone she meets. 
What are you looking for? 
A cure? You mean, besides death? 
But where are my manners? Ahem... must get into my professional tone... ahem... 
Everyone is talking, but no one has anything to say. 
A place of blessed darkness. A holy place where we may worship in our wretchedness. Why are you here? 
Hrmph. Very well. We shall see how prepared you actually are. 
We should go to the Imperial City at once. Lead on. 
Things in the guild have been different since Traven was named Arch-Mage. They're more structured, but everyone seems tense. 
Seems things are a mess in New Sheoth. 
You traveled a great distance to find me. 
It's a pity she wouldn't surrender. Such a waste of a young life. 
You must have a deathwish. 
The Flame will be lit, by my Lord's command, not yours. 
My Lord's choice of emissaries is strange. But He tolerates the Mazken in His service as well, so who can fathom His ways? 
Have you ever spoken to Dul gro-Shug about wearing light armor? 
Your task is only half done. The Font will not be fully cleansed while Order pollutes one of the pools that feed it. 
Have we been forsaken? What has happened to Sheogorath? Arden-Sul, guide me in this time of need! 
That master thief died sometime shortly after stealing the Gray Cowl and receiving Nocturnal's curse. 
Now's not the time for talking. 
You dare disturb me in my sanctum?!? 
A replacement for the Duchess of Dementia could put the wrong people in positions of power, if you get my drift. 
The Altars which feed the Flame of Agnon can be kindled only by the willing death of an immortal. 
Thank you. I'm happy you gave me a chance to explain. 
Sithis be with you, Sister. 
I heard that he stood in one place for hours, just to teach himself how to be sneakier. Sounds boring, but whatever works for you. 
What is it... sister? They send you to find me? 
No. No. Certainly not. This isn't good. I'm sure it's bad. I can't do this anymore. No more.  
Don't hurt me, okay? Do you want a bone? I'll tell you a secret. They say a new adventurer has come. Don't bite me! 
Huh? 
You! You're one of them! What do you want with me? Scratch me with your claws? Steal my breath? My babies will protect me! 
Very good. It's up the stairs there, first door on your left. Sleep well. 
A journal? Sounds like he fought bravely. I should have known the Blackheart Company was involved. Reckless amateurs! 
Excellent work. I knew I could count on you. The gods did not idly choose you as their agent, whatever you may think. 
Heinrich Oaken-Hull, captain and shipmaster. My ship, the Serpent's Wake, is in for refitting, so I'm high and dry for a while. 
Voices from nowhere. I don't get paid enough. 
Buildings here look different. Why? This is the Gold Coast style, like in Hammerfell. Eastern towns look grey and dull to me. 
I've heard many of Alga's stories. She's got a real gift for telling a tale. 
Mehrunes Dagon knows that if I can reach the Temple of the One and light the Dragonfires, he has lost. Come on! 
But we'll teach her to try to take the Mazken by surprise! We'll cut them to pieces in those corridors! I'll redeploy my forces at once. 
Run for your life and hide your head, the Knights of Order have returned. These soulless beings know naught else but death and now we all shall burn. 
Bye. 
These are the Silencers. Each Speaker employs his or her own private assassin, to extend their reach and strike forth as necessary. 
It's good to see you again. I'm so sorry that we didn't realize Seridur's deception. 
In any event, this should make your job easier than I had feared. 
There are six commonly recognized varieties of runestone. 
Gal bursten it. 
I have the diary! 
Take Cheydinhal, for example. Pretty little town. But the Count's a Dark Elf, and it's crawling with Orc thugs and gangsters. 
I'll be here. 
Stonewall is the best in the city when it comes to shields. 
Please! I've got to get to work! All we have left is the farm! 
You have my congratulations, and my thanks. 
You just go give them to her. No need to let her know where they came from; it doesn't matter. So long as she's happy. 
Arnora was killed. Such a shame. I wonder if Jorundr had something to do with it? I wouldn't put it past him. 
It's good to know that if I'm sick, I can head to Tumindil. 
But the Dragonfires can only be relit by an heir of the Septim blood wielding the Amulet of Kings. 
Maybe it's not worth doing any more work. I mean, it certainly seems like we're all doomed. What's the point? 
Away from me, housecat! Look at that fur. What a disgrace...  
I bet the guards give you "special" treatment before the end. Oh, that's right. You're going to die in here, Imperial! You're going to die! 
Whoa, look at the fangs on you! There's a new ruler in Bliss. Don't bite me! 
Let me make it very simple for you. Don't speak to me. Ever. 
Even though he may be a bit misguided, I'm still proud to call him my son. 
Between you and me, I think Matilde found the gold, and one of the others killed her for it! Maybe that means the rest of us are safe.  
I'm looking forward to some payback for what those bastards did to Kvatch. 
If only I could end it all... it's so simple. No. I mustn't do it myself. Maybe someone will accidentally knock me off the edge. That'd be wonderful! 
We will hold the line. 
Ah, so you infiltrated Fort Sutch, remained undetected, and replaced the medicine with the poison I provided. You are truly a master of shadow! 
Have you located their hideaway? 
I'm afraid that this version of the Elixir of Exploration will be the last. I've wrung every bit of information from my research that I can. 
Your actions have gotten you suspended from the guild. 
I must say, I enjoy this take-charge attitude. I presume you are the Grand Inquisitor, then? Lady Syl said she'd be appointing someone. 
Hi there. 
I've settled down here. Nice place. A little slow, but it suits me. Burz gro-Khash is a bear sometimes, but I got thick skin. Doesn't bother me. 
There's someone else here! 
May Arden-Sul enrich your mind and guide your heart. 
And so, here I remain until the day that Sheogorath -- or rather, you -- choose to release me. And we both know when that will be... 
Reach for glory, Rose-Bearer. 
So, were you able to find out about the gold or not? 
You befoul the very air with your presence. Begone! 
Select one pair of legs, one left arm, right arm, torso, head, and heart. See me when you have finished your selections. 
I need imp gall for my studies. Ten portions of it, in fact. Since I hired the Fighters Guild, I expect you to get it done. And carefully, please. 
After that, you must flee from Chorrol, and Hides-His-Heart must not be killed! That way he can go back and tell his employers I'm dead.    
Captain Matius sent us in to try and close the gate. We were ambushed, trapped, and picked off. 
You've come back! Have you reconsidered? 
I was in there just a few days ago. Rasheda's prices are very reasonable. 
Is it that difficult? Fetch one of each. Hurry up! 
Two people are dead. Could he really have done it? I... I just don't know...  
Jauffre? He said that? Why? 
My name is Ida Ottus, and I'd like to talk about Mother Mara. 
I have seen that she is in town. Though she has not approached me, I know she wants something. I would like you to find out what it is. 
Hafid takes care of his customers. It's a bit expensive, though. 
All this, and now Farwil is dead. Oblivion is truly cursed. Make sure you take his signet ring to bring to the Count. He would want proof. 
Maybe I twist his head all the way around for him. Make it easier to see behind him. Hahahaha. 
I like cheese. Not more than sheep, though. I'm not sure about Uuras. 
Right, right. You were finding that fellow who's stolen my name. Have you had any luck? 
If you've been good, Wayshrines of Dibella may bless your Personality. 
A new Duke in Crucible? They're all just bags of meat to me. 
I knew it! You should tell Kaneh what you saw. Maybe you can convince her to change her attack plan. 
Are you... you are, aren't you? The Madgod! No... I must be dreaming again. 
Until then, I'm afraid it wouldn't be in my best interests to be seen talking to you. You understand, of course. 
The last tenant of Arborwatch has cleaned the place of furniture. I'd recommend stopping by Northern Goods and Trade. 
Bravil perhaps presents little scope for an ambitious member of our guild. Perhaps you may find the castle entertaining. Little else. 
Go away! 
Your stars are not mine. Today the Ritual shall speed you on your star-patterned path. 
Apparently, Bradon Lirrian was one of those vile creatures, and Raynil slew him. Kind of strange though. I never figured Bradon to be a vampire. 
I know it's all in my head. I'm spending too much time on my latest project. But enough about me. What can I do for you? 
You're offering to help me with my research? Well... I suppose I could find a use for you, despite your lack of training. 
I have full confidence in you, and so I leave the guild in your care. When I am gone, you will be recognized as Arch-Mage and leader of the Guild. 
I created the Order of the White Stallion to honor free adventurers who perform noteworthy services for County Leyawiin. 
Olfand really has his hands full with Skjorta. I don't know how he has time for business. 
Brother Hridi, your homily was most inspiring. 
The Flame being re-lit is a good sign. 
When those soldiers came to Morrowind, they persecuted my people and stole our lands. 
If all goes well, I may call upon you for one last task. The danger will be great, but the reward will be greater. Unfortunately, there is a problem. 
If they're smart, they'll take the opportunity to have you perform a small service for them. One good turn deserves another, after all. 
You honor me, Lord. May your Realm be free of cats. 
Perhaps these potions will help. 
Of course, he won't appear. Because it's not raining. He loves the rain. 
Yes actually, I'm quite fond of collecting all manners of wines from all over Tamriel. 
Order stands at our door. They've taken the Fringe! Did you even know? Do you care? And you speak of "change"? 
My boys are safe! Oh, thank you! 
Get them out of here! 
The Night Mother is the Dark Brotherhood's Unholy Matron. She guides our actions, just as the Dread Father Sithis once guided hers.  
If you like what you see, don't hesitate to say so. 
Have you ever shopped at Rindir's? 
Don't run into the water to escape a Scalon. They'll follow you. 
I'd love to oblige, but we have no kitchen. 
Good people, you have just witnessed the impossible! Agronak gro-Malog has been defeated! I say again, the Gray Prince has been defeated!     
Okay. Hand over those keys or die! 
Syl is always threatened. 
Many thanks, on behalf of all of us. 
With such hope, and with the promise of your aid, my heart must be satisfied. 
I'm Maenlorn. I'm the twin in brown, remember? 
You've found it! Oh, how wonderful! Finally, things can return to normal. By all means, see that it gets to her immediately. 
While I am not without means of defending myself, I believe you would be an invaluable companion on such an expedition. 
Fine. Be that way. 
Won't anyone else send help? We can't be the only city willing to come to Bruma's aid. 
You must be new. Oh, it's so nice to see new faces in the guild! 
So I better get started doing my good deeds. And maybe I'll see you at the White Stallion Lodge? 
You're going to travel to Cheydinhal, and find out what sort of imposter is trying to besmirch my good name. And you're going to tell him... *hic* 
It was my father's dream, for us all to start a new life there. He spent everything he had to buy the land. Now it all seems to be ruined. 
The Resonator sings its sweet song once more. Promises of riches and fame, fulfilled with death and madness. How delightful. 
Perhaps you need new armor? A weapon? I have a large selection of both. 
Yeah, I've got a room. 10 gold for the night. You sure you want it? 
It is all in the nose. Yes, of course, it is also in the mouth! 
Ships are always careful to stay away from it, especially when its foggy on the Bay. The rocks would tear right through a ship's hull like parchment. 
So, we have no choice but to invoke an ancient ritual. We must wake the Night Mother from her slumber, and seek her guidance!  
Die! Die! Die! 
I do delicate things with Madness Ore. It tingles across the flesh when it cuts. 
So the addict says to the whore, "Gimme back my Chalice of Reversal!" Ha ha! 
You need to close the Great Gate! We'll try to hold them off as long as we can! 
We got plenty of rooms if you want one. Ain't nobody staying here these days 'cept old Rufio. 
Help us.... 
Between the seen and unseen, the seeming and the being, lies the gulf of ignorance. 
The daedra did a lot of damage, but we'll rebuild. Before you know it, the city will be as good as new. 
Neville was probably the most capable fighter among us, yet he was cut down silently, just a few rooms away. I fear one of us is not who they appear. 
A gang of women in Anvil seducing men? Did you hear? Take my copy of the Black Horse Courier. Poor fools. 
All of you! Out! Now! 
That's so typical for a mage. 
By the Nine Divines, you're an ugly one. But then, all Orcs are ugly. The most repulsive race in all of Tamriel, really. 
What are you doing?  You can't leave me here to die! 
You will help replenish alchemical supplies for the guild. Bring me 20 Vampire Dust and 20 Daedra Hearts. 
Gatekeeper at the Gates! Singing songs of gatekeeping! 
Have you anything new to report? 
If I may be honest, I feel a bit sorry for the old woman. She comes from a noble family, I'm sure, but seems a lot less well off than she should be. 
Would you like to buy some of my Famous Potato Bread? 
Oh, so you want to get cute, do you?  All right then, mate, we'll do this the hard way! 
Resonator of Judgment is working again. Big deal; if it doesn't work on Scalons, doesn't do us a lick of good. 
Pardon me, noble Scholar, but... Could I speak with you a minute? 
Finally! A new customer! Please... look around. Just promise me you won't buy from that fetcher, Thoronir. 
Now heed these words. The slaying of Rufio was the signing of a covenant. The manner of execution, your signature. Rufio's blood, the ink. 
Kneecaps! Go for the knees! 
In Crucible lives poor Bernice, she's sick I think you'll find. But is it really illness, or is it all just in her mind? 
The treacherous ones: the Dark Seducers of ill-repute, whose every action drags Sheogorath's holy name through the mud. 
I should have told you. It was not your fault. An Orc pays her debts. You helped me, so I forgive you. And thank you, too. 
It's a fine chapel. And a fine group of healers, as well. 
What is it, Emissary? 
I can't help myself. I'm just a sucker for well-heeled men. That Olav, for example, at the Tap and Tack. He's dreamy. And successful, too. 
But to murder the Emperor... Mara preserve us! 
Thanks! Thanks a lot! 
Welcome to the Brina Cross Inn. Can I interest you in something to eat, or perhaps a bed for the night? 
Hello, Wizard. 
Careful! Don't want to get squashed. 
Then, these many years later, voila! The brother reappears. It seems the rest of the family did not die in the wilderness after all. 
Do you have Guild matters to discuss? 
If he won't surrender, I think you know what to do. Hurry, I fear you have a day at the most to stop him. 
Are you sure? 
Don't worry, it will be very soon. Now get outta' here. 
I heard she's trying to catalogue all the living things in the Shivering Isles, and she'll pay for help. 
Go now! Learn the identity of the betrayer so we can end this madness, and restore the authority of the Black Hand. 
You're gonna end up rotting here anyway, you idiot. 
The forces of Order have overwhelmed us, and forced us from the stronghold. We must regain control! 
Do you know Reynald Jemane, the fellow who lives on the west side of Chorrol? 
Okay, I'm going to pretend everything is normal. Make your move as soon as you can. But, let me get away first. Don't let me see it coming. 
Don't worry, pal, you'll get used to losing after a while. 
We're almost ready to start planting crops. Cropsford is really starting to feel like home. 
My Lord! What can I do for you? 
Did you hear that Dar-Ma has disappeared? 
I can't afford to do that. 
Alas, poor Orc. This was not your finest hour. 
I fear that the Amulet was the target of this attack. Go and see if it is safe! 
If you're caught, there isn't anything I can do to help you. Just be careful. 
Years of service to the Empire, and not even a tombstone over his head! Hrmph. At least he was able to maintain the illusion of sanity. 
The Great Torch, the Great Torch! Why's everyone bothering me about that? I've got a Great Torch for you, right here. 
Grrahh! 
That is why you must go to Bogwater and eliminate that treacherous snake! Please kill Scar-Tail, so Ocheeva and I can put this matter behind us. 
No, light the Torch for Dementia and you'll see how we treat our friends. Dementia takes care of its own. 
Vilena Donton's eldest son. Good man. We lost him on a botched mission recently. You've probably seen the other wounded around. 
Well, there's an idea! Why didn't I think of that? But, where would I sleep? I need someplace to sleep. 
Seven of the evening watch, and all's well. Everything's fine, sir.  
Well, you finally returned with Rohssan's sword. 
Ra'qanar is your friend, no? Your servant? Whatever you require? Ra'qanar knows nothing... less, even. But Ra'qanar wishes to please. 
I have no idea what you are talking about. 
I am Andel Indarys, Count Cheydinhal. There is no more generous or just ruler in Cyrodiil, if I say so myself. 
Oh! You must be thinking about the skyboat. Yesterday's news. I'm working on a collapsible fork now. 
Leyawiin! 
Don't wait too long to decide. 
You know, of course, that the Realm would still be in jeopardy were it not for me. 
The Flame of Agnon! Sheogorath's blessing upon you! 
An important part of our history, my friend! I would be glad to tell the tale if you have a moment. 
Yes. Unfortunately, it seems you have a price on your head. Clear that up, and perhaps we can speak about this again. 
I'm sorry, most honorable Listener, but I've already given you your weekly earnings. Please, come back again after you've spoken to the Night Mother. 
I will transport you to the plane of Oblivion in which they are trapped. Find their souls. When all are collected, I will return you here. 
I heard Thadon's heart exploded. There would have been a great deal of blood. Sweet, sweet heart's blood. 
I'm glad you asked. I could go on all day about our little community. We are but a handful of Khajiit, as you can see. 
Yes, honored Listener! I shall become shadow! 
I've bought a number of things from Gunder. I've always been satisfied. 
So, thank you. You been good to me. And I won't ever forget it. 
I've already told you, I'm not helping unless you agree to do something for me. Do we have a deal, or not? 
Seven of the morning watch, and all's well. Top of the morning to you, ma'am.  
Have you ever listened to one of Uravasa Othrelas' sermons? 
I am unsure as to why he has requested that you, of all people, should be the one to visit him. I have no wish to put you in harm's way. 
Thank you, thank you!  I can never repay you for your gift of my daughter's life, but you have my friendship and gratitude to the end of my days. 
She seeks a cure to calm her ills and will gladly reward gold to pay your bills. 
Until we meet again, may your travels be safe and the road remain clear. 
You've got it. I'll have the two Trolls brought out to the Arena. Now get up there and give the people what they paid for!  
Wait, scratch that. Cheese for no one. That can be just as much of a celebration, if you don't like cheese. True? 
I've spoken with Erthor, who seems to be all right. Good work. I'll see to it that your recommendation is sent in, as soon as I have a free moment. 
Still, I don't quite think she deserves the hard time the others give her. 
I see you got my message. 
Awful. I don't want to talk about it. 
He's a Nord. Even a complete idiot could see that. So what does that say about you?     
So, the thief opts for the stoic approach, hmm? Oh, my friend, I'm afraid you've broken into your last house. Ha ha ha ha ha!  
Do you realize what you're saying? Do you fully understand the honor you are rejecting? For your own sake, return to me when you're ready. 
You're due for advancement. I hereby name you Protector of the Fighters Guild. 
If a Guild fighter defaults on a contract, he's out. We won't compete with Blackwood Company by defaulting on our contracts. 
You've got a contract to take care of. Why are you talking to me? 
Of course, the Blackwood Company is mercenary in the Western sense... a reliable, professional contractor for military services. 
The dead drops will allow me to deliver your contracts, and contact you if need be. They are secure, known only to the members of the Black Hand. 
I searched a long time, and asked everyone, then I finally heard he was hiding at Fisherman's Rock. 
As promised, I have your Moderate Elixir of Exploration. Use it well! I have more available for a great price if you'd like. 
Darkfathom Cave isn't that far from here, but the route may be treacherous. Be careful, and journey safe. 
I'm working on a very unusual new juggling routine to commemorate the relighting of the Torch. But you'd probably hate it. 
Oh, well, I'm sorry for bothering you.  My mother often says I'm too forward with strangers. 
I've never been a huge dog lover myself, but some people really love them. 
Lead on. 
There was only a 16 percent chance Thadon's heart would explode. 
With the staff, there was hope. But now, hope is dead. I am dead. The Realm.... 
Kill me... please! 
He's the killer, you idiot! Can't you see? He murdered all of those people!  
Eleven of the evening watch, and all's well. Long day, ma'am.  
Not here! Not in public! We must never speak to each other outside the Sanctuary! The risk of detection is too great! 
I hope this won't take long. 
I've heard so much about you. Welcome to our family! 
Yes, indeed... Sheogorath's palace is quite lovely this time of year. Sure, I can give you directions! 
Welcome to the Imperial Palace. 
Find them, eh? I won't poke my nose any further. Official business and all that. I'm used to working with the Blades, don't worry. Say no more. 
There are still goblins around. Can't you smell them? They're still here! Check the houses! 
Good riddance to this tool of mischief. 
All right. No need to get angry, I suppose. It's a small problem, but one that you can resolve. 
I'm seen some people sleeping out on the street, but they huddle too close to the walls. I need someplace safe. I can't just sleep anywhere. 
I do hope Primo and I can be, you know...friends. He's so handsome. And he lives a life I can only dream of. I can make him so happy in so many ways. 
Pssst. Buddy. Gimme the skooma already. Quit playing around! 
The guild is always accepting new members. You seem capable enough; are you sure you want to join? 
You can find her at the Lonely Suitor lodge. I wouldn't recommend bothering her at home, unless the door is unlocked. 
As we are doomed to eternally relive the last moments of our failed attempts to save our keep, so shall you eternally watch us. 
I'd check with Anya Herrick, her Courtier, and Kithlan, her Steward. Maybe they can help you. 
I have two witnesses willing to testify against Audens Avidius. I'll get a warrant and arrest him. 
You again. Guess you're not afraid of catching it.  
Ho, there, laddie, now you're just bein' insultin'! She may be tougher than me, and meaner too, but a better sailor? It ain't even possible. 
Sheogorath's Duke or not, you try my patience! Are you confused about your task? 
Victory calls for celebration, don't you think? I wish I had the coin to drink a toast to Sheogorath. 
These stupid scamps are driving me crazy! 
Well done, my friend. This mine is once again safe for the miners. 
I suggest you travel there, and seek an audience with him. Given your condition, I believe he may assist you. 
That will take care of pesky adventurers. 
I caught him drinking in the West Tower on the upper level. I told him if he didn't stop, I would tell the Countess. He just grumbled and agreed. 
Didn't Azzan give the new recruit another contract? Something in the protection line? 
I'm sorry to bother you, Lord, but there seems to have been a misunderstanding. 
Thadon... the snake. He showed up, asked for a contingent of guards. Said there was trouble, and that we were needed. 
Don't butt in. 
The ironic thing is that I think the Order of the Virtuous Blood should continue its work. Perhaps I'll speak to the others. 
Are you sure? I don't know what we could offer you to change your mind, but I'm sure we could come up with something. Please reconsider.   
It's a great relief that the gate is gone. Now the people of Cheydinhal can breathe easier. 
Talk to Horkvir. Our Horkvir. He's in charge. He'll know what to do. 
They can be done in any order, but they all must be sent in to the Council before you can enter the Arcane University. 
Would you lift your hands to help another, to help me find the words? 
My order is dedicated to the service of the Septim Emperors. We have failed in our duty to protect him. 
Leave an offering of the pelt of a bear, or the pelt of a wolf at the shrine, and Hircine may find you worthy. 
He still teaches, though he lost his passion for it after the Levitation Act was passed. Can't say I blame him. 
Take Big Head's charm! Listen to Bolwing! His tongue is tied, but his mind is unraveled! He'll tell you the secret. Who has the Fork? 
Yes, I suppose it is. Well, then, we've talked enough. Only one of us will walk out of here alive this day. Good luck. 
The blue plates are nice, but the brown ones seem to last longer. 
... I have an idea. One last hope. I must reach the Dragonfires in the Temple of the One. 
Are you ready to help us destroy the Mazken and take control of the Altar of Despair? 
As lord of this Realm, there are a number of benefits to which you are entitled, as well as a number of duties to which you must attend. 
It was then that Azura, may She bless our days, sealed the cavern, protecting the world from the monstrosities within. It has been sealed ever since. 
The indignity of it all. 
I try and I try, and it just doesn't matter. It makes me furious sometimes! 
Ahhh, good to see you again. 
The Zealot is a misguided man whose belief has gone astray. Steal a robe from their back and among them you can stay. 
I'm sure you didn't see it, but there was a very interesting beetle right there. Now it's gone, of course. 
She has a gift for blades. No doubt about it. 
Oh? Then she must really trust you. Still, I better hold onto it. Just in case. 
Annoying creature. 
Irlav is dead? 
The Fighters Guild is recruiting again. Not a bad way to make some money, if you've got the stones for it. 
Please consider my proposal. 
Run along now, see you later. 
You shall know them by the coldness in their minds. A darkness of spirit.  
Did you hear that? Did you? Voices from nowhere, madmen... where does it end? How did I get this posting? 
You can find her in the audience chamber in the mornings. She dines with the Countess from evening's eighth bell until midnight. 
I feel so bad for you. 
Run for your lives! 
Yes, yes! Enough! What? I'll tell you what you want! 
You honor me with your presence, Lord Sheogorath. 
You're a smart one then. I was going have to arrest you in a minute. 
Don't you worry, what with the recent killings and all? I'd be ever so scared, if it were me. I haven't left the Inn in days, just in case! 
It's not that I'm lazy. I'm just not very ambitious. You can live comfortably in the city very cheaply. So why work yourself to death? 
As you wish. Good day. 
They can make all your outstanding warrants go away, for only half the price of the fines. 
By the Nine Divines, you did it! You actually won! You ain't so bad after all, Pit Dog. You may even survive enough matches to advance in rank. 
The Knights of Order have returned as foretold. Arden-Sul save us! 
Rufio is dead. He was murdered. It looks like he was hiding out from somebody after all. 
Arkay, bring light to the dark. Arkay, bring hope to the hopeless. Arkay, protect these souls. 
The Battle Matron serves as the Grand Champion's trainer and manager, among other things. Plus, I get to keep Owyn in line. Works for me. 
You can imagine how difficult it is to run an inn while invisible. Once you get a reputation as a haunted inn, you can just forget about it. 
You're not on my list. And that's all I have to say. If you were somebody, I'd know. But I don't, so you aren't. 
I suppose I should be happy to see you again. I'm not. 
You believe yourself worthy to approach the Shrine of Boethia? Perhaps. Or, perhaps you will be slaughtered. It is your choice. 
Leave me. 
Oh, I do remember telling him to go there... hmm. Well, we'll just have to do something about that, won't we? 
I'm not about to go to the Missing Pauldron, even if they do sell armor. I'll stay in Crucible, thank you. 
It's northwest of here along the Yellow Road. You'll see some of our supplies near the road where we left them when the goblins attacked. 
Hurry. We don't want anyone to see us talking, do we? 
All right, my friend. You've got 100 gold down on the Yellow Team. Good luck, and enjoy the match! Oh, and if you win, come see me for your payout! 
You need to take care of those fugitives from the prison break in Bravil. 
There are only three of us left! You and I are no killers, so that leaves the old woman! Don't be fooled by her appearance. Matilde is no weakling. 
My work is never done. 
I fear they grow in power as the Greymarch progresses. More and more Knights of Order make their way into the Isles. 
Well, that's up to you, I suppose. I'm going to go about my daily life, such as it is, as if nothing has changed. 
Did you see it? The avatar of Akatosh himself? There it is! The monument to our deliverance! 
She may seem like a tough woman, but the Gatekeeper makes her all weepy. Go see for yourself. She visits him every night, around midnight. 
Prior Maborel and Brother Piner may also be able to help. You should speak to them about it if you haven't already. 
The only thing we can do is let the adventurers complete a cycle through here. I'll be glad to help. 
Dead. I warned them, didn't I? 
You better have a very good reason to interrupt me! 
Follow me! You are deserving to bear witness to Ciirta's destruction! 
I'm Fathis Aren, Count Bravil's staff wizard. I can teach you Conjuration... anything to relieve the tedium of castle patronage. 
I understand Vashanti has some problems with the skooma. That can't be good for her fighters. 
What do you want? I suppose you've come looking for duties, huh? 
I think it's a disgrace that Argonians can swagger around Leyawiin, boasting how they whupped this Khajitt silly, and beat that Khajjit to a pulp. 
This is our one chance -- don't screw it up for us. 
I have nothing to say about the Count and his son. The rest of the town is a little rough. But I don't mind. I like it that way. 
You're right. You're right. I can't just leave poor Menian to his fate. If he's still alive, we've got to try to save him. 
Well met, adventurer. 
Have you not heard? The Oblivion crisis has ended! Martin Septim gave his own life to destroy the Daedra horde! We are victorious! 
Best if kept just between us, yes? So, what say you? 
Dul gro-Shug always seems at ease in light armor. He moves well in it. 
I needed some cash, so I went to see Jensine. 
Sadly, you must demonstrate more skill before I can allow a commission job. 
She's certainly good. I'm glad she's willing to teach others. 
You have been suspended from the guild for theft. Are you willing to do what is necessary to make amends? 
All right, that's it! You've gone and annoyed me, now! Have at thee!  
You creatures are all the same. 
Yes, I sort of know her. Well, I mean I don't really know her, but I've talked to her some. 
Hmmm. I had hoped for the whole arrow, but that is not your fault. I will have to have it repaired. 
It translates directly to "Magicka Shines." That doesn't seem right. Perhaps it makes more sense in context; you should look at the others. 
Hurh! 
With Syl gone, perhaps someone will help us out here. 
If only Lewin were here... he could get us through this in no time. 
Sheogorath is gone. This can only mean the end is near. 
Do you think the attack will come soon, sir? 
I'm not talking to you about anything. You're an outsider. I bet you're trying to trick me into telling something and the guards put you up to it. 
Despite this recent lapse in professionalism, your overall efforts have been commendable. It's time you were advanced to the rank of Eliminator.  
I'm glad that scum got what he deserved. Good riddance. 
She's nuts. Her hobby is falling from high places. 
Once you have decided which Duke to replace, there's no turning back. One choice. No more, no less. Try not to do something stupid. 
Guilbert should be able to help you with anything you need... for now, I'm going to celebrate! 
Or is there something else I can take from -- I mean, help you with? 
How did I get here? Do you know the way out? 
I'm Bejeen. I'm a hunter, and Weebam-Na's partner. I hope he didn't bother you about the rat thing. He's gone totally rat-cuckoo, I'm afraid. 
Is everything all right? You look a bit ill. 
This match is a battle of the Brawlers! Let your voices be heard, as these brave warriors fight for glory! Combatants... begin! 
Spearing fish in a barrel might have proved a bit more challenging, but there's definitely something to be said for making it easy for yourself. 
I am sorry to be so forward, but I desperately need your help. It seems that my husband, Rythe, has gone missing, and I just don't know what to do. 
Oh, great... now I have to entertain a god. 
I hear you. 
There is a Khajiit in Crucible who believes the world is about to end. 
You've done a great service to Chorrol, and you should be proud. 
Where else? You have to be here. This is THE City. The BIG City. Why waste time in little places? 
Good choice. 
I'll have to buy a bit more of her wine. It's just excellent. A fine choice for any meal. 
Oh, her. I've seen her around town, but I don't really know her. 
He is a hard master, but he delivers. I gave my word, and an Orc honors his word. 
Once we have it back, Martin can use it to light the Dragonfires in the Temple of the One, and reseal the barriers between Oblivion and our world. 
Fool! I am immortal here! 
If you must. Don't try anything funny though. I'll be following you. 
One of the afternoon watch, and all's well. I hope I see you well, sir.  
Julienne Fanis. I'm the Alchemy Expert. At least, the best the Mages Guild has. 
Your Grace! We didn't expect you here. Grakendo Udico is in command. You should speak with her. 
All of your recommendations have been approved, have they not? Then everything appears to be in order. 
Speaketh you on. 
Still staying away from my fishing spots? I may be retired but they're still mine, you understand? 
Thank you for your help!  If you are ever in Chorrol, please look me up. My mother owns the Northern Goods and Trade shop. 
I have seen your name, Traveler, and heard it whispered in twilight. I ask a service, which holds promise of fame and reward. 
I didn't think so. If you had some sort of evidence, like vampire dust, I might believe you. I'm not stupid, you know. 
If I didn't have such a busy daily routine, I'd likely indulge myself in its pleasures more often. 
The workers in Fellmoor aren't too happy with Cindanwe. 
Greetings, Redguard. 
I can't give you any arrows because then the armory would be empty. Then what would I do if someone needed some arrows? 
The others are dust! You alone, Khajiit, remain, First and Last! Go now! Beyond the next gate, your portal waits. 
Help? What makes you think help will get here before more of those bastards? We need to get the Emperor out of here. 
Someone really ought to put up a railing. That happens all the time. 
I really can't tell you what happened. I'm just lucky to be alive. 
Kud-Ei is a member of Bravil's Mages Guild. She put the word out that a good friend of hers went missing. 
I have some things for you. 
You honor me with your presence. 
If you want a room or a drink, I'm your man. Otherwise, I got nothing to say to you. 
Can't say I know anything myself, but I heard that Newheim the Portly had some things stolen, and he's been asking around about it. Ask him. 
If you wish to become a part of the Mages Guild, seek out the heads of the local guild halls. They will instruct you further. 
Please. Although I'm concerned about the safe return of my son and the closing of the gate, please see Amminus Gregori for all of the details. 
Hey, don't you walk away from me! 
Don't know why you'd want to cover up that gorgeous head of yours, but here you go. 
You're back! And Antus is with you.... thank you for bringing him home safely. 
I know you'll do your best, but... please... if I don't make it, at least bring the news to my mother, Seed-Neeus, in Chorrol.  Let's go! 
I'm Vontan Sintav. Kastus, Beran, and me got this house from Uncle Iniel. Nice, huh? 
Rythe! Oh my love! You are home safe... I was so afraid... 
Anyway, I'm always looking for new exhibits, so remember me when you come across anything Odd. 
Is that why someone invited us here? To kill us? This is horrible! 
Fine. Just leave me here to die. Not like anyone will miss me. 
Then along comes Arnora with a "plan" to waylay a tax shipment headed for the Imperial City. We're talking serious gold, complete with armed escorts. 
I've already heard the news! Well done! 
And the great thing about killing a target up close and personal is you can talk to 'em before you do it! You know, say something scary! 
Haven't you heard of 'em? Former soldiers, sent down into the swamps to take some territory back from the lizards. Talk to Vantus. 
I finally accomodated him by enchanting a very special chest for him. You'll find it in the Arch Mage's quarters. 
Hello there. Have I mentioned that my left arm is actually one inch longer than my right? Never know when that might be important. 
Killed off hordes of goblins when they attacked the town. Killed off a nest of minotaurs singlehandedly. That's all in the past now, though. 
Send Relmyna my love. That'll get her going. 
And so, here I am. I come to you with an offering. An opportunity... to join our rather unique family.   
Because He is Me! I'm Him! We're a bit of each other, really. I won't be here when He arrives, because I'll be Him. 
I've heard of it. Are you willing to make a donation? 
Our neighbor. A bit eccentric. Why, is there something I should know? 
You horrible creature! You've ruined everything! 
You're a fine negotiator. 
I may have let a "detail" or two leak out, to entice someone such as you to assist me. Until you agree to my scheme, I don't want to say more. 
Rany Roo! Rany Roo! 
To arms! To arms! 
He said any Argonian can kick any Khajiit's butt to breakfast any day of the week. You believe that? 
Is there more I can help you with? 
Have you seen Armand Christophe? 
Who cares if a new adventurer will be in our Realm soon, he wouldn't wish to hear what I have to say anyway. 
Order shall rule this world once more! 
Ah, the Thieves Guild's new favorite. 
I feel as though I'll be trapped here forever, and I don't even know why. 
Without question. 
I'm not talking about them. Not to you. I barely know you. 
No, I haven't. I've heard that he really knows his way around, though. 
There's been nothing unusual about those crystal obelisks. Nothing strange at all. 
I'll just take the money from you then. And here's your staff. Now, since our business is concluded, you must excuse me. Good day. 
Armor is for the weak! 
We appreciate it. 
I hate the fact that you've made everything better! I just hate it! 
I feel better with the Torch burning. 
Ignorant folk hate us, so we stay far away from them. 
You have the Fork? I hear it singing so close? Songs of such closeness! Songs of almostness!  
For the Empire and the Dragon! 
I'm at your disposal. 
Oh, I couldn't just give away all my business secrets. They wouldn't be secrets any more, would they? 
You remind me of my homeland. During the Blight. 
Lots of us Dark Elves came to Cyrodiil to get away from the Temple. We're sick of living under the thumb of the priests, and scraping by on the dole. 
Why does everyone in this city look at me like I'm speaking gibberish? 
You were supposed to check out those disappearances at Harlun's Watch. What's the status? 
I don't really feel comfortable talking to you right now. 
Order has always proved the stronger. 
Gracious! What a hero! 
Here we worship Lord Clavicus. Do you have business with the Daedra? 
Dear friend, three of the guests have been killed! You and I, we must stay close. Band together, for mutual protection!   
You got quite a deal on that house. 
He's a very serious man, but I guess that's normal for a retired soldier.  
The Fighters Guild is a good place to go if you need weapons training. 
We have but the six sheep in our pasture, and we make sure they are well-tended. 
There are rats and goblins down there... but from what I've seen of you, I'm guessing you are an experienced Acrobat. Am I right? 
You're welcome on board the Bloated Float any time. 
That Museum of Oddities is a joke, although I hear Una Armina will pay for certain items. 
I was right there. You could have just walked over to me. 
He's not likely to just come out and tell you, so get creative! 
Never liked you, Redguard. Never will. 
You bought an execellent Chestnut horse. Take care of him. 
Long, short -- it all ends up the same. Dust and tears. Usually tears first, then the dust. Dust can't cry, you see. That would be... well, amusing. 
Prisoner! Stand away from the door! Over by the window, now! 
I wish you luck. I fear you'll need it. 
We finally got him! There'll be no excuses this time. Ulrich is mine. 
I know Primo could be the killer, but I just don't want to believe it's possible. If... if he likes me, he could take me away with him...  
Vampires have a weakness to fire. You may wish to use this to your advantage. 
Very good, Emissary. With your help, we will rid Cylarne of the Mazken once and for all! 
So much to do. So little time left to do it. 
That Honditar sure knows his way around this area. Have you spoken with him recently? 
Orcs are smart. They know, you want something, you do what the Boss tells you. So listen good... 
Thank you for closing the Oblivion Gate. We all took heart when we heard the news. 
How can Thadon drink from that Chalice? Who knows what germs are on it? 
Even the great Lord Sheogorath forsakes us. The bones are getting louder. 
Then I don't understand why you are still here in the Imperial City. You should return to Malada and retrieve the carving! 
But you must be discreet. Do not remove the robes, or you will be attacked. Even I will have to kill you, so I do not draw more suspicion to myself. 
Rallus and Antus need your help, whether they know it or not. There's no time to waste. 
Behold the new hero of the people of Cyrodiil! Behold, your Arena Grand Champion, Dragonheart! 
Once the mage has revealed himself, we will step in and settle the matter quickly. Now, get yourself some sleep. You'll need to be well-rested. 
Hmm. I have never heard of this "Shade of the Revenant." Some sort of celestial phenomenon? 
Praise the Nine! 
I've heard that even their corpses can be dangerous. 
Is that so? Well, perhaps we'll have to pay them a little visit. Thanks for the tip, friend. 
They're in here to eat every afternoon, and bed down just before midnight. Outside of that, it's none of my business. 
Hey! My friend! You made it, huh? That's... That's great. Did... Did you want to just relax, or... Did you want something... something else? 
If you seek an audience with His Grace, you must open this door. I hold the key, and I will die defending it. 
I need you to find Ajum-Kajin and bring him back to me. I want to talk to him. 
Perhaps the new head of Dementia can do something to help people protect what's really theirs. 
He's on his way, so I'm on my way out. It's terribly inconvenient, don't you think? 
Are you sure? I will pay very well. And the matter is urgent. If you decline, I will find someone else. 
Please... please. I need your help. My husband was no vampire! It's ridiculous! No one will listen to me! 
Now we can't have you standing there all uncomfortable in all those clothes. Why don't you take everything off and place it there on the table. 
The Count is too preoccupied with his pastimes to spend time on county affairs. So the burden lies on me. 
That is not the right answer. S'razirr knows you have been paid by Umbacano. Oh yes, this one has listened much since we met at Malada. 
The Master knows the secret mind of Lord Dagon. He speaks with Him and teaches us from His holy book, the Mysterium Xarxes. 
Was that you? What did you eat? 
Sorry we had to fool you like that, but it was the only way to get someone in close enough to stop Faustina's gang. 
I wish I had a stick like that. 
I've heard of her. What's it worth to ya? 
You believe your Council would send you here to merely fetch a book? No, they wanted information on me and what is going on here. 
We've failed. I've failed ... The Blades are sworn to protect the Emperor, and now he and all his heirs are dead. 
A new adventurer may set foot in the Shivering Isles, I hear. Perhaps I will bake him a fine treat in case our paths should cross. 
You're going to find out who knows. You're going to learn who keeps secrets, who conspires against me. 
Who are you? Why do you invade our place of worship? Surely, you don't think yourself worthy to visit Namira's shrine. 
[SNIFF] 
Here's the list of things I need. Get me everything on it. Try to remember where you found it so you can tell me. It's important. 
Blackwood Company is putting the Fighters Guild to shame. They're a new mercenary company, competing with the guild. 
Thadon has been replaced. It is a moment worth capturing forever. 
Get your men out of here! 
Well, when somebody gets murdered, everyone nearby could be considered a suspect. That includes young Primo. 
We're sure it was Ancotar's doing, but we can't find him. If you can help us, we will be extremely grateful. 
You won't regret it. Go out to the corral. Mivryna will have your new Black horse saddled and ready for you. 
It comes in four volumes. The first two volumes are rare, but you may run across them from time to time. The third and fourth are impossible to find. 
You had your chance, fool! Now you will never leave this house alive! 
What brings you here? 
They built a new Gatekeeper! Yes they did. Yes they did. Aren't you just precious? 
Her Ladyship has no intention of remarrying. Liked her first Count well-enough, I guess, and doesn't fancy a replacement. 
I want you to lay low for a while. Talk to Azzan or gro-Khash. Let me deal with Vilena. You've still got a career ahead of you. 
What do you require? 
Trade places, a bed under a roof for a bedroll under the stars? Mm-hmm. Sure, sure. I don't trust you. 
Did you? And you have proof of this? 
The Emperor's words-- "Close shut the jaws of Oblivion"-- certainly suggest that he perceived some threat from Oblivion. 
I'd say your next move is to head to Xedilian and get it reactivated. 
I'm rather curious about this disappearance of Sheogorath's. Is he incorporeal, invisible, or has he moved to another plane? 
You kill me here and now, and as far as the town guard is concerned, it's a crime. So you make your choice. You want to do it my way, or Jorundr's? 
Remember. A knight's title shall be your reward. 
The truth of this, well, it is open to interpretation. Being the pragmatic fellow that I am, I side on the practical explanation. 
Half of the Council of Mages resigned when Traven took over the position of Arch-Mage. 
I hope Martin knows what to do now. I will die by his side, if this is the end. 
It is good to see you again.  
How about you send over a few more drinks, sweetheart? 
Two people dead, yet Nels still lives? I don't think that's a coincidence. Nords are savages, born to kill. I just know he did it!  
Damn it man, two people are dead! Have you nothing better to do than question me about the Nord?  
Lord Dagon will walk Tamriel again! 
What were you thinking, lighting the Great Torch for Mania? For shame. 
Perhaps this Gatekeeper will be made of sterner stuff. 
You have received recommendations from every guild hall, have you not? Then you are ready to advance to the Arcane University. 
Know what I think? I think that barbarian will do anything to get his hands on the chest of gold. His kind are greedy and vicious, all of them. 
Please to relax... we have a common goal. You see, I know that you have not come here to join us... Your Grace. 
So, you say Llevana wishes to see me? Very well, lead on. This should prove amusing. 
This is insane. We're being hunted down one by one. There must be a way out of this madhouse! 
Have you recovered either the Bloodworm Helm, or the Necromancer's Amulet? 
Gatekeeper's gone. For good. Or not. Might just be on holiday. We'll see. 
Silencer! What news do you bring? 
Ruslan and Luronk. Those idiots don't know when to stay quiet. Look, I'm not telling you anything, stranger. I don't trust you. 
One place is pretty much like another. Regner hates it, but Regner hates everything. 
You've done good work, and you deserve better than your current rank. I'm restoring your previous rank of Guardian. Congratulations. 
What's the plan, ma'am? 
Are you here to rescue me? 
Don't you worry, my friend. Nels won't get away with this. Not on my watch. 
My blood for the Empire! 
Thief! Help! 
So, I said "Rectum? You killed him!" Great work! 
We are from Bruma. 
What hole did you crawl out of? 
I've shopped there many times. The brothers never fail to please. 
The Yellow Team surprised even me with that match. Three against one! I guess they didn't know who they were dealin' with, huh? Well done! 
You shall have a true Mages' Staff soon. 
Either you or Nels is the killer! I can't trust either of you, so just stay away from me!   
Go now, Child of Sithis. Walk in the shadow of fear, and bring glory to our Dread Father. 
That's rather forward of you, don't you think? We've only just met and already you're ordering me around... 
Their link to Jyggalag gives them power. As long as their obelisk is active, they cannot truly be killed. 
Greetings, guildmate. What can I do for you? 
The guild needs you, child. Perhaps it has always needed you; always been waiting for you. 
Have you seen my friend Luronk? I'm worried about him. 
Hey, if I paid you twenty gold to spend a night in the Abandoned House, would you do it? 
Hrmph. Think they're all so high and mighty, that they've somehow got a monopoly on power. 
We're in your debt. 
I think Glarthir is having one of his bad spells lately, have you noticed? 
Elements? Inside a dream? Bah! That's the most foolish thing I've ever heard! Get away from me... you're clearly insane! 
First and foremost, I will never meet with him again. I can promise you that. Secondly, I remember him mentioning a place he had to be this very day. 
Oh... hello. 
We should check the Chapel. Come on! 
There's a killer in here and Matilde needs protection. Who better to defend her but me? I'm keeping my eye on the old woman, don't you worry. 
Really, we should be going. Her Ladyship expects results! 
I assume you've made your choice. Umbra hungers. What shall it be? 
I fashioned a tale about a "Golden Galleon" that the previous owner hid within this very vessel. It was to be a statuette made completely of gold. 
If you're ever in Cheydinhal, be sure and look us up. We have a lodge just outside the City Gates. 
This time, however, it comes from Arch-Mage Traven himself. You should go see him. 
Yes? Ah... silly me. The book has no pictures. Can't really expect you to read that, now can I? 
I admit to sharing the common enthusiasm for the Arena. It is barbaric, but the stakes of life or death make the drama irresistably compelling. 
They say there's a newcomer about. I wonder where he's from? 
You've made your choice and forsaken the name Arden-Sul. Please, leave me be. 
Give them gargen to emeet with. 
Your Speaker should look for this person in the Elden Grove, in the Wood Elven nation of Valenwood. 
Where are those Dark Elves? Let me deal with them! 
You must be joking, right? Who hasn't heard of the greatest known hero of the First Age? 
Thank you, thank you! I can't tell you how long I've been looking for this book! 
I met him in Hammerfell, but I understand he moved to Cyrodiil a few years back. The Roxey Inn, I think? You should look there for him. 
You're the boss. What orders do you have? 
To Oblivion! 
I'm glad to hear that the villagers aren't invisible anymore. It will make it easier for me to avoid them. 
You'd better have a good reason for interrupting me. Keeping these miscreants working this mudhole is no simple task. 
You just have to know the right people. Look up Ida Vlinorman and Othrelos in the Elven Gardens. They're the right people. 
It's been a pleasure Lord, now it's back to getting some rest and relaxation. All this talking has taken its toll on me. 
Go on. 
You do me too much honor. For who am I? The bastard heir of a dead Emperor. 
Lead on... to victory for the Knights of the Thorn! Oh, and you too of course. 
We're ready when you are. Just say the word and we'll follow you into that hell-spawned Gate. 
Stay away from Greenmote. Your enemy will just use it to lull you into a false sense of security before he strikes! 
Yes. I'll come with you to Weynon Priory and hear what Jauffre has to say. Lead on. 
When you bring them to me, I intend to wait until the spell wears off to capture them. I enjoy the challenge. 
I know I've lost something. Yes, that's it. I've lost many things in this strange place. Would you please help me? 
It is a small community, not far from here. If Lord Clavicus has sent you there, I suggest you be on your way. 
Farewell, friend. 
Move along. 
Surprising, don't you think, since she never seems to leave that guild hall. 
Do I look like I want to talk to you? 
You answer a simple question, and I'll think about training you. So here it is: What does the name Hazadir mean to you? 
Let us be on our way. 
The Gray Fox is hiding nearby. What do you know about him? 
I do not fear death. 
And take this key. It will allow you into the Gardens and give you direct access to my Sanctum. 
He's waiting for you. Unless he isn't. He wasn't, but then he was. Maybe he still is. 
Hello again, muthsera. 
I did, in fact. I don't think she was paying attention, though. 
Very good, My Lord. As you know, I must also take any items that might be considered stolen, in order to preserve the peace and justice of the Realm. 
The Amulet ... is it safe? 
I heard he had to flee Morrowind, and is now hiding out in the forests of Cyrodiil. If there are other cultists out there, he's probably with them. 
What's the status of the Stone of St. Alessia? Have you returned it to Cirroc yet? 
The Isles, the Isles. A wonderful place! Except when it's horrible. Then it's horribly wonderful. Good for a visit. Or for an eternity. 
Here in this Realm where secrets are power, Dyus is a being of great might. He has knowledge of events beyond even that of the Daedric Princes. 
We have trainers for block and marksman in Skingrad. And there's a shepherd who teaches athletics, too, I think. 
I saw Kud-Ei moping around outside the Mages Guild yesterday. In fact, I could swear she was crying. I hope she finds her missing friend. 
Those things are quite harmless. 
You have lifted the curse. All of Vitharn thanks you. You may keep my helmet. It never did me much good. 
Someone finally solved the problems with research at Vahtacen. You'd think the Council would know more about the Ayleids by now. 
No one wants to live in the Jerall Mountains. Well, maybe in Bruma, but they're like Nords. They don't feel the cold. 
Here's my problem. I'm being followed. Watched. Marukhati Selectives, maybe. Not sure. I'm a threat, you see? To their plans. I know too much. 
Pfft. If you weren't authorized to be here I'd conjure up an Atronach to freeze your blood cold. Watch your step. 
I don't like it, having to rebuild My Realm every era. Sometimes I forget where things go. Like New Sheoth. I can never remember where it belongs.... 
Even if you don't agree with the method, you have to respect the hard work it takes to replace a Duke. 
We need your help. 
You've done well. The Bruma garrison is much stronger now. We should be able to put up a good fight even against a determined assault. 
Yessir. 
I've heard Brodras at the Fighters Guild is well-versed in using heavy armor, especially for a wood elf. 
The Gates! The Gates! And...him! 
That is good. Remember, this is a mission of stealth, not blood. Your payment will be higher than normal to cover the expense of the forgery. 
Tenet 4: Never steal the possessions of a Dark Brother or Dark Sister. To do so is to invoke the Wrath of Sithis. 
Drels Theran. I'm the count's Special Inquisitor in charge of suppressing the Renrijra Krin insurgents. 
Third, don't steal from the poor. The peasants and beggars are under the personal protection of the Gray Fox, particularly here on the Waterfront. 
What? No! I'm loyal to Lady Syl, I swear it! I would never turn against her! I just heard a rumor, that's all! I don't know anything! 
Hah! I'll have it before sunrise! 
Yeah. Nice going. 
Hidden away, by virtue of its own self-awareness, was the sixth, containing within it the five which birthed it. Flesh!  
These certainly won't be official duties. Fact is, you'll likely be expelled from the Guild if Vilena gets wind of the fact that you're here. 
Time passes, and still you are here. Perhaps you do not wish to play the role that has been forced upon you?  
I see from your expression that you were successful. 
That's just not funny. 
You have been told what you need to know. Your path is now your own. 
The night of the theft, I was in the Great Hall, having an argument with a delivery boy from Bravil. 
Listen well, my child! The Black Hand has sanctioned the Rose of Sithis. It is an enchanted arrow that will kill Phillida... instantly! 
Light guide you, brother. 
It's the only piece of my history that validates who I am. 
Business is bad with that damn Oblivion Gate outside of town. You think things can't get any worse, and then they do. 
I'm afraid I don't have it anymore, you see. I... I sold it. To a friend of mine, Soris Arenim. 
Please accept my thanks on behalf of the people of Chorrol, for restoring this sword and the honor of our city. 
Like members of my order, the Blades are devoted to the divine Talos. We honor them for their dedication and devotion. 
What is it, Associate? Do you need something? 
Shhh! Watch if you want, but don't bother anyone. 
Another satisfied customer. 
Keep an eye out for them. 
Dementia will never be yours! 
We don't have time to talk. I want to find Blackheart. What do you need? 
Someone new comes to the Isles. Much more interesting than someone old. 
For the Blades and the Emperor! 
Don't worry, if you die I will bring you back to life. We have much left to accomplish. 
But my Eye is blind and drowned, stolen from its shrine, and hid in dark waters. 
Well, it's safe to say I'm a collector of sorts. I've invested a great deal of time and money acquiring these bits of ancient history. 
The others are dust! You alone, Breton, remain, First and Last! Beyond the next gate, your portal waits. 
You wound me, and my heart bleeds with pleasure. 
You know, throw a good punch? Can you? I'd like to find out if I'm going to spend time working with you. So are you up for a sparring match? 
A few too many loose lips, it seems. It's not something I want to be public knowledge, if you understand my meaning. 
Her tomb is in the northern croft. It's a pity about her highness. She died so young, at least for an elf. 
I went to the chapel yesterday, but Valandrus was the only one there. I figured I'd come back another time. 
Lyra Rosentia collects Akaviri artifacts. She might have a project in mind. Her house is west of the chapel. 
When more men are out there completing contracts, we all make more money. Including you. I'll get on it. 
Go tell him I want to see him right now. I'll meet him here. 
If you want to buy Benirus Manor, it's still available for a modest price. No questions asked please. Interested? 
I know you all expect me to be Emperor. I'll do my best. But this is all new to me. 
Talk is free. What do you want? 
I confess, I didn't think we had a chance against the daedra. But Martin proved himself a true heir of Talos on that day. 
Maybe they're just confused. 
And in sparing me, Sheogorath made His final mistake. In this place, I will gather a new army and dethrone our coward god once and for all! 
Please keep your weapons sheathed, and use your best manners. 
Thadon's got his cup. The world's back in order. I get it. So then why the hell are you still here bothering me? Get lost! 
I saw that Erthor is back in town again. 
Mountain lions! In her basement? I just wanted to lure her vermin outside! I didn't mean to hurt anyone, except the rats. Please, don't tell her! 
What can I make for you today? 
Well... it seems I am dying. Yes, these may be my last days in the Shivering Isles. 
Blessings. I'm Orag gra-Bargol, servant of Stendarr. May you grow in the Faith. 
Viranus, the Fighters Guild son-and-heir, is dead, and Vilena kicked Modryn Oreyn out of the guild. The Fighters Guild is falling apart. 
Your path is clear. Send Rufio to his death, and the Dark Brotherhood will embrace you as family. 
I'm Glistel. What do you need? 
The Flame is lit from the Shrine's two Altars. Once the Aureals are driven out of Cylarne, it will be our pleasure to light the Flame for Sheogorath. 
You want me to publically accuse Audens Avidius of corruption? I'd sooner swim naked in a pool filled with slaughterfish and mudcrabs! 
Tumindil does excellent work. I always feel comfortable in his care. 
As you wish, Lord. 
Well, the local wine is great. It isn't cheap. But I don't bother with beer or ale any more, and for a Nord, that's saying something. 
Please, your Grace. Hurry to Brellach while there's still time. 
Got nothing else to say to you. Get out of here before I get angry. 
Please hurry, we must know of Raynil's whereabouts. 
This is supposed to scare us? Ha! 
Armies? Pah! Armies are worthless. Killing is best by one man alone. In the dark. Sneak. Sneak. Then blood. 
I can't believe I'm saying this, but you're no longer a Pit Dog. That's right, you've actually advanced in rank. Congratulations... Brawler. 
I've got a room, and a cheap one at that. You looking for one? 
Be careful. Some things in here don't react well to magic. 
But it is one thing to talk of becoming Emperor, and quite another to actually be the Emperor. 
No opinion, huh? Maybe I'll just stay close to him for a bit. You know, hover about and see if he notices me. Maybe then we can talk. 
Or, perhaps you will learn what it is to be the hunted. 
Interesting. 
You want me to testify against Audens Avidius? You're crazy. Exactly how do you intend to persuade me to do that? 
In fact, I'd be so bold as to proclaim my collection the most complete in all Cyrodiil; perhaps even beyond. Except for one thing. 
Who are you? What do you want? I ain't done nothin'! 
At your command, Lord Sheogorath. 
Shoo! Flies, lice and disease? No, thank you. 
Then why do you waste my time? Jollring! Show him the door, if you please! 
Hear now the words of Lord Dagon. 
At the moment of my death, Lord Sheogorath appeared. We had already earned His wrath for sins of pride.  
Tar-Meena. This is my Mystic Archives. Keep it neat. Keep it quiet. No eating in the stacks. 
Now, to the matter at hand. You need a cure for vampirism, yes? I believe I can create a potion that will do the trick. But it requires a few things. 
Should you be confronted by this cowardly mage, do not hesitate to protect yourself by whatever means possible. 
Only the Demented can truly appreciate the Hunger. 
Suppose that, under the guidance of the gods, these runestones were newly consecrated to a great purpose... the founding of the Cyrodilic Empire. 
The bards will be busy composing songs in your honor for years to come. To think that we lived through such times! 
Safe journey, milady. 
Are you ready to follow me to Henantier? 
Something catchy, something the people of Cyrodiil will remember when they tell stories about your inglorious defeat! So, what's it going to be? 
We meet again, mortal, for we have met before, whether you know it or not.  
Kind of stuck-up, that one. Right before you got here I told the funniest joke about an Argonian maid, and she didn't even crack a smile. 
I love being in the guild. There's money to be made. If you'd like to join up, let me know. 
Hi there! 
Got them all, did you? Good work! I promised you a reward, and here it is. Now, go find some other work to do, you layabout! 
I'm afraid there's little I can do to assist you, unless you have the wood we need to start. Bring me some wood, and we can get to work. 
You're up against a swordsman, an archer and a spellcaster. Two lower level combatants, plus that Yellow Team Champion you've seen down here. 
Umbra. It is everything. 
We will make sure each person on these tax rolls gets their money back. 
Come, I have much to tell you. A tavern is right over here. We will drink a toast to Umbacano. 
And if you don't, I'll swallow your soul and vomit it into the Everfilling Chamberpot of the Ageless. 
I'm afraid I cannot follow you beyond this point, Inquisitor. My duties require me to stay within Crucible. I shall be there if you need me. 
Knowing their fate, they sealed themselves up in the vampire's lair. Their suffering weighs heavily on me.  
Bat gro-Orkul is so stingy with the armory. He should dance today. He may cost us our town today. Then we'll see who dances! 
Words cannot to do justice for the joy I feel... many blessings upon you, my friend. I do not have much, but I wish to reward such valor. 
Dagail has been training high ranking mages more about mysticism. And he's also been researching sheep, from what I hear. 
It's hard to complain. The food is good, and the service is excellent. 
Thanks again, assassin. Your services have been invaluable. Soon I will find passage out of Cyrodiil, and be rid of those moneylenders forever! 
The room at the end of the hall upstairs is yours for the night. Dream well. 
Ever since then, he's been drunk. Sure, he gets rowdy sometimes, but he's never hurt anyone. 
It's not a bad place, when Bernice feels up to cooking and cleaning. 
Shhhh, not so loud. How many time have I told you that? 
The Council is in complete disarray at the news of Mannimarco's presence in Cyrodiil. 
Gweden isn't far; they're taking quite a risk committing these crimes so close to Anvil. 
Your Grace! You... you're alive! Truly, you are the greatest warrior ever to hold the seat of Dementia!  
Very well. Should you happen to find it, it would be in the best interest of all for it to be secure here within the guild hall. 
Long ago I made a promise to Bradon. I promised to never reveal to anyone what I'm about to reveal to you now. 
With the Count worrying more about his son than the defense of the city, things were looking pretty grim. 
I was once in Syl's interrogation cell. I counted 35 dead rats in there. Of course, I had to kill a couple to get the count that high. 
The guilds are inside the north walls, to the west. 
I have hoped for this moment since I took command of the Mazken at Cylarne. I return my soul to the embrace of Oblivion's dark waters. Farewell. 
As a Knight of the Thorn, you are now expected to carry this symbol of your knighthood. Carry it proudly and wear it well. 
Greetings. What news from Cloud Ruler Temple? 
Of course, since we can't get inside, we don't know how strong their numbers are, or whether we really have a chance at this. 
Yes. I'm an Orc. I was born under a rock, and I have no parents. So I don't need a family name. 
Good day. I'm Tolgan, herald to Countess Narina Carvain here in Bruma. She requests your company at your earliest convenience. 
You also managed to leave Phillida's severed finger as a warning to his successor. Well done! Your bonus, 500 additional gold coins, is well earned. 
It's our duty to strike back. We need to make a move against them. And we need to do it now. 
Newcomers to the isles, you say? Bah! Unless they're here to work my farms, I couldn't care less. 
He reminds me of the guards under my father's employ. Strict, no-nonsense, and ready to fight at a moment's notice. 
Residents of Fellmoor have complained of creatures encroaching on their lands. Perhaps you might be of some help, time permitting. 
Llensi Llaram. Fighters Guild, through and through. 
Your killing of the old man Baenlin... the execution of Adamus Phillida... the way you stalked and murdered each member of the Draconis family...  
A bit eccentric. Loves old things. He's practically got a museum upstairs. But he'd never let anybody else see it, oh no! 
Yeah, I know all about it. I overheard Agata and Dagail talking. And you know what? I'm glad it's gone! 
Get me out of the castle and I'll give you his message. 
How did you fare? 
Here is your reward and bonus. Both have been well earned. Go now and rest, and may the Night Mother guard your dreams. 
I've been watching you fight, my friend. It's a good thing we're both on the Blue Team, 'cause I sure as blazes wouldn't want to go up against you!  
Speak with Raminus Polus at the Arcane University. He can lift the suspension, and get you back on track. 
You are no longer one of us! Fighters Guild spy! Traitor! Your life is forfeit! 
Well, of course. I mean, there's always something there I need. And Seed-Neeus gives a fair price. 
There is a related book that needs to be recovered. It was recently loaned to Janus Hassildor, the Count of Skingrad. I'd like you to retrieve it. 
My pardon, Emissary. I am at your service. 
The poison of the Elytra can be debilitating. 
I'm at your service, my lord. 
The bed is quite luxurious, is it not? 
You must be referring to Mankar Camoran's "Commentaries on the Mysterium Xarxes." A common mistake. 
Sorry, friend. It's not safe here. Can't talk now. Got to move. Carefully. Don't want to bring the place down on our heads! 
Yes? 
I'd love some work. Seems like joining the Blackwood Company is the only way to get it, though. 
Greetings. It is high time that we meet face to face, don't you think? 
Wait, I know you... You... You're the one! That day the Emperor was killed! They went through your cell! You lucky bastard! But... You came back? 
Every time I pass by that woman's house, I hear odd animal noises and smell a foul odor. Maybe she's caring for some sick pet or something. 
I can't believe it! The Gray Prince has been beaten! There's a new Arena Grand Champion now, someone called Shadowstep! 
Have you ever browsed the goods at Three Brothers Trade Goods? 
I feel Ulrich's eyes upon me as we speak, so be brief. 
Have you ever spent the night at the King and Queen Tavern? 
With all due respect to our wonderful leader... 
Why would I be so stupid as to carry it around? It's safe in my home. Yes, that's right. Are you going to go and get it yourself? I think not. 
Hahaha! Oh, you're a funny one! Good, I'm glad one of us has a sense of humor about all of this. It will make our time here that much more enjoyable. 
I heard he lives with Zoe Malene. 
Please, leave me to my grief. 
I don't think I'm going to make it! 
Heard there's a new Gatekeeper. Spends all day by that huge wall. It's bound to fall in on him. 
Ah, it's you! You're the one... err... who are you again? 
You're not supposed to be here now. Leave, please. 
Seek out Sinderion, a resident alchemist of Skingrad. Strange plants are his specialty. 
My cousin says the beggars all work for the Gray Fox. It's rather frightening. 
Most of our information on the Necromancers has come from an informant inside the cult itself, a guild member who offered to infiltrate their ranks. 
Tootle-loo! Ahaha! 
Strange noises? They should have the guards look into that. 
Listen well, child of Sithis. You have been chosen to perform the ancient rite known as Purification. Everyone inside the Sanctuary must die! 
No. He is not one of them. 
Maybe the best thing to do is fight them with spells -- lots of spells. Don't use a weapon. 
I understand that Othrelos isn't a bad man to talk to, if you need to learn how not to be seen. 
Yes, you learned that it is the ruin now known as Malada. Were you able to recover the carving yet? 
I must see Rythe. 
You're interested in joining? Great things will be expected of you. Are you sure you're ready for it? 
The nobility hate him, but the peasants and the beggars love him, especially in the Waterfront. 
Forgive me. You were right to bring it. But you'd better give it to me. I know some ways to protect myself from its evil power. 
But I'm convinced the Mazken don't expect us to come that way. 
Those wanted posters of the Gray Fox are everywhere. 
Those traps up ahead will cut my Aureals to pieces! 
The armies have returned. Thank the Madgod! I've had nightmares about them disappearing. 
I understand. The Cheydinhal Black horse is only for the most discriminating of customers. 
Farewell, Brother. 
Hmm, what? I'm rather busy right now. 
You have done well enough for yourself. I'll pass along my recommendation to Raminus. 
I don't know what her problem is, and I don't care. Her money's good, and that's all I need to know. 
Why do you get to go to a party? It's not fair. I hope they discover the truth and kill you in your sleep!  
Everyone is talking about that damned Resonator of Judgment -- talking instead of working. 
Follow me! The Temple is our only hope! 
I feel sorry for Norbert Lelles. He's a good man, but he gets taken in so easily. 
I confess I have a weakness for crystals of a magical nature, and I must add these to my collection. 
I'll be having a very long talk with my impetuous son. I don't blame him directly for their deaths, but he must learn to do things the proper way. 
What kind of deal can I make for you today? 
The pride casts out the hunter until the fine is paid. Is the hunter prepared to pay the fine? 
Greetings, fellow Altmer. 
All I can tell you is Syl is rarely seen in public, and her staff takes care of the day-to-day activities. 
Oh, I loved it! Best I've ever seen. You're one of the Realm's greatest artists, if you ask me. 
Well there's the obvious way. But don't let us see you do it. Sheogorath has a thousand eyes and ears. 
Whew. I've never worked so hard on a formula in my life, but I got your Grand Elixir of Exploration done. 
I'll remember that when I'm lying on the beaches of Sumerset Isle with your wife, you Imperial pig! 
I know these stars well, and I wonder... which sign marked your birth? 
I'm not easily impressed, but even I would think twice before going into one of those Oblivion Gates. Well done. 
Oh, and the place is fairly bare. If I were you, I'd head on over to Nilawen at The Fair Deal and get some furnishings. 
<screaming in pain> 
Shhh! You'll spook the deer! 
The Night Mother wishes for you to take some time to consider your new position. We will speak when we are back in the Sanctuary. 
Oh, I shouldn't... well, all right. Gogron had a pet rabbit as a child! He petted the thing so hard he crushed its skull! Ha ha ha! What a brute! 
The Bruma guild hall has been decimated. Our hall could be next! 
Ah, your tone is more in line with my station. Please, continue. 
He was a traitor. Thanks to you, the Order lives on. Long live the Order! 
A hail and hardy welcome, friend. 
You have what you need, don't you? Time to seek out Muurine, I think. 
He's a warrior, a battle-hardened mercenary who's spent time all over Tamriel. He'll keep his prize tree locked away. You'll need to find his key. 
Poor fella. 
This next opponent is your standard axe-armed Orc. He's in a Heavy Raiment, and looks pretty fit. Nothin' you can't handle. 
When we decided to make the group official, Seridur offered his basement as our headquarters. Quite nice, isn't it? 
I could be wrong, but it seems to me there's something shady going on at the Oak and Crosier. 
Once Phillida is dead, sever his finger, the one that bears an Imperial Legion signet ring!  
You got him? 
I'm here because even though I'm afraid, I know that we have to do this. Father would feel the same way. 
This is a classy event. I don't know you. I don't like you. And you're not dressed for it, anyway. 
He decided to test the theory. Cast a spell. Split us all in two. Do we get twice the work done? No! Ridiculous. 
Stand clear of the cistern. Over here by me. 
I've been told to send you to Chorrol for some duties. Speak with Oreyn. 
Hello again. 
Here's your copy of the Black Horse Courier. New Imperial Watch captain. 
No? Very well. Should you change your mind, you know where to find me. 
I suppose that's just the kind of person you want training other mages. 
If.... If I don't make it, take the key and carry on without me. You need to reach the tower at the north wall of the city. 
I have no desire to speak to you until the blood price is paid. 
I sure don't like the looks of that Gate. 
That sniveling Legion dog must die! Do you understand me? He's the murderer! He killed all those people! He must pay for what he's done! 
You would dare?!?! We had a bargain, little hero. You would risk my wrath for a pitiful little sword? I will be watching you mortal. And waiting. 
You are strong like Him. I made you for Him. But still He refuses me. Why? 
While Faelian walks the streets of the Imperial City, the Night Mother weeps in her restlessness. Kill this High Elf, and all will be well. 
She was expelled from the Mages Guild for this belief, and for the... extreme nature of her experiments. 
Have you ever spoken with Varnado at The Best Defense? 
This is a travesty. A complete and utter travesty. The crystal ball is just sitting there in the hold, but I'll be damned if I'm going back onboard. 
Pale skin, snotty expression. You're a Breton! The masters of magicka, right? Hmph. You're nothing but a stuck-up harlot with cheap parlor tricks. 
It's funny. I don't even know you, and already I don't like you. 
This is the part where you fall down and bleed to death! 
Hey, did you hear that? Thought I heard someone calling for a guard. I guess that's our cue.  
Goodbye, my friend! And remember, you're always welcome here! 
I am sorry about that. Just use the Reverse Invisibility scroll I gave you. 
Behold the new hero of the people of Cyrodiil! Behold, your Arena Grand Champion, Shadowstep! 
You looking for me? 
I can't believe I'm alive! 
You'll dance for me, little one, yes, you will. I'll make your corpse dance, and then tear itself apart! 
For years, I have fed my blade the souls of man and mer. Warriors and priests, kings and paupers. Men, women, and children. All have bled for me. 
Fall before me, scum! 
Oh, yes, I have one of those... no, that's the one that I misplaced the other day. I'd really like to replace it, but funds are so tight... 
The Gatekeeper's been killed, I hear. Now who knows what new faces I'll get a chance to mangle. 
If you need more, you know where to find me. I'm nearly always at work. 
I wonder if the new Duke of Dementia is a patron of the arts. Perhaps he will be more appreciative of my act than Lady Syl. 
Remain leery of Seridur, he's much more cunning than you may suspect. 
Have you been to Wellspring Grove? 
Just got a look at the new Maglir guy. Another 'eight-pint hero', if you ask me. 
May the Goddess watch you. 
Make him sing. 
Just one more time. At least. He's a sport. 
Praise be! 
I don't know if he ever wrote your recommendation. I'm sorry. I didn't expect this to happen. Perhaps you should go look and see if he did write one? 
This is it. The entrance to the passage is right here. I'll unlock it for you. 
My friends, we have a winner! Behold, the combatant from the Blue Team! If you bet on the Blue Team, see the Gatekeeper to collect your winnings! 
I hope the room meets your needs. 
The Lord of Order shall rule this Realm! 
Tell me what you learned about Toutius Sextius. 
I hope this is as much fun for you as it is for me. 
I've never heard of it. Why do you ask? 
Someone turns up dead and you have nothing better to do than pester me about that fine young man? How truly pathetic you are.  
Take a few moments to catch your breath and think it over. When you're ready, let me know, and we'll get underway.  
Welcome to Black Waterside Stables. Finest horses in all Cyrodiil. And I'm speaking literally. I'm Tovas Selvan, the owner. 
You're being rude. 
See Azzan in Anvil or Burz gro-Khash in Cheydinhal for contracts. 
Welcome to Jensine's 'Good as New' Merchandise. I'm Jensine. Take your time. I'll be right here. 
I'm pretty handy. What needs to be fixed? 
Afternoon, sir. 
We're done here. 
Gold, that's what! Septims, and lots of them! Show me that you've got the starting capital, at least ten thousand in liquid assets. 
Isn't the Tap and Tack a relaxing place to visit? 
The Countess is in attendance from 8 in the morning until 6 in the evening. 
The Mouth of the Panther is what they call the delta where the Panther River meets Niben Bay. 
Not a lot to tell. He doesn't much like company, and spends most of his time in his room. Manheim thinks he's hiding out from someone. 
You're my only hope. 
Ganredhel can teach you about Acrobatics, for a price. Of course, she'd rather be training her dogs. 
How could you do that to all those innocent people? What did they ever do to you? 
By Shinji, we have a new Champion! All hail the Blue Team! Victorious Champion, return to the Bloodworks now and see the Blademaster! Well done!   
Touching a vampire, or even the corpse of a vampire, can result in infection. Do be careful! If you want to know more, browse our library. 
But two tribes are at war, and their war parties are crossing right through Cropsford. What you'll need to do is stop the war somehow. 
That torch in New Sheoth is lit. Hopefully, that will burn off some of the airborne germs. It won't get all of them, though. 
This is no time for gossip mongering. A dark destiny awaits us.  
We've got to kill that cold-loving bastard before he turns on us! You cover me while I strike the killing blow! 
Emfrid? She owns the Grey Mare, right? Huh. I go to the Oak and Crosier.  
So, I assume you're the one who's been sent to track us down. Damn stone was more trouble than it was worth. 
Are you the best the Madgod could muster? 
Oh. That's a shame. I don't see how three farmers can fight a whole tribe of goblins, but I'm sure we'll figure something out. 
I plan to visit the Imperial City soon to pay my respects at the Temple of the One. They say the Dragon Statue is 100 feet high! 
I'm sorry, but I don't think so. The guild doesn't accept wanted criminals. Get rid of that bounty on your head, and perhaps I'll reconsider. 
We will not speak of training here. When I have settled myself in my favorite spot in the bay, then we shall talk. Follow me there, if you wish. 
I've heard they have good magic trainers over at the Mages Guild. 
Where you heard this information I'll never know, but please don't mention it again. Accusation without proof is unfounded. 
I'm afraid you'll have to speak to Falcar about that.  
I can't believe it! The Gray Prince has been beaten! There's a new Arena Grand Champion now, someone called the Tamriel Terror! 
Instead, you must report to Ocheeva, here in the Sanctuary. She will be providing all your contracts from now on, and is waiting for you as we speak. 
I trust there were no run-ins with the guards in the barracks. 
Bernadette Peneles works over at the Tamika Winery. They make a quality wine there. 
You... you do not belong here. You are a stranger! 
Do you remember that matter you asked me to look into? I have some new information. In short... What you proposed IS possible! 
The lands of Dementia have a new ruler. Perhaps we'll finally take care of this Scalon problem once and for all. 
Alright. Please, come back soon. I'll wait for you here. 
If you're applying to join the guild, you'll need to speak with one of the local guild heads. Carahil would be the one to talk to here. 
Fadus Calidius sure can use a shield. I've never seen him take a hit! 
You've done it! The Ritual is complete, and you've survived! Who'd have thought? Now, on to other... 
I - I'm sorry. I've been hiding up here in this cabin and I've forgotten my manners. Try and understand. I loved her, I'd never harm her! 
I still don't like you, but you do good work. 
Crucible can be a dangerous place. 
There's more to tell. 
I've noticed the same thing. I wonder what's going on there. 
As you wish, sire. I would imagine that is for the best. 
I hope there isn't something you need from me. Being needed is worse than being forgotten, isn't it? I think so. Well, go on. Go on. 
This one moves! A welcome change. So, mortal, you have found my shrine, and you have seen my followers. They are an embarrassment to me. 
Nice present! Good! And from a nice Orc, too! Double good! 
I heard some nice fellow found her held prisoner in some cave, and rescued her.  What a romantic story! 
And I aim to keep it that way. You were right about one thing though... 
Yes, I've seen him, but never spoken to him.  He seems to be at the Low Gate every morning when I pass by on my way to the castle. 
I'm Brother Jauffre. What do you want? 
Brace yourself. 
If you know how to close that Gate, be my guest. My orders are to hold this position, and that's what I intend to do. 
Sweet moon sugar. 
Against all hope, you returned from Camoran's Paradise with the Amulet of Kings! We now have a chance to turn back Dagon's invasion. 
The Oblivion Gates will close, and Mehrunes Dagon's invasion will have failed. 
I don't know what you are talking about. I don't buy or sell things. 
Visit her at the Leyawiin Guild hall. But be aware that she's a bit...  odd. 
I'm the Count's man's-man in all occasions... have been for donkey's years. I run the Count's errands and do whatever's required. 
Mankar Camoran has a lot to answer for. No wonder he never comes down to the Eternal Garden. 
I see that you've been suspended from the guild. I've never had to deal with this before, but I do know what you'll need to do. 
Hope you rot, criminal scum. 
Oleed-Ei, Blackwood Company Master-of-Assassins.  
I've got my orders for now. Check back in a month or so, and we can talk about what to do next. 
The source of my income, of course. I bought it for a song from a foolish Orc. My ogres mine the gold, and I reap the reward. 
Sorry. 
No. Who are you? 
My services are only for Fighters Guild members. Nothing personal. 
Not far from from the ruins of Fort Sutch lie the ruins of a tower. That tower was once part of the Fort Sutch Abbey.  
Have you discovered anything new? 
Don't you worry, my friend. I'll get us out of here! 
Before the Arcane University was founded in the second era, Crystal Tower on Summerset Isle was the source of all magical learning. 
Behold the Savage Garden, where my disciples are tempered for a higher destiny: to rule over Tamriel Reborn. 
Unlike the Daedra Lords, the gods have no artifacts, and do not physically manifest themselves in our world. 
I've just discovered that water is actually heavier than air. Who would have thought? 
And, to thank you more personally, I shall teach you this spell. You may find it useful in certain circumstances. 
The services provided at the Arcane University are just priceless. You can create your own enchantments there! 
What can I do? He's a Captain of the Imperial Watch. Only another Watch Captain can arrest him. Fat chance of that happening. 
No. YOU must kill me. 
I require weapons. For myself and for the Apostles that will help me do the deed. But Ciirta already is suspicious of me. 
You've done well. 
Once I can see J'skar again, I'd be more than happy to write a recommendation for you. 
[Knight of Order POWER ATTACK sound] 
Why would someone invite us here? Why would they just give away an entire chest of gold? If I didn't know better, I'd say this whole thing is a trap. 
Why would Thadon need a stupid Chalice when he could simply have me as a refreshment?  
The Imperial City is located on a large island surrounded by Lake Rumare. 
Until I hear your name spoken by others, don't expect any training from me. When you're known as a hero or a villain, I might change my mind. 
It's not my place to question the wisdom of Lucien Lachance or the Black Hand, but trusting you with the Rose of Sithis? It is... folly. 
Acquire a taste for rat stew while you were in there? Hehe. 
The Tower guards the Gate, but the Gate holds the Key.  
Good to see you're working hard. I've got some more thieves for you to deal with in Anvil. 
The Gray Fox wants this list replaced with one that highly recommends Hieronymus Lex. From Anvil he can do little harm to the guild. 
Hurry! There's no telling how much time I have left! 
We are safe. For now. 
You... you do not belong here. Quickly! Put on a robe before the others see you! They will kill you on sight! 
The Surilie house is right next door to mine. A large house with a backyard conveniently located to observe my every move. 
I am Arriana Valga, Countess of Chorrol. 
Add some onion and... wait. I almost walked into that one. No, of course not. That would be wrong. You shouldn't eat horses. 
I can help you. You need my help if you are ever to leave the Forbidden Grotto. 
She's in the Lonely Suitor Lodge for her noon meal. That much I'm sure of. 
My pardon, lord. Receive this key, and with it free passage throughout the Shrine of the Flame of Agnon. 
Waiting's been difficult, I hope your journey was successful. 
One leads to Mania, one to Dementia. Two shades of madness. 
Something's wrong... I can tell. What's happened to Aleron? 
He must die. It's the only way. 
You are truly an asset to this Sanctuary. Here's hoping all of our contracts work out that well! 
Your reward, Brothers and Sisters! The time of Cleansing draws nigh. I go now to Paradise. I shall return with Lord Dagon at the coming of the Dawn! 
Just keep your eyes on the menu, and off of Sheer Meedish. 
A most interesting plant. From the planes of Oblivion itself, so it may require some effort to find. 
There's islands in Niben Bay no one has visited in a hundred years. No telling what you'll find. 
Who is Gaiden Shinji? Are you serious?  
Here is... well, I think there used to be something very Odd here, but it seems to be missing now. Let's move on. 
Forgive me, but now is not a time for talk. We must reach the Wellspring with all possible haste. If it is damaged, we are lost. 
I am the wrath of the righteous! 
Have you heard? The Oblivion Gate at Bruma -- they've shut it down! The Daedra will never defeat the people of the Empire! Never! Ha ha!  
Have respect for the dead while you are down here. 
Syl never has anyone tortured. She's a gentle and kind leader. She trusts everyone, and is therefore trustworthy. 
Is something wrong? Why are we stopping? 
Did you hear that Dar-Ma came back, safe and sound?  You know, Seed-Neeus's daughter, the Argonians. 
Into the Skingrad dungeons? Not likely. Not unless you got yourself arrested. Of  course you are a thief. Just break in. 
He even stole her Mages' Staff! 
I would like to send help, but unfortunately my guard is short-handed with the death of Captain Lerus. I need all my soldiers at home right now. 
If we follow the waters of the Wellspring, we will surely find her. 
But you shamed my kin at Ganonah. To bring you into my service... that would also bring me honor. 
All I know is there seems to be four of them. They blindfolded me before they put me in here, so I didn't see much. 
Well met, citizen. I see few new faces these days, it seems. With the Emperor's murder, a darkness has fallen upon all of Cyrodiil.  
Ready to find J'skar? 
I heard from Bernice that Ushnar might get another dog, a new dog. Maybe Ushnar will let me pet him. 
I'm Weebam-Na. What do you want? 
Kyn and Valkyn! 
I hope Ohtesse is taking care of herself. She's a gifted healer, and she spends all her time helping others. 
Although I admit, things are not going according to plan. 
I saw the Zaxer. And I magged it too. Aw, fribble! 
They'll pay for the murder of the Emperor. Now that we know who they are, it's only a matter of time. 
Yes, we are based out of Cheydinhal. Our leader, Farwil Indarys, is the son of the Count of Cheydinhal, Andel Indarys. 
I was in my studio, when a Bosmer wearing dark clothing accosted me. Before I could call for help, he knocked me unconscious. 
Uurwen the Evoker. I'm responsible for enchanted item recharge for the Cheydinhal guildhall. 
Irlav sent you, did he? Figures.  
He's been around for hundreds of years. I've heard tell that he is immortal. I don't know about that, but he sure ain't normal. 
The guild can provide you with some training, but the best trainers are usually very hard to find. 
I don't suppose you've found those fugitives yet. 
He can't leave! Bliss must be protected! 
I've heard stories of a woman who traveled the world on foot before settling down somewhere in Cyrodiil... Anvil, I think it was. 
I feel like I need to be on the other side. I'm just not sure how to get in. 
I am Lord Rugdumph gro-Shurgak. How may I persist you? 
Where has Sheogorath gone? Mama always said, "The Prince of Madness is a basket of riddles." 
I understand you're looking for a cure for vampirism. 
I'm Dion, captain of the Skingrad Guard. 
Seems like I've seen one of those before. But I guess it is Odd enough for the Museum... but I certainly can't justify buying it from you. 
At your service, Master. 
All is not well here. The Gnarls are disturbed. Order is spreading among them, and thus into the Font. Find the Pools and stop the taint of Order! 
Great! There's a... a simple task. Yes, a simple task that you must perform. 
I don't know what you're talking about. Get out of my shop. 
Really? Then you shouldn't have brought up the subject. 
The Isles are safer now. 
Three guests have been slaughtered, and you want to ask me about that Legion dog? I don't know who I hate more, you or him! 
Oh? We must? Well, last I saw, you didn't outrank me, Journeyman. I suggest you mind your manners... and your own business. 
Have you ever had a meal at The Feed Bag? 
You... You would do that for me? You are truly a good friend. Yes, I... I fear this is beyond even my ability. I'm not as young as I used to be. 
I went to the Imperial City in hopes of joining the Thieves Guild. Now I am forced to live as a freelance thief. 
The Madgod is no match for my Lord Jyggalag! 
You may be a killer, but are you an actor? I think not. The guests will discover your true identity and you will never leave that house alive. 
How little you understand! 
I should have the final part of the ritual deciphered soon. It's only a matter of time now. 
Don't worry about him. We'll handle it. 
So, the Countess hired you to find the painting, eh? Well, you'll not find it by gawking at me. 
Someone's been killed, and you know what my real problem is? Trying to decide who did it, you or that worthless Nord. 
Though the darkness comes, I feel no fear. In your glory, bring us to the light. 
You? Why would I want to talk with you? Very well, out with it before I change my mind and add you to my list of experiments! 
So I would ask that you take up the search on my behalf. If you are successful, I will reward you in whatever small way I can. Will you aid me? 
Okay. You? 
Just let me know when you're ready for a match and we can get this over with. 
It's about time. 
Two people dead, and you're still alive. I'm sorry, but you're starting to make me nervous. Please go away. 
You'd better watch your tongue, old man! Captain Tussaud hears you talkin' like that, he'll cut it out! Now come on. We been gabbin' long enough. 
I should only say this once. I will go away when you hit goodbye. 
I assist Her Ladyship so that her enlightened policies might achieve the greatest  possible influence upon the affairs of County Leyawiin. 
Except for Jearl coming back from a trip down south, things are pretty quiet. Not much travel right now with the Oblivion Crisis. 
Whatever it is, she should clean up her act. It's surprising that a wealthy woman like that would let her property fall into such disarray. 
Kill it.... 
It looks thievy to this one. 
There you are, some of the best combat moves you'll ever learn! You'll need them if you want to last more than five seconds against me in the Arena. 
Spare me. 
Quite clever, eh? 
Someone new in the Isles? Oh no, I don't want that. Perhaps Syl will put a stop to it. 
Out of the frying pan into the fire, eh? 
You won the last round. I salute your bold spirit! 
If that's Theranis' treasure, I know where it is. But I'm not telling you anything until we're out of here. Get me out of the castle. 
When you leave here, we will not speak again, unless I deem it necessary. Ah yes, there is one last thing. I have for you a very special gift. 
Good. I need a weapon. But it doesn't look like you have any! Go get them. And quick. 
Please, I'd like to be left alone. 
The Nibeneans think they're slick. 'Slippery' is more like it. 
The Prince of Destruction he referred to is none other than Mehrunes Dagon, one of the lords of the demonic world of Oblivion. 
Good work. 
Also, he seemed sober, which is a refreshing change. Usually Reynald is stumbling around Chorrol drunk as can be. 
I can't tell you about that. Please, just go. 
Dedicated to the last! I cannot thank you enough for bringing the gem here. I have need of it immediately. 
I still don't believe it's real. If it was real, you'd have some sort of proof, right? Well, I don't see any proof. 
No service for the likes of you. Take a hike. 
A lot of mages swear by Rindir's Staffs. 
It seems They have been thwarted for now. I know They're still plotting against me, though. It's only a matter of time. 
We've managed to slow them down this time. 
Kurdan doesn't make most of his money being a simple usurer. He also invented what he calls the Hunter's Run. 
Go back to your sty, pig man. 
You're probably wondering what this one is doing in this gods-forsaken wilderness. Same here. S'razirr doesn't get paid nearly enough for this. 
Please, you must help me! 
Ohhh... I'm a bit stiff, but quite fine otherwise. Ah yes, the Undercroft. My family members are buried here, you know. 
The Gatekeeper's dead. Relmyna is very unhappy about that. 
Good thing we have the Black Horse Courier. I don't know how we'd get our news without it. 
What will I do with my collection of curiosities when I go? Donate them to the Castle, of course.  
What do you want, Slop Drudge? 
I warned you to leave, and you didn't listen. Brethren! Help me! 
If you go to New Sheoth, beware. Syl has been rounding people up and asking them strange questions. 
I'm sorry. I didn't know. 
[Knight of Order Hit Sound] 
I can show you some new things. 
Once again, Jyggalag walks! 
Well, I've heard that recent events in Syl's court have made Kithlan a bit disillusioned with its leadership. But you didn't hear that from me. 
Bumph gra-Gash is very skilled in heavy armor use. I wouldn't want to get on her bad side. 
It wasn't long after that the Knights came. 
But wait, I'm sorry. I'm being selfish. You're a Champion, and have the right to challenge me for my Grand Champion title. Is that your wish? 
I can't thank you enough for returning it, friend. 
Perhaps I wasn't clear. I cannot spare time to talk with you. Would you be so kind as to leave me alone? 
I shall remain here, Arch-Mage. 
Right, what can I do for you, citizen. 
I guess things will go back to normal now that there is a new Gatekeeper. Oh well, I was looking forward to some drama. 
I wish to tell you a story, so that you might understand why I would trust you with my secrets. Would you hear it? 
Dovesi is a sweet young lass. She reminds me of someone I knew. But perhaps we should talk about something else. 
Vilena is pretty useless since Vitellus died. Thank gods Oreyn is around to keep things together. 
I think I'm close to deciphering more of the ritual. I hope to have made some progress by the time you return with a daedric artifact. 
Have you seen Eitar making trouble again with the Khajiits and Argonians? 
Infiltrating the Imperial Prison is no small matter. Those guards are heavily armed and professionally trained. If discovered, don't be a fool. Flee! 
That's terrible! 
Yikes! Get away from me you foul beast! Somebody help! A mountain lion has gotten into the village! 
I am Sister Angrond of Gottlesfont Priory. We gather and prepare healing herbs and mushrooms. 
All right, but only because it's you. 
Not now. There's work to be done. 
Know what's funny about having a double? Nothing! 
Dovesi couldn't have been any more than fifteen years old. What threat could she have posed? Why was she murdered? Damn it, I mean to find out! 
Indeed. Lord Sheogorath will be anxious to hear of our victory, I am sure. 
At least hear me out before you decide to end my life. 
This place has been nothing but trouble, as far as I'm concerned. 
Sheogorath has vanished? He proves his cowardice! Leaving us here to die at the hands of Order. 
Yeah! 
We operate throughout the Imperial City and Cyrodiil. Very fast, very accurate. News happens? The Black Horse Courier is there!   
Hieronymus Lex is still in the Imperial City. Do not speak to me of this again until the letter is properly replaced. 
The fences report to me how much loot you have turned over to them. When you've added more to the guild coffers, come back and see me. 
Well, well. Word is finally spreading, is it? They won't be able to keep up this facade much longer! 
Take this as a token of my thanks. 
If they're reluctant to help, you just say the word and I'll do my best to persuade them. 
I run the North Country Stables. 
I don't think so. I'll tell you what real trouble is. It's trying to pay my debtors when there's no work. It's my wife taking in wash to buy food. 
I'm sure he can provide very highly detailed descriptions of the women. 
Ah! You are just in time. Go quickly. The Aureals may attack at any moment. 
That's unfortunate. Let me know if you change your mind. 
I thought we had more time. I thought we had a chance. My plan has failed. And we were so close.... 
Please come with me, Your Grace. According to the law, any stolen property must be handed over, then you're free to go. 
You won't help me? You're abandoning me now, just when I need you the most?! 
It seems an odd skill for a priest. 
The infamous Gray Fox! You're the most famous thief in the world! 
Look, I assure you, this is of the utmost importance. Together, we may be able to save the lives of many innocents. I implore you to follow. 
I've heard you mentioned in hushed tones. Quite the evil doer, are you? Well, what's infamy but another type of fame, after all. 
I love you, Pyke. 
Take this! 
The new Gatekeeper will keep out those horrible Khajiit. 
When I first joined the family, this Sanctuary was controlled by another Speaker. Lucien took over when she was killed while fulfilling a contract. 
You look upset that we deceived you. Please, don't be. 
Oh, thank you. You're just too kind. 
It sounds like you and Baurus are making progress in your hunt for the Amulet of Kings. Good work. 
Well, then. I trust my servants didn't give you too hard a time getting in here. Haha! What is it Sheogorath's lackey requires of me? 
The Resonator was my idea, you know. People never remember that, but it was. I'm glad it's working again. 
Four of the night watch, and all's well. Wish I was in bed, ma'am.  
All else is put aside to celebrate of our deliverance from evil. Thanks to Akatosh and his servant Martin. 
If he's on his way, I'm on My way out. I already feel not quite Myself. Not quite someone else... but not quite Myself. 
I do not blame you for my son's death. He brought that upon himself, as hard as it is for a father to admit. 
Goodbye. If you find any interesting things, let me know. 
There isn't much to tell you about Albert Jemane. He was one of my best, then he got greedy. The rest is history. 
The defenders of the gate were not the only ones to fail their town. My greatest shame is that I was struck by cowardice and fled. 
Second, never kill anyone on the job. This is not the Dark Brotherhood. Animals and monsters can be slain if necessary. 
Varnado at The Best Defense knows a lot about Heavy Armor. 
It's good to see a friendly face. I feared we'd never see anyone from Cyrodiil again. 
However, the universal belief that runestones are magical, despite all evidence, is good reason to suspect that the runestones are indeed magical. 
Ah, yes. This is indeed the correct book. You've not been able to open it, I presume? Then all is well. 
You don't have the money for the room. Perhaps some other time. 
That Resonator keeps adventurers trapped until they die. Lots of bones in there. 
I've made some progress on the Mysterium Xarxes. I think I've identified the section that deals with opening a portal to Camoran's Paradise. 
The Gatekeeper walks again. He'll help keep Sheer-Meedish safe. 
Thadon has his Chalice back. Doesn't he know a good leader doesn't need any of that? Just his native intelligence. I would know. 
There are plenty of sights to see, and plenty of places to shop, but the Watch frowns on brawling and adventuring in the city. 
Chanel and Orgnolf both reside in the Private Quarters section. They have been restricted to remain indoors, so they should be easy to find. 
The scrolls I have given you should protect you from the magic the mage seems to use most frequently, but do not let your guard down. 
I'll hold onto the spoon. Wouldn't want this to fall into the wrong hands. 
The knife I gave you has been coated with a rare poison called Languorwine. You need only cut Motierre once, and he will appear to die.    
I am Bat gro-Orkul, warden of the armory. If you need weapons or armor, I've got them. 
Ready? You call that ready? You're not even wearing your Battle Raiment! Don't talk to me again until you're suited up, you disrespectful maggot! 
Thadon with his Chalice. No Fork for Big Head. Songs of sadness. 
Your desires are my command, my lord. 
Thank you for coming forward, citizen. 
This is it. The entrance to Silorn is just ahead. 
Desideratus is a little too attached to that doll, if you know what I mean. They don't like to dance. It gives me the creeps.  
I'm not sure I can trust you. Why don't you just move along. 
Blessings of Akatosh upon ye. 
Have you made any progress? Is it safe for us to go to Cropsford yet? 
Next is the plague of Famine. It is foretold that our livestock will fall dead in their fields, with no apparent explanation. 
A curious thing, that. Long roads get longer too, if you're thinking about them, but what about long words? They don't change nearly as much. 
Kantav Cheynoslin. I am the Primate of Leywiin, and Zenithar's Advocate. 
You've made it, and just in time. We've got trouble with goblins here. I'll take the bow. You give the weapons to my other two men. 
I've heard that magic doesn't affect them much. 
I must hurry, excuse me. 
Yaaaaiii! 
I offer you this: remember who it is you're attempting to replace. You'll need to approach them in a manner to which they are not accustomed. 
The Count is on his way. Please, remain here and be patient. 
Next time, go someplace else, huh? The Inn of Ill Omen, the Tiber Septim Hotel... Anywhere but here, okay? 
You have returned! 
Savor the divine essence of a well-spun plot. And here's a little needle to help you stitch your own tangled tapestries. 
Skooma? Oh, yeah... Hey! You gave me some skooma! You are so... nice. Oh, yeah... You're such a good... friend. 
I'll have to tread lightly around that subject, or I might get another lesson in the exalted nature of Pain. 
Greenmote is the refined version of the spores that are harvested from the spore trees that dot Mania. 
I could turn you into a goat. Or a puddle. Or a bad idea. I could make you eat your own fingers. Or fall in love with a cloud. 
He said to tell you that the matter he needs help with is of the utmost importance to the citizens of the Imperial City. 
Well done! You have much to learn about this business, my friend, but you show definite promise. 
That was a good fight, Bloodletter. You really showed that Redguard who's boss! Here's your take. Now go clean yourself up. 
So, they're at Gweden, eh? Good to know. Keep on it. 
You were to avoid detection and kill Roderick by means of poison, yet you failed to follow these parameters.  
Don't count on seeing the Count at the castle. He's a great sorcerer, but he doesn't like visitors. 
Better go talk to ol' Arvena. 
At our wedding, my father gave us a family heirloom as a gift; Rockshatter, a mace that's been in my family for many generations. 
Seems you've bloodied your knuckles a few times. 
Head on. 
I'm sorry, friend, but I have no idea who you are. Never heard of you. I'm afraid I don't offer training to just anyone. 
I thank you for your trust. In your name and for the sake of the Shivering Isles, I shall not disappoint you. 
Zoe Malene's the name. Sorry I don't have much time to have a formal introduction, but I must get my latest painting finished! 
You're not one of us! 
Enough! I am beaten. The Greymarch is ended. 
We are a farming community. Nothing more. Nothing less. That is, when I can get these layabouts to actually put in a day's work. 
Angelie Blakeley. This is my father's house. He was lost at sea, many years ago. 
Die, heretic! 
Yes? Do you have questions about your contract? 
Die, unbeliever! 
But it's over. Thank Akatosh, the Oblivion Invasion is over, and we've survived! 
I have a warm place to sleep and three squares a day. It ain't 'The Bard's Tale', but it's good enough for me. 
The wizard Arkved has the Orb of Vaermina... snatched from the dreams of my followers and dragged into the waking world. 
With Vitellus dead, Vilena thinks only about protecting Viranus. That's a sure way to ruin the boy. 
My bestiary? Oh, yes. I want to start one. I'd like a Baliwog to begin with. You just get it close to me and I'll take care of subduing it. 
He said if I let him stay for free, he'd tell me how to cure my sickness! How fortuitous! 
Yeah? What? 
I need you to leave now. 
Then you will get Weebam-Na for her. The Argonian is a well-known hunter; he has a house in town. 
Ah, here you are. So good to finally meet you. 
Fabulous! That's great. Good for you! 
Ah, the treasure hunter. Please, have a seat. 
Just take your trinkets and go! 
Only those few wearing the Bands of the Chosen are allowed to leave the Garden. 
I don't know! I think they're right behind me! Prior Maborel is dead! 
If you think I'm interested in whatever you're selling, you're wrong. I'm not. Why don't you go play with the Gatekeeper? Run along now. 
Busy today? 
We should go get it right now. 
They want to bring back the Deep Ones. I thought I did, too, but ... she's so innocent. 
Have you changed your mind? My sons could use your help in their fight. 
A desperate plan indeed. This ... Prince? Emperor? Martin would risk my whole city to gain a Great Sigil Stone? 
For instance, you can only really see the bones when you take them out. 
What? N...No. I don't know anything about anything. I'm sorry, I can't help you. 
It's a very old text, written in a language I'm sure you wouldn't understand. Don't worry about it -- just bring me the book. 
My lord... I would speak with you. 
We are all safer now. 
Eleven of the morning watch, and all's well. Good day, ma'am.  
Greetings once more. I know you must be eager to get to work. I think you'll find the task Vicente has available to be quite intriguing. 
Very interesting. 
Here it is... the throne of the last king of the Ayleids. And so it falls to me to begin the restoration of our ancient glory... 
You can't scare me. 
By the Nine! You've got the scales! Thank you! Let it never be said that there are no kind souls in this world. 
There must be someone in Crucible who knows more. We should talk to more people about what's going on. 
Folks think we're all evil? What do they know? Do I look evil? 
Victory is ours! I have already selected a candidate for the honor of kindling the Altar of Rapture. 
When Sheogorath discovered the library he had it burned, insisting that it was an abomination and that personal choice defied logical prediction. 
Hail, citizen. I speak for the Emperor. Or... at least I did... 
I won't talk to you! Never! Do your worst. 
Why does this one always have to get the beggars? 
In this I am blessed to see the hour of my death... 
I've heard if you're in the Fighters Guild, you can learn a lot from him. 
I've been waiting for you. 
... Oh, forget it. Let me guess: you're worried about what my men and I are doing here in town, right? 
I'm praying for the gods to protect me from the Fanatics. 
You have but to lead us to Weatherleah. 
Why not? We can't just let those creatures live, and no one else is going to do anything about it, so we should get going! 
Necromancy may be legal in Cyrodiil, but few will openly admit to practicing it now that the Mages Guild has banned it. 
The only thing we can do. 
We're all in your debt for closing that Oblivion Gate outside the city. Well done. 
Certainly! Here you are. Shepherd's Pie... my own recipe. 
Maglir? I think I've seen him. Try in the Lonely Suitor Lodge. 
Tsrava says the sound of J'bari's dogs drives her to distraction. Can't say I blame her. 
They appear out of nowhere at the base of the Spire. We kill five of them, five more come.  
I was hoping Vicente would give you this contract. When you are captured and killed, the assignment will go to someone more competent. 
I said we'd speak later. What do you need? 
Well, I should go. If you need any backup, just give me a shout.  
Speak with the Aureals and tell them where you wish them to stand. Then speak to me when you are satisfied. 
Ah, yes. My treasure-hunting friend. What can I do for you? 
I say live and let live. It was an unfortunate accident, and he helped make it right.  
You came for the Amulet. Take it then! 
Some mages do not abide by the principles of the guild, and operate outside its boundaries. Many hold little value for the lives of others. 
The Bloated Float on the Waterfront is cheap... and a bit too interesting for my tastes. 
I'm listening. Speak. 
Now for the bad news. You committed murder to retrieve the stone. I am forced to remove you from the Thieves Guild until you pay the blood price. 
You've got some nimble fingers. What have you been getting into? 
He was involved with Jagar Tharn's plot against the empire years ago. It doesn't surprise me to find his hand in the current calamity. 
Look, I've got things to do, and I don't need crazies like you getting in my way. Take a walk. 
Welcome to the Inn. If it's a room you're after, speak with Christophe. 
It's coming. I think I'm the only one who sees it, though. And I'm going to be ready. Oh, yes. I'll be ready. 
I know the risk. I was at Kvatch. But there is no other way. We have no choice. 
Keep looking for that wine! Farewell! 
The King is the Key, and the Hand guards the King. 
You're wanted dead or alive, Gray Fox! This will be easier if you're dead. 
I can't recommend the Bloated Float on the Waterfront. The Waterfront is not a very desirable location. 
I'm Arvena Thelas. They call me 'the rat lady', on account of all my pet rats. 
A friend gave me "The Book of Daedra." It's an interesting study. 
Shhh. The walls have ears! 
I've heard of a hidden torture chamber. They say that Count Marius interrogates Argonian immigrants from Black Marsh. 
I need you to leave so I can lock up. 
How do you like the bottom boot on the rat thing? Not bad, eh? 
You won't regret it. This one will keep his eyes open, and wait for an opportunity to help you. 
So, you're a coward. Just my luck. Never mind. I'll find someone else to do it. 
Somebody help! Come quickly! We've got a burglar! 
All those that enter the Realm are forever changed, but some believe it is for the better. A good portion of them, at least. 
For giving you this contract, Ocheeva is wise beyond her years. You will fail in your task, and die in the process. 
One must be very careful in the Imperial City. There are things... dangerous things... that cannot abide the light. 
We should find him soon. If he knows something, it might be a key to what's going on in Crucible. 
We'll be right behind you. 
Apologies, my good friend. I mistook you for someone else. Always being asked about it, I am. 'Didn't I see you in Cheydinhal?', they say. 
So, you infiltrated the Imperial Prison, eliminated Valen Dreth, and killed not one guard. Most excellent! 
She's afraid, and for good reason. If the killer strikes again, they may very well pick an easy target, like Matilde. She needn't worry, though. 
Primo seems kind of nice. I just can't imagine him killing anyone.  
Your stars are not mine. Today the Mage shall light your way on the paths of glory. 
Nobody really knows who he is. He's always hiding under that weird cowl. Kinda spooky if you ask me. 
But why, Sister? What is the point? Why should anyone bother with all that sneaking and skulking? 
A new Gatekeeper protects the Fringe. But he does nothing to stop the spread of disease. 
In the Argonian homeland of Black Marsh, those born under the sign of the Shadow are taken at birth and presented to the Dark Brotherhood.  
And another thing. The guards are making a big deal out of no one seeing Bradon out in the daylight. Well of course that's the case! 
The only way you can learn more about Destruction magic now is to find Bralsa Andaren. She can train you better than anyone. 
You're trespassing! Get out, or I call the guards! 
Now this is interesting. Two people turn up dead, and you're more concerned with my feelings toward the Nord.  
We're ready. 
Take a seat, please. 
Carahil was justified in his actions. Slaying me was the only way to stop the madness. I have accepted that fate. 
You needn't tell me the details of what was involved in getting it; it's perhaps better that I know nothing about it. 
So, the work is complete. Now we can discuss the information I have for you. 
Come on. 
For Sheogorath's glory! 
The rest of us have already traded introductions. I'm Matilde Petit. The others are Nels the Naughty, Neville, Dovesi Dran and Primo Antonius. 
As long as you're not a wanted criminal, there's a place for you in the guild. Are you interested? 
We aren't going far, so no need to prepare for a long journey. In fact, he's still in town. More I can't say aloud without risk of others hearing. 
By the Nine Divines, you're the Grand Champion of the Arena! This is such an honor! 
Your Speaker should look for this person in the swamps just north of the city of Archon, in the Argonian homeland of Black Marsh. 
That mead-swilling barbarian killed those two people, I'm sure of it! I don't have the proof just yet, but I'm watching him. 
I've got another job for you, slightly off the record. You'll be going on a mission with Viranus Donton. Yes -- the Guildmaster's son. 
He's upstairs. Go ahead. 
I don't understand what you mean. We can see just fine. 
My rats are all dead! It's too late to do any more. I won't be needing your services any longer. 
Oh. Well, do hurry. I'm beginning to feel faint. 
The Dark Brotherhood is an ancient organization. We have survived for millenia. Sometimes, to ensure that survival, drastic measures are required. 
With this, you can manipulate people's opinions of you. Is this what you want? If not, we can start over. 
How could they be waiting for us here? 
Even though I never intend to be a Knight again, that Medallion represents an important part of my past. 
When I came to, I found that the door to my studio was still locked, and that the thief had snatched my paintbrush. That's when I saw it. 
I just don't know what to think. I had my doubts about Nels, and he is still alive. Could it be true? Could he have killed all of them? 
Some idiot killed the Gatekeeper. Now we'll be swamped with morons coming and bothering us. Present company not excluded. 
Yes. What can I do for you? I imagine you're here about the door? 
Never mind. Get that gate open. 
Ah, all right then. I guess I should get back to my duties. I should be around later. We'll talk. 
Lord Drad took my ogres. Poxy white-skin says he owns them. Lying maggot! They're MY ogres! 
Good. Got your attention. I'm Barbas, the Hound of Clavicus Vile. Not that I've always been a hound, or always been called Barbas. 
Farewell. Stay safe. 
Aurig Desha is wise. Duke or not, who are you to doubt her strategy? 
Remember, act casual, like we haven't done anything illegal. 
His appearance seems imminent. His hatred for this land, for what it represents, is unimaginable. 
I hear you got quite a task from Adrienne. 
Ha! Yes! That is an Argonian heart, of that I am sure! You have slain Scar-Tail! Well done! Please, take these boots as payment for your services! 
The Great Torch shines with the pure light of Mania! You chose well! 
My name is Carwen. Remember. I'll be rich and famous one day. 
By ancient tradition, I may not present myself as a candidate for the throne. I need you to formally present my claim to Chancellor Ocato. 
Don't waste my time. Not in the mood for it. 
Good to see you again. Do you need me to sharpen your blades? 
Have zickle to it. Nobody does rebby zickles any more. 
You've done a great service freeing my Gadeneri. Thank you. 
What brings you to me today, friend? 
But most importantly, I've met the woman of my dreams. If I had to leave Zoe, I think I'd be the loneliest man alive. 
Last I heard, she'd set up camp in the mountains, somewhere in the northeast corner of the province. You should look for her there. 
In order to receive your bonus, you must kill each guest secretly, one by one. If anyone sees you commiting murder, the bonus is forfeit. 
This Bay horse will serve you well. Try to serve him just as well. 
I really must get back to my paintings. 
Actually, Lucien did not try to recruit me. Not at first. He tried to kill me. My father wanted me dead, and he hired the Dark Brotherhood to do it. 
The letter is currently in steward Dairihill's desk. She has lied to Lady Umbranox, telling her that the letter has yet to arrive. 
Speak quickly! I have no time for mindless blather! 
As I live and breathe! The Gray Fox! It's an honor. 
No more needed for me. I have this fine blade with which I'll slaughter some of these miserable beasts. 
Oh my! 
They won't do me any good in here. 
What is it you require, my lady? 
I'll talk to Primo, give him a bit of encouragement. If he and I are vigilant, we may prevent the killer from claiming another victim. 
I am Geem Jasaiin. We come from Black Marsh to the city to work the water ways and water trades. 
Ugh... What's happening? 
You left your charge in that place? Get back there! 
Well, I guess I can take a short break. A short one, mind you. I have lots to do still. 
It must be the Maruhkati Selectives. All the evidence points to them. 
He works at night, and has to sleep during the day. Why does that make him a vampire? 
I'd prefer to only discuss the property with serious buyers. 
Light the Great Torch! Let the flames proclaim the glory of Dementia across the realm! 
Now, you didn't find any sort of recommendation? Very well. I shall write one myself, and include it in my report to the Council. 
The blessing of the Fox upon you. 
I'm sorry, but I really don't know much about the town itself.  I spend my time outdoors, walking the ridges and valleys. 
It's a pleasure to be here with you. 
Look for Andragil. You can find her living in Bravil. 
Much to see. Much to learn. 
Make sure you have proof before you accuse anyone of a terrible crime like grave robbing. 
Stay safe. 
Is there something I can do for you? 
I've been waiting for you, or someone like you, or someone other than you, for some time. I need a champion, and you've got the job. 
I believe you have completed the tasks in the Gardens of Flesh and Bone, have you not? 
How many times can I say it? There's no time to waste! Hurry it up! 
The Resonator? Maybe it'll keep strangers out of Bliss. 
This one is a Doyen. Armand Christophe is a Doyen. 
I wish I could say that. 
The Emperor's death was a harsh lesson for all of us. We failed in our duty to the Dragonborn. It must not happen again. 
No. But he did give me a message about a treasure to deliver to the Thieves Guild if I was ever to get out. 
I'd stay away from him if I were you. There's something very wrong with that man. 
Do you think what happened to Kvatch could happen here? 
I rarely leave the University, as I have all I need right here. If you need ingredients, try Ogier Georick at 'The Main Ingredient.' 
That is not what you will be remembered for. 
The blade. It hungers for souls. 
Thank you. 
I'm a captain, you see, and the Oak and Crosier serves... a better class of people... 
If you've done all that you can do, are you prepared for battle? 
(Hic) Eh? 
You've priced yourself out of a deal. Care to make a counter-offer? 
I've heard she's quite a talented mage, with an extensive knowledge of illusory spells. 
Damn Knights! Scaring away all the beasts! 
Ever wonder why flies like both? Best not to ask. 
Mazken! 
I was walking past Rosentia Gallenus' home the other day, and I heard these strange animal noises or something from inside... very odd. 
It will be done. I will shred all of the hunter's criminal warrants. 
Do not put yourself in harm's way, if it can be avoided. 
Do not be foolish. We can both get what we want. Come to me when you have made a decision. 
Have you eaten at The Feed Bag recently? 
Sheogorath rules the Shivering Isles. We, the Aureal, are His favored soldiers, the most perfect expression of His might. 
She seems to have real issues with her sisters. I can't imagine why. Shamada is lovely, and Shomara is very sweet. 
Captain Burd and I make a good pair. He understands Nords and the North, while I appreciate the subtleties of southern culture and politics. 
And of course I will expect payment in full at that time. 
Can't you just wizard it open? 
Perhaps if you return later, he'll be here. 
Sheogorath is gone? If he is gone, then who is watching us? 
Yes, well, if there's one thing you know how to do, it's get yourself out of an unwinnable situation! He he he he.  
Lies do not befit a soldier of Akavir! 
I'm Ruslan. Not that it's any of your business. 
There's not much to do here in the Bruma Guild. If you can get to the Arcane University, though, they let you make your own spells there. 
I don't have time to help you now! 
A particular relic has eluded me for many years. Possessing this piece of Akaviri antiquity would make my collection complete. 
Changed your mind? 
You're a wanted criminal, hardly the sort of person that has a place in the guild. Clean up that record of yours, and maybe you'll be considered. 
The Ritual is completed, and a new ruler presides over Dementia. 
Well, I must say. You have some nerve, attempting to swindle me out of a night's stay. If you've no gold, I suggest you find alternate lodging. 
Don't hurt me! 
I suppose few really do, but that's beside the point. We're going to give you a taste of where you have found yourself. You're going to learn. 
Thank goodness I found you. I assume you know that Hieronymus Lex has issued an arrest warrant for Armand Christophe. 
Your generosity restores your honor within the guild. You may now seek membership. 
One copy of the Black Horse Courier coming up. Gray Fox steals taxes. 
The longer we wait, the smaller our window of opportunity. Get ready, and do it quickly. We've got to move soon. 
Raelynn will finally get what's coming to her. 
Graman gro-Marad. I'm the night man on the Bloated Float. 
The little bastard! We took him in when no one else would. This is how he repays us? Talk to Aryarie in Bravil. She's our client. Do the job. 
I've heard good things about the mage trainers there. 
There are foul tidings from Skyrim. The Greybeards speak of the end of all times. 
A sword, huh? Hmm... good enough for me. I'll split scalps instead of bash skulls. 
He's a Captain of the Imperial Watch. He is pursuing a personal vendetta against the Thieves Guild and the Gray Fox. 
The Azura shrine north of town, up Lake Arrius way, for instance. I know a Dark Elf there. Nothing evil about him. 
The Master doesn't like visitors. Leave this house. NOW. 
My name is Selena Orania. I'm a Mages Guild Journeyman. 
I see it's back to the Fringe once again, Your Grace. 
Fine, fine. So the Realm still stands. That doesn't mean there are any fewer Scalons in the Isles. 
For that matter, I don't know who she is either... 
Pleasure doing business with you, friend! 
The guild has received a 'request' to obtain a unique statuette. It is a bust of Llathasa Indarys, the recently slain Countess of Cheydinhal. 
The lodge lies a short distance north of Leyawiin, on the west bank of the Niben. 
You're very curious. Perhaps too curious for your own good. 
However, you shall still fall victim to the same pitfalls as he. Leave me to my torment, Madgod. Leave me to suffer as Sheogorath before you. 
Huh? Sorry... I ain't interested.... 
You can find your monthly stipend in the Master's Chest upstairs, along with anything we find that you might find useful. Here's the key. 
Lord, you know that Brellach is ours and ours alone. You may not enter. 
I hear that everything is ready for the Cleansing to begin. Sister Orla has seen the gate citadels. Lord Dagon is mustering His finest troops. 
My pardon, Lord. Are You lost? 
You just have to try it. It'll change your world, expand your horizons. Contracting leads to expanding, you know. Well, most of the time. 
Please! No! No!! 
That Modryn Oreyn has got no sense of humor. Hell of a warrior, though. No wonder he's done so well in the Fighters Guild. 
Oh, go away! Shoo! Shoo! A man's not even safe in his own home anymore! 
When the blood flows across your knuckles, think of me. 
Tell your friends about me! 
I need the ashes of a powerful vampire. You have them in your possession. It is good to see that Hindaril has been defeated already. 
Hold on there! There'll be no sneaking into the Countess' dinner party. Allow me to escort you out of here. 
A mortal? Wait... a mortal I know. MY mortal. What are you doing here, mortal, when I've given you things to do? 
The Torch shines brightly over Bliss. 
This is a restricted area, citizen. Leave now, or face the consequences. 
If you have something to show me, then show me... 
Sweetroll for Fimmion. Yummy in tummy. Answer for you. Problem solved. 
Although your intentions were good, your actions were despicable. Murder is the lowest form of revenge, and a road I would never dare to tread. 
Because of this, the people of Anvil concluded the manor must be cursed. You are the first person to set foot inside in a long time. 
I like what I see. 
Is this the best your pathetic guild could do? If so, our work will be easier than I suspected. And to think, Traven has sent you to defeat us? 
Oh my! The Gatekeeper is dead! I must hurry back to Thadon's side. He must be protected! 
But, kill the shaman and the tribe will dissolve into confusion. Most likely end the war. 
I'd steer clear, citizen. 
We're here to help. 
He's never been cruel to me, it's just that he's never been kind. It's as if I'm just another part of his shop. 
I would gladly let you invest in my shop! The extra coin will allow me to purchase more goods from adventurers such as yourself. 
How do I know he won't come back? 
No sweetroll for Fimmion, no answer to problem. Hrmph. 
I guess you heard Vilena recruited a new sword. Been a while, hasn't it? 
Everyone's talking about your latest exploits. Not only did you eliminate the target, but his six Imperial Legion escorts as well! Most impressive. 
Please don't hurt me! 
The two ruins lie apart on the surface. But underground, they're connected by some now-flooded tunnels. Wet and dark, yes... but surely unguarded. 
I'm not surprised. I have not been able to find any modern reference to it. 
I am Hlidara Mothril, Lady Leyawiin's chaplain and chief advisor.  
I understand. Well, if it's all the same to you, please don't tell anyone about Gogan's indiscretion. 
I have some spells I can sell you if you have no way to command the beasts yourself. 
She was a ruthless woman, and I'm glad she's behind bars where she belongs. 
I can't die here... not here! 
Oooh, I hope you know what you're doing... 
I suppose I've got something I could use the Guild's help with, but I don't know you well enough to talk about it. 
My progress on the Mysterium Xarxes is slow, I'm afraid. How goes your search for the Armor of Tiber Septim? 
No, I don't think so. Try again. 
Are you serious? 
If I'm not mistaken, that's the traitor Thadon. Right there. I'm not normally a bloodthirsty man, but I wonder if killing him might be a good idea? 
Well, if it doesn't look just like you! So lifelike! My patrons are going to absolutely adore this. 
I appreciate your warning. I'll be on the lookout for him. But please tell the guards so they can arrest him before he attacks me! 
Afternoon. 
One Moderate Elixir of Exploration, coming right up! 
Here is your reward. I am also promoting you to Master Thief in the Thieves Guild. Fathis Ules of the Imperial City will be your new fence. 
Be glad you will not live to see the day Lord Dagon walks the earth. 
You know what it's like. Make lots of friends, and look busy. Same as anywhere. 
*Gasp!* 
Today's your lucky day, so let's hear it. 
Please, no! 
Who knows what will get in, now that the Gatekeeper is dead. 
There is much to learn. 
Only the servants of Sheogorath can light the Flame, by kindling the Altars of Despair and Rapture which feed the Flame. 
Be careful, my friend. I know you have braved many dangers already, but Miscarcand is not to be taken lightly. 
She's the best I know. Luckily, she'll teach you some of her tricks. 
Urgh! Blood for blood! 
Waste no time. You must find Martin before the enemy does. 
You'll notice that the list gives each child's location and some suggestions for gifts. Oh, and here's the gold I'm supposed to give you.             
All appointments to see the Count must be made through Hal-Luirz 
I'm overjoyed to hear that Garrus has replaced Ulrich as the Captain of the Guard. I'm sure he'll do a fine job. 
Your place is on the battlefield. I have trusted you this far. Do not fail me. 
Listen. I'm going to get up in a minute and walk out of here. That guy in the corner behind me will follow me. You follow him. 
I believe he's always looking for new members, but I don't think it's for me. 
Greetings, Nord. 
I never thought to see a Great Welkynd Stone! As beautiful as all the old tales tell... 
The other Princes, fearful of my power, cursed me with Madness, doomed me to live as Sheogorath, a broken soul reigning in a broken land. 
You're back. I trust everything went as planned? 
We're all wondering when more of those evil Gates are going to open. I'd leave town if I dared. 
Mirabelle Monet is quite a woman. Ask any of the sailors down at the Fo'c's'le. 
The guards have imposed new, ridiculously heavy fines for every infraction under the sun. They almost seem to make up laws just for charging fines. 
Here kitty, kitty! 
It would be wise of you to be on time. 
Very well. I'm sure someone else will want it if you don't. 
Four wins is okay kid, but it don't make you Grand Champion. Here's your payout. Now go clean yourself up before your next match. 
Our most celebrated citizen is Rythe Lythandas, the famous painter. Speak to his wife, and she might let you take a peek into his studio. 
Leave Mephala an offering of nightshade at the shrine between midnight and dawn, and the Webspinner may grant you an audience. 
That seems a fair price. 
You have the right equipment. This is good. 
So you do know a thing or two... Hazadir was my great-great grandsire's sister's-son. Bet you didn't know that! 
The Altar of Arden-Sul awaits. 
Our brother returns to the fold! 
Place this between you and your foe. Creates less of a mess that way. 
The Staff of Indarys it is. Again, I thank you on behalf of all the citizens of Cheydinhal, and I especially thank you as an elated father. 
Savlian says they can hold the road. No... no, I don't believe him. Nothing can stop them. If you'd seen it, you'd know... 
Yes, Nirnroot. Haven't seen any yet? It appears as a slightly glowing shoot that grows right out of the ground. 
I can only hope the prison guards do to you what they did to me. You will know the true definition of the word "horror." 
I've heard that Reman is good with a bow. Apparently, he's the best in all of Skingrad. 
You don't want to sell them? I'll have to get you to sign a no competition writ a few days ago. Can't have you building your own skyboat. 
He is captain of the Imperial Watch. He is pursuing a personal vendetta against the Thieves Guild and the Gray Fox. 
This thing you've done goes beyond what I would have expected from you. You've chosen a dark path, and I shall help you get there sooner! 
Hello, friend. Thank you again for your help. 
Hurry, there's no telling how much damage has already been dealt to the Resonator! 
Lord Sheogorath, I trust you'll protect us from the impending apocalypse. 
You have obviously made a mistake. Sir Lazare Milvan would never speak with someone of your low birth. 
By failing to fulfill this contract, you have brought shame upon us all. Leave me now, and contemplate your uselessness as a member of this family. 
Right. I'm on my way. 
Calipers? Tongs? What would I need those for? 
The March Rider sells and repairs weapons and armor. Can I help you? I'm Tertia Viducia.  
Really? That is odd. I know for certain that she returned alone. I don't like it. 
However, I do have another task, a rather urgent one in fact, if you would like to redeem yourself. 
What kind of nefarious sorcery is this?! 
Can I beg a favor of you? 
About thirty years back, there was some trouble out there.  Bad trouble.  Legion had to be called in, people killed. 
Yes. Of course! Anything to help. 
Greetings! Welcome to Lelles' Quality Merchandise. We have a wide range of goods to suit your needs. 
The Gray Fox protects you. 
Even if you don't agree with the method, you have to respect the hard work it takes to replace a Duchess. 
Do I sense good news? 
Hail, Dragon Born! Hail, Martin Septim! Hail! 
Hello to you. 
Go in Madness. 
All right, my friend. You've got 50 gold down on the Blue Team. Good luck, and enjoy the match! Oh, and if you win, come see me for your payout! 
I have found the names of a number of Ayleid cities where the statues may have been taken for safekeeping during the siege of White Gold Tower. 
If only I had a way to strike back at the enemy. But we can't leave the barricade until that Oblivion Gate is closed. 
You don't know what it's like! I need the Skooma! 
I hereby bestow upon you the title of Eliminator. Your blood is cold, your heart hard. You exemplify everything the Dark Brotherhood stands for. 
Have you ever spoken to Rohssan about learning to be an armorer? 
I wish I could be more hospitable, but I'm a bit distracted. It seems I'm having a bear problem and I just don't know what to do. 
Three people have been killed, and now Matilde thinks she's next. I guess only the killer knows for sure. Isn't that right? 
We are a brotherhood, a family. What affects one of us affects us all. Fighting, drunkenness, dereliction of duty are not tolerated. 
You are no longer a member of the Thieves Guild until blood price is paid for the lives you took. 
You? What do you want? 
You want something? Then, if you're smart, you do what I tell you. 
I'm Mirabelle Monet. I run the Fo'c's'le, a boarding house for sailors. Sorry. I reserve my beds for seamen. 
It is pleasant, and a bit melancholy, to walk among the graves in Green Emperor Way and contemplate the dead who precede us. 
A little food and drink will do you some good. 
But now you are here. Perhaps you can kill Mankar Camoran. Save Tamriel from Dagon's final victory. 
Ocheeva, Vicente Valtieri, Antoinetta Marie, Gogron gro-Bolmog, Telaendril, M'raaj-Dar and Teinaava. All of these family members must die! 
Sheogorath's army is restored? I should find them. They'd be sure to kill me. 
Welcome back, milord. 
Vinicia Melissaeia, Office of Imperial Commerce. You got complaints? Of course you got complaints. Who doesn't? 
What? Phintias sold you my copy? This is outrageous! I must speak to Phintias at once. That book is mine! 
He's waiting inside. 
We knew you would find your way here eventually. But it is of no consequence. 
Gasp! Oh... oh. I'm sorry. I... my nerves. I just want to get out of here. Three people have been murdered! I'm so very frightened!   
Smart thing is to join a guild. Any guild. Gets you a place to sleep for free.  No muss, no fuss, no crummy tavern food and lice-ridden beds. 
Thank you for getting me out of that cursed place. 
In sooth, mostly goodly done. 
Don't worry about Vandorallen Trebatius. I'll have him evicted. I'm sure he'll find another home easily.  
Yes, I see you may have what it takes to replace her. 
Please, help me find what I've lost. 
Welcome to Water's Edge! 
Back again? You ready for my test now? I haven't got all day. 
The area is clear? Then as soon as Captain Matius gives the order, I'll escort the civilians to safety. 
You're the one who closed the gate? Thank you. 
Paradise awaits me. 
More revenue means more gold in all our pockets. More men means that we're likely to have more spare equipment around here. 
Biene? She should be around here somewhere. Just look around a bit. 
Unfortunately, my hangover is making it difficult to think straight. You're best off speaking to Guilbert for now. 
If you can bring me five empty Grand Soul Gems, I'm quite sure I can help you with this cure that you seek. I shall await your return. 
Heel, dog! 
The Grey Mare isn't a bad place to stay, especially if you're low on Septims. 
One of your military minions was looking for you. It sounded urgent, but I'm afraid I don't know the details. 
He will suffer greatly at the hands of Lord Sheogorath. 
Sheogorath is dead!! 
There's no doubt that she knows a lot. Years of studying all sorts of things, I'd expect. 
I've already told you pretty much everything I know about their gang. 
[Gasp!] A burglar! 
But I do appreciate the sentiment. If there's anything specific you need, that may be more reasonable then just asking me about Necromancers. 
Her accusations that Raynil is lying is not surprising. At this point, she's so upset that she'll say anything to deny what really happened. 
In fact, there's quite a bit more to their family history than meets the eye. Want to hear about it? 
Run for your life. 
Welcome! If you wish to talk, it is really no trouble at all. 
You're really pushing it. Just keep disturbing me. 
Always forward, never back. Is the concept of time correct? Is time relevant? It matters not. One way or another, I fear that our time has run out. 
Mach-Na runs a good business. He's a grumpy old man, though. 
Good. Good. Bring to me the daggers. Then kill Ciirta, we will.  
From what I know, Carahil is a powerful mage. I suppose she should be, if she's going to be in the Mages Guild. 
Remember the Emperor! 
Feel free to wait for him if you want to speak to him yourself. 
Scar-Tail has fled Black Marsh and refuses to fulfill his duties as royal assassin! This is an act of treason! This treachery must be punished! 
Until now, we numbered only seven, but attacked like a regiment. Our enemies quake at our approach, and falter at our charge. Huzzah! 
Guards! Guards! We've got a pickpocket here! 
We must get out of this place. 
But with an Oblivion Gate threatening Bravil, I need all my soldiers here. 
Guards! Guards! Someone's being attacked! 
Serve your time peaceably, and pay your debt to society. 
You listen good. This is your only warning. One more disqualification, and you'll never fight in the Arena again! Now get out of my sight! 
Huzzah! More of my kin have joined the fight! 
Don't get involved with him. If he asks you to do anything... strange... you come see me first, got it? Or any of the town Guard. Let us handle it. 
You've written a tragedy in our small town. 
Belongs to me? The Amulet of Kings? 
Have you seen the Oblivion Gate? I haven't dared leave the city since I heard about it. 
You make me sick! Now get out of here before I have Manheim throw you out! 
Go, then... 
Where am I? What is this place? Arkay preserve me, I remember now ... hooded men grabbed me as I was leaving the Temple ... 
I thank you again for your efforts. I have one final task for you, if you are still willing to face danger on my behalf. 
I'm Shuravi, the sister-that-works-and-worries. Shamada is sweet and decorative. Shomara is dumb as a post. But she can cook, at least. 
We rebuilt it here, as it was when it hosted its most famous guest. Sometimes at night, I can still hear Emperor Pelagius screaming. 
You're truly a master explorer. To imagine you've actually acquired 30 more samples. I'm astounded. 
Might we stop this now? 
What should I do? 
Like the leaves of a tree, Syl has fallen from Sheogorath's grace and no longer rules Dementia. 
Everybody's talking about the Hero of Kvatch! They say he actually went into an Oblivion Gate and destroyed it. 
We haven't yet spoken to the others, for fear they would be less than accepting of her situation. Perhaps it is time, though. 
You did it, Captain! You closed the Oblivion Gate! We didn't think we'd ever see you alive again! 
The Imperial Legion is at your disposal, citizen. What seems to be the problem? 
He probably won't believe you, so you may have to persuade him. Hopefully he will at least go and check it out. 
Fantastic! Thanks for asking. 
Look at the muscles on you! 
We wouldn't be here if you'd done your job! 
You are a breaker of Tenets, and have been eternally exiled from the Dark Brotherhood! Begone from here, and never return! 
You will be asked to perform certain duties for the Guild. These are mainly internal matters--discipline problems, defaulted contracts, and the like. 
You... how did you get in here? Are those horrible creatures gone? 
Whatever you need, Champion. 
You disappoint me. I was counting on your help. 
I'm glad that's over. You've kept me from my work long enough. 
If you're looking to learn even more, experience is your best bet. If you want pointers, I hear that Alix Lencolia is somewhere in Cyrodiil. 
Don't answer that. I know the answer. I knew far more answers once, but they seem to have dried up. Or perhaps they drowned. I don't know anymore. 
Just when I thought I was making some progress, I hear that Sheogorath himself has gone missing. Is this the end? 
If you don't have the gold, then I don't have a room. I'm sorry. 
You hit that Orc so hard, her mother in Orsinium started bleedin'! That victory advances you to the rank of Gladiator. Enjoy the gold. 
I'm not staying here any longer. I need to get someplace safe. 
As you wish, sire. 
Welcome, Breton, to the Tournament of Ten Bloods. To your right, through each of nine gates, another Chosen awaits you. 
Is there something you require? 
I'm worried about those people. The Blackwood Company can't be trusted with their lives and homes. Get there and look into it. 
More conspiracy in the House of Dementia. People are always sneaking around there.... 
Hircine has deigned to speak with you, and he has provided you with glorious prey. You have been greatly honored. Do not fail him. 
Hey, have you heard about that strange party at Summitmist Manor? 
A hammer! Excellent! Good for bashing in puny goblin skulls! 
You should be gathering the items Martin needs for the Mysterium Xarxes ritual. There's no time to lose. 
Nothing I'd like to talk about. 
No doubt, they make a fine wine at the Surilie Vineyards. 
Why visit that other smith? Piercing flesh with my blades doesn't satisfy you? 
I figured you'd be back for more work. Good. There's more to be done. 
We are from the IC (not to be confused with the OC). 
I sat here and feasted while others fought. Thus I earned my doom. 
I'm afraid I don't trust you enough to talk about it, though. You are working for Jeanne, after all. 
Why Sheogorath sent us a male, I'll never understand. If you're going to help us take control of the Altar of Despair, you need to decide now. 
Agh! No! I can't take much more of this! 
Happens every time. The Greymarch starts, Order appears, and I become Jyggalag and wipe out My whole Realm. 
Have you heard the rumors about why Edla Dark-Heart left Skyrim? 
My sister, Ugak gra-Mogakh, runs the Grateful Pass Stables. She's the quiet one. I'm the talker. 
From this moment forward, you will walk the shadows as my Silencer. You will receive contracts only from me. Your new life has begun. 
12... uh... 6? 4? 
I cannot thank you enough for helping me rescue Rona from the terrible state she was in. I hope that she has found the peace she sought. 
Won't someone end me? Take my life, please! 
I'm Alga. I'm a bard and a Speechcraft trainer.  
I'm thinking of doing some traveling. Just to see the world a bit. 
Best to play it safe. No complex magic. Stick to basic spells with single effects. It's not worth taking unnecessary risks. 
That Maglir is probably parked in some tavern. I never did like that eight-pint hero. 
Greetings, friend. 
I find it comforting to know when the end will come, and that there's nothing I can do about it. 
Good that you made it. You should talk to Rienna. 
With all the farms in Nibenay, there's still plenty of forest and wilderness open for settlement. 
There's no one else in our group except the four of us. The Blackwater Brigands don't just take on new members out of the clear blue sky. 
Go with our blessing, Goldbrand. 
Why? I mean... of course. All I have available right now is a hovel on the Waterfront. 
Been here thirty years, and I expect I'll last another ten or so. When I'm gone, gods willing, my apprentice, Enilroth, will tend the smithy. 
Watch out! 
If you're here to join up, I'm afraid you'll have to speak with Farwil. 
Good riddance to the Blackwood Company, and good luck to the Fighters Guild. 
The other guests are waiting for you at Summitmist Manor. I suggest you get going. 
Makes all of my subjects uneasy. Tense. Homicidal. Some of them, at least. We need to get that Torch relit, before the place falls apart. 
The Argonian, Big Head, is always searching for the Spoon of Horripilation. Yeah, the Spoon of Horripilation. Certainly not a fork. 
We're busted. Get him! 
He supports all of your enchanting needs. 
Please, use the extra bed here. If you sleep too far from Henantier, it may not work. I'll watch over you both to make sure you're safe. 
But no more. No more! 
Did you hear the one about the Argonian Maid? 
This Heart is the heart of the world, for one was made to satisfy the other. You all remember this. It is in every legend.  
You hear about Gogan? A gang of thieves is running a scam in town, and he fell for it! Hahaha... what an idiot! 
My family and I are still trying to figure out what to do. We spent everything we had to buy the land and supplies, so we can hardly go back. 
I've heard rumors about her. 
I understand Delphine Jend has some other mages worried. She's skilled, but a bit unpredictable. 
Then that's my answer. 
Yeah. I'll be there. 
Now is not really the time for conversation, is it? I feel like I'm interrupting something. 
I'll mark it down on your map, just so you won't forget where to find us. Meet us there around 11 in the evening. 
Someone has been brutally murdered, yet you want to question me about that little Dark Elf tramp? Go away, you fool. 
May you walk always in the shadow of Sithis, dear Brother. 
Ha! Take that! 
A pity, but not unexpected. We shall speak again. 
I've lived here all my life. Grown grapes. It's all I know. Fresh air, mountains, the grapes on the vine. It's just... beautiful. 
The Ring of Disrobing -- removes your clothes if you put it on. Now, don't you go trying it! I have enough Oddities on display already, hahaha. 
I'd stay back, no telling what that thing can do. 
Don't be frightened, they won't harm you. They look much fiercer than they really are, I assure you. 
I will follow your lead. The Wellspring is at the heart of Pinnacle Rock; follow the waters to reach it. I am yours to command, Your Grace. 
I sent men into the Gate, to see if they could find a way to shut it. They haven't come back. 
I haven't been in a while, but it's always nice to stop in and chat with Rasheda. Plus, she always gives a better deal to her friends. 
I suppose I should be glad the world didn't end. But, in some ways, I wish it had. It would be easier than... this. 
Truth be told, most of the Council has returned to the provinces to deal with urgent local matters, but we are in regular communication. 
This maze truly has a familiar feel ... as if I've seen it in my dreams. But no dream could be this vivid, or last this long. 
I think... I think we got them all. We're safe, for now. We'd best return to town while we can. 
Oh. Well. I heard lots of others, only I can't remember them. 
Actually, I gave you this contract in the hope that whatever Roderick has is contagious, and you'll die a slow, lingering death in a matter of days. 
We can't advance until you get that gate open! 
I've lost my way. This place looks so familiar, but I can't remember how I got here. Can you help me? 
Now, follow me, and we'll find a quiet place away from all this trouble. I trust you will clear up this matter in your own time, in your own way. 
I'm Maelona. Gogan's wife. 
Well of course it does! It was obviously planted here. Why would he stash a body in his own house? That's ridiculous! 
Not bad. 
Where is Thadon? Have you seen him? That traitorous coward! 
You said he was at Bleak Flats Cave. Haven't you looked there for him? 
Thadon had outside help getting his Chalice back. Something sneaky going on there. 
Leyawiin is in a state of transition. It has long been a respected county making moderate cultural and economic contributions to the Empire. 
Ohtesse is a wonderfully gifted healer. I sometimes worry that she spends too much time taking care of others, and not enough on herself. 
Unless I'm mistaken, I believe this dose is promised to someone. Should you ever have need of another, for... personal reasons, I can provide it. 
I speak for the Night Mother. 
A prisoner, sent in by ... 
You do not have all the materials you were told to collect. 
A contingent of Battlemages has been sent to the site. I would like you to oversee their actions on my behalf. 
Here to sell me more Nirnroot? 
There's someone new in town, I hear. Finally, someone with a wider perspective who can appreciate my art! 
Let me ask you something, friend. Why is Primo even here? The rest of us need the money, but his family is wealthy beyond measure. 
I feel so much better now that I have my ring back. 
Brotherhood. 
You've agreed to help them clear the goblins from Cropsford? That's great news! 
Why do you think your world has always been contested ground, the arena of powers and immortals? 
You'll find Grandmaster Jauffre at Weynon Priory, living as a simple monk. 
That flesh monstrosity that patrols the Fringe has been rebuilt. Better to let it stay dead if you ask me. 
You came all this way for training from Aerin? You must be really disappointed that she's not here. 
I never tire of the beauty of Gaiar Alata. 
Too much thinking, not enough work getting done! Fine. You think it over. But stay away from the other me, that Demented Horkvir. 
I... I don't even know what to say. How could we have been so wrong? Lucien tried to explain, but we wouldn't listen... 
Die, damn you! 
Hello there! Welcome to the Arena! I don't think I've ever seen you around here before. I know all the regulars, believe me.  
The light.... 
What is your wish? 
What can I do fer ya, ma'am? 
I was in the Legion for a great many years, my friend. I saw a lot of horrible things, including the murders of children. 
He killed them, one by one. Volanaro was last, I think. He was trying to run away, but he didn't make it, did he? 
Take these daggers! Slay her and at last, we can be on our path to true enlightenment! 
Do you know Jantus Brolus, the spellsword? 
No! No! 
Let's take them! 
Ah, wonderful! These will be most useful to me. 
The Dark Brotherhood must seek out a Nord named Erich. He has need of our services, and we are only too happy to oblige. 
You need to help Arvena Thelas with her rat problem. What's on your mind? 
What business do you have with Meridia, Lady of Infinite Energies? 
You may find me rather harder to kill than poor, innocent Thadon. 
There are rats and goblins down there... but from what I've seen of you, I'm guessing you are an experienced Healer. Am I right? 
If you get rid of them, I'll make it worth your while. 
Damn the Ulfgar! They'll pay! 
They've strongly fortified the main passage against us. If we attacked through the Underdeep, we could take them by surprise. 
Gold is the blood of the Thieves Guild. Keep the fences busy and rich. Then come to see me. 
It's a town, like any other. Well, go outside, and there's the mountains and wines and sheep. Here in town, though, nothing special. 
What? Janus... please, no. Let me sleep. Please, let me sleep. 
Don't talk - fight! 
I want to go to Fisherman's Rock. Where's that? 
You've survived! It... it cannot be! 
I know of him. Would you... loan me a few coins? 
Just watch. You'll see. 
We must all be on watch. 
Please, Your Grace. Hurry; we haven't much time. 
The Gray Fox requests a meeting. Please travel to Othrelo's house in the Imperial City Elven Gardens. 
You have defied the expected and accomplished something that denies all logic. I must contemplate the error in my calculations. 
Fine. Here's your money. Let me know if you find more. 
We believe these deaths to be the actions of a rogue Mage. 
We honor the Rose and its bearer. 
The front line will arm themselves with axes of war. They will hold the line against the enemy's charge. 
The light reveals all secrets, and knows all thoughts. None can hide from it, and it shines in all places. 
This is going to be fun. 
It seems someone has taken away an heirloom that is quite dear to me. I want you to help me recover a stolen painting. 
She works the other residents pretty hard. I hear they're not happy. 
Saying goodbye is my favorite part of talking to you. 
You are one hot customer! 
I must speak to the Count. 
Delphine can get you a spell to summon bound armor, if you're interested. And if you're able, of course. 
Big city. I really LOVE the lights at night, shoo-shoo. The City of Love. Got it? Love? Light? Night? Big. Big, big, big, BIG! 
There are a lot of fine-looking women in Chorrol. But they're all... kind of snooty. And not very nice. 
Well, I suppose I can trust you. You did bring me the spoon... Cindanwe is pure evil. She must be stopped at all costs. 
I think I trust you enough to tell you this secret. 
Henantier created the amulet to see if he could use his dreams as a training ground to help better himself. 
Read any good books lately? 
Your mind follows the simple path ... the choice of an animal. You see an enemy and you attack it, unthinking. 
The noose around Bruma is tightening. Now that the Mythic Dawn has learned Martin's location, we have to be prepared for the worst. 
Good, I'm glad she's dead. I can tell you that because we're friends. Matilde didn't like me just because I'm a Dunmer. She got what she deserved.   
A little skill with a shield can save your life. Of course, she'll only train other Fighters Guild members. 
It's curious. Skingrad's people scarcely ever set eyes on the Count, but he's apparently loved and respected by all his subjects. 
Excellent. I knew you wouldn't disappoint the Order. Here's the reward that was promised. However, I must ask that you reveal nothing about us. 
Betrayer! I have found you at last! Your reckoning is at hand! 
How do you tell one from another if you're smack in the middle? Don't answer that, I already know the answer of course. It came to me during a meal. 
Have you seen Right-Wind practicing with his sword? Very impressive. 
It's been a pleasure doing business with you. 
I am Newheim the Portly. What can I do for you? 
Ah! Still thinking about your reward, eh? I have not forgotten you or your loyal service to the Thieves Guild. You'll just have to trust me. 
Anyway, you're going to help me find calipers and tongs. No point in denying it. You've already agreed tomorrow. 
'Blackwood' refers in part to Blackwood Forest, but it also carries a reference to the 'thoghatt', of 'charcoal warriors' of Khajiit tradition. 
She eats dinner in the castle at the eighth bell. You may have to sweet talk her, but she knows all about Alessia Caro's habits and schedules. 
Oh. No sense of humor? Your loss. 
Fouled meat! You have returned Ahdarji's ring, but have also broken the covenant of the guild. Killing is not allowed. 
The cup of Thadon is back in hand, a vessel full of dew. It seems someone helped him find it, someone who is new. 
You have served me well, and I am pleased. I give you this, the Oghma Infinium. Knowledge given by me to Xarxes is recorded within. 
Welcome to Border Watch. 
Oh, dear. That's a shame. I was so looking forward to helping you. 
You've already purchased the staff, friend. There really isn't much more to say on the subject, is there? 
Let me see your face... 
I'm glad to have Baurus here. He guards Martin night and day. His way of atoning for the death of Emperor Uriel, I suppose. 
It's our duty to protect our own, even if others will do nothing. Father taught us that much, and we won't back down from a fight. 
Hey, there! You! Kinsman! I haven't seen another Dunmer in here in I don't know how long. Where you from, huh? Vvardenfell? 
Fighters Guild is still better for sensitive jobs, and you know it. 
You're not supposed to be down here. 
I see. I suppose there is no hiding it from you. No hiding. What a joke! My whole life is hiding. 
Yes, Arch-Mage. 
There's more gold in Arena fighting, sure. But contracting with the Guild is safer. And more respectable. 
I was in the sheepfold when they attacked. I heard the Prior talking to someone.  
You've already told me all that I need to know. 
Lady Alessia is uncomfortable with Khajiit ways. And Argonian ways. And Dunmer ways. She is only comfortable with pure white-bread Nibeneans. 
Nasty creatures, but I hear their meat is rather tasty. 
Until our paths cross again, my friend. 
Now it's my turn, you bastards! 
People are talking about a new adventurer who is seeking to get into the Isles. Mama warned me, "Only go where you've been invited." 
What of him? 
Naryan that! I'll balitoe before I krayble. 
Thank you!  You're the first friendly face I've seen since I arrived in this hellhole. 
I believe my master would be interested in speaking to you right away. 
Jauffre. 
Your next opponent wears a Heavy Raiment, but attacks with a short sword. She's like a heavily-armored wasp, and has the temper to match. Careful.    
I've put together a, well... a gang. We make money by luring fools out to the middle of nowhere and robbing them blind. 
This is not over, Madgod. I give myself to Jyggalag. As a Priest of Order, I'll be safe. Your empire will crumble before the armies of Order. 
That Else God-Hater sure has a chip on her shoulder. Great with a blade, but she really holds a grudge against the church. 
It is too late in the day to begin your test now. Return tomorrow before 1 PM, and we shall discuss it then. 
He will reward you greatly for escorting me home and closing the Oblivion Gate. 
A gate opened and daedra poured out. Everybody ran. Or they died. 
It has been told from our fathers, and our fathers' fathers, that our time in this place will come to an end. 
And take this key. It will allow entry into the Gardens and give you direct access to my Sanctum. 
Let me know when you have them. 
I'd look in the Lonely Suitor. She takes her meals there. If you try her house, don't pick the lock to get in. She won't like that. 
Watch yourself, prisoner! 
You're wasting your time. 
Would you even now attempt to trick me? You do not have what I requested. 
Oh... Hi. Hi again. You're the one who... who was going to bring me some skooma. To be my friend. Yeah... I remember you... now... 
He's a trained soldier, after all. I bet if anyone can figure out what's going on here, it will be him. 
He's just a thief. He's supposed to be the head of the Thieves Guild. What a joke! Can you imagine a bunch of thieves trying to form a guild? 
If you're any good with a lockpick, we can help each other out. We can get into the Gardens of Flesh and Bone. 
Look at those jewels! 
There's no way I'm going in there! 
The Chalice is in Dunroot Burrow. Haven't you been listening? 
Ah, these look lovely. I'm sure she'll like them. 
Walk just up the stairs there, and it's the door on the right. Thank you. 
Then leave this place. Namira has no business with you. 
I find her annoying. She's way too full of herself. Quite the big talker. 
Dogs are an orc's best friend. Good protection, good companions, good eats. The Bruiants have dogs. Lots of 'em. 
I trust that you will be able to remain professional? 
Aye, Bladesman. What's on your mind? 
Look what you've done! Spoiled my invisibility! This is my reward for trying to help the wretched villagers? 
Now, if you'll step on the last teleporter pad, I will meet you in the reception chamber so we can recover your earnings. 
Speak, while I can still hear you. 
We were so focused on organizing quickly that by the time we realized she'd let Order in herself, it was too late. We were split up and picked off. 
She's been a great help to all of us in the guild. Without her, I think Dagail would be lost at times. 
Good morning. 
Pain.... 
It's a pleasure to have you become a citizen of Chorrol. I'll take care of the deed. 
And maybe you'll make some friends along the way. That's always nice! 
And you, if you help me, then you can have what you want and no need to risk your neck, yes? 
If you say so. 
I can't order you do this with me. It's dangerous, and Vilena isn't going to know about it. It's your choice. 
What? I don't understand... 
You've done better than I had hoped. Bruma's garrison is now as strong as we can make it. 
Carahil has sent you, has she not? 
The general trader and smith are near the fountain. The book store is up the street towards the chapel. 
Safe journey. 
It seems a bit odd. I don't know how Ardaline feels about it. 
Very well. We'll do it your way. Be careful, and remember, we can't leave here without that book. It's our best chance of getting the Amulet back. 
He's not the friendliest person around, but he can teach you a lot about running a business. 
Cut them down! 
You needn't concern yourself with him. He was unfit to be a guild member, and it's better that he's no longer part of it. 
Halt. Mortals are not permitted within the walls of holy Cylarne. 
Let me see your hand. I see the City in the Hand, and the Hand in the Stars. 
I have told you what I require from you. There is no more to say now; speak with Hal-Liurz when you have found this woman. Excuse me. 
That Resonator is up and running again. It traps adventurers like the disease-infected rats that they are. 
Twelve midnight, and all's well. Hope it stays that way, sir.  
Why do you speak to me, when you have the Chalice but have not yet returned it? 
If Brellach is indeed under attack, you should prepare yourself for a difficult fight. The forces of Order must be quite powerful. 
I've heard she works long hours. It's worth it, though. That's some fine wine. 
Though I must warn you. I have seen things in your future. Things which may be, and things which will be. 
You'll always leave stuffed, assuming you can keep it down. 
I really don't want you around me. 
Our troubles are almost at an end, Sister. Soon we will visit the Night Mother, and she will surely guide us. 
Nels seems just as unnerved as the rest of us that someone has been killed, but he seems to find solace in a bottle.  
Soon we will birth a new Gatekeeper! 
Great Sigil Stones are the anchors of Great Gates. The kind of gate the Mythic Dawn opened at Kvatch. 
Here, Arch-Mage? Very well, I shall wait. 
The last period of First Era road-building was in the reign of the last strong Akaviri Potentate, Sidri-Ashak. 
Likewise. Sorry to send Gilen's wife to get you in that manner, but it seemed safer if we weren't seen on the streets right now. 
If all this is part of a divine plan, I'm not sure I want to have anything to do with it. 
Hello. Are you searching for something? 
I sent him on a mission to Forsaken Mine. He and some others were supposed to clear the place of trolls. Haven't heard back from them in days. 
Dark days, my lady. 
Go with the grace of the Nine. 
There is a small nuisance I would have you deal with before I tell you what I know. One good turn deserves another, after all. 
Have you heard about how the Blackwood Company is growing? 
It will be safest here with me. When you return with Martin, we will figure out our next move. 
Really? I find being invisible quite refreshing. 
I'll be waiting for teeth and horns. 
It seems to be a source of power for these invaders. A... portal, or some sort of gate. I don't know. 
For Sheogorath! 
It's tolerated because Farwil is the Count's son. Plain and simple. He has the power and the coin to put it all together. 
I've heard what you've done. 
I'm not so sure about that Eugal Belette. An odd fellow, and people have said there are strange noises coming from his house at all hours. 
Hey, if you say so. You do all the work. 
I spoke to him yesterday. He seems rather concerned about those boys of his. 
I'm not surprised at all that he tried to have me killed. That's his way. Always the traitor and the coward. 
An unfortunate encounter for both of us. But as I said, it was only business. No hard feelings, I hope. 
0, 5. Hloval is our priest and healer. 7, 7.  Unfortunately he was born with stunted magicka, but not a stunted ego. 
These mercenary groups tend to be fanatically loyal to whomever leader they follow. Roderick's people will likely fight to the death. Be cautious.    
Please, leave me in peace. 
Put that torch away. Do you want people to see us talking?  
My dear Gogron, you are a life-taker for the Dark Brotherhood! Our very existence relies on shadow and deception. Do you not value our secrets? 
About two days ago, Count Indarys's son, Farwil, entered the Oblivion Gate with six other men. We haven't heard from them since then. 
I've been looking for those. I thought Fimmion stole them thinking he could eat them, but I could never prove it. Thank you for returning them. 
My Blades are leading me out of the city along a secret escape route. 
An oath is an oath. 
Do you think those Knights will come here? I hope they do! I'd be the first to fall before them! 
The Great Gate will allow them to bring out the siege machine to blast the walls of Bruma, just like at Kvatch. 
I won't take up much of your time. But I felt you should know, I've had a breakthrough! 
Blades! Dark times are upon us. The Emperor and his sons were slain on our watch. The Empire is in chaos. 
Several mages tend to the grove, and should be able to assist you. Speak with either Zahrasha or Elette when you arrive. And choose wisely. 
When my Lord walks the earth, you shall know that our victory is complete. 
Speak to each of the Mazken to give them orders. 
Yes, yes! I swear it's the truth! Please, please let me go! 
Because my Lord wills it to be so. It poses no danger to Mundus; no compact has been violated.  
This is preposterous. Were I in charge, the culprits would've been found and executed immediately. 
It's a good thing I've kept all the weapons and armor in good condition. If I let those soldiers use them, they'd be all dented by now. 
Ah... our Lord has granted you the power to summon me. How wonderful for me. 
The Fringe has been laid to waste! I do hope none of my poor children were caught up in it. 
Oh, well. Been good knowing you, kid. Back to being His Hound for me. As for you... good luck, I guess. I've met worse. 
Varel Morvayn. Been making weapons and arms here in Anvil for 30 years. People say I do good work, and I don't aim to argue with them. 
Flyyyin'... flyyin' in the skyyyy.... cliff racer flys so high.... flyinnn'... 
Why, hello there! 
You come crying to me for help? Perhaps Lucien Lachance was wrong about you after all, eh? 
I don't know how you did it, but I appreciate it. And by appreciate, I mean reward. Enjoy. 
Dirty Orc! Get out! 
The Gatekeeper has been rebuilt. I wonder if I could get a little piece of the old one. 
My previous Silencer perished while fulfilling a contract. That emptiness has now been filled by you. It is an honor without equal. 
I avoid those things whenever I can. Horrible creatures. 
An insight into their origins may lead us to those who are responsible for them. 
The Resonator is still broken. It never worked. And it never will. 
I don't think so. You wouldn't try to cheat an old pro, would you? 
How you manage to do this is up to you; do not wander off, or I shall consider this test of your ability failed. Are you prepared to begin now? 
What can I do for you, Arch-Mage? 
Adventurers are always causing trouble around here. 
Two hundred gold? I don't think so. Not from me. 
Talk tough to me. I love tough guys. 
Some help is better than nothing, but my militia are farmers and shopkeepers, not soldiers. I would recommend delaying until more help can arrive. 
You destroyed the Oblivion Gate, they say. You gave them hope. You helped them drive the daedra back. 
There's a rumor going around that the undercroft may be haunted. 
The Battle of Bruma was a great victory! The Mythic Dawn have learned that we are not defenseless. 
So here's what we're going to do. We're going to find out whether or not you can hold up in combat. You put up your shield, and I hit you. 
Yeah, he eats here. Terrified of cats though. 
What can I help you with, sweetheart? 
I'm sorry to trouble you again...but I think the cure has worn off. I feel the cold grasp of death sneaking up on me once more. 
In selflessly serving the guild, at risk to yourself, while putting your own feelings aside, you prove your devotion to the cause. 
Mankar Camoran bound himself to the Xarxes when he created his Paradise, using dark rituals which I will not speak of further. 
Who are they? 
The town is very nice, but I advise you get out and see the countryside... the vineyards and farms, pastures and sheepfolds. Lovely mountain country. 
We will keep fighting until the last of us is dead. 
May your path be free of danger. 
Sooner or later they will order him to return the guards to their original posts. When that happens, come and tell me. 
Of course, I wouldn't put it past the Orcs over at the Two Sisters Lodge to rent them a room. 
Ancotar gave you a scroll to get rid of the invisibility? Fantastic! What are you waiting for? 
I've looked everywhere. Perhaps she's still in Kvatch, in a basement, hiding? 
Dammit, this is no good! 
If you want to find the Tears, I'd suggest reading a book called "Knightfall." The information inside may assist your search. 
No, it's too much. I don't know why I keep coming to visit you! 
Hahahaha! You're so funny My Lord! I mean, your presence is intoxicating! 
You remind me of a witch I once knew. I hate witches. 
Big-Head knows secrets. Secrets of learning. Alchemy, Sneaking, and stabbing with Blades! Which will you learn? 
An honor to be sure. 
Hieronymus Lex, Officer of the Watch. Every hand is needed to build an honest city, and it begins with you. 
Oreyn and the new master have saved the guild, sure enough. But we can't let it go to their heads. 
Behold, the Night Mother! The locals call this statue the Lucky Old Lady. They have no idea how lucky they really are. 
Shatter, weakling! 
It's time to say goodbye, I'm sorry I must fly. 
I have already sent word to all the local guild halls that you are now in charge. Congratulations, Arch-Mage. 
My double is always working. It takes all my energy just watching him work. It's got to stop. 
I'm ready as I'll ever be. 
Nothing we need to talk about now. I'll pay Viranus for his contract. This is for you. Who knows. I might be able to make soldiers out of you both. 
Did you hear the bad news?  Dar-Ma's daughter was killed by some strange cultists down in Hackdirt. Terrible, terrible times we live in. 
No time to talk! I have to get rid of these rats! 
I didn't hear you killed the other Atrabhi. And I'm not happy about it. 
All hail the Corrupter of Souls. 
Then prepare for battle! I'll not let this fort fall to the dogs of Reman! 
I hope you can help me with my crisis. 
Gwinas will be terribly disappointed when he learns it is gone. 
So what else did you expect? Justice? Go to the Chapel. Talk to Zenithar. He'll take care of everything. 
I'd been thinking about our conversation yesterday, and decided to consult some of the ancient texts. You were right! About everything! 
Now I hear there's a stranger in town asking about them. A Dark Elf, from back east they say. I wonder what he wants. 
This case here I'm saving for something special. Wouldn't you like to be the one to find something Odd enough to go on display here? 
Your Grace has restored the Wellspring, and saved us. For this, we thank you. 
You've found Gadeneri's skull? Take it to her at the Hill of Suicides! Before They find out you've got it! 
Ah, you've got it! Thank the gods! Finally, my mead will stay cold and won't taste like goblin piss. Take these, and my thanks. 
You have entered a holy place. What is your business here? 
Welcome back. An important task awaits you. 
Do be prompt in collecting them, however. Anything left in the chest for a full week will be destroyed. 
The Sintav clan is very close. We watch out for each other, and Uncle Iniel, he knows everything, and takes care of us. 
We're so close. Just bring 40 Nirnroot samples, and we can make the best version of the Elixir yet! 
Do you think that stranger's here looking for the girl? 
Greetings! Greetings! I am Ocheeva, mistress of this Sanctuary. Lucien has told me all about you. Let me welcome you to the Dark Brotherhood! 
I believe I heard a Benirus is in town. You should check out the Elven Gardens District. A Benirus wouldn't be seen anywhere else. 
If you'll just follow me. 
By the Nine! And there was nothing you could do for him? 
You must make them stop! 
That's what I was getting ready to ask you. You were found unconscious on the streets in Leyawiin. 
Goodbye, Blackwood Company. The Fighters Guild has a new master, and Oreyn is back. 
If only I had seen it sooner. Thadon might stand here next to me, to help usher in the rule of Order to this benighted realm! 
Where did Sheogorath go? Great. I bet he got sick and died. We're all going to die now! 
Get back with the Emperor! Protect him with your life! 
Go ahead. Leave me to rot in here. 
He definitely doesn't live with Zoe Malene. 
Jobs would be great. Too bad no one is giving us any these days. If you can find some work for us, we'll do it. 
Hail Sheogorath! 
Othrelos is a sneaky one. Kind of makes you wonder what he's up to. 
Bradon... I'll miss you... 
Your magic is useless! 
There's a new Gatekeeper guarding the Realm. Uncle Leo thinks it's too little, too late, but I disagree. 
It was an honor to serve with you, sir. Now that I've seen how it's done, I think my guardsmen and I can handle any new Gates that open near Bruma. 
What makes you think I would know about such a thing? 
Mine's down! 
And if not good deeds, then deeds of a sort. Strongholds to save, and Daedra to rescue. That sort of thing. Now get going. 
We are from Kvatch. 
You're here from the Council, aren't you? 
Come to me, sweet flesh! 
Jyggalag's minions must have introduced Order into the very wellspring of Madness. You must cleanse the Pools, or Order has won the war. 
It is a satisfying sound, when an arrow rips into flesh. 
If anyone asks, you are a traveling merchant, nothing more. Do not say otherwise to anyone. 
I don't really have any interest in learning how to use a blunt weapon, but I understand he's very good. 
Henantier was slain in his sleep. How awful. They should find the one who did it and send him straight to prison. 
I saw that Earana woman hanging around the Mages Guild again. 
Sheogorath uses the Resonator to find the "cream of the crop" as he calls them; the best of the worst to populate the Isles. 
Hello, dear! Listen, I've been thinking. Why don't we form a kind of alliance? If either one of us finds the chest of gold, we split it, 50/50! 
Fair enough. He left town yesterday. I heard he was going to... uh, Anvil. Yeah, that's right. No need to go lookin' for him. He's gone.  
Those who despair will certainly never be permitted to leave the Eternal Garden. 
Spirits of ancient souls are trapped in the Ore. Find it in old ruins. Also, Grummites are especially attracted to it. 
The Champion? He was on the second floor last I saw him. 
No! I am here! I stand proud before you, City-Swimmer, trainer of the prospective Sneaker, the sly sliding unseen! 
Use your silver tongue. Try to befriend the guests, and then you may be able to lure them to their own dooms! Hahahahahaha! 
I can't believe it! The Gray Prince has been beaten! There's a new Arena Grand Champion now, someone called Dragonheart! 
Nobody likes the Blackwood Company. They're brutes, plain and simple.  But they get the job done. 
Oh, hello. The real world just isn't as colorful as the ones in the story books, is it? Nor as truthful as the essays and histories. Alas. 
I shall serve with honor, Lord. 
The Nine welcome you to Bruma. I'm Isa Raman, priestess of Talos. 
Azzan's report says there were ogres in Sedor. I think this gold soldier might be the real thing. 
You will be asked a question. Answer thusly: "Sanguine, my Brother." You will gain entrance to the Sanctuary. Once inside, speak with Ocheeva. 
Right! Okay... It is with great honor that I present to you this gold, and the esteemed Raiment of Valor, and name you the new Arena Grand Champion! 
At least you've got that brutish strength, huh? Must be nice to just rip someone apart like some kind of monster. 
Aye, it was a fine portrait of a fine man. 
If you ask me, the Dark Elf is our killer. They're an evil and vengeful people, all of them.  
Thank you for warning me about him. Please, hurry and tell the guards before it's too late! 
Good day, Sir Knight. 
Oh thank goodness! The Resonator of Judgment has saved us! 
Look under the bush near the well, behind Nerastarel's house. I was going to take it for myself, but I owe you a great debt. You should take it. 
You want to talk to me about Dovesi? Someone's been murdered, you idiot! There are more important matters to discuss right now! 
I sought Sheogorath. This is His Realm, and I knew that He would protect us. And what did I find? The Throne of Madness -- empty! 
Congratulations! You have returned with the diary. You have earned the right to join the Thieves Guild. 
Get away from me, peasant. Someone has been murdered, and I'm rather unnerved by the whole thing.   
It is a sad day in this fine city when the stench of torture poisons our spirits. 
The Daedric Prince of Order. Or biscuits... No. Order. And not in a good way. Bleak. Colorless. Dead. Boring, boring, boring. 
A fine study to add to my research. I thank you for your help. 
I will obey your orders, but know that I do not trust the tactics of any male. Men are meant to fight, not to lead. 
Ah, another happy spectator! You of course want to bet on a fight! Who will it be this time, the Blue Team or the Yellow Team? 
I... I'm sorry... I can't right now. 
Now is not the time for us to speak! We must hear the words of the Night Mother! She will guide us in this hour of despair! 
The only "Mystery" is how he stays in business. 
Were you able to provide the Mazken with aid? We have little in the way of supplies here. No healing. No restoration.  
His home is located in the Temple District. Right across the garden from my home in fact. Ironic, isn't it? 
Let's kill us some big cats. 
I know Vilena's got Vitellus on her mind, but she'll spoil Viranus if she keeps him out of the real action. 
The Elixir of Exploration is a multi-purpose potion that was obviously created with the dungeon explorer in mind. 
Welcome to the Five Riders Stables! I have many fine horses for sale. Okay, so only one, but it is a fine Paint horse. 
I've no time for conspiracies. Get in the way, they do. Glad I wasn't involved at all. 
Go to the Leyawiin Guild hall, and speak with Dagail. She can train you further. 
Here you are, my brothers! At last, we will be rid of Ciirta! 
Then ... Martin Septim still lives? There is still hope to stop Mehrunes Dagon's invasion? 
Try him if you like. Believe me, after you die, I can put your flesh and bones to very good use. 
Why? Why would someone do this? The taking of a life is against every principal I hold dear. It's something I just can't understand.  
I'm sorry, but someone has been murdered! I really don't want to talk about Neville right now.   
Not that I can think of. People are mostly staying home, what with all the troubles in the world. 
Yes? What news are you bringing me? 
If we attacked in full force, we could take the Altar of Despair before they had a chance to react. 
It's good to see you again! I hope your contracts have been giving you much pleasure. 
If I don't have what you need, you might try the other Chorrol merchants. Renoit's has books. Fire and Steel for your armor and weapons. 
You have cleansed my followers' perfect darkness. The Forgotten are free to wallow in their misery. 
No. I'll lead the defense of Bruma myself. If I am to be Emperor, it's time I started acting like one. 
Greetings, brother. How does the light find you this day? 
Don't try anything. I'm watching you. 
Perhaps now that our guards are restored, things will quiet down and I'll actually be able to get something done. 
The Count has ordered the Guard to defend the city to the last man. There will be no panic here. 
I've heard he joined the priesthood to avoid serving in the military. What a coward. 
That was the strangest book I've ever read. 
By Sithis, I hope you shoot your own eye out... 
I accept such low prices only for guild members. 
So word hasn't gotten around to all the townspeople. Interesting. They must be very good at keeping a low profile. 
However, if you insist: I once served as the keeper of the great library of Jyggalag.  
I have a room ready, if you need it for the night. It'll be 10 gold. Interested? 
Greetings. Did you know that I slept for exactly 237 minutes last night? I find that fascinating. 
Got a sword and armor for her, huh? Not bad work, meat. Here's your payment for the contract. 
Yeah, sure. Like I'm going to say something about Syl's court to the likes of you! 
Things are always such a mess around here! 
The best they could do to was to imprison him underground, where he survives to this day. 
You hear about Jorundr? He was caught stealing gold, and now he's in jail! I bet Arnora's beside herself with grief. 
Have you changed your mind about helping me? 
I can't believe someone got past him. 
Oh, I don't think that would be best for you. You need to get out, see the world, discover things for yourself. 
You don't really know what it's like to crack skulls. Until you do, I've got nothing to say to you. 
How's business? Are things going well? 
What can the Order help you with, brother? 
However, since you aren't fully at fault, I won't report your involvement to the Count. Llevana, on the other hand, will pay for her crime. 
No, you do me too much honor. 
I know, I get way too fired up over this. It just annoys me that she's in charge of the guild, when she's clearly not fit. That's all. 
You're a liar. You don't even look like a Count. 
See to it that your leader, Traven, learns this as soon as possible. I have no love for your guild, but I have no wish to see it destroyed either. 
Slash 'N Smash. Doesn't the name say it all? 
Please... give them to me! I must have them! 
Hmmmm... Yes... Yes... It's as I suspected after all. But I wonder... Will this affect the Destruction discipline as well, or merely Conjuration? 
We are going to steal one of the Elder Scrolls from the Imperial Palace. Are you ready for this challenge? 
See you back in Anvil. 
She wonders why she cannot find me? Doesn't it occur to her? That I am hiding from her? 
Hearing rumors of Syl's madness makes me glad I live outside the walls of New Sheoth. 
Chorrol? That's where we are, right? Really? Great. I don't care. And I'm not interested. But it's sure nice of you to let me know. 
My betrothed! I must save her! 
I steer clear. They're fast creatures. 
The guards sent for Carius, who is an investigator for crimes here in Bruma. In minutes, Raynil convinced Carius that Bradon was a vampire. 
[Knight Attack Sound] 
Because of this, her eye will serve well to contain that which the staff must hold. 
The light shines within us. 
Congratulations on your victory. Your fame was well-deserved, it seems. 
Are you here to pay the blood price? 
My son? He's at home, I would imagine. 
I also want you to know that I had a long discussion with Jensine, and I have decided to join the Society. 
However, spare me your grief. My imprisonment is as meaningless as my immortality.  
Hello, I am Velwyn Benirus. If you're in the market, I'm selling a manor house right now for a very good price. 
He's dead? 
Jena, good day to you. 
You've fulfilled your end of the bargain, though, so I'll fulfill mine. Raminus will have my recommendation. 
I understand money is tight, but buying discount spells seems like a bad idea. 
You've done well, mortal. I'm amused, I think. Head into the center of Border Watch. And make sure to duck. 
It fills my heart with warmth to see you again, Sister. 
I'm not even the one you want. Muurine is behind it. You'll need solid proof to pin it on her. 
I... I am returning to the Sanctuary, as quickly as I possibly can, oh great Listener! 
Why should I trust your word? You'll have to do better than this to persuade me to take action against one of the other Watch Captains. 
You don't belong here. Get out! 
What a waste of my talents. 
How goes the search? 
To be honest, it wasn't the best idea. And it really began to smell. Must have been clowns. Clouds don't smell bad. They taste of butter! And tears. 
I'm not certain what happened to the knight, or why the tears were frozen, but I do know someone you could ask. 
I'm so excited! I expect an invitation to perform at the installation of the new ruler of Mania any day now! 
I need you to come with us. You've got far more combat experience than these men. 
So stop telling lies and tell me what you're doing here! 
A little bird told me that Syl is rounding up people again. That's silly, isn't it? Would you like some milk, little kitty? You look thirsty. 
Yes, it's all finished. It's in that cupboard, back in the corner. I hope it serves you well! 
A new ruler in Dementia is no reason to lay about. 
As I look upon your face, you remind me of a summer's day. Of a distant and secret place not so far away. 
You dare approach my shrine, Child of the Light? You, who walk this plane basking in the light of the warm, cruel sun? 
She certainly does take pride in the Newlands.  
I heard someone relit the Torch at the Sacellum Arden-Sul. Good news, unless... what if someone is just trying to trick us? 
You blew it. You had it in the palm of your hand and you threw it all away. You make me sick. 
Mighty warrior, the fallen Gatekeeper. Relan wonders if he would be able to do the same. 
He's a very hard worker. Sometimes I wonder if he ever gets out. 
Have you found an exit to this place yet? We must escape! 
Spare a coin for the infirm? 
In any case, finding them won't be easy. I've studied Mankar Camoran's writings a bit myself, at least those that I could find. 
You will be sweet, bloody nectar for the lady. 
When I have learned what I need to know, I will call for you again. Let us leave Helvius' house now. He has served me well and deserves his peace. 
My feet are killing me. 
Happy Big Head for having spoken to Lord Sheogorath! 
I warn you... don't cross me. 
Next time, bring some Skooma with you! 
I may have a bit of a proposition for you involving the Jemane family you so recently assisted. 
Mucianus Allias. He is not a Council member, but has long served the guild here at the Arcane University. 
Why are you trying to ruin everything? 
Arvena Thelas is an odd one. I've heard some strange noises coming from her basement. 
Tsavi, Count's Mage and Castle Healer, your servant.  
Sheogorath hasn't disappeared. Did you know that he and Jyggalag are the same person? It's all very hard to understand. 
You're off duty now. 
Little busy right now. Got your mess to clean up. 
Feet are for walking. Hands are for hitting. Or shaking. Or waving. Sometimes for clapping. 
No staff yet? Well, keep at it. Those charm scrolls should do most of the work for you, if you put them to good use. 
It seems you've been cured of vampirism yourself, so I can offer no help in that regard. I can, however, present you with a sum of money. 
Thieves Guild members revere and respect her power and influence. We give her blessing with the phrase 'may shadow hide you.' 
You must return to Kvatch at once, and rescue Martin if he lives. There is no time to lose! 
Someone managed to turn the Resonator back on. I guess that's a good thing. Though it sounds like a lot of work for little pay off to me. 
If, by any chance, you're interested in actually fighting in the Arena, you need to head down to the Bloodworks and speak with Owyn, the Blademaster. 
My love is home again. I'll never leave his side. 
Ah, the savior of Aleswell! Whatever you need, I'm at your service. 
They say that invaders have come to the Shivering Isles. Of course, "they" say a lot of things, don't they? 
Yeah. I get it. 
Yesterday, the usurer, Kurdan gro-Dragol, sent for my husband to meet him at the Lonely Suitor Lodge. He hasn't returned since. 
Death to Dagon's lackeys! 
My home.... my goddamn home, in flames. It kills me that I can't get in there and DO something. 
Nothing else I can tell you about him. He comes and goes and doesn't talk to people much. 
You stupid or something? What are you doing here? Go back where you came from. We don't like your kind here. 
Light guide you, sister. 
What do you mean he's not coming? He told YOU to come with us instead? Has he no honor? 
As I promised when we first met, here is your reward for completing the set. Take it with my sincere thanks. It is well-deserved. 
My best advice is to destroy them on sight. They wouldn't hesitate to do the same to you. 
Hello, is there something I can do for you? 
Then Martin is gone... 
Nice town. But you need money here to live well. Head out of town and do some hunting. Sell the skins. Or, you can loot old caves and ruins. 
I can't quite decide where I should look. I don't want to break anything but the chest of gold could be hidden anywhere. 
Hey, you're the one that helped Captain Burd destroy that damned Oblivion Gate! Well done, friend, well done! 
This contract will require a bit of detective work. I suggest you speak to your fellow Brothers and Sisters and see if they can offer any advice. 
Have you spoken with Adrienne today? 
Drink. Drink! We need to go. 
Talk to Hjolfrodi. I can't help you. 
I believe you'll find it quite helpful. Once you've had a chance to read it, I'd be happy to discuss it with you. 
Audens Avidius escaped from prison! 
Listen! I'm calling the guards if you don't leave, now! 
It was our people who got Azani Blackheart, but I can't talk about who. I promised. 
Only one group can stick around. Either we Demented or those blasted Manics. It's the only way we'll find any peace. 
Welcome. 
You've killed my child! How dare you! Get out of my sight! 
Since you were courteous enough to tell me the truth, I'll do the same by trusting you to talk to a guard if he asks you to do anything... strange. 
Samuel was a bit wild as a young man. The City will do that to you. Bad company, bad influences. 
Very well, what is it you need from me? 
He's as good as you'll find in the city when it comes to heavy armor. 
That's right. Rats. In my basement. And something has been killing them! It's horrible. My poor babies! You must do something! 
I believe in the transforming power of honest work. I honor your vocation as adventurer. By your labors and their fruits, you praise Zenithar. 
These hearts are a source of power for the agents of Order. You may find them quite useful in certain situations. 
Guildmaster! How about that! 
There are things I like to do. Does this never occur to her? Does she think I live each minute to run her errands for her? 
I don't think it would be appropriate for me to talk about private family matters with a stranger. 
The Blood of Thadon has been consumed by Arden-Sul's will, and all of Mania welcomes you with open arms. 
I have created a chivalric Order of the White Stallion. Find and kill the leader of the Black Bow Bandits, the Orc named Black Brugo. 
Guilbert and Reynald know nothing of their father's past deeds. If you want to tell them about it, suit yourself. 
You may not leave here until your initiation is complete. Lord Dagon thirsts for red-drink. Sate him. 
But the Bruma Guard cannot defend the city indefinitely. The daedra of Oblivion are innumerable; the guardsmen of Bruma are not. 
The Shivering Isles is what Sheogorath wills it to be. 
Know that Rufio is old and weak, and sleeps his days away. You could kill him before he even has a chance to wake. If you so choose.                 
I won't beg you, but I ask that you please reconsider. My boys need another steady hand at their side, else they may not survive. 
I need your help now. Have you made up your mind? 
For 150 gold and a roof over my head, I'm yours. 
Ah, wonderful! I'm sure they'll make her happy. It's the least I can do; she's brought so much joy into my life, whether she knows it or not. 
Mog gra-Mogakh runs a fine establishment at the Two Sisters Lodge. And her sister has some quality horses. 
You have helped to save Kvatch, or what is left of it. For that, I can do nothing less than help you spread healing throughout Cyrodiil. 
May Sithis be with you. 
The Dark Brotherhood must seek out an Imperial named Severio. He has need of our services, and we are only too happy to oblige. 
It's wonderful to see you again. 
Hmmm. Unfortunately your pathetic Illusion skill makes that idea useless. 
It's her, you understand me? It's Matilde! She's the killer! She's the one doing this! We've got to kill her first! Do you understand me?  
My husband's wedding ring! I never thought to see it again. What I wouldn't give to see him once more. 
Come back when you've got the ectoplasm, and we'll talk about those other men getting work from me. 
Have you seen Rhano at the Fighters Guild use his sword? Impressive. He could teach us all a thing or two. 
Cat's out of the bag on that one, isn't it? Who puts cats in bags, anyway? Cats hate bags. 
Come with us... 
Protection does this woman seek in items of magic both strong or weak. 
You want to join us? Hmm... another guild rat leaving the ship. Very well. Speak with Jeetum-Ze. He handles recruitment here. 
I put the book aside, because frankly, I had so many other delicate experiments going on that I just didn't have the time to go plant hunting. 
Hail, My Lord. 
I ran across a couple of mudcrabs not long ago. Annoying creatures. 
Is that possible? This is grave news indeed. 
I am one of the few who know of his existence. Many years ago, I served as captain of Uriel's bodyguards, the Blades. 
Behold the new hero of the people of Cyrodiil! Behold, your Arena Grand Champion, the Messenger of Death! 
Place the Essence of Breath into the Cistern of Substantiation. 
Of this place I know you'll agree, the residents there live without glee. 
Give me your possessions, and put on this initiate's robe. 
They're quite friendly with newcomers. Just walk up to them and say "hello." 
Speak quickly. 
Some fool lit himself on fire in the city. 
He's here somewhere. I know it. 
Dammit, it's that prisoner again! Kill him, he might be working with the assassins. 
Something isn't right here. 
This blade has slain many a hero over the years. Tamriel will be better off without it for a while. 
Really, now. You're such a charmer. 
A worthy foe, at last! 
The Countess is very happy to have her ring back. I don't think she has taken it off for days. If you want to hear the whole story, talk to Hlidara. 
The Greenmote flowed like water in a stream as the revelers voraciously succumbed to its rapturous ways. 
I'm... I'm sorry! I didn't mean to do anything wrong! It was the robed man! He... he paid me to put those things in the barrel! 
No sign of her yet. We'll do our best to track her down, and deliver her to Lord Sheogorath for a fitting punishment. 
I'm at my wit's end! I beg you to help me! 
Go now. Get some rest. Sithis knows you've earned it. When you're ready for another contract, you need only ask. 
Lex has pulled city Watchmen from the Arcane University and the Temple district to scour the Waterfront. 
Did you hear Deetsan talking about the Mages Guild again? 
Ahem. Citizen of... Skingrad. Please be advised that I am here on official business, and wish no harm... 
Fine. Take the stairs up to the right, the room on the left. No visitors allowed. And no pets. 
Behold the new hero of the people of Cyrodiil! Behold, your Arena Grand Champion, the Spellslinger! 
Well, that chest of gold is supposed to be in here somewhere. Though why someone would invite us all here just to give it away is quite the mystery. 
A toast to Sheogorath! Order is no more. 
Good day to you. 
The Mythic Dawn? Are you... I mean, I don't know what you're talking about! I don't know anything about any cult. 
That's a lovely gesture! Thank you so much. Everyone will be so glad to have the Ring back where it belongs. 
True, but perhaps you can hold the throne -- provided that you possess the proper symbol of office. Namely: the Staff of Sheogorath. 
Yes, I know the Gatekeeper is back, but so what? He's missing the best parts, so what's the point? 
You're trespassing! I warned you, and now the guards are coming to arrest you! 
The only way to close all the Oblivion Gates forever is for me to relight the Dragonfires in the Temple of the One. 
This gem needs to be confiscated and brought here, before it can be delivered to the King of Worms and used against us. 
Why should I tell you where it is? Here I sit in Leyawiin's dungeon while you are free. What will you do for Amusei if I tell you? 
Have Erthor see me when he gets back, Associate. 
Very well. We shall speak again in three hours. Good luck to you. 
So, the story has been rewritten and the Greymarch is at a new ending. Arden-Sul's will be done. 
Whoa. What was that? 
Alves Uvenim, Journeyman of the Guild. Welcome to Leyawiin. I don't believe we've been introduced. 
Be well, and live free. 
Place the Blood Liqueur into the Cistern of Substantiation. 
Hi, I'm Gogan. How's it going? 
I can't escape the Xarxes, even in my dreams. I wonder if my warding spells will be enough. 
Honestly, she's never done anything to be fined or get in trouble... yet. The person I'd love to bring in as a witness is Aldos Othran. 
Sheogorath's pet. That used to be me, so blinded by my suspicions that I could not see the truth of my own situation. 
I believe that Martin's sacrifice sealed the gates of Oblivion forever. Tamriel no longer needs the protection of the Dragonfires. 
Once the Aureals are routed from the Altar of Rapture, I will be most pleased to command my soldiers to light the Flame for Sheogorath's glory. 
How can I be of service? 
I need to get in there! 
You should get out there, and experience things for yourself. Discover new places, travel to lands you've never seen. 
That sounds interesting. Perhaps I'll have to read it as well. 
Kill me? What is this? Who are you? I don't know who sent you, but you won't take me down without a fight! So go ahead, make your move! 
Stuck his tongue to his axe! Ha! Serves him right. 
Psst! You got any Skooma? 
I know what you've heard, all about Jorundr and his run-in with the town guard. Well, let's just say it isn't exactly all true. 
A wizard did it. Stupid layabout mage. Had a theory about each of us having a Manic and Demented side. 
I had hoped for more help. The Empire will stand or fall with Bruma! Have all the other cities abandoned us? 
Itius Hayn, Guard Captain. You don't want to know me. Stay on the right side of the law, and we can stay perfect strangers. 
Lord Sheogorath wants me to leave? Okay, for you I will. I know a nice spot in Bliss where I can stay. 
I owe all of this to that heartless treacherous witch, Arnora. 
Gods' blood, you don't know, do you? 
You'll have to speak to Dagail. I just don't understand what it is she wants. 
This place is giving me the creeps. 
Anytime, friend. I'm right here. 
People always enjoy a good fable. M'aiq has yet to find one, though. Perhaps one day. 
We are from Leyawiin. 
What's the point in being happy that the Greymarch has ended? Tomorrow something new will arise to destroy us. 
Speak. 
Not until you've got those wines for me. I thought I made that clear. 
Ha ha! Weren't expecting this, were you? You'll get no more enjoyment from me today, Herdir. All I know about is the note. 
Excuse me, Sister. Can you spare a moment? 
I hoped you would come. Now you shall pay for my brother's death. 
Don't stand too close. I need room to swing my weapon. 
A messenger, sent by Issmi. You must go to Brellach at once! We are under attack! 
Hello again, sister. 
The old fellow? At Weynon Priory? It's a small community outside the walls, southeast of the Chorrol gate, on the Black Road. 
We will spill their blood in the name of our father! 
Your mind follows the simple path, the choice of an animal. But you have courage, at least. 
After you read the book, I'll help in any way that I can. 
The Master will call us back to Tamriel soon. I'm sure of it. 
What's new? 
The loss of the Emperor must be a terrible blow to them. 
If the guards don't like you, then I probably will! Hahaha. 
Then I suggest you head back to the safety of the encampment. I have no more time to talk. 
You've committed yet another crime against your Fighters Guild brothers. Go speak with Donton. Until then, goodbye. 
Please do make it rain burning dogs. 
Maybe I should get a Great Torch like in New Sheoth. I'll bet it would help keep me awake. 
I'll have your head on a spike! 
The culprit in this crime has already been dealt with. It's just a matter of wrapping up the details. 
I think we'd better get that Gate closed. 
I was one of Mankar Camoran's chief lieutenants. I helped plan the Emperor's assassination. I opened the Great Gate at Kvatch. 
Have you seen anything cuter than that?! 
Yes. After all these years, I have my ring back. I wear it all the time now. 
According to the diary entry, it seems that I'm the only one who can open the secret door in the manor. 
Everyone wants to know what really happened in the Temple. What happened to Martin? Was the fiery dragon really Akatosh? 
But, you'll still get your prize, won't you? I think it was worth it... don't you? Keep up the good work, little mortal. 
Please bring back Rockshatter. It means a great deal to me. 
Lord Sheogorath chose you to sit on His throne. With the Staff, you may be able to do just that. 
Just stop it! 
May I be of some assistance, Arch-Mage? 
Weynon Priory is outside the south gate, just past the stables. 
She travels a lot to research her books. She's in great shape from all that travel. Maybe she'd teach me a bit about getting into shape. 
Oreyn is in a foul mood lately. I think he's just about out of patience with Vilena and the whole Blackwood Company situation. 
My soul for Sheogorath! 
I'm sure now that they knew all along that the land was in goblin territory. But no matter, who cares if a few settlers get themselves killed? 
You've got nothing to lose. So why not just tell me and save us both a heap of trouble? 
Who put that there? 
When he has the amulet, his power will be increased, and Traven will be helpless to stand in his way. You, I'm afraid, won't be standing at all. 
He threw his lover to the ground and turned his attention on me. Luckily, I managed to run back into the street and escape his grasp. 
She's an excellent alchemist. I understand she teaches the trade for Mages Guild members. 
Are you ready to pay the fine? 
So Kalthar overheard us, did he? That explains why he's been so cranky lately. 
I have word that two of the jobs were successful. 
Myvryna Arano. Now Armand needs your help to neutralize her. You are going to pin the theft of the bust on Myvryna. She lives in the Waterfront. 
By the Divines, you've done it! 
I believe you've already been instructed as to how to proceed. You'll need to ingest Felldew to enter the Burrow. 
Good day. 
Well, you found me. Congratulations. Go tell Jeanne, if you must. 
Hello, good sir. 
You heard of 'Goblin Jim's Cave'? It's a big one. It's a long walk due north of Skingrad, in the Imperial Reserve... a long way from civilization. 
There isn't time for idle chatter. 
Of course, you'll need an offering. I think a lesser soul gem, a head of lettuce, and some yarn will do the trick. Yes. That's what Sheogorath wants. 
You're Fighters Guild! Get them out of here! 
I wouldn't mind learning something, but I don't want to join the Fighters Guild to do it. 
He's an odd one. I'm sure someone will take care of him soon. 
What a great story. 
Pyke has a new love in Hale, a woman named Zoe Malene. Will they ever find true happiness and, if so, until when? 
I love you, Zoe. 
Shh! Keep it down. This isn't exactly legal. 
A course of action could not be agreed upon. Some felt that we are in danger of being exterminated, and that it is time to fight back. 
I think this place got to him... perhaps we should leave. 
What can I do for you, meat? Need something to do? 
I think we should get out of here, quick! 
Oh, really? I'm invisible, you say? Thanks for letting me know. Talk to my brother Diram if you want to know all about it. 
Justice has been done. 
Carry on, soldier. 
Everyone in Aleswell suddenly became invisible several weeks ago. It was sort of fun at first, but the novelty has definitely worn off now. 
No time to talk. Go away. 
The Aureals no longer defile holy Cylarne, thanks to you. 
I knew I could count on you. 
If it's spells you need, Earil's is the place to go. 
I knew there was a curse on that place which is why I sold it to you so cheap. I suppose I should've warned you, but I had to get out of Anvil. 
They don't like the sunlight much. Dangerous, too. You'll want to avoid them if you can help it. 
You've always been too smart for your own good. 
Syl! You dare interrupt Me? Only I interrupt Me. Like just then. 
That's enough. Really. 
This leaves me with little choice. Either I fight you now, and have a chance at freedom, or I surrender and rot in a city dungeon. 
Let's see if we can't find those mountain lions. 
Yeah. I don't need you. So go away, huh? I'm asking real nice, because my mom brought me up right. 
You always bring in good business. 
0, 1, 0. I always aim for the heart. 1, 0, 1. 
Speak to Thoronir first. Although I am happy you were able to recover some solid evidence, he deserves to see it as well. 
The supposed leader of the Mythic Dawn cult. He wrote the infamous "Commentaries on the Mysterium Xarxes." 
You've spoken to Dyus, yes? Then there is little more to say. Do as he instructs -- recreate the Staff of Sheogorath before it is too late. 
So, what's this about? 
You want me to think Nels is the killer, is that it? Maybe you did it, eh? Maybe you're just trying to turn me against him!   
From there, I went directly to my chamber and slept the rest of the night. 
Good day to you! 
My long duel with the Septims is over, and I have the mastery. 
You have restored your honor within the Thieves Guild. Now I can pay you for your recovering the taxes and promote you to the rank of Footpad. 
As you command. 
Have you talked to my sons yet? I don't want them leaving on their own. 
The Daedra came out of the gate in the middle of the night. 
May the path ahead be free of danger. 
You've already got the room for the night. There's nothing more I can offer. 
Someone I'd never seen before. When Jearl wasn't home. You see what I mean? 
Agronak will be wearing his Raiment of Valor, and he's probably got it heavily enchanted, so feel free to do the same to any armor you have. 
Erm, well... yes. I'll just pack up my supplies and be on my way, then. Thank you for sending someone to help me. 
I can't believe that the Countess is more obsessed with that painting than the Oblivion Gate threatening the city! 
Are you ready? We need to move out soon, while we still have a chance to strike. 
Then, at the risk of being rude, could you please stop disturbing me? I'm very upset, and the last thing I need are false hopes. 
Make no mention of the book to him. It's just the sort of thing he'd want to get his scaly little hands on. 
A few years ago, an adventurer not unlike yourself sold me a musty old tome containing alchemical formulas. Most of them were worthless. 
Sir. 
I'm glad it was you that put them down. My only regret is that I wasn't there with you. 
In effect, simply by finding their way to the shrine, prospective members have already passed the first test on the road to "enlightenment." 
Remember. Read "The Cleansing of the Fane" before deciding whether to seek for Umbacano's treasure. 
I sure don't like him! No I don't, you fuzzy little sweetiepie! 
Neville seems different now that someone has been killed. More alert, more aware. Something tells me he's not going to take all of this lying down. 
Our arrangement was clear. I would pay you for delivering me the carving. Since Maric delivered the carving, he earned the reward. 
But if you insist... Do you know the lengths of his depravity? How low he stoops to pursue his pathetic lifestyle? 
You again? 
Sadly, I don't have anything for you. I only work with the less experienced guild members. You should go see S'krivva in Bravil from now on. 
What can the Order help you with, sister? 
Dinner is promptly at 8 o'clock and those who are late don't get Alocasia Fruit Cup! 
Maybe I know him, maybe I don't. But since yer so interested, I know somethin' that could jar my memory. 
That was some good goblin bashing. What else you need? 
Can't say I know him well. I understand he'll train people to cast illusions, for a price. 
Fetcher. 
Please, Seridur is anxious for your report. 
I've heard he's good with his bow, and he'll train you, for a price. I like the wine he makes, too. 
Sheogorath has vanished? Another already seeks his throne. One tyrant passes and another rises. To the void with them. 
You'll need more than just my confession. You'll need evidence, and I have none. 
She is hiding in Dynari Amnis' house over in the Talos Plaza district. She's one of the few that escaped when Lex invaded the Waterfront. 
It is a beautiful city. I love to walk, talk with everyone, hear the news, share the little stories of the day. 
Find this proof and return it to me, and I'll share with you some of my finest combat techniques. Trust me, you can't learn these moves in a book! 
Die, betrayer! 
You have no rights here, convict. 
I'm sure you'll be able to find these things, if not, perhaps Sheogorath's faith in you is misplaced. Go now. You try my patience. 
Now, I fear that the Gnarls themselves may be accelerating the spread of Order throughout the Tree's roots. Be careful. 
I've sold some things there. Thoronir is an odd one. 
Well, not me. No way. I'll be calm and collected with these pants on. Ready for action. 
A fine transaction. 
Another conspiracy in Crucible. Not a surprise. 
You just wouldn't leave! So I HAD to call the guards! 
I'm Magician Orintur of the Mages Guild. I divide my time between the Cheydinhal Guild and my own private studies at Willow Bank.  
How did you survive the collapse? 
I've heard some new person has arrived in the Realm. I simply don't have the time to meet somebody new. 
Certainly I've spent time there. Talasma runs a good, quiet Inn. 
The Dark Brotherhood must seek out an Imperial named Florentius. He has need of our services, and we are only too happy to oblige. 
See you later. 
Then heed my words, for I will not repeat them. On the Green Road to the north of Bravil lies the Inn of Ill Omen. 
I'm sorry. You must speak to Countess Carvain for any further information. 
Who will survive this week's epic battle of combatant versus beast? Let's find out! Lower the gates! 
Then, if you won't tell me why, I won't take you anywhere. 
You will fail, mortal, and then where will you be? Dead. And nothing. 
This area is off limits, worm! Get back to your cage! 
I haven't got all day. 
Interesting... these markings are unexpected... the royal glyph is not as described by Sorcalin... 
Hmm? 
It all started when Aleron became foolish, and started gambling. He'd visit the arena every week and spend our hard earned money on bets. 
You are welcome here anytime, my friend! 
Need new clothing? I have a fantastic selection. 
I need you to get down to Leyawiin and infiltrate the Blackwood Company. 
It's not safe, talking to strangers. I don't know what's going on, but I have to be careful. 
Everything is ready for Martin's arrival, don't worry. 
Isn't it obvious? Do you know the number one reason people die in a catastrophe? Do you? They panic. 
Perhaps Anvil will not go the way of Kvatch, thanks to you. Well done. 
Have you recovered the Necromancer's Amulet? 
And I've already been expelled. Doesn't mean I'm done, though. I'm taking down the Blackwood Company, and I want your help doing it. 
Once infected with vampirism, you must wait three days and then sleep once more. Then the Dark Gift will truly take hold. Sleep now, and awake anew! 
Here, take this to him. It is not my fault. The job will be finished, I swear it. 
I'm afraid you'll have to find it yourself. I'm so out of sorts with all these requests, I've lost track of most everything. It's very distressing. 
Armor, weapons, I have it all. How may I help you? 
Let's assume 'no'. 
It was only a matter of time before you or Carius figured it out. No matter. After I've killed you, I won't need my vampire hunter ruse any longer. 
He pays peanuts. And thinks it entitles him to chew us out 18 hours a day? Sometimes I wonder if I made a mistake coming here. 
Don't do that. 
Show me the head, so I know it is safe for the settlers to return to Cropsford. 
Don't forget to wear that ring I gave you when you cast the spell. Not that there's anything to worry about. 
Silencer! At last you've arrived! Fear not, for the crisis that has threatened the Dark Brotherhood has finally come to an end. 
Each night, he wanders the shore of Niben Bay. Then he stops and looks mournfully out to sea. 
Come on, we've got to keep moving! 
Are you sure? I truly have no wish to harm you. It is the carving I want. Just business. 
You've got Agronak's Raiment of Valor! Good! Give it to me! All right, now I give you your own. By Shinji, I... I'm shaking! This is amazing! 
This isn't my idea of a good time. 
A bunch of junk. That's what it is. 
Get a move on, will you? 
Cindanwe is always trying to hurt my sweet Kishashi. Wouldn't want the slave-driver to get her hands on this spoon. 
Oh, yes, I've already shown you this shelf, haven't I? My poor old brain just isn't what it used to be! 
Still folks living up there, but no one you'd like to meet after dark. 
I'm short on patience as well as magicka. Out of my way! Once I regain my power, I'll show you. 
But in your face, I behold the sun's companion. The dawn of Akatosh's bright glory may banish the coming darkness. 
No, no. I know nothing. 
Just go right up to them and introduce yourself. They love meeting new people. 
Oh? We must? Well, last I saw, you didn't outrank me, Protector. I suggest you mind your manners... and your own business. 
This area is off limits! 
All appointments to see the Count must go through Mercator Hosidus. 
I don't have much of a sense of humor, so if this is a joke, I'm not amused. Come back when you have the money. 
Come on! 
We have fulfilled our last duty. We go now to Aetherius without shame. Farewell. 
I'm the lighthouse keeper, Velan Andus. 
Here's the key, and something extra. I don't know if it will be of use to you, but from what I've heard of Falcar's ring, it may come in handy. 
The Knights began arriving shortly after the spire activated. They seem to have no interest in pushing us back, only in killing those who resist. 
Something strange is going on with Ardaline and Varon Vamori. I always see him hanging around her. 
I've put aside a little mead for you. I know you like it. 
Your efforts are in vain, mortal! 
Owyn likes to think he's the boss, but without me, this place would fall apart. Who orders the ointment? Who mops up the blood? Me, that's who! 
Can I tidy up for you? Your house is always such a mess. 
Good to see you. We should have a drink sometime. 
We'll show them. 
Salute! Welcome! Please say your piece. 
You're wearing a Battle Raiment! Oh, isn't that cute. The wittle girl wants to pway dwess up. Go home, princess, before you get yourself killed. 
It's an honor to finally meet you. When I heard you were in town, I just had to send for your help. Your reputation precedes you. 
By good fortune, my research has uncovered some new information that may help you in your search for the remaining statues. 
I heard that thieves broke into the Arcane University, the Imperial Legion Compound, and the Temple, all on the same night! 
You wish entertainment, My Lord? 
Tovas knows his horses, and I'll stay with him and these beautiful creatures. Forever. 
The daedra Prince of Destruction. An inveterate foe of all mortal races. 
Watch the gate! 
Now, put up your guard, and let's begin. I'm losing interest in this. 
Wait! I've seen you before! You're the Blade that Brother Astav was tailing! 
Be careful. There may be more of them about. 
Good luck, Associate. 
The sigil stone for this Oblivion Gate is the key. As soon as we have it, we shall rid Cheydinhal of its existence. 
Heard the Gatekeeper was killed. Waste of a creature that size anyway, if you ask me. 
You wear the Bands, but you're no prisoner. Who are you? What are you doing here? 
Sorry, no time to talk! I have to deliver these copies of the Black Horse Courier! Here, have the latest edition! Some Elf in Bruma got killed! 
Too bad about Elidor. The Guildmaster pays funeral expenses, doesn't she? 
I'm a knight. So say, 'Sir'. Say, 'Yes, Sir Mazoga'. 
I was Valdemar, loyal Blade of Emperor Tiber Septim. I do not know how long I have been dead. It feels like an eternity. 
They say his fear of cats extends to the Khajiit, or pretty much anything with furry paws for feet. 
Have you heard any of Dar Jee's jokes? 
Look! Haha! I told you! Treasure! Let's have at it, Syndelius. 
I hid for a while and then returned to the garden. Roland was gone and the woman was dead. She had two puncture marks on the nape of her neck. 
The Best Defense! That's me, Maro Rufus! Light Armor! The very best! 
I'm so sorry. 
I... I've heard some talk. This past year, some family members have been found... murdered! Could there be an assassin among assassins?  
There is no disguising the bestial nature of some of the daedric Princes. 
You've got duties to attend to. First, though, you're ready for advancement. 
All right, I'll be honest. I'm not quite sure what to think about Primo anymore. My list of suspects is getting pretty damned small as it is. 
That's right. I've been stockpiling supplies. Things I'll need to ride it out... or survive when they come for me. 
How awful. An adventurer trying to get into our fine land? I hope they stay far from the palace. 
So, what of the Rogue mage? Has he been found? 
Perfect cover for the ringleader of the whole conspiracy! He watches my house constantly. You'll see. 
To steal from a god is most unwise. In Leyawiin, two Argonians think themselves secret, but the Eye has seen them.  
Ah... you've returned. 
We've learned to just accept that he's there. Every night, sure as clockwork, he appears at Bawnwatch Camp at 8 on the shore of Niben Bay. 
I've never seen such colors on a cat before. You're the most beautiful thing I've ever seen! 
Further use of Savilla's Stone has revealed that I need another special item to move forward with my plans. 
Here you go, my friend. Trust me, you've earned it. There is one last person that needs looking into, though. 
No! No, I'm too late! I thought I could get here in time, thought I could stop you! 
I'm staying right here... where it's safe. 
Additionally, our forces are dangerously thin. We have no idea what opposition may await us inside.  
I'll leave at once for Anvil. 
I hope you have something for me. 
I know that Dovyn Aren is getting up there in years, but he still knows a bit about Alteration. 
My dear, sweet daughter Olga was killed that day. She was murdered, and the Legion would do nothing to help her. Neville and his kind are scum. 
I don't expect we'll learn much. While I have the utmost respect for her Ladyship, she is well known for being... overly cautious. 
Gimme the skooma! Don't hold out on me. I know you have it! 
Bring me the Soul Gems I've asked for, and then we'll discuss a cure. 
He was an Associate, just like yourself. Perhaps not the brightest, but very eager. He was given his assignment from Falcar, and disappeared. 
The next section of the Mysterium Xarxes is very difficult. I haven't deciphered the rest of the ritual yet. I hope you are making better progress. 
I am at the Emperor Martin's command. 
Hmmm... I've never had much interest in the Fighters Guild. 
I bought some wine from Davide Surilie. Excellent body. He's a fine vintner. 
You know what it's like now... Always wanting that next fix, hating it but craving it at the same time, and hating yourself for all of it. 
Where is Sheogorath now? He has abandoned you, as he did me. 
Wanna buy a stick? I gotta fresh one right here. No? Then what can I do for ya? 
I believe that the Count may want to handle this matter personally. 
[SNORT] 
Thief! You won't get away with this! 
That Amiable Fanriene is afraid of his own shadow. 
This is a restricted area, I'm afraid. Guild mages only. 
We kill and kill and kill! All we know is death! It ends here! 
I'm afraid I haven't given it much thought. I'm rather busy, you understand. My research occupies nearly all of my time. 
I see you took us up on our offer. Good. I'm glad to see you. Signy will be along shortly. I'm sure we can find something to do while we wait. 
Good afternoon, sir. 
The Gatekeeper walks once more, but what good does that do me? Who knows what's already inside the Realm. 
Mind your damn business, stranger. 
Thank the gods you killed that thing. This is ridiculous! Someone's out to get me, to get my poor babies! I'll bet it's that Quill-Weave next door. 
Filthy convict scum. 
I can't believe the Gatekeeper is dead. 
Look at you. No concept of what you've stumbled into. No sense of place. You don't even really know where you are, do you? 
I'm Yngvar the Wanderer. Although most people now call me Yngvar Doom-Sayer. It's true, the world is about to be destroyed. 
I'm savin' up enough for some medicine. 
Unless directly crossed, I do not believe so. They have been known to help those in need in times past. 
Search the mountains in the northeast of Cyrodiil for Aerin's Camp. Aerin can teach you all that you need to know. 
You may choose to spring a fire trap and cause them great harm as they stand before the gate. 
I hope you get some use out of that. 
You are obviously of low birth. Unless you dispute my judgement... and you would press your suit at the end of a sword. 
All I want is for her to care about me, to feel the same way as I do about her. But she doesn't. 
You'd damn well better be ready! You've got an Arena full of people and the Grand Champion himself waiting for you! Now get up there and fight! 
What...? 
Excuse me. In the Imperial tongue, it means, roughly, 'clan chair' -- the seat of the clan patriarch. 
The guilds are west of the river, south of the west gate. 
What a perfect little Oddity! Just strange enough that it makes you go "Hmm?" but not so strange as to become a Miracle or an Omen. Thank you! 
Oh, it's you. 
I was stricken with vampirism three-hundred years ago, while on an expedition deep into the Ashlands of Vvardenfell.  
Yes, you do that. And in the meantime, I'll decide what to do with all of these ill-gotten things. I'm so sorry. 
That looks like the armor I asked for. Well done. That wasn't so hard, was it? 
Yes, Lord Sheogorath? Why do you disturb me?  
To bring them down, I need more information. My sources tell me they're trying to expand, and they've set up camp in Glademist Cave. 
I've heard he's the best in town with a shield. If you want to learn, go to him. 
Sheogorath's armies again can protect sweet Sheer-Meedish. 
All my patrons keep disappearing! It's impossible to create important art under these conditions! 
I'm so mad, I could kill you! 
Keep your hair from getting tangled in melee. 
Brellach will be cleansed! 
I know! You're about to quote Vanto's Third Law... don't worry! I have not actually found a way to violate the Conservation of Perception! 
Why, yes it would! Theranis was drinking in the Two Sisters Lodge. He was bragging about stealing something from the castle. 
The Watchman looks like he may have been a sailor. No one knows where he came from, or why he looks so sad. 
Your Highness, what are your orders? Shall the Guard fall back to the Palace? 
The gate is open. Go forth and greet my Chosen Orc. 
The land is good, the farm productive. But it's mining the wealth from beneath the land that will make my fortune. 
Always a pleasure! 
Trolls, I have been foretold, are particular to unflammable weapons. 
Sorry, buddy. I'm with Hides-His-Heart, and I can't be distracted.  
But who, you might ask, could possibly be brave enough to face such a fearless foe? Who could wrest the title from our famed Gray Prince? 
On behalf of the entire town, I thank you for ridding Rosentia of the scamps. 
Your first dead drop contract, you carried that out, killed Celedaen. After that, you eliminated the Draconis family, as ordered. Then, betrayal!   
These creatures will do for now. However, I'm sure I will eventually get bored with them. Ask me again later. 
Well met, guildmate. 
May your story end happily! 
Why would you come to me with Thadon's problems? You think I don't know what you've been tasked with? Why would I help my enemy? 
Look, one more of the Madgod's deluded followers. 
Have you ever spoken to Gruiand Garrana? 
Well I'm sick of it. Sick and tired, tired and sick. And perhaps a little drunk. But nevermind. You look like the honest sort, so I've a job for you. 
The armies of Sheogorath have returned? Putting lots of people in the same place is known to spread disease. I hope they keep the barracks far away. 
Now that the secret door is open, the manor is quiet; perhaps the curse has been lifted. You should check. 
The thought of what might have happened if you and Martin hadn't stopped Dagon's invasion... 
If you ever change your mind, fear not. My offer will always be open. Simply return and speak to me about the Dark Gift, and we can proceed. 
The Rumare slaughterfish are a special breed -- nastier than the regular kind. They have a spawning pool nearby, so this area is lousy with 'em. 
I'd already convinced myself I'd never see Rockshatter again, but I was wrong. 
Speak with Raminus Polus when you arrive. He will assist you. 
I am getting weary of the same two beasts. All they do is scream when I experiment on them. Do you suppose you could get me a Gnarl? 
But on the whole, I like Cheydinhal's Dark Elves better than I like the Imperials, so go figure.... 
Azzan says the scholar lady was lucky to get back alive. But Oreyn's new 'hard hand' did just fine in a tough situation. 
Very well. I presume he gave you some indication of where the staff is now located? Take these, and go resolve the situation. 
I've only recently been promoted. I'm not going to cause trouble by filing charges against one of the other Watch Captains. 
Two people are dead, and for all I know you could be the killer! 
You do realize I've been holding back? 
Sleep, dear friend. Sleep. And awake anew. 
I just know they're dangerous, and they travel in packs. 
We're simple, Gods-fearing folk here in County Chorrol. Easterners worship their wallets and their fat bellies. 
He guards the Gates of Madness. See for yourself. He's about to destroy a party of adventurers. 
What? What's the meaning of this? What's going on here? I don't want no trouble! Here, take the damn key!  
Then I'll be on my way. Meet me back at my home tomorrow evening if you'd like. For now, I need some time to myself. 
There's nothing strange about those Knights. Nothing stranger than any of us. 
Your betrayal of the Aureals was a strategem worthy of one of my own people! Victory by means of treachery is the sweetest kind. 
Yes? Is there something you need? 
Your role within the guild becomes ever more essential. You have now attained the rank of Warlock, and are freely able to access the Council Chamber. 
Mistress.... 
Because you seem a nice enough sort. And you've made it this far. 
Bradon told me about this amulet when they first brought it home from whatever distant land it came from. 
Over there. That's new. 
The Count of Skingrad is not all he seems. Let's just say I'm not the only one who enjoys his evenings... 
I'm sorry, but I'm retired. Haven't worked with armor for years. 
Please. Just don't mention me to her, or she will burst into one of her tirades... 
Blessings, citizen. 
Be careful. They're listening. 
You'd be better off praying for a miracle than going to see Valandrus. 
You grace my presence once again. 
Our affairs are none of your business. I don't know who you are, and you think I'm going to talk to you about my ex-lover? 
Just leave me alone! 
Come back and visit me anytime. 
And if you know anything about Ayleid-ruled Cyrodiil, that should make you very uneasy. 
If you cannot perform a simple function for the guild, you are clearly undeserving of membership in it. 
This is the shrine of Azura, Queen of the Dawn and the Dusk. What is your business here, traveller? 
The Mages Guild should fund further study of the early Imperial Legions, their battlemages, and their traditions of patrol and route-finding. 
To start, I'll need six cloves of garlic, two shoots of Bloodgrass, and five leaves of Nightshade. Those will be easy enough for you to find. 
Ah, your task is completed. Wonderful. Our Lord Sheogorath may wish to hear of your success. Perhaps you should tell Him yourself. 
Excuse me, madam. 
He has a way with words, that's for sure. You could learn a lot from him. 
Hmmmmmm.... 
Go. Find Thalfin, and the other Battlemages. Stop the gem from reaching Mannimarco. 
I always wanted to see the Jerall Mountains. Beautiful, aren't they? Almost makes you forget why we're here. 
Oh, come on! You couldn't even follow through with getting that book from Jeanne's room? That would've been hilarious! 
He is the best fence in the Thieves Guild. He spends time in the guild hall, and in the Elven Gardens. 
Really? She wanted help? I could use some help. Actually I could use some food. Do you have any? I'm not picky. Anything at all. 
Nothing's keeping you here. So move on. 
If you are quiet, you may remain. Now, stand aside. 
I thought it was pretty clear that you need money to rent a room. Come back when you have some. 
Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! By Sithis, you are an idiot! Ocheeva has sent you on a suicide mission! Phillida's men are going to cut you to pieces! 
By the way, thanks for recovering my comrades' swords. I'll see that they are given a place of honor in the halls of the Blades. 
You'll be hunted all over Cyrodiil. You don't want that do you? I don't think so. Good luck. 
Well, well. You're late, Mage. 
Then, I'll fight you until my last breath. I won't surrender and admit to a crime I didn't commit! 
I'm sorry, I have to patrol the area... but you should hurry to Castle Cheydinhal. The Count doesn't like to be kept waiting. 
I wish for you to find Mucianus, and ensure his safe return to the Arcane University. I do not want anything to go wrong. 
Yes, your Majesty. Beneath the Legion Compound. We're headed for a secret passage known only to the Blades. No one can follow us through here. 
And... Wait, I know you. You're that new Champion, right? Oh, don't tell me you've actually challenged the Gray Prince to a match! Are you insane? 
Nevertheless, I shall endeavor to change his mind on the subject. Return tomorrow - perhaps he will see you then. 
Your task is nearly complete. All that's left is to touch the Altar and let Arden-Sul devour the Duchess' heart. 
Do not let your guard down. We do not know whether the Inn's staff is involved somehow. 
Bastards. Take my flagon.... 
How dare you interrupt me!  
The Ring guides us all. 
Don't let me keep you. 
Have you been to a Healer recently? Because you don't look so good. 
Follow me! For Kvatch! 
You're the only one who understands me, and you'd think me a traitor? You disappoint me, friend. I'll take my leave now. 
1, 2... Did you hear? The Gatekeeper is dead.... 4, 5... That's bad news... 7, 8. 
Your Seducers are at the ready, Your Grace. 
I've been promoted to the post of Captain of the Guard, and hope to return respect to the peacekeepers of this town. 
Now that forever is over and you're here, you need to go away. Yes, away. There are places you should be, far away from here. 
So, you both tricked me, and now you're here to mock me. Fine, fine. I hope you were happy working with that deceitful wench. 
Anything for you! He lives in the Temple district on the far east side. 
This time, it wasn't to take something away from the graveyard, it was to add something. I'm afraid all I can offer you is an unmarked grave. 
As soon as this opens, I'm leaving. 
There's a bed, of a sort. It ain't much, but it gets the job done. 10 gold a night if you're interested. 
I hear Adrienne Berene is quite a mage. Of course, it's not like she'd bother to stop to talk to you in the street. 
When that happens, he tends to make our lives uncomfortable. Let's not give the good captain any reason to go poking around in our affairs, hmm?  
I've got another job for you. It's a sensitive one. I need you to find Viranus Donton. 
Our Dread Father foresaw your defeat of the traitor, here in this very crypt! You have been chosen! You are to be my new Listener! 
Oh, my. How wonderful! A ring that removes people's clothing! This will be one of my most popular exhibits, I'm sure. 
Our troubles are almost at an end, Brother. Soon we will visit the Night Mother, and she will surely guide us. 
If you hear any bones talking, come get me right away! 
I also get the sense that he's very eager to find the gold. I can't imagine his life of servitude to the Empire left him with much to retire on. 
I know, but he usually stops by once a week or so. I don't recall seeing him lately.  
She has visions, for lack of a better term. While they used to be helpful at times, they have lately become problematic. 
Hello. Welcome to Castle Chorrol. 
I have a weapon now... this hammer. Not my usual weapon choice, but it will have to do. Let us slay these creatures. 
8, 9, 10. 
Come! Now is the time! 
Sweet Skooma. 
If you are still trying to file a complaint against Audens Avidius, go see Itius Hayn. I can't help you. 
If you've killed fifty people, it's still not enough for my tastes, but I might reconsider at that point. 
Surprised? Annoyed? It is not unexpected. Nevertheless, that is your path to re-acceptance in the guild. 
I... I'm at a loss for words. 
You have your task. Find Delmar, and ask for his help. 
I've served the Nine all my days, and I chart my course by the cycles of the heavens. 
You're doing quite well so far... keep it up! 
I saw a mudcrab a couple of days ago. Ugly little animals. 
Sithis? What is this treachery? Who sent you? I don't know who is behind this outrage, but I will have blood! To the Void with you, assassin! 
Being a devout follower of Dibella, he prayed to her for something that would allow him to express himself once more. 
Any new entry to the Shivering Isles is the chance for a new convert. I welcome it. 
What... What is that? Is that a... a head? No... No, it can't be... I.... Um... Sorry, Speaker... I'm... distracted.... 
Lord Sheogorath's armies are back! Maybe they'll fix some of these buildings so they don't collapse on people. 
We'll never forget how you saved us from Ancotar's crazy magic. What can I do for you? 
What? Do you have business in the House of Dementia? 
They seem at home on land or in the water. 
I brought her to my Realm so she could continue to study her "sixth element." Honestly, I didn't know there were five already. 
No!!!! 
If you have seen anything unusual, particularly anything implying the presence of the undead here in town, please report it at once. 
She's dead. You wouldn't happen to know anything about that, now would you? 
Breaking any of the three rules means expulsion from the Thieves Guild. If you commit murder, you must pay the blood price to rejoin the guild. 
Martin Septim! 
Walk with darkness, child of the Night Mother. 
I just don't think about it. The Elder Council will take care of things. Sooner or later. 
Skooma! Oh! Oh, yeah... You want to... want to be my friend? I'll... I'll tell you what. Skooma's the only thing... the only thing I want... 
Lord Malacath doesn't want the little brothers locked up, working like donkeys so men don't get their pretty pink hands all dirty. Makes Him mad. 
I think I'll have to refer you to Sinderion. He's a fantastic alchemist in Skingrad who specializes in this sort of thing. 
I don't like competition. Just stay away from the menfolk, and we'll get along just fine. 
Will no-one help a poor beggar? 
All the painter has to do is have the Brush in his possession, and whatever he imagines appears in the canvas. 
Send them back to Oblivion! We'll hold the city in case any of them break through. 
I shall be following out of sight, along with a fellow Battlemage. Make no attempts to speak to us; trust that we will protect you. 
Please leave! These are private moments! 
I plan to live out my days on the farm in peace and quiet. 
It's good to set my foot upon the soil of my home. 
Yes, Arch-Mage. I shall await your return. 
Gundalas guarantees! Everything... almost free! At Best Goods and Guarantees, retail service at warehouse prices! 
But what if the trolls eat it? 
What's going on here? Who's this? 
This better be good, or you'll regret it. 
Just go! I can't stand the sight of you! 
Yes! That's what I'll do. I'll go. The enemy of my enemy. Order is the key. I'll keep them close. 
What do I care of armies that I never see? They don't ever set foot here, do they? We have to protect ourselves. 
I can accept that. 
Well, there's still time, is there not? I shall continue to wait. 
Lead on, my friend. 
All right, Myrmidon, time to stop messing around! You ready to teach those Yellow Team scumbags a lesson, or what? 
Until we meet again, my dear friend! 
So, any new revelations in your... errr.... investigation? 
Haven't you seen her around town? She's either at the Grey Mare, or she's skulking around the Mages Guild, it seems. 
Have you ever shopped at Mach-Na's Books? 
Oh, hey, yeah. Yeah, I'll talk to you... Later? Yeah, later. 
Her expertise in arcane knowledge and lore could be invaluable to us, if we can make proper use of it. 
Yes, I heard Bernadette Peneles say that she thought he was following her. It might finally be time to do something about that crazy Wood Elf. 
It's good to be a Fighters Guild member, don't you think? 
Anyway, I have duties to tend to. If you see my mother, tell her I'll visit soon! I promise! 
The tide is turning. Bruma has been saved, and Martin Septim has claimed his birthright! It's time for every citizen to do their part... even you. 
Of course the Fringe was destroyed. This is how the Greymarch always begins, you know. 
Do what you will with me. I've got nothing left. 
Thadon's blood is so tainted. He needs to be cut open so he can let some of the toxin out. 
If you will help me, you can have what you want, and we can have what we want. Everyone is happy... except Ciirta. 
In order to deal with the apparent growing problem of Necromancers in Cyrodiil, the Council needs as much information as possible. 
Maybe in the past my family was notorious, but never let it be said that the current Jemanes don't pay their dues. 
Be quick about it. This is our best chance to rescue the survivors from the Chapel. 
Just hurry back with that ring... please. 
What makes you think that I know how to get it? And why would I tell you even if I did know? 
I have stories of old, implying they could cure someone of vampirism. I know nothing more than that. I hope you can learn the truth. 
But Seridur is a stubborn one. Hehe. Takes integrity for a man to risk his own life to honor the fallen. I admire him for that. 
I fear the enemy came here for the Amulet of Kings. 
You must leave this place. 
Your actions have set back our investigation, and maybe driven the rest of the gang into hiding. Nice work. 
I've figured out another item needed for the ritual to open the portal to Camoran's Paradise. 
If you've got to travel, by the Nine Divines, stay on the roads! The wilderness just isn't safe anymore. We've had sightings, you see. The Daedra... 
Excellent. It's up the stairs there, and then directly across the hallway. Center room, wonderful view of the city. Sleep well! 
If you see a Gnarl, be careful what spells you use on them. 
Speak, madman. 
H-how did you know about that? No matter. Once I've taken care of you, we'll scuttle the ship and be off to our safe house. 
They're all I have left of value, but you must have them. I insist. 
You are welcome in my home anytime, friend! Maybe one day you'll learn to love it so much, you'll wish to stay here, too. 
Get my back! 
Me children are starving. Please help. 
You've bested me, friend. 
You must then flee from Chorrol, and Hides-His-Heart must not be killed! That way he can go back and tell his employers I'm dead.    
What brings you to Skingrad? Hunting goblins? Sure, they're thick in the West Weald, but you'll find their holes all over Cyrodiil. 
This is good news. 
This is a Dark Elf bar. Cursing, spitting, and screaming? No problem. 
Someone slaughtered that poor old woman like a lamb. I've got my eyes on you. Make one false move and I'll come down on you like a hammer. 
Shouldn't you be on your way to the Sacellum? 
I am in the Thieves Guild. 
Four of the afternoon watch, and all's well. Have a nice day, sir.  
Damn right! 
My feet hurt so bad. I could sure use a new pair of shoes. Can you help me out? Please? 
Aye, we've heard the old man's story. Nothing to back it up, though, except the word of those two kids of his. No real evidence. 
You are going to help me do so. 
A small group of Skooma dealers led by a Dunmer named Kylius Lonavo is holed up in the Greyland Settlement just up the road. 
Did you know that the Gatekeeper had only a three percent chance of failing? Most interesting that he was defeated. 
...ma-makes no sense...should be d-dead...what...who... 
He usually comes out to eat dinner and sleep, but two days ago, he didn't come out at all. At first, I wasn't worried. He does that occasionally. 
Try not to cough on me. 
Last time I clashed with mortals, I underestimated their power. I shall not repeat that mistake twice. 
I must be dreaming! 
What do you want to know? 
The holy book of the Mythic Dawn. Supposedly written by Mehrunes Dagon himself. 
The tide is turning, my friend. Bruma has been saved, and Martin Septim has claimed his birthright! Soon, all of Oblivion will tremble in fear! 
Sithis is the darkness of time immemorial. He is no Daedra, and dwells not in the realm of Oblivion. No, Sithis is something altogether... different. 
I am the Master Smith of New Sheoth. Why bother with that other smith? 
Am I? Am I? It's not paranoid when they're really out to get you. That's why I've been stockpiling supplies. I'll be ready. 
If he's not sleeping or eating, he'll be fussing with his books, I reckon, over in the Priory House. 
The original offer is still on the table: this one helps you against Maric in return for half your take. What do you say? 
I hope you're not suggesting that Primo is the murderer? I'm the trained investigator here. Just keep your mouth shut and stay out of my way. 
Watch for the Elytra's stingers; their poison can be deadly. They don't like magic much, though. 
I am Mahei... that poor fellow who is chased everywhere by that nagging fishwife, Numeen. 
Nords who drink either get friendly or mean. I'm here to deal with the mean ones. 
Time to save the Realm! Rescue the damsel! Slay the beast! Or die trying. Your help is required. 
Alves is a practiced researcher... she's sure to have some good information for you. 
I must have that Brush. 
Your Grace, I bend my knee to you. How you survived the collapse, I cannot imagine. 
If it's not one thing, it's another. The Count is very particular about his food and drink. Everything must be just so. 
Don't just stand there! Go get that mountain lion! 
You convinced them to leave, I see. A wise plan. 
Very good. 
Travel to all of our cities, and speak with the unfortunate souls forced to beg for change. Look into their hearts, and then look into your own. 
I can't imagine eating one of those things. 
I overheard someone say that Aleron Loche is missing. I don't know what happened to him. His wife, Ursanne, is beside herself with grief. 
I saw them a few nights ago. Very odd. 
In Chorrol, we don't think much about what goes on in the Imperial Palace. But these murders... the emperor and all his sons dead... what's next? 
Many guards are coming forward with more evidence of his greed, so it's safe to say he'll been spending quite a bit of time in the city dungeons. 
Daedra came out and set fire to the town. Many people died, but some got out alive. 
We got the contract from his aunt. Was in Nonwyll looking for gems of some sort. Never heard from again. You and Viranus go find him. 
But Savlian Matius might know more. He's in charge of the city guard that are defending the camp. 
Welcome, stranger, to the Five Claws. Food and beds, cheap and good, but most of all, your hostess promises, always clean! 
A vampire! Away, everyone! Run! 
You return to Kaneh and lead her into the trap. Once they are destroyed, I will kindle the Altars. Good hunting, friend. 
I'm Ardaline. I'm the guild's Advanced Trainer in Alchemy here in Bravil. 
You killed him? Good. I've got to get back to work. And so do you. Keep at it. 
What news from Tamriel? Is Lord Dagon's victory almost complete? 
To be honest, I started getting a bad feeling about Nels. But now he's dead! I... I should have gotten to know him better. Now it's too late.     
Wake up, kitty kitty. That's it. There's a rat in my cell, Khajiit. A fat, tasty rat. Does the kitty want it? Is the kitty hungry? 
Have you seen a land dreugh? We call them "Billies." Don't know why. Steer clear of them, though. 
Is it my Lord Sheogorath? It can't be. 
I've not read that yet. It's a shame there isn't more time to spend with good books. 
My Lord Jyggalag will never be turned aside by the likes of you, fool! 
Ah. That confirms it. You're the new Duke. The stink of hubris surrounds you! My Lord allows you to lick his boot straps, does he? 
I dare say my opinion might carry more weight than others, if you take my meaning. Still, all are necessary to proceed. Good luck to you! 
Mountain lions? Here? Odd. If they're around, I can find them. Come with me. A hunt will do us good, and maybe make that old nut feel better. 
I have been waiting for you, assassin. We have not spoken in some time, but I am well aware of your accomplishments within the Dark Brotherhood. 
With enough force, this will cleave through meat and bone.  
You're trying to turn me against him, aren't you? Just leave me alone! 
Do you know Maro Rufus? He specializes in light armor at Best Defense. 
Nirnroot doesn't need sunlight to thrive. Don't forget to check underground as well. 
The three of us were inseperable. When our training was completed, we reluctantly parted ways. But now... Now, the unthinkable has happened!          
As Captain Burd says, we have to stay on the good side of the local Nords. It ain't their fault they're ignorant barbarians. 
I don't have anything for you to do yet. Come back after you've taken care of some more contracts. 
Your deal is made. Return when you have done your part. 
He and the rest of the Elder Council care nothing for Cyrodiil. They focus obsessively on the provinces, leaving us to fend for ourselves. 
Find out if Jeanne is all right, and let me know if she needs anything. 
He's a sneaky one. I understand he'll teach others to be sneaky, too. 
Oh, you poor dear! Well, this does make things difficult for me. I want to find the gold as much as anyone, but you need it so much more than I do! 
I'll meet you further along in the caves and remove the Bands when you get there. May Akatosh favor you! 
You thought we'd go down easy? 
Foul tergens they are. Heffin all of them. 
Really? That is surprising. I was SURE she was watching me. 
By Ysmir, you've got nerve! Three people are dead! What, are you trying to turn me against Primo now? 
Oh, I believe he left a message with Grey-Throat. Something about not being here for a few days? 
I'm trying to help Skaleel as best I can, but I'm not going near the thing again. 
Aye. I know of Umbra. But you're a stranger to me, and I'm not talking. 
Very good, then. I'll get right on it. 
Your Grace. 
I can hear the Fanatics attacking the gate! 
Everyone wants my weapons. But they're my weapons. Mine! 
Nelrene admits to being involved, but more evidence may be required. 
You really enjoy this whole hero thing, don't you? Everybody fawning all over you? I'm not like that. 
Come back anytime. 
Ah, of course. Here you go. Keep us in mind for any future needs! 
Even still, if I don't get my work done... I need to harvest at least five pod pits before the day is done. 
Well, this case seems to be empty. Strange. I'm sure that yesterday... ah, my memory just isn't what it used to be. Let's see what else we can find. 
It will be our great honor to fight by your side, My Lord! 
Visit Passwall once, Relan did. Good that it burned. People there deserve pain. 
Two of us have been murdered! One of us is a killer! But who? 
My soul for Sheogorath. 
I'm just waiting for Captain Matius to give the order. Finally, a chance to fight back! 
Rufio? He's an old codger. Been living here for a couple weeks now. If you ask me, he's hiding from something. But what do I care? He pays his tab. 
You should be helping Irlav Jarol, shouldn't you? 
Now, let me give you your Battle Raiment. It's the uniform of all Arena combatants. Do you want a Light Raiment or a Heavy Raiment? 
These people split in two are sad but such is the will of the god who's mad. 
I don't care for those elves. 
One of the Madgod's minions! 
I shall stay here. 
My master is not available at the moment. Perhaps you can call again another day. 
I understand Areldil is good at getting into places other people can't. 
Make them go away! 
Be cautious, my friend. 
Oh-kaaay... Well then, I'm going to go about my business. And stop staring at me, would ya? You're giving me the creeps! 
You and Viranus are to go to Nonwyll and find out what happened to Galtus Previa. Now get to it. 
Why are you following me? Please... go away. I'm quite busy. 
Sheogorath's armies are at full strength once more. They will be needed in times ahead. 
Inventory? I am a simple trapper. My inventory just consists of pelts and skins. I would hardly call that inventory. Now get outta my way. 
I'm waiting to discuss our battle plans with the Countess. Have you told her to meet me here yet? 
Time's wastin'. He's safe... for now. 
Where would you go for the best blunt weapons? Slash 'N Smash in the Imperial City. 
It was a pleasure talking to you. No lie. 
I'm getting out of here! 
A day without sunshine is like... night. Ahahaha! 
Hmph. Word on the street is that you've been into some bad business. That's not good for the Guild. Clean up your act and come back later. 
So, here's the list of all my precious little ones, though I dare say they're not so little anymore! Ha ha ha ha ha! They grow up so fast, I swear! 
Okay, Hero. This next opponent is a High Elf wizard, a master in the school of Destruction. But wait, it gets worse... 
You're trespassing. You should leave now. 
I'm sorry, but I don't think I know any Glarthir.  Wait, do you mean that strange Wood Elf that you see wandering around the city? 
I take care of what little administrative work there is. Dagail isn't interested. I do it because it has to be done, and no one else wants to do it. 
Bless you! Dar Jee lives east of the temple. 
Don't feel bad that you're not as gifted as me. 
I'll see you in Anvil. 
Given your present condition, the main gift I would offer is useless. I can, however, offer you a monetary reward for your troubles. 
This can only lead to your death. My guardians are sworn to protect me. 
I've put myself in your hands. Don't fail me. 
You. I've seen your kind before. You've got blood on your hands. Keep your blade sheathed, you murdering bastard, or I'll put you down myself. 
I have a feeling that you and I are about to become very close. 
Curious. This one is smaller than the others we've encountered. 
Had something of a false alarm earlier. Some Khajiit, acting suspicious. Turns out he was just grooming his tail. 
I like you, but not that much. 
The Arcane University is the greatest repository of knowledge in all of Cyrodiil. The privilege of admission is a goal every mage strives for.  
Flesh Atronachs are dangerous. Some are smart enough to heal themselves when they're hurt. 
That's fine. I'll find them elsewhere. 
You like my amulet? It's enchanted, makes me lucky! I swear it helps me win these matches!   
Yes, yes. A most unique place. Of course, the Chalice would be there! Don't you see? It's the Elytra. They're the reason. 
Lady's Mantle Leaves are helpful in healing wounds, whether applied directly or compounded in potions. We have plenty. Help yourself. 
Once an Imperial Legion bulldog, always an Imperial Legion bulldog. I've seen his kind before. He cares about laws and regulations... not people. 
I'll teach you to steal from the Countess of Leyawiin! 
The gates are locked, and the only way to open them is from within the gatehouse. 
Hieronymus Lex is no longer searching on the Waterfront? This is good. It's too bad you slew innocents to make it happen. 
Clearly he was wrong. Yet I do think he meant well. 
I find your decision most agreeable! Now, the details. Far south of here, on the southern end of Cyrodiil, lies a swamp called Bogwater. 
Hello there, hello indeed! I'm Caldana Monrius. Well met! 
My family said I could move here to the Imperial City once all our loose ends were tied down. The manor was one of those loose ends. 
Strange noises, you say? How very odd. I haven't heard it myself. 
You've got some experience with the Guild now, so report to Vilena Donton in Chorrol. I'm sure she'll have work for you there. 
Now that you have her eye, you must seek out a branch of the Tree of Shades. 
There is no Great Torch. And it isn't ablaze once more. 
Don't say I didn't warn you. 
It is! It is! You've done so well! You deserve a reward! Let me teach you a special spell. It will effect all those around you. 
Glistel and me, we keep an eye on things here in Chorrol for certain interested parties... as a public service, like. 
I've seen undead of all types walking in the dark woods near the cave entrance. Now, this area's getting a bad reputation and my business has waned. 
Raven-Biter runs the Choosy Beggar. Not a bad place. 
Thanks again, buddy. 
I had never thought to see eight of the Ancestors together again in my lifetime. Well done! 
I'm Dairihill, steward of Castle Anvil. We do things differently in Anvil. And the difference shows in the comfort and trust of its people. 
I can't believe you just went ahead and killed that gang member. Gogan and I were actually working undercover for the Anvil City Guard. 
Intruders are my business. I think instead of locking you in the storage room with the bouncer, I'm going to dump your body overboard! 
... Because I'm the emperor's son? 
... Well, don't expect a handout from ME. You certainly don't need it. 
It's just that the entire Council of Mages has been in here at one time or another recently, all wanting information on Necromancers. 
I hope you both get mindrot! 
Shh! It's dangerous to be heard talking about that. 
If you're still standing when I'm done, you've earned the right to learn what I have to teach. Shall we find out what you really know? 
At first I thought maybe he was from wealthy stock, but many of the goods have been delivered recently. 
It's a pity my busy consulting and training schedule leaves me little time for gathering ingredients... 
Talk to Diram in the inn. I'm tired of this minstrel's freakshow our town has turned into. 
I'm afraid I misled you. The Count won't be arriving - in fact, he doesn't even know you're here. 
Hey! You said you would unlock the door! 
Make yourself useful. Talk with Horkvir. The proper Horkvir. He runs this place. 
I miss him so. We were study-mates at the Arcane University and we've come to grow fond of each other over the years. 
You have driven all meaning from my life. I shall throw myself upon the swords of the Fanatics so that I may join her sooner. 
Please, prepare yourself as quickly as possible. 
Have I seen her there? Of course! She certainly loves a good fight. 
I've had many good meals at the Count's Arms. I've had even more good bottles of wine there. 
Such strong blood pulses through the legs. 
At this moment, which hurts more, your insides or your outsides? 
Maybe she could teach me how to fall off things. That's a useful skill! Much better than, say, swinging a sword or casting a fireball. 
There's no reason to avoid them. They're harmless. Why would I lie about that? 
... sailors, ship-owners, men made rich and poor by the sea trade, and the lonely wives of men who follow the sea. 
The men around here are mine. You want fresh pickings, go out and scrounge up some leftovers in a settlement or something. 
Ah, child. I thank you for helping me. 
Yes, sire. What is it you need? You're not in danger, are you? My sword is yours! 
1, 2, 3 - hurry before I lose count - 5, 6, 7... D'oh! I just lost count. 
Show me what you've got! 
We hold the Altar of Despair, here within the Shrine of the Flame of Agnon. 
Only the finest wares to buy and barter at Northern Goods and Trades. I'm Seed-Neeus, the proprietor. How can I help you? 
A visitor. What a treat. So go ahead. Whoever you are. They call me Orgnolf Hairy-Legs. Because I got hairy legs. Am I going too fast for you? 
Watch yourself around goblins. Some of the nastier ones will toss spells at you. 
Believe me, it was no picnic. But thanks to our friend here, I now know we can close these hell-gates. We can defend Bruma! 
Oh, do you now? And just why should I give you that?  
I'm on my way to Rosethorn Hall now. I won't be long. 
We'll talk later tonight at the gathering. 
That confirms it. You're the new Duchess. The stink of hubris surrounds you! My Lord allows you to lick his boot straps, does he? 
And what might you want... peasant? 
Please, you must show this to the guards at once. My life is in your hands! 
Capital! I like the swiftness of your reply. Here is your reward for getting me those boots. Be ready. I may call for you again. 
Do not worry, milady. No harm shall come to your ring if I can help it. 
You are now one with the Dark Brotherhood. Visit Ocheeva at the Cheydinhal Sanctuary and your new life will begin. 
Me? I got no problem with Bravil. Lovely town. That little prince, the count's boy, he's sweet with the sugar. EEEA-sy Street, all the way. 
Order is gone! They didn't leave anything interesting behind, though. 
Soris Arenim sure seems upset. I think he lost something important. 
I..I can't believe she's dead. Seeing her body lying there.... It's like my poor daughter all over again. 
The news has not been good. I've heard it said that the daedra have overrun the town of Ald'ruhn. The entire town has been destroyed. 
Yes? What can I do for you, my tight-lipped friend? 
That's a lot of chances to fill your purse with coin. So what do you say: you want to bet on a match? 
Yes, her seer's stone is missing. It's the one thing that has kept her visions at bay, and without it, they're nearly crippling. She can't function. 
I was half expecting you not to show up. Are you ready to go to the manor? 
Life is a blessing, and death is not the end, but only when the spirit remains incorruptible. 
That Delphine Jend seems dangerous to me. She's very skilled, but I think she's reckless. 
By Ysmir's beard, we've got ourselves a live one! 
Aggh! Yes, strike me down! 
Oh, you heard about that? We were trying to keep it quiet, but people in this city are far too nosy. Very well, since you said you want to help. 
I... I rather like Primo. He's not like the other boys I've known. He has... class. He could never have killed anyone.  
Have you seen my double, you cute little monkey? Have you? 
The Gatekeeper is dead. He's got really big bones. 
The Staff is the symbol of power in this Realm. He who rightfully holds the Staff may hold the throne of the Shivering Isles. 
Yes, Your Grace. 
No? Perhaps I was mistaken about you. You know my plight; should you change your mind, speak with my steward. 
What? There's a city out there? You don't say. What good is it, eh? Dirt. Horses. Idiots. Be my guest. 
Greetings, child of the Ra Gada. 
The people of Nibenay consider themselves to be more civilized and sophisticated than Colovians. 
At least the Oblivion Gate outside the city is gone. Although news from the rest of the Empire is still just as bad as ever. 
Jesan Sextius, singer, composer, and storyteller extraordinaire. Glad to meet you. 
Don't bother. The door to this place is now locked. The only way to get out is by decending into the Hunter's Run and killing the Hunters. 
Be a dear, and fetch me that book like I asked. Hurry along now. 
I think she's living in Bravil these days. You should look for her there. 
The Aurmazl merely wants you to know that matters of the gravest import to the Realm's security may be at stake. 
Do... do you think he could have done it? I mean, he is a retired soldier. He's killed before. Oh, dear, this can't be happening! 
Well aren't you a darling? I know just where I'm going to put this. 
Oh? We must? Well, last I saw, you didn't outrank me, Apprentice. I suggest you mind your manners... and your own business. 
The Yellow Team's combatant has slain many opponents with his magical dagger, Shimmerstrike! Let's see if the Blue Team can end his winning streak! 
We need to talk. 
I keep an eye on his place. Stuffed full of treasure, you know? But no dirty thief's getting in while I'm on duty. 
my current disp is 100 
He obviously takes great pride in the lodge. 
Listen, sunshine, I ain't in the mood! You want something, talk to Owyn. He's right over there for Shinji's sake! 
Tenet 1: Never dishonor the Night Mother. To do so is to invoke the Wrath of Sithis. 
I'm sorry, but the investigation is a secret, and I don't trust you enough to discuss it with you. 
Welcome to Bruma, stranger. Hafid Hollowleg. I'm your host at Jerall View. Bed, food, whatever you need.  
I wanted to get a little practice in with my sword, so I headed to the Fighters Guild. Turns out you have to be a member to train there. 
However, she did not recognize this event for what it was. She believes that Sheogorath had abandoned the Realm out of fear of Jyggalag's attack. 
I hear the newcomer made a real mess in Passwall. I sure hope he stays out of Highcross. 
These are very serious charges. If you can get two witnesses to testify against Audens Avidius, I'll arrest him. Otherwise I can't help you. 
There's only one place in all the Isles to get the cure for what I have... Knotty Bramble. I'll mark it on your map. 
Don't tell Hridi I said anything. I could be banished for telling you. 
The traitor is dead, dear Mother. We have come now to ask your blessing. Anoint one of us your Listener, so we can restore the Black Hand!         
Damned amateurs. You people should leave it to the professionals. 
Fantastic. I can't tell you what it means to me to have this in my collection. You are a good soul. 
I can think of three. The Hircine shrine is south of town, northeast of Bravil, between the Upper Niben and the Green Road. 
Cheydinhal is safe once again thanks to the Knights of the Thorn! Huzzah! 
I'm sorry you had to be tasked to right this wrong that my father was responsible for. Once again, you've stuck your neck out for us. 
Phillida now resides in Leyawiin, in the City Watch barracks, an honored guest of the soldiers there. He is, in fact, more vulnerable than ever.     
Defaulted? I suppose so. I'm not paid enough to do the job. I was supposed to find Brenus Astis' Journal. 
Personally, I think she's a little floozy. She's been eyeing young Primo Antonius, probably smells his wealth. 
While I believe that you should be attending to your duties, it is, of course, your prerogative to spend time wherever you wish. 
It has certain superficial magic powers, true, but its real power is hidden. 
Again! Hit me again! 
Yes, hatchling? Do you seek Thadon? 
We must find out who is behind this betrayal! We haven't much time... I am hunted day and night by the Black Hand! They want me dead!                 
Everything's so dirty! 
Fighters Guild members have been going to Sherina to learn blade skills. She's good, and she'll be the first to tell you so. 
The Thieves Guild is not a myth. We are followers of the Gray Fox, and I am his Doyen. Merely by finding me, you have passed the first test. 
I think... I think it might be... sadness? Why would its destruction make me sad? 
Hey... Now that we're... we're friends... You want to come with me? To my... my special place? It's not... you know... very far... 
[Gasp!] Why you dirty little thief! How dare you touch me! 
Training? Oh, no. I don't think so. 
Now, taste the power of the true Lord of this realm! 
The Lord Bal has given you a task. Perform it well. 
He loves dogs. Dogs like sticks. Dogs like meat. I wonder if they like meat on a stick? 
Mankar Camoran's views on Mehrunes Dagon are fascinating, revolutionary even... 
This is my house! Get out of the way... move, I say! 
Of course, my lord. If there's anything you need, anything at all, just name it. Have you been threatened? 
How would I know?  Maybe she went crazy and run off into the woods.  Now if you'll excuse me, I got things to do. 
Much as I dislike bards, I wouldn't mind learning a thing or two from her. 
Take what you want from the dead. I came to keep my oath, and now I'm done. 
I am beaten. Leave me alone. 
Back for more? It just so happens I have another contract available, one that requires an expert in infiltration. 
He keeps busy. Repairing weapons, training light armor techniques, keeping track of Skjorta.... 
Whatever Uncle Iniel says. 'Lay off the Atius bastards,' he says, so we lay off. 
Looks like you've taken care of it. Good work. Now, go find something else to do. 
Excellent. Here is what you must do. Go to the Waterfront District of the Imperial City. There you will find a ship named the Marie Elena. 
The crystal ball is in a chest in the ship's hold, but I can't get to it. I made it as far as the captain's cabin, but the spirits nearly killed me! 
It certainly seems to be his passion. I understand he used to be quite an alchemist. I wonder if he'd teach me more about that. 
I've heard you were able to lift the curse from Benirus Manor and destroy Lorgren Benirus once and for all. 
I really can't do anything without 20 more samples of Nirnroot. Come back when you have them. 
Indeed it is. Remember, those who wear the robes shall not be harmed without cause, by Ciirta's decree. 
But of course. What troubles you? 
My Lord has a real edge I'd like to cut myself on. 
Hello, my name is Tove. "The Unrestful," they call me. So much to do, and so little time. There's only one of me to go around, you know! 
It's worse than my nightmares! In fact, it's like my worst nightmares come true! 
Of course, your Grace. 
A few months ago, that witch of a Necromancer decided to inhabit Moss Rock Cavern just north of my inn. 
I'll see you soon! Or maybe I'll see you later... I can never remember... 
Silverhome-on-the-Water is where the north wall meets the river. The Lonely Suitor Lodge is in the port, across the south bridge. 
If the Council really did split up, the guild is done for. This is serious. 
Well, you could always just fight your way into Cracked Wood Cave and kill their shaman. 
With Emperor Uriel dead and no successor crowned, the Temple of the One will be dark for the first time in centuries. 
1,2... It's the Madgod! Wow. Wow. 4, 12, 36.... 
Over here! Quickly! 
The Gatekeeper will keep out those adventurers again. Too bad. Some of them had exciting stories to tell. 
Oh, very well. No need to be rude. 
Adrienne can make you a member of the guild, if you can convince her to take her nose out of whatever book she's reading. 
Why don't you go ask him yourself? Or maybe you're afraid? You should be.    
Be happy to help you. 
The deer here are skittish. Need to get them quick, or they'll lead you a merry chase. Poison on your arrows can help, and it won't hurt the meat. 
Umbra? You need to speak with Irroki the Wide. I've got nothing to say about Umbra. 
How can I help you? 
Get it back to Traven immediately, or else this whole attack was a waste! 
Would you dare make demands of me now? 
But that feeling only lasts a little while. Then I start thinking about how miserable everything is, and then all I want to do is step off the ledge. 
In Chorrol, we Highlanders treat our Gods' teachings as rules to live by. Our lives are governed by the Ten Commands. 
Kid, you've got more guts. And skill. I think you can take the Gray Prince! Go over and talk to Ysabel if you think I'm right! 
Have you heard what a good alchemist Ardaline is? 
It is good to see you again! I have a message for you from the Gray Fox. 
Hi. 
I've already given you everything you need. Unless I'm mistaken, we have little more to say to one another. 
Hear me out before you leave. 
The Amulet of Kings is the key to everything now. 
I've agreed to help you already. Torturing me further will do you no good! 
Oh, the Count is quite aware of your presence here. He simply has no interest in granting you an audience at this time. 
I... I didn't do anything. She threatened me, but I didn't do anything. I'm loyal to Syl, I tell you! 
Is there a better person to learn heavy armor skills from than Bumph gra-Gash? 
In the Fringe, you can see for yourself the devastation that accompanies the Greymarch. Let us hope you are up to the task of stopping it. 
Hieronymus Lex has indeed been reassigned. However, you have slain needlessly to accomplish that goal. 
Skjorta. Nord Winds. We've got clothes and armor. And I've got a headache, so keep your voice down, please. 
What a battle, eh? I thought we were all goners until I saw that fiery dragon in the sky. 
I shall be here when you are ready. 
I've heard them, but I think they just do it for fun. They seem to enjoy it, and it's all in good fun. 
What I would do for a warm bed. Soon I'll be leaving here. As soon as I can figure out how to leave without them noticing. 
Modryn Oreyn got kicked out, and Vilena Donton thinks only about her dead sons. The Fighters Guild is finished. 
The sap of this Tree already flows with the pure essence of Order. 
What do you think I'm doing? I'm not sticking this close to you because I enjoy your pleasing aroma. 
You don't belong here. 
You must be rid of the staff, or the scamps will follow you around forever! 
As long as you cut off his finger and leave it in that desk, you'll get your bonus. Sounds to me like you can kill the old sod anyway you'd like. 
I hate indecision! Or maybe I don't. Make up your mind, or I'll have your skin made into a hat -- one of those arrowcatchers. I love those hats! 
Please! No! 
Shh. The Master is speaking! 
Then there's nothing I can do. Too bad. 
You've done well. I wouldn't have expected such bravery from someone who isn't a Knight of the Thorn. 
The obelisks like glass towers tall stood silent until today. "Stay away from them lest you won't come back," is what the people say. 
This is official business. Do not interfere. 
My Lord! Aurmazl Zudeh sent me to find you. She requests your immediate assistance. 
Did you bring back my aquanostrum? 
Yes, Arden-Sul. Doesn't the name simply roll wonderfully off the tongue? 
Convincing a Dark Seducer to reveal secrets to you may require more pressure than you've experienced thus far. 
Here's how it works. We case The Flowing Bowl for a likely subject. Namely, we look for a married guy who drinks a lot. 
Look, j-just stop right there, all right? 
Light the Great Torch! Let the Maniacal dance of the flames blaze out across the realm! 
You are a welcome sight! 
My child. It is time to fulfill your destiny. Stand guard in this land against all those who seek entry not bearing the mark of Sheogorath's favor.  
Don't make them wait. 
He didn't finish out a contract in Skingrad. Suppose I shouldn't be surprised. He's raw, like you. Go and find out what's wrong with him. 
You don't have the money. I'm not just going to let you sleep here for free. 
It just stood there, holding its tail and whispering. What did it say? 
Prince and Power! 
I know, dear child. I know. You carried out your orders to the letter, in the name of the Black Hand. How could I be anything but happy with you? 
I'm sorry. Please. Just come back to me when you've spoken to Bittneld. 
Discount spells. I'd just as soon buy a "slightly used" shield. 
Don't get in our way. 
That little Dark Elf urchin killed three people in cold blood, and now she's going to try to kill us! We can't let that happen! 
Let's show these bastards how we do things in Bruma! 
Order is defeated! I think I actually feel a little better. No... I don't. 
You know, if you're really interested in more, there's a book I read once called "Knightfall." It may have more about Garridan. 
The Mysterium Xarxes is the most dangerous daedric sorcery I've ever encountered. 
My weapons and armor are fashionable and deadly. For the sophisticated warrior. 
Training, eh? The real question is, can you fight? 
Hurry to Nenyond Twill and make sure he is unharmed. 
Marz is a gifted healer, and teacher. I know that she longs to return to the swamps, though. 
We need those Gatekeeper bones. You ready to go to the Gardens with me?  
Deetsan loves to talk about his guild. It's good that he's proud of his work. 
When all the guests lie dead, you will be free to leave. Now go, see the doorman at Summitmist Manor. He will explain the rest. Have fun.    
Yes. 
Far be it from me to criticize my patron and sovereign. Bravil obviously flourishes under his wise and beneficent rule. 
Hey. Check out the new associate. Not bad, if you know what I mean. 
You're the boss. 
Speak with J'bari here in town. He's good with Light Armor; far better than I. 
We should find a defensible spot and protect the Emperor until help arrives. 
They've got a nasty bite, as well. 
Bravil? Good points? Cheap to live. Unpretentious. Free-wheeling. Bad points? Culturally, a hole. Count's a clown and his son's a skooma-sucker. 
I'd prefer to avoid them altogether. 
You've murdered one of your brothers. While we may die in battle, we do not expect to die at the hands of our friends. 
The room is down below deck. It's the door on the left. 
You didn't think you could take me unawares, here of all places? In the Paradise that I created? 
Sorry. I don't get it. 
Give this ring to Countess Umbranox in Anvil. Say nothing about me to her. I need to know how she reacts to it. It may provoke anger or tears. 
Did you... Did you just take that?   
Haul your carcass to that settlement, meat. 
We had an agreement, don't you remember? I'm trying to build a skyboat and you are supposed to bring me calipers and tongs. 
I'm afraid you have failed the first test. There are no second chances in Lord Dagon's service. 
You choose to share your time with me? You humble me. 
A hearty hello to you. So good to see you again! 
When I walk the earth again, the Faithful among you shall receive your reward: to be set above all other Mortals forever. 
Seen them about, have you? Odd things. They've always been here, but they're not OF here, if you take my meaning. 
I've heard rumors that the Council of Mages is taking advice from outsiders. I'm not sure how I feel about that. 
The Great Torch has been relit. I wonder if that's a good sign, or a bad sign? 
You don't belong here. Please leave. Now. 
You again. Are you ready yet? 
Now you must pay his blood price to enter the guild. However, because you are not yet a member, it is only half of what it would normally be. 
Ah, the Great Torch. It is a symbol of Sheogorath's power and a source of great comfort for the citizens of New Sheoth. 
Consider it done. I will get rid of all your criminal warrants. 
She dares to touch the sacred Xarxes! Kill her! 
Me? Pah! I was just getting used to being retired. You can see how good my painting is getting. I'm an old man. I've done my time. 
Yes, dear child! Yes! The Dread Father foresaw it all! You were meant to kill the traitor! You were meant to be named Listener of the Black Hand! 
I can't believe it! The Gray Prince has been beaten! There's a new Arena Grand Champion now, someone called Lady Luck! 
Let's get inside the chapel and make sure those folks are all right. If there are injuries, they'll need to be tended to right away. 
Sounds like we need to ask around Anvil for any clues. Figures we'd get a mission without any real direction. I'll follow you. 
We can't talk about it. Just go about your business. If Oreyn needs something, he'll let us know. 
I guess Rosentia Gallenus got rid of whatever barnyard animals she was keeping inside her house. Smells much better now. 
Words like that make me happy to be here with you. 
Who cares about Crucible? Who will replace Thadon? 
Please, wait here. I shall let the Count know you are waiting for him. 
She's led such a troubled life. I just do what I can to make it easier on her. 
Well, hello there. Nels is my name. Some call me Naughty, but don't you believe it! Hahahaha! 
Quiet, you fool. The Garden of Dareloth, on the Waterfront. Midnight. Be there. 
You're in Rindir's Staffs. And I'm Rindir. I sell magical staffs. Imagine that. 
Follow the setting sun to the border of Mania. Climb the cliff there to the top. At the peak, you will find Knifepoint Hollow. 
We're all better off now that Necromancy has been banned from the guild. It's just safer that way. 
Be careful in Shadeleaf Copse. No telling what else resides there besides the Nirnroot. 
The Altar of Despair is ours! We'll hold our position here and cut the remaining Mazken to pieces when they try to retake it! 
We need to gather what allies we can before Bruma is hopelessly besieged. 
I heard a rumor that you're an idiot. Any truth to that? 
There's nothing left here for me. I'm getting out as soon as I can. 
I've taken care of Arnora, she won't be around to point the finger. And Jorundr's not going anywhere for a long time. That just leaves you... 
We never even knew what hit us. They were inside the city before we knew what was happening. 
Why don't you just go? We don't want any trouble. 
I guess I can trust you. It's that bastard Audens Avidius. He's in here every month taking my wares without paying for them. 
If you really plan on killing the guests one by one, make sure that when you strike, you strike hard. Don't want anyone running for help, do you?     
If the other members of Bradon's group were still alive, and I on my deathbed, only then would I pass the knowledge onto them. 
The only thing I know that resonates around here are the sounds from my bedchambers. 
Eletta and Zahrasha dead? I can't believe it! 
The Count always says that Leyawiin stands alone, but your actions proved him wrong. Well done. 
Yeah. Well. Maybe you're right. A real knight shouldn't act like a jerk to his pals. 
Ah, well. All over now. The Chalice helps, doesn't it? Indeed it does, and I could use some helping right now. I'll just take that back from you. 
Its scent is unfamiliar. 
This is good. Your honor is restored. Your overdue promotion may now be granted. I am promoting you to Prowler in the Thieves Guild. 
Have you ever bought a potion from Ardaline? 
I hope you've found Erthor. 
Good question. I've heard stories, but nothing I can prove is true. Maybe they've got a mage working with them. Maybe they're just well trained. 
You cannot stop me! 
No, child. Not while the barriers between worlds are so weakened. 
Time to choose! Oh, how I missed these moments... so exhilarating! 
You have pleased the Lord Clavicus. A wise decision. 
Take my advice. Stay away from the Watchmen. 
Stop these maniacs! 
Hmph. Better them than me. 
One of my scouts reported that the ruins have been opened recently and a number of these Knights are now guarding the entrance.  
You what? Well, I'm sure I don't know what you're talking about. I would never go skulking about.... 
I'm with you, friend. We kill Black Brugo, and the Count makes us both knights. 
Alas, we cannot light the Flame until we take control of the Altar of Despair from the infernal Mazken. 
May Shadow hide you. 
I don't want to talk to you, traitor. 
One leads to the lands of Mania. The other to Dementia. Enter through either one. The lands are quite distinct, but both are Sheogorath's domain. 
Right now my main concern is figuring out who the killer is. She may be young, but Dovesi is a suspect just like everyone else. 
You have restored your honor and that of the Thieves Guild. I can now officially pay you for your efforts and promote you to the rank of Bandit. 
My place is on the battlefield. The time for hiding in Cloud Ruler Temple is over. Come, let us go down to battle together. 
All right, then. Just don't forget I'm a knight. 
Relan hears there's a new ruler in Bliss. Relan finds this interesting. 
And here you are again, my friend! 
Soon, I'll turn into Jyggalag. There's no stopping it. That doesn't excuse you from your duties, though. Get to it. 
You contradict me. This conversation is tiresome. Leave me. Or draw your sword. 
She's quite beautiful, isn't she? A little young, perhaps, and not exactly high-born, but she possesses a unique elegance.  
Like the hearth in my kitchen, the Great Torch burns once more. This makes me as happy as a batch of sweetrolls. 
You really should be more careful when you talk in the dungeons... the sound tends to carry. Jorundr's such an idiot. 
I need more time to work on the translation. The more you bother me, the longer it's going to take. 
The sage told him of an artifact called the Everflow Ewer. The vessel, which looked like a silver pitcher, was said to supply endless water. 
Yeah. It's a battleaxe with the word "Dragol" carved into the haft. Huge. You can't miss it. I ain't gonna draw you a picture. 
Are you certain? Oh well. If you change your mind, you know where to find me. 
Vaermina has spoken to you. Surely you are blessed. 
I try not to eat there. At least since the last time. 
You're a welcome sight. 
Right. And you'll be rich, too. Oh, and you'll become a king! You know what I think, Dreth? I think you'll be back. You lot always come back... 
You must do more to fill the guild's treasury before I can assign you commission jobs. 
We're a Nine Divines priory dedicated to the Order of Talos. Lord Talos teaches us to be prepared to protect his people in peace and war. 
I don't suppose during all this torture anyone asked about where my things have gotten to. Or who stole them. 
Push off, scroat! We got nothing to talk about. 
I don't remember where it is, honestly. I know it's west of Skingrad... Druja could probably tell you. She has a better memory than I do. 
Ah, yes! This is a big step for you, friend. Whether you know it or not. 
The end of all things has come! We're finished! All hope is gone! 
I've heard they feel at home in the water. 
We can go in? Well... I better stay here. There's no telling what kind of diseases are floating around in there. 
Yes, honored guest? 
I must say, I expected Arch-Mage Traven, rather than his star pupil. I am disappointed to see that he could not face me himself. 
Kill the Mazken! 
My sword shall strike true. 
I'm almost positive I sent you away to do something important. Cylarne... Flame... Great Torch. Yes... why are you here? 
We're going to die! 
Shadow hide you, Pickpocket. 
Virtuous visitors to Wayshrines of Kynareth may receive Blessings of Agility. 
Our conversations are done. There's nothing else to say. 
Oh. Another Mute Screaming Maw. I already have one of those on exhibit. 
I cannot leave Cloud Ruler undefended while my men search the whole mountainside, but these spies must be eliminated. 
You just take care of Agarmir, and I will be sure these things are disposed of properly. 
Lords and ladies, citizens of the Empire, I give you the battle of the ages! Combatants, steel yourselves! Lower the gates! 
Not enough gold? I thought you looked like a pauper. 
Nine of the evening watch, and all's well. Good to see you, ma'am.  
I'm Else God-Hater. Yes. I hate the gods. All gods. They can all bite my garters. And if you don't like it, YOU can bite my garters, too. 
Most people just call me the Gray Prince. It's kind of silly, I know, but the people of Cyrodiil need heroes. I'm more than happy to oblige.  
The authorities at the Imperial City took her off the ship as soon as we docked. I was also informed that there was a reward for her capture. 
Sinderion in Skingrad is the elf you should speak with. He's a very talented Alchemist. 
We've been trying to foil Faustina's gang for months now. Every time we tried to interview a man who was lured there, they refused to talk. 
I'm Cirroc, Bruma's Chapel Healer. 
I see you have a Black Bow. Would you like to turn it in for the bounty? 
If you need armor, weapons, or just a place to sleep, the barracks in the west wing is available to any of us. 
You say a beggar told you seek me out? Good enough for me then. The beggars are the eyes and ears of the Gray Fox. 
You should stay out of there, just in case. 
Oh, your guild privileges have been suspended. You should speak with Raminus Polus at the Arcane University to rectify the situation. 
You think you know what it's like to really, truly wield that kind of power? Hmm? 
I'm Gaston Surilie. Perhaps you've met my brother, Davide? Together, we are the Surilie Brothers Winery. 
You killed the shaman of Cracked Wood Cave!? I'm impressed! Barthel Gernand will be glad to hear that. 
Out of the way slop drudge. 
This house is a deathtrap! We're being killed off, one by one! 
I now declare you Duchess of Mania of the Shivering Isles! May your light shine upon all our happiest days. 
They would have no qualms about killing you once they had the Icestaff back. 
We all owe you our lives. From what I've heard, the battle was hanging in the balance until you destroyed that horrible daedric machine. 
It's not right! Madness! Why? Why? Everything is wrong! It can't be done! Stay away from me! 
For me? Thanks. 
Thanks again, my friend. You are always welcome in our home. 
They'll get more and more active as the Greymarch continues. If they've already taken the Fringe, they must have one there already. 
I came home only just a few hours ago. I found the door open, and my Bradon dead. Standing over him was a Dunmer. 
The sun and moons transform day to night, but what transforms the mind? 
Look, I told you everything you need to know. Go to the cave, kill the ogres, get a reward. How hard is that? 
It's always a pleasure to hear Uravasa Othrelas speak at chapel. She has a real way with words. 
They've been undercutting us on contracts ever since, and they've no qualms about accepting jobs no guild member would be caught dead doing. 
I wish these adventurers would stay out. 
Don't worry, its bark is far worse than its bite. Hahaha! 
That's what we call folk from the eastern side of Cyrodiil. The old name of the lowland part of Cyrodiil is Nibenay. 
Undena Orethi grows some good tomatoes. Yep. They sure are good tomatoes. 
Well, things aren't always as they seem. In fact, I think I hear the answer to your problem coming as we speak.... 
I had rather enjoyed the Resonator being broken. Greater opportunity for meeting someone new. 
They're obviously very fond of one another. 
It may take a while, but with the Blackwood Company gone, the new master can rebuild the Fighters Guild to its former glory. 
You have reneged on your bargain with Lord Clavicus. You are not welcome here. 
He runs Lelles' Quality Merchandise here in Anvil. He's been having problems with break-ins, though, and he's hired us to put a stop to it. 
I don't know. I just don't. 
The Countess will never agree to it... 
You must hurry. We cannot let him do this horrible task any longer. 
When the rite of Purification has been completed, return to me here at Fort Farragut, and we will discuss your future.   
If I didn't know better, I'd say you were trying to turn me against him to cover your own tracks. 
He is a guest of the Legion, at the Legion Headquarters in Cyrodiil. Seek him there. 
Yeah. Restita Statlilia. I work at the Chestnut Handy Stables. Have you seen our horses wandering around? No? Okay. It's just that they're missing. 
What is it, Brother? 
Mara's blessing on you, and on all her children. Speak to her at the Temple of the One. Ask Mother Mara; she will shower your heart with love. 
I hear she's a very private person. I also heard she knows a lot about using light armor. 
There are still more out there; I swear I can hear them. Be on your guard. 
It's not much to look at, but the smell will soon make you forget how ugly it is. 
They're amazing creatures, but hard to kill. 
Have you ever had a complaint about a merchant? 
Hurry up! The bones are calling. 
Here you face the swift and subtle Breton. Go through the gate, Chosen, and test your fate. 
Do you really require help in finding it at this point? I suspect you can manage on your own from here. 
My family didn't approve of my vocation, so I had to come to Cyrodiil for my education.  
It's my pleasure. Please continue. 
Apparently, Right-Wind teaches his blade skills to other Fighters Guild members. 
Mucianus last reported being sent to the ruins of Nenyond Twyll, south of the Imperial City. That is where the Battlemages went. 
Pretty scary, isn't he? Jayred's planning on killing him. I don't know how... the Gatekeeper looks indestructible to me. 
The best place for you to start would be Shadeleaf Copse, which is a part of the Great Forest northeast of here. 
If you visit Hale, you may see Pyke, a Knight of the Thorn. 
Our little farm is thriving. We couldn't have done it without your help. Come back and visit us anytime. 
You have come across a vampire or two in your travels, perhaps? I assure you, they are nothing like what you must face. 
You sure took your time. 
I'm sure Ormil can help you now. I'm busy trying to get us home. 
The Duchess of Dementia has been assassinated? Well, no need to finish her portrait then. 
Someday I'll get out of here and take my revenge on everyone that put me in prison. 
Once inside, search for the source of the Spire's power. It must be underground somewhere. Once you find it, destroy it. 
Bah. I was a fool to have trusted you in the first place. Get out of my sight. 
Grommok, be careful! This looks too good to be true. 
Sometimes I come up here to think. Everything looks so small from up here. Makes me feel better, you know? Like I'm not so small myself. 
If you want it, you'll need to persuade Varon Vamori, using whatever means necessary, to return that staff. 
The king of Nenalata is the last Ayleid King known to history, true. 
Well, despite everything, Aleron Loche turned up dead. That's what you get when you deal with gamblers and usurers. 
It has no master? 
It is not always an easy life we lead, but the people must be served. 
Have you pulled that little prank yet? 
We've lost so many... 
Take the key. Get to the Sigil Keep, and find the Sigil Stone. It's the only way. 
Are you going to the service for Brag gro-Bharg? 
So? Go on... say it! Say... 'I greet you, Sir Mazoga.' 
Return when you have everything. 
I bought a fine mare from him once. A fine, fine animal. 
Oh! Our Lord has abandoned us! What will be our fate? 
If he's not in the Priory House, you may find him praying in the chapel. 
That's fine. We'll still get some solid revenue, and pick up some new recruits along the way. Not a bad strategy. 
Precedeth most urgentlike. 
Alves should be able to help rid me of this staff. We play cards at the Three Sisters often and are old friends. Seek her advice! 
You've gotten rid of the other one? Fantastic. I can finally get back to my book. 
Good work at Vahtacen. Jarol is quite pleased with the information now coming in about the site. 
Back to the watch then, eh? Don't forget to stop by the barracks later. I'll show you those new greaves. The Mithril ones. Until then... 
The Chorrol guild hall had an unpleasant visit recently, from someone who had a grudge against Teekeeus. 
Your time has come. The Arcane University needs you, child. Raminus Polus waits for you even now. 
Crime in the City? You hear a lot of complaining, but it's really not so bad. The Thieves Guild is smart; they don't want any trouble with the Watch. 
I'm speaking of Greenmote, of course! There is no greater pleasure. 
I hate gossips. If I tell you something, will you go away? Fine. The Resonator of Judgment is on again. Blah. 
This looks like a farm, doesn't it? That's what they want you to think. Truth be told, these plants are monsters. They sleep... below the water. 
You have the Icestaff? 
Good luck finding her, though. The latest I heard was that she had wandered off into the wilderness, looking for a shrine to Kynareth. 
I'm too upset to talk right now. 
You're making me nervous, sneaking around like that. Just make sure you keep your hands to yourself. 
I don't belong here. I'm not crazy. Not like the rest of them. They watch me, you know. Waiting for me to go crazy. But I won't. Nope. 
He said something about Echo Cave, and destroying the Mages Guild. Then he looked right at me, and grinned! 
The others are dust! You alone, Redguard, remain, First and Last! Go now! Beyond the next gate, your portal waits. 
I'll smash your skull! 
The one path from the Savage Garden is through the Forbidden Grotto. 
Have you caught my act yet? I'm Thaedil, the juggler. I'm sure you've heard of me. 
Has there been any sign of J'skar today, Volanaro? 
For now, Modryn Oreyn will be handling your duty assignments. Please speak with him. 
Do you think we have a chance, ma'am? 
Very nice. In fact, I may be able to make use of this particular item. Seems like a nice potential replacement. 
If you are looking to buy a horse, go inside and talk to Bongond. 
The Hero who lights the Great Torch for Mania is traditionally awarded the Raiment of Arden-Sul. Not that this should influence your choice at all. 
I never suspected it was Thadon's time, but what's done is done. I honor his choice. 
Remember, walk lightly, and always look up. 
1, 2, 3. That idiot Bat gro-Orkul refused to equip some of us. 5, 8, 13.  He has arrows, but won't give me any of them. 21, 34, 55. 
The Fighters Guild still gets a little work from old friends, but the Blackwood Company gets all the big contracts. 
What? Dead?! ... you mean you... did it really have to come to that? Well, if that was the only solution... I suppose I should thank you. 
He's trapped at the back of the cave. It took us weeks to prepare the trap, and he killed us many times before we finally succeeded. 
A pleasure to serve you. 
I've already said too much. I'm sure you understand. My customers expect absolute discretion. 
Behold the new hero of the people of Cyrodiil! Behold, your Arena Grand Champion, Skullcrusher! 
Don't eat me. DON'T EAT ME! By Sheogorath's beard, you're a mean looking one! 
He became obsessed and decided that by using necromancy, he could prolong his own life. 
At no time did I ever suggest that you should actually follow through and give her the book! It cannot be left in her hands! 
Leave me, mortal. Your words hold no meaning for me. 
I was in the Thieves Guild. But I'm out now. I retired. Too old for that foolishness. I don't keep up contacts. You get out? You stay out. 
Some folks are missing in Harlun's Watch. We've been contracted to find out what's happened. Speak to Drarana Thelis for all the details. Get going. 
Perhaps the new ruler of Dementia will do something about the cat problem. 
Oh, Sulinus! Thank you for coming to get me! I was afraid I'd be trapped here forever! 
You've got it. I'll do my best to keep everyone healed. 
She doesn't like it when I run through her plants. All she seems to care about is collecting plants and animals. 
Good luck, Your Grace. May the truth light your way through the darkness. 
It's a supple and flexible ore.  Yet it holds a good edge. I can shape the sharpest of blades from it. I can also create magical items. 
I don't know Gaston well, but I helped him drink his wine. And he always has a mighty fine wine. 
You must fullfill your new duties. The statue in Bravil serves as a conduit between the Night Mother and the Listener. 
We simply wanted to survey the situation in Skingrad. Our relationship with Hassildor is tenuous at best. 
Did you want something? You're not here to join the Mages Guild, are you? 
To go from the gladed realm of Valenwood to a rat-infested hole like this... how very sad. Those walls must feel like they're closing in on you.   
May Talos guide his soul to Aetherius. Rest in peace, my Lord. 
If it were not for you, and Oreyn... I dare not think it. Now, we must speak about what you've done, and how it will affect any further advancement. 
What? I... No, that's not it at all. I just... I don't know. Why am I here? 
Arkay protect me! 
Greetings, Emissary. We await your command. 
Ah... you must be from the Fighters Guild. Good. I have a problem. It has to do with the rats in my basement. 
Behold, Skullcrusher! 
They're twins, actually. You got to take 'em both out! Now get in there, and show those tree climbers who's boss! 
Witseidutsei runs a clean establishment. She really hates it when people mess up her place. 
Whoever wears Nocturnal's cowl shall have his name stricken from history.  
Yes, Guildmaster? What can I do for you? 
These Knights are strange creatures, indeed. 
Remember, always look near water. That's the best place to find Nirnroot. 
Don't, please! I'm sorry! 
Oh, hey there! Nice to make your acquaintance. I'm... Well, my name's not important, really. I'm a combatant in the Arena. Gladiator rank. 
She once made her way into the throne room during the Greymarch and saw that Sheogorath was nowhere to be found. 
The Blades are, as always, at your disposal. 
He wants you to learn for yourself. Learn, grow, experience. It's his way. I shouldn't say more. But the Burrow, it's northeast of New Sheoth. 
I think there's more to it than that. And I see that I'm going to have to persuade you to be honest with me. How delightful. 
Until you have the message from S'Krivva, we have nothing further to say to one another. 
They shall fall before my blade. 
It's a pleasure doing business with you. Tilmo has your horse waiting outside. 
My scrying with Savilla's Stone has provided clues, but not the details. I know the tools you will need there, but not the obstacles themselves. 
The fools cast a spell in the hopes of summoning me to them. It was prideful and foolish, and it has had its consequences.  
Thanks for the help, friend. I didn't recognize you at first, but you're the Hero of Kvatch, aren't you? 
Listen to me. I sure sound like a snob. Snooty, in fact, and not very nice. 
Perhaps I was wrong. Maybe the Scalons aren't the worst thing that could happen to us. I mean... Sheogorath himself has vanished. 
Thoronir better pray he had no knowledge of Agarmir's grave robbing, or the Watch will have his head. 
Now off with you! 
Don't get your tail in a knot. 
Do you think yourself a hunter? Then approach the Shrine of Hircine. Leave our lord an offering. 
Nenyond Twyll awaits you. Return with Mucianus as quickly as possible, so I may settle the Council's fears. 
Does being a soldier make him a good person? Does it make him above murder? I hardly think so.   
I had, perhaps foolishly, believed that Necromancy was all but stamped out in Cyrodiil. It seems I couldn't have been more mistaken. 
Well then, history lesson notwithstanding, I hope you can recover the Draconian Madstone. 
Now get out of my sight before I make you sorry you meddled in my affairs. 
Have a good day now. 
No! The Wellspring!... 
Got him! 
Oh thank goodness! That horrid woman kept threatening me! She said if I didn't come up with the loot she'd throw me to the slaughterfish. 
He looks familiar... 
I need the boots of Springheel Jak. He is a famous thief that died some 300 years ago. Legend has it that he was buried with his boots on. 
Only a true warrior could have accomplished this task. The Aureals shall sing your story for eons to come. 
I was able to get a message to her earlier, but I've yet to get a reply. If I go, then the scamps will follow and my secret will be revealed to all. 
It is a privilege. 
You've done it! But what of Farwil? 
Mother's coming for me in the dragon ships. I don't like these itchy clothes, but I have to wear them or it frightens the fish. 
Is there anyone in the city who knows more about heavy armor than Varnado? 
If you know anything, it is in your best interest to tell me now. After all, your town is at stake! 
My sons ... they're dead, aren't they? 
I put aside the dark arts when I became a priest. But the workings of fate may be seen in this, too. 
As you wish. But I advise you to join the winning side if you really want the Flame relit. The Aureals will never drive us from Cylarne. 
Psst! Hey you! Yeah, you! Come here! I got what you need... 
The Mages Guild runs more or less like it always did, but we lost quite a few members when the practice of Necromancy was banned. 
Recommendations you need, from all guild halls in Cyrodiil. None will be easy to acquire. Too many motives, too much noise. 
Greetings, son of Skyrim. 
What, you think you're ready now? 
I don't know where those bears came from, or why they picked my place to attack, but you must drive them away. 
You are a fool to be here. 
All you need to do is decide what becomes of the adventurers. Will you drive them insane or will you pull the life from their bodies? 
We'll have to break the news to him that Antus didn't make it. He fought bravely, and father will respect that. 
The Chalice of Reversal is waiting for you. When I say you, I mean me, but it's no difference to the Chalice. One ends up being the other. 
Deal! I can sell it for twice that price, to the right customer. 
You win this one. 
What's your problem? 
Hurry! There's no time! 
I am now allowed to grant you a promotion to Master Thief. Congratulations, I suppose. Be ready if the Gray Fox should need you again. 
1, 2.. A new person has come to the Isles... 4, 5... recently. 
Are you... Are you ready to fight? Go talk to Ysabel, let her know. Then we'll, um... You know, we'll meet in the Arena. And it will all be over... 
Teach you to mess with the Legion! 
I'm not going near the things. 
For reasons unknown to this one, the Gray Fox has extended his protection to the Umbranox family and Lady Umbranox in particular. 
Rhano. I'm Anvil's Advanced Trainer in Blade Weapons. 
Who will help an old beggar? 
The three of you should be prepared by now, but as you see we have a new recruit with us as well. I'll need a word with you, recruit. 
Come back when you actually have the money for it. 
You shouldn't be. It's the death of all things. 
The city lies southwest of the Imperial City. The castle overlooks the city from a steep hill. You should have no trouble finding it. 
He leads the Dalvilu family. He is a wise man, and a powerful wizard. 
Poor Tivela. I hear she is turning Cheydinhal inside out looking for her husband, Rythe. I hope nothing bad has happened to him. 
Great things will befall you. There will be trials, but you will prevail. You must, for the good of the guild. 
Is it true what they're saying? Is Baenlin really dead? 
I am busy, so, if you will excuse me. 
The Fighters Guild needs to get aggressive if they're going to compete with the Blackwood Company in Leyawiin. 
Lots of big weapons there. Urbul always has some in stock. 
Dul gro-Shug. I could show you a thing or two about Security... for a small consideration. 
Well, perhaps, yes, one hears such things, what is one to believe? That S'krivva collects goods of untestable provenance? Pshaw. Rumors. 
Congratulations. I had a feeling you were the right person for the job. And it seems I owe you a reward. 
He's dead? Hmm. Of course, I'm too tired to walk all the way up there at the moment. I'll head up there after I rest my eyes for a moment. 
Ah, about that. You see ... I don't have it any more. Terribly sorry. A full refund, of course... 
Brugo's a jerk. He's got a hideout in a ruin called Telepe. Every night, between midnight and six AM, he stops there to pick up his take. 
I'm not surprised. It seems that Skyrim is always involved in a border dispute. 
I find your very presence foul. Say what you will and then leave my sight! 
No sign of him yet. We'll do our best to track him down, and deliver him to Lord Sheogorath for a fitting punishment. 
Has the new ruler of Bliss thought about setting up a city morgue? I'd keep track of all the bodies! 
If someone can cure her, I'm sure she'd pay well. 
Perhaps you were sent by Akatosh. Perhaps not. But I of all people should know that the gods work through us, not for us. 
That's for my father! 
Excellent! I long to sink a blade into some goblin flesh. 
You must eliminate both the Mythic Dawn agents in Bruma. We cannot allow them to continue to plot against us. 
The Dark Elves are my favored people. But I am fair-minded... the outcome is in your hands. 
If you want training from me, you're going to have to earn it. 
Aw gee! You sure? Okay, well, I'll be hanging around the Arena grounds if you need someone to worship the ground you walk on. Bye! 
Syl is a paranoid fool. 
I understand. No need to jump headlong into a dangerous situation. But do hurry. I can only keep it a secret for so long. 
Perhaps I may yet come to believe it myself. 
So much easier to get around these days. Not like the old days. Too much walking. Of course, nothing stops M'aiq from walking when he wants. 
But one vintage continues to elude me; Shadowbanish Wine. How I'd love to add it to my collection. 
Excuse me, Brother. Can you spare a moment? 
Walk with virtue, friend. 
Wayshrines of the Nine in the wilderness confer blessings on the righteous and faithful. 
Even though I have served with these Aureals for centuries, as the Duke of Mania, it is your right to command the troops.  
How are things? 
Very well. Scout ahead and return when it is safe. 
Her room is upstairs; make sure no one sees you. You do that for me, and I'll make sure you can find J'skar. 
It's an apt name. He's got big maces and big axes. Urbul is a big fan of killing things thoroughly. 
If you retreive the Draconian Madstone for me, I'll be happy to compensate you by rewarding you with another Akaviri artifact. Are you game? 
They are stable portals between our world and Oblivion. They violate the most basic principles of daedric magic. They should be impossible. 
Let's just keep this affair between the two of us. 
Go ahead, try your magicka in here. Let's see you make those bars disappear. No? What's the matter? Not so powerful now, are you Breton? 
You see, I am the Master Smith of New Sheoth, don't bother with that other smith in town. 
There is a great deal of runoff from the waters of Mania that collects in Milchar. One particular tree has grown healthy from those waters. 
Yet those gates to Oblivion existed. The old rules no longer apply. Kvatch is only the beginning of what Mehrunes Dagon will do. 
Tell Ardaline I'm sorry. 
Good morning, ma'am. 
Once you understand what My Realm is, you might understand why it's important to keep it intact. 
You've made it, and just in time. We've got trouble with goblins here... but where are the weapons? Get them and get back here! Quickly! 
Blessed are you. How may I serve you? 
Your Speaker should look for this person in the city of Lillandril, on the High Elven home of Sumerset Isle. 
You should not be here, mortal. 
Did you see my last performance? Did you like it? 
I wouldn't have any friends if it weren't for the guild. I'm very grateful. If you want to join, you should talk to Adrienne. 
The whole Realm is at risk. Finally everyone can understand what it's like living under a blanket of fear. 
Perhaps they are especially blessed by Lord Sheogorath. 
I believe a little friendly competition always sharpens the wits. Even more reason for you to get back to hunting for my carving. 
I really know very little. They contacted me. I suppose they learned that I was looking for the third and fourth volumes. 
Where did you come from? You look real enough. You must be from the outside! Oh, thank goodness someone finally came! 
There's a fresh bed available to anyone who's got the 10 gold. Would you like it? 
I was wrong! Don't you see? I thought Neville was trying to catch the killer! But he IS the killer! We need to find a way out of here!  
Welcome to Chorrol. Keep your nose clean, and we'll be good friends. Make a mistake, and the Chorrol Guard will be all over you like a cheap cuirass. 
Got any stories? I love stories. 
What do you mean you disagree? That's a bold statement. What proof do you have that Gelebourne was not a vampire? 
The Mages Guild is the single best resource for Alchemists in all of Cyrodiil. If Alchemy interests you, talk to Dagail about joining. 
Maybe it's just me, but I find Falanu Hlaalu really odd. And I've seen him hanging around the graveyard with a strange smile on his face. 
Look for Irene Metrick in the Imperial City. She can do some amazing things with a weapon in her hand. 
Just as I suspected. If you ever believe yourself to be ready, perhaps we'll have reason to speak. 
My father had told us that he had hidden something away for us... something to provide for our future, but I never imagined it was this. 
The Count went missing about ten years ago... but just recently he reappeared. It's a bit of a mystery, but the Countess seems pleased. 
Baurus! Lock that door behind us! 
Good. 
Welcome back to the true world. 
That's good news. 
Ahjazda in Crucible believes the world is ending. 
Back to Oblivion with you! 
Honor, and pride, bids me tell you: none can escape the Forbidden Grotto. There you will be the charge of my kynsman, Orthe. 
Hmmm. Is this too much pain? 
 I know your type. You believe yourself better than everyone else. 
My Lord! What brings you to my humble museum? 
Leyawiin has always been a melting pot of races and cultures. Of course, racial and cultural conflicts produce inefficiencies and confusion... 
I appreciate your forebearance. 
Seridur is an honorable man. Forming the Order shows just how much he cares about the Imperial City and protecting its people. 
Just walk away like you don't know me. 
The Greymarch comes, and Jyggalag walks. Or runs. Never skips, sidles, or struts. Mostly, he just destroys everything around him. 
Your Speaker should look for this person in the small, unnamed village just west of the city of Alabaster, in the Khajiit homeland of Elsweyr. 
I've been looking for you. We have a situation in Bruma that I need you to deal with. 
I assure you, I am not responsible for them. I would never be so careless. Where there are mindless animals, predators are never far behind. 
Is there a new Captain of the guard? I thought I saw him walking the rounds. 
Really? You want to talk to me? Is this some kind of a joke? If you want to help, just end my life. Kill me. Here, now! 
Dementia has a new ruler! Perhaps a new fork for Big Head as well! 
I've got my eye on you. 
Good people, the Grand Champion is victorious! Esteemed Grand Champion, leave the Arena now and rest! You've earned it once again! 
Perhaps my Lord could help me die? 
I wish I could help more, but I can't fight. I've never held a weapon before in my life. Please... get us out of here! 
In fact, daedric artifacts are known to be formed from the essence of a Daedric Lord, from whence they derive their great power. 
I'm sure the armies will protect the city, but what about us? 
Of course, My Lord. I meant no disrespect. My zeal in the Realm's service got the better of my judgment. 
I am SICK of Orcs coming in here and giving me the business. 'Ooh. Bugak got a book store. Ooh. Bugak's a sissy scroll-scribbler!' 
Poor Big Head will never find the Fork of Horripilation. 
R'vanni just wants to get along. No trouble. Anything you want. R'vanni's know-nothing, good-for-nothing. Ask anyone. Just don't hurt R'vanni. 
Then I have no use for you. Begone until you can pay the fine. 
Not now. I need to think. 
Hail, Duchess of Dementia. 
If you didn't have the money, you shouldn't have wasted my time. 
The usual daedric claptrap of the purifying power of Destruction. They hope to bring Mehrunes Dagon back to Tamriel and give us all a good Cleansing. 
Oh, Nelrene. You take the fun out of everything. Very well. What do you know of a conspiracy against Lady Syl? 
Just remember, my sword's here if you need it. You run into any trouble, just holler. 
I... I thought he was hunting the killer. Now I don't know what to think! I don't trust him, or you! Stay away from me!  
How quaint. You seek to educate yourself. At the expense of my precious time. Go. Shoo. Bother someone else. 
Who the blazes are you, anyway? 
The rookies took care of all the thieves. How many was it? Seven? Eight? 
While being summoned is truly a wonderful thing, and not at all tiresome, I believe Lord Sheogorath wishes you to speak with Him again. 
Why do you delay? Do you fear to face Mankar Camoran himself? As well you should. 
E'Tah Mazken! 
As you wish. Too bad, I was just getting to like you. Kill him. 
He never really trusted anyone else in the group, and before he secured the treasure in that cave, he had a special enchantment placed upon it. 
So, Francois Motierre has been killed. He hired us, sacrificed his own mother's blood, and we could not even fulfill our end of the bargain. 
You need a place to sleep in Chorrol? Well, why don't you just join the Fighters Guild, or Mages Guild? Sleep for free around Cyrodiil! 
I like dogs, but it's a bit excessive with those two folks. 
The Gray Fox appreciates all you've done for the guild. 
We can use your help! Let's go! 
But why am I telling you? You were there. You saw... him. Sometimes I wonder if I'll ever be able to sleep again. 
Kill the betrayer! 
Oh, it's you. Looks like we're working together. 
Oh. Sorry. The old memory is not what it used to be. 
Escaping prisoners! 
You've been suspended from the guild. You'd better see Raminus Polus if you want fix things. 
Excuse me. We have a small problem that we hope you can help us with. 
Oh! Well... um, hello. You must be the one Lucien Lachance told me about. I've been expecting you. We haven't got much time, I'm afraid. 
Well, I've got to be going -- many treasures to find around here, yes indeed! We'll speak again, I'm sure! 
Pretty soon you'll go mad, and the guards will cut your throat just to stop the ranting. That's right. You're going to die in here, Wood Elf! Die! 
I'm a trained soldier with over twenty years experience dealing with situations like this. On my honor, this killer will be caught and dealt with!    
Thank you for closing that Oblivion Gate. Despite what the Count may say, we're all in your debt. 
Is that truly the best you can do? Your "wit" might be better suited to the Aureals across the way. 
I shall have your reward soon. 
I understand he lives with Zoe Malene. 
They live in utter darkness in the secret catacombs. Of course it doesn't affect them because they are blind. 
I'd consider it a personal favor if you'd give this matter top priority. When you learn more, let me know. Keep up the excellent work, magister. 
I don't think we're going to make it out of here alive. 
Seems odd, given his vocation. Still, I suppose there's no harm. 
Lord Sheogorath! Have you found any yet? 
Yes, Brother? 
The poor lass looks upset. But if she's anything like my daughter, she's tougher than she looks. She'll be all right. 
But here you are instead. Skilled enough to make it this far, which speaks volumes about you. Perhaps you'll be as useful to me as Traven would. 
I am being honest, that is all. The only strange reports I have received are of a robed figure seen leaving the palace late at night. 
If you're just learning how to pick a lock, he's a good man to talk to. 
I'll be honest, that Oblivion Gate out there scares me. And believe me, nobody that works in the Skingrad Guard scares easy. 
GRRRR 
I'm afraid until the adventurers are dealt with, Xedilian will keep you here. Even I can't will its doors to open. 
Luckily, Bradon's wife wasn't home. Poor thing, she didn't even know her husband was infected. 
Who's on duty tonight? It's not me, is it? 
Let's not waste time on pleasantries. Gaston Tussaud is still alive, and it's your job to remedy that. I suggest you tend to your duties. 
He told me the dog can smell its food on anyone. Ushnar let that dog tear that poor Khajiit apart. 
You hear any word about Kud-Ei's friend? She's offering a generous reward, so hopefully someone will show up and lend a hand. 
How may I be of service to you, milady? 
If I ever see that elf, he's in so much trouble. 
So, ready for your next match? 
Let's get out of here, Syndelius. This is obviously a trick to waste our time! 
I've heard that he'd rather be a painter. Still, he runs the place well. 
A man with pockets as deep as a cave whom everyone wishes would just go away! 
A new ruler of Dementia. Excellent. If I could only freeze this moment in time. 
Then it's a sad day in Cheydinhal. The Knights were boastful louts, but they didn't deserve to be killed. 
Return to me when you have slain another vampire, and the Order will gladly reward you. 
Have you seen Ahdarji trying to start trouble? 
Imperial criminal scum like you give the Empire a bad name, you see. You're an embarrassment. Best if you just... disappeared. 
It could be worse. Vilena could just shut us down. I hope she doesn't. 
I've heard of a Daedra worshipper named Olyn Seran. Very powerful, and might be helpful, if you can find him. 
The holy Flame can only be lit from the Altars of Despair and Rapture. Alas, the Aureals hold Rapture... for now. 
Even I know that some from your guild have defected to join him. I believe you can be trusted, as you have been attacked once already. 
Very well. You can use either bed on the top floor. Oh, and do watch your step. 
But one of the moldy pages contained the recipe for a potion known as an Elixir of Exploration, a sort of "ultimate dungeon delver's" brew. 
Dion takes his job as Guard Captain very seriously. He's all business when he's working. 
No? Joining the guild is a good idea for anyone who wishes to become a powerful mage, you know. 
Cast lots of spells at Gnarls. That's the best way to hurt them. Really! 
So, what's the news from Greyland? 
You could try taking your problem to Itius Hayn. Maybe he'll be willing to risk his career by arresting Audens. 
Faelian, you say? Why yes, I know who he is. Rather distasteful fellow, actually. I believe he lives at the Tiber Septim Hotel. 
Did battlemages activate runestones on arrival, thus lighting arcane beacons within the next runestone? 
As my master has done, so will I, before I pass on. 
It seems to be the source of their power. Aurig Desha may know more. 
I fear the settlement of Highcross is experiencing some difficulties. Perhaps you should intervene? 
Then go away. 
How'd you get in here? 
Urbul gro-Orkulg knows you NEED axes and blunt weapons. BIG ones. So he makes them and sells them here... 
With Thadon gone, perhaps someone will help us out here. 
The world didn't end. Today, at least. That doesn't mean we're safe tomorrow. Doesn't really mean we're safe now, either. 
Sure I know. I just need motivation. 
I know Chorrol is the best town I've spent time in. 
I have the orders right there. I'll fill in his name and you can deliver it to Captain Lex. Thank you courier. My steward will tip you. 
What are you looking at? 
Don't feel bad -- no one lives forever! 
Not now. First we have to see about Myvryna. 
I always enjoy meeting my rival treasure hunters. What, did you think you were the only one? Ha ha ha! Come, let us have a drink together. 
Why, yes. I do have a lovely room available for a mere 40 gold a night. Are you interested? 
Vanashti is a frightening one. I've heard she likes the skooma a bit much. 
The creatures are now loose all over the forest and in the clearing where I was still working. The Brush is on the body of the Bosmer thief there. 
Something I can help you with? 
Remember, timing is everything. You need to slash Motierre with the blade in Hides-His-Heart's presence, and then flee before the enforcer can react. 
I now declare you to be Duchess of Dementia of the Shivering Isles! May your wrath and anger be your guide. 
Mind telling me why you're sneakin' about? I don't think I have to tell you what the Legion thinks of thieves, now do I? 
She made him in the Gardens of Flesh and Bone. She's my teacher. She's going to teach me all her secrets. 
There is still a chance to strike back at the Necromancers. 
Obviously, no matter which path you take, it ends in the death of either Syl or Thadon. 
The town eccentric. Lives in the big house on the corner, southwest of the Chapel. Don't worry, he's harmless. 
Well, these are simply beautiful. Thank you so much. And there's no need to let him know that I know where they came from. You understand. 
Do something! 
Congratulations. You've gained another ally in your efforts. Do remember to follow up with Ma'zaddha. 
A sincere welcome to you. May you be forever blessed. 
Greetings, Dunmer. 
You should speak with Relmyna Verenim as quickly as possible. I fear our time runs short. 
I suppose you expect some sort of a reward? I don't think so. I have some gold tucked away, but we never struck a bargain. 
Everyone is very fond of Ohtesse. And her healing skills are simply excellent. 
Excellent! This is exciting news indeed, magister! Just think of the possible advances in Restoration and Alteration!  
I'm not sure how you feel about pirates, but you've got to kill one. A captain, in fact. On his ship. Surrounded by his crew. Interested? 
Your stars are not mine. Today the Serpent shall sting the foes who seek your blood. 
Of course, when the Guard found out, they ran his sorry butt right out of town. But they left the rats! RATS!!! 
Wonderful! I would be glad to tell you more. 
I'm mature enough to admit I was mistaken about Thoronir. He's a welcome member of our group in the Market District. 
I can see by the look on your face you wonder where I get all these fantastic items. I'll tell you what I tell everyone else who asks. 
Kill the Aureals. Don't stop until every last one of them is dead. 
I feel as though we've talked about this. Am I mistaken? 
Oh no. What do we do? I'm so scared. 
You're going to stop the Greymarch by becoming Me. Or a version of Me. You'll be powerful. Powerful enough to stop Jyggalag. 
The Madgod's army has returned, their weapons primed to slay. Could this mean our downfall, or will we win the day? 
If you're looking for a shield, Stonewall shields has a fine selection. 
Did you hear about the Blackwood Company? They were all mad murderers hopped up on hist? And crooked, thieving frauds? 
A curse on that Hieronymus Lex! 
I don't expect anyone to be working any less just because of Thadon's death. Take a moment to mourn, then back to work. 
You need to go find Lady Rogbut, meat! Why are you standing here talking to me? 
There is a place in the Isles that goes by the name Split. If you think everyone there is unique, you don't know the half of it. 
She seems like a good person to talk to. I imagine she could teach me a lot. 
Stay back! This one's violent! 
Really? 
I find myself in your debt and this irks me. I am honor bound to repay my debt to you. If you will it. 
There are some quality books at Mach-Na's. Just don't catch him when he's in a bad mood. 
Welcome, guild mage. We meet again, although in different circumstances. 
Three people have been killed, and the only ones left are you, me and a little old lady. One of us is a murderer, and my money's on the old lady.  
Well, it seems you've accomplished the task set out for you. Well done. Another man damned. Another ruined soul. 
Chancellor Ocato! Chancellor Ocato! 
Head to his estate and talk to him. Find his daughter. And mind your manners! I don't want you embarassing me! 
Yes, I have it. Why? 
He's here. I know it. Lead the way. 
You'll change that. Break the cycle. You'll stop Jyggalag, and I'll have My Realm to come back to. I've never actually tried that before. 
Father will be so proud of us... but I wish he'd been here. 
The most common practice is to place the raising of the runestones within the High First Era Cyrodiil of Empress Hestra and the Reman Emperors. 
Yeah. This is the Cheydinhal Fighter's Guild. Look around. See any fighters? Right. That's the problem. No fighters, no guild. 
Well... in a year or two. Maybe a bit more. There's no way to be absolutely sure. That's the exciting thing about basic research! 
I now declare you to be Duke of Dementia of the Shivering Isles! May your wrath and anger be your guide. 
The Aureals will soon pay for their arrogance. 
Better that you should be adequately prepared. I shall await your return. 
The Fighters Guild thing at Desolate Mine went perfectly, didn't it? They cleared out the goblins, and no one got hurt. 
The Dark Brotherhood must seek out a Breton named Evangeline. She has need of our services, and we are only too happy to oblige. 
In your absence, I dispatched a runner to Skingrad to let them know they need to clear Gelebourne's name for the record books. 
Do you really think that I'm surprised to see you here? I let you find me. What better place to get rid of you than all the way out here. 
Die! All of you! Die! Agggghhh! 
Now that you've found Syl's escape route I'd tread very carefully. She is the Mistress of Deception after all. 
My informant tells me it's hidden in the main keep at the center. Dunno what's guardin' it, but I'm sure you can handle it. 
But, this... stranger? Someone new? From somewhere else? Not here. I'm sure of that. I don't understand. Or I can't. 
Ah... a hammer. Well. Not my first choice, but it will suffice. Let's go! 
Julianos preserve us! I can't believe it ... why me?! Please, show this to the guards right away! 
You know, if you need to get better at archery, you should talk to Reman Broder. He's quite a good shot. 
Hope you're not planning to get much sleep. 
Vilena Donton, Master of the Fighters Guild. Please excuse the mess. Paperwork. But what can I do for you? 
Don't forget, my friend -- you and I are what stand between order and chaos. Without us, the Empire would crumble. 
Or, you may continue onward, through the door behind me. If you can pass the Gates of Madness, perhaps the Lord Sheogorath will find a use for you. 
Yes, well. I suspect our Inquisitor would like to see you leave as well. As soon as you tell me what I want to know, you may go. 
Hello, my friend! What can this grizzled old Blademaster do for you? 
My dreams grant me no opinions of success. Their compass ventures not beyond the doors of death. 
Thanks anyway. 
Kill it. 
Hey... Hey! How... What are... What are you... doing here? You're not my... Not my friend. What... You know, what do you... want? 
My duty now is to the Realm. By serving you, I serve Lord Sheogorath. 
If any of our books can help you in the cause of destroying more, you're welcome to read them. 
So it's Greenmote you need, eh? Well, I think it's fairly clear who knows where that powdery substance is stored. 
Well, at least you took care of Jeanne's book. We'll be able to laugh over that one for weeks, I bet. 
Daedra cults aren't necessarily evil, of course. In nearby Morrowind, for example, they worship Daedra in the Temple. 
We really shouldn't be talking about this. Someone might be listening! 
Who's there? 
I welcome the contest! 
I happen to know that if you go up the stairs there, you can get a vantage point on the meeting room. 
The arrows aren't ready yet. Come back later. 
How may I assist you, Arch-Mage? 
I am honored to be entrusted by the Gray Fox himself to run these errands. 
I don't like talking about the dead like they're some kind of tourist attraction, but that spirit has been making his ghostly journey for years now. 
My grandfather built this place, not that it's any of your business.  We been down, but we got plans to bring back the good old days.  You'll see. 
You are to travel north to the Brina Cross Inn, and speak with Arielle Jurard. She will give you further instructions. 
Except where the backbone is an actual backbone. Ever been to Malacath's realm...? Nasty stuff. But, back to the business at hand. 
Yes? Why do you not approach the Shrine? 
He protects the Gates of Madness. He'll kill anyone who gets near. He's about to destroy some adventurers up there now. 
I appreciate the help that you have brought to Bruma. I begin to think we have a chance. 
I'm afraid you're late to the party. The guest of honor has already left! 
You've got it. I'll have the Bear brought out to the Arena. Now get up there and give the people what they paid for!  
I don't know why Denel is even trying. This is doomed to fail. 
Your Grace... 
A girl can always win an argument with a weapon like this. 
We must now take our leave of each other, you and I, for there is much work to be done. I'll be following... your progress. Welcome to the family.  
I've heard it all. They say he's immortal because he's led the Thieves Guild for over 300 years. 
Two amulets? One of them must be a fake. Clever girl, taught her everything I know. Good thing you saw through her ruse. 
I fear this time you may find the results no more to your liking than the last. Less so, perhaps. 
You must bring that evidence to Garrus. Make haste. 
Sure, the Fighters Guild raided a family tomb, but they did it for a family member. What's wrong with that? 
Mirabelle Monet runs quite a boarding house. I understand all of the sailors leave very satisfied. 
The truth has been in front of you since first you were born: the Daedra are the true gods of this universe. 
The Gatekeeper has been slain. I bet he died of a disease. I hope someone takes care of his corpse. Can you imagine how disgusting that will be? 
Mogens got away, but first he killed Ra'vindra... my best friend, Ra'vindra. 
Hail Sithis indeed, my child! Now listen closely. No longer will you receive your orders directly. Instead, you will visit secret dead drops. 
Soon. Too soon. I can already feel the change beginning. I feel like I'm not quite here. I'm not over there yet, but I'm not quite here. 
Aggh! Again! 
The land is good, the farm productive. The mine's under construction, but once it's working, it will make my fortune. 
I should be the one who is leading, however. Do I have your support? 
We mock the thieves, for bitter is their loss. You, mortal, may take this. It shall open the secrets of dark places for you. 
What do you call someone who messes everything up? You. 
I give you a spell to trap these souls. Return to me when you have finished. When you do, I will further your journey on your true path. 
This is not a gift to be taken lightly. It may cause you harm in the long run, but at least you already know a way to rid yourself of it. 
Excuse me. If you have a moment, I would speak with you. 
At last we meet in the flesh. 
There have been a number of thefts in the area, and witnesses believe the thieves are holed up nearby. Check around, and see what you can learn. 
A lady might be a killer, but she shouldn't ruin her manicure by chipping a nail. 
Greetings, Warlock. 
We threaten no one. Why can't they just leave us alone? 
I'm not the one you want to talk to. 
Have you met the newcomer, yet? Rich, maybe? Kindhearted, or just another skinflint? 
The Duke of Mania and the Duchess of Dementia. Seek them out, and let them show you what New Sheoth is. You might be surprised. 
When I saw my friend killed, I swore I'd be a true knight and right all wrongs. So now I gotta do some good deeds. 
Certainly. I'll unlock the door for you. Of course I have to stay with you in there. 
I've got some bad news for you. Donton didn't take the news about her son well at all, not that you'd expect otherwise. 
I can go no further. You alone must stand against the Prince of Destruction and his mortal servants. He must not have the Amulet of Kings! 
A safer choice, perhaps. Maybe you'll live through this. Thadon's a bit lost these days. Not that it's a bad thing. It suits him. Until now. 
Please, go away before I lose my temper. I know I'm no match for you in combat, but I don't have to talk to you. 
Yes, I think that the Order will live on. Give me time to make arrangements, and meet me in Seridur's basement. 
That's exactly what I'm saying! But will the Captain listen? Noooo... "We must have a presence!" "The prison must remain secure!" 
Help! You must help! They're killing everyone at Weynon Priory! 
That's incredible. I didn't think it possible. 
I'm a vampire hunter. I came here with a few others to get rid of the vampires in Skingrad. 
They're perfect! Perfect! 
Is there a busier smith in Tamriel than Tadrose Helas? 
Wha- ? What are you doing up here? They find the Golden Galleon yet? 
If the guards don't do something about the Oblivion Gate soon, I'm leaving town. It's not safe here! 
It killed the intrepid adventurer who really should just be doing exactly what I say at all times. 
What can be said about taxes? They're high, but we must pay. At least they are administered efficiently, and the shrinkage is within decent limits. 
This is unsual! The ashes of a famous madman are perfect for my Museum! 
Are you? Hmm. I'd expected an entrance with a bit more flair. Ah, well. Perhaps you'll grow into the role. One can hope, eh? 
Edla. Edla Dark-Heart. If you want to be a Marksman, I can train you. If you can breathe, I can teach you. 
This is when I should smite you. Give you a serious smiting. Completely smitten. When I tell you to do something, I generally mean it. 
Caves run all beneath the town. Some natural, some dug over the years since we found the Deep Ones. Every house has an entrance now. 
Perhaps he'd be willing to sell you Volume 3. But I doubt it. He was very pleased with his purchase. 
By Azura, by Azura, by Azura! It's the Grand Champion! I can't believe it's you! Standing here! Next to me! 
It is increasing the power of the obelisk somehow. If you can shut down the obelisk, the Spire shouldn't matter. 
Not a very good meal, though. Too much pie. Pie is a tricky thing, wouldn't you say? Don't answer that either. 
It's a damned shame. I haven't been giving the project the attention it deserves. 
Magister! We must talk! Please... It's rather urgent. 
Do you know anything about some book that Earana is looking for? 
If I find out who's running the show... there'll be hell to pay. 
Can't you find someone else to bother? 
I once killed a minotaur with that spoon. It's a mighty daedric artifact! 
I'm angry. I want to stay angry. That anger keeps me going. 
He can teach you a lot about using light armor. 
Toutius Sextius, do you know him? A quiet fellow, appears harmless enough, but I've identified him as one of my key suspects. 
She's a Dark Elf and a harlot, and for all I know she's a murderer too! Now leave me be, you cretin!   
Oh, just drop it anywhere. I don't think he really cared about it. I think it was some sort of sick joke on his part. 
Yes, I'm the city's Arena Gatekeeper, but I'm not on duty now. If you want to bet on a fight, see me at the Arena between 9:00 AM and 9:00 PM. 
You must hurry! 
In any case, there's no need to meet me again until you've finished... the job. Safer that way. Then I will pay you in full what I promised. 
There's no reason to shop in that dump. 
Don't eat me! You're worse than those knights in the Fringe! 
Stay put, prisoner. 
You've stopped them from fighting. Now find out why it went on. Then do something about it! 
The Black Horse Courier. Brothers Urjabhi and Ra'Jiradh, and I, Hassiri. We bring the news of the Empire to the people of the Empire! Fast, fast! 
The Countess is in attendance from 8 in the morning until 6 in the evening each day. 
What news do you have of Black Brugo? 
Sickly Bernice's isn't a bad place. Just make sure to wash your hands. 
I don't recommend leaving before I've had a chance to offer you more information on your potential reward, although I admire your zeal. 
Get out of here! There's no time for this! 
You... You picked their pocket! Shame on you... 
Excellent! The guild accepts your... apology and welcomes you back into the fold. 
A charged magic item is a useful magic item. 
Certainly. 
What do you take me for? 
That's where Erthor wound up, after Adrienne told him he couldn't practice in the guild hall anymore. She probably doesn't even remember that. 
I got through the gate, and kept running through the woods by the light of the fires. 
The Grakedrig Ulfri will explain everything. You should speak to her at once. 
One night Uriel called me in to his private chambers. A baby boy lay sleeping in a basket. Uriel told me to deliver him somewhere safe. 
Oh! It... It seems you already have a family member traveling with you, dear Listener. Perhaps I can help, when you are done with their services? 
It's just this way, not much farther. 
That never happened. 
What is it you want? You were told to stay out of my sight. I'll assume you're here to tender a resignation. 
Return at once when you have their deployments. This could make all the difference. 
Now is not the time for business! 
Psst.  Over here! 
Your Grace, a dark time has been thrust upon us. Passwall is under attack. We are outmatched and outnumbered. 
Take Goldbrand, sheathe it in your enemies, and offer their souls as praise to me.  
Hello milord. 
Then it is time for you to leave. 
Ergh! What twisted mind spawned these beasts? 
What are friends for? Fathis is also the wizard in the tower outside of town. He keeps his most treasured items there, not in the castle. 
Yeah? You're who? And why do I care, exactly? 
Move your ass, boot. 
The Madstone appears as a snake coiled around and encircling itself. The eyes of the snake are supposed to be precious gems or some such. 
He runs a nice store, but Mach-Na is a grouchy old man. 
Our library is yours, friend. 
Listen up! This next match is an outrage, but there's nothin' I can do about it! You've got three opponents this time, and you have to beat them all! 
Make haste! Find him quickly... no telling what mischief he may get himself into and we need him as a witness! 
The Howling Halls, is it? It's been some time since I last saw this place. 
You will pay for this. 
If that is your wish, Arch-Mage. 
What do you think about all of Skjorta's antics? 
Once I donned the cowl, no-one in all of Tamriel could recognize me. With the cowl I became the Gray Fox. Without it, I was a stranger, even to you. 
A dangerous choice. I like it! She's gotten to be a bit much, anyway. Thinks everyone is out to get her. Which they are, in this case. So be it. 
You must set me free! 
And have one of your nosy friends snoop around here and steal it? No, it's safer in Tidewater Cave. 
With an open Oblivion Gate just outside our walls, I cannot risk weakening Cheydinhal's defenses, even for such a worthy cause. 
It means Order has tried subterfuge... not its strong suit. Amazing! Perhaps things aren't going as poorly as I'd imagined. 
People keep saying that the Gatekeeper is dead. I have no idea what that means. Do you know? 
There's a new Gatekeeper. I hope this one doesn't get sick and die like the first one. 
One of my dear friends was killed while trying to kill Phillida, several years ago. He was twice the assassin you are! Your are doomed to failure. 
Good to see you again! 
Come back for a drink! 
I guess it all doesn't matter now. Unless you can defeat those Painted Trolls, we have no chance of getting the Brush back. 
What're you doing here? You don't look like one of the party guests. I don't remember you on the list. 
If you require further training, you might consider venturing into the mountains in the north of Cyrodiil. Aerin's Camp, specifically. 
Our Lord comes singing! Songs for Sheogorath! 
Well now, what might you want? 
If your tactics are as bold as your words, we may live through this next attack. 
Since no one's lived there for many years, it may be quite overgrown by now. If you find it, let us know. We'll be waiting anxiously. 
I am ashamed that I took the painting, but my love for the Count was greater than you could imagine. 
What is it, my friend? 
Lighting the Dragonfires will no longer save us... the barriers that protected us from Oblivion are gone... 
Here we have the mortal remains of a fellow named Din, who as I understand was driven mad and killed himself, a truly Demented act. 
It is very near, don't worry. We await only the Master's word before we throw open the gates to Oblivion. 
I told him that trying to travel into one's own dreams is risky. But as usual, he didn't listen to me. Always has to do things his way. 
Your first task is to locate the ruins of the High Fane. I believe it must now be known by a different name. 
Is that so? Well, then perhaps you know something that may be useful to our Inquisitor. Would you care to share that information? 
I've killed far worse than you. 
I could eat nothing but Salmo's baking for the rest of my life. That'd be fine with me. 
I heard something strange happened in the House of Dementia. Probably disease-related. 
I don't spread gossip. I have nothing to say. 
Greetings, Speaker.  
I need a new Elven cuirass. Nothing fancy, nothing enchanted. Just a decent piece of armor. You get that for me, and I'll train you. That's the deal. 
Based on the activity I've seen, that should be very soon. 
Mankar Camoran was our leader, our teacher, our Master. He had the secret knowledge. He dealt with Mehrunes Dagon as an equal. 
Well, since they're out of the way, if I kill you, that means Selene and I split the take two ways. This heist is getting better and better! 
So. You killed Black Brugo. Well, the bastard had it coming, I guess. You get a reward? 
When you're ready for battle, the Countess will order her men to stop closing the Gates outside the city. 
If you need to know more about the Nirnroot, read the missive. 
Desideratus is a gentle fool. I never should have allowed him to take up the sword. My curse will not allow me to help you with his need. 
To find their secret shrine to Mehrunes Dagon, you'll need to study the four volumes of Mankar Camoran's "Commentaries." 
Keep the Key safe. 
Brellach is our stronghold. It is our place of refuge in this Realm. 
Go talk to Relmyna in Xaselm. Tell her you're working for me. She'd do anything for me, that little minx. 
Ha! 
Peace at last. Thank you! Thank you... 
You can call me Hillod the Outlaw. Because I'm on the lam. 
I can't imagine who'd want to hurt Toutius. 
It's quite possible you may find Nirnroot in people's homes or businesses. Not everyone knows its true potential. 
There is a settlement called Border Watch that your predecessor found rather dull. This, of course, offended Him greatly. 
I need you to check out some people for me, the ones that are following me.  Watch them, see where they go, who they report to. Will you help me? 
Do I want to hear this? 
I got no beds here. You need a bed in the Imperial City, you got four choices. The King and Queens and Luther Broads are in the Gardens. 
Be ever vigilant. The crime of grave robbing is punishable only by death, so Agarmir is likely to do anything to keep his crimes secret. 
Another rat job? Not me. No thanks. Let the bottom boot do the rats. Unless you want the gig.... 
You're the leader of this expedition. So lead on! 
This evil book was written by Mehrunes Dagon himself, and given by him to Mankar Camoran. 
The Prince of Destruction awakes, born anew in blood and fire. These cutthroats are but his mortal pawns. 
I hear there's someone new in the Shivering Isles. I do so enjoy making new friends. 
Welcome to Border Watch, stranger. You are welcome here. I am Ri'bassa, shaman of our people. 
There's some fine light armor at The Best Defense. Talk to Maro Rufus. 
You should be out acquiring a Mage's Staff for yourself. What do you need? 
I know we're not part of Dementia, but I think their new Duke still deserves a toast, don't you? You're buying, right? 
Remember when our new master was just a rookie? Who would have thought that a bottom boot would save the whole guild from the Blackwood Company? 
Greetings, marsh-friend. 
Greetings, Conjurer. 
That day, I became a knight, and swore a knight's oath. 
I don't know. In the Chapel praying, I think. You must help us! 
If he'll train you in picking locks, you're probably already pretty good at it. 
I'll have your head, you filthy Nord! 
To be so close, and yet so far. If only we had the key! Wait.. do you hear something? 
We shall never speak of him again. 
By the Nine Divines, can't a woman get a moment to herself? Leave me! 
It's just too horrible to comprehend. I don't even know what to say. I guess an apology is not enough. What can I do? 
It's just this way. 
You will be my Grand Inquisitor. Expose the conspirators, and they will be punished, I assure you. Find out who keeps secrets, and what they are. 
Isn't Alga a good storyteller? 
She thinks she's so smart. She and all the other women. I'll show her! I want you to keep an eye on her. Find out what she's up to. 
It might keep out unwanted visitors. 
Hello, fellow magician. 
Ulrich keeps his quarters locked, but I've glimpsed inside. The things he has in there could never be purchased on a Captain's salary. 
Yes, my lady? How may I help you? 
We'll go together. But I fear the worst. 
However, when you remove the cowl, eveyone will know you as yourself. Fortunately, the cowl still has the power to hide your alter ego from them. 
He was right about that. I can feel it. In My bones. The little ones. 
I love this Guild, and all its members, perhaps to a fault. My concern for them has made me blind to what's been happening around me. 
That's ridiculous. I understand there's a Khajiit beggar that follows him around, just to annoy him. 
Get him to leave sooner than later, and your friend can sleep sooner than later. Watch it, though. Dogs don't like the smell of him. 
Looking for an axe or a mace? Head to Slash 'N Smash. The name says it all. 
While not the source of the Daedric Princes' authority, each Daedric artifact provides that Prince with a measure of power. 
Please hurry back.  You're my only hope! 
I'd like to tell you, but... really, I shouldn't say anything more. 
I slept in the woods. I came back in the morning, and Kvatch was gone. 
I need you to acquire Savilla's Stone. It is a large crystal with special properties that I need to gain... advantage. 
Good luck... you'll need it. 
You dare attack me? 
You've done what? I... I had no idea it had gotten so bad. How is it you accomplished all of this? 
You want my honest opinion? This whole setup -- the party, the chest of gold -- it doesn't make any sense.  
I'm eager to help you defeat my former Master, if you're willing to accept my help. 
Ontus Vanin, retired. Sleep late, and read trashy books. I don't keep up with Mages Guild affairs any more. 
Then, lead him here, and I'll do the rest. 
I'd take great pleasure in bestowing one of them upon you. Please, choose the Thornblade or the Staff of Indarys. 
How does this make you feel? 
Lord Dagon's victory is at hand, fool. 
The Lonely Suitor is a fine place. Bogrum gro-Galash is very focused on making it a success. 
Oof! 
Yes, yes! This is indeed the Honorblade of Chorrol, finally delivered back to us after all these years! 
I'll be right behind you. 
I hold you responsible for Mazoga's death. Your disappointing performance proves you are not suited for service to County Leyawiin. 
This can't be happening. This is horrible. 
The Mystic Archives have been consulted with minimal success. Guild members are investigating other avenues, but I believe more can be learned here. 
Our clan sacked your city of Kvatch... a trifling task fit for scamps. 
I got no complaints. Kind of an arrogant bastard if you get right down to it, but he pays us well enough. 
Nothing comes to mind. Of course, my memory sometimes ain't what it used to be. 
In your coming, I hear the footsteps of Fate. 
Julitta Plotius. I'm Betto's wife. 
My favorite thing is fresh slaughterfish, caught fresh from the docks on the Waterfront. 
Shouldn't you be helping Norbert Lelles? 
Welcome, traveller. We're all so worried about the goblins, we may not be as hospitable as we should be. 
What's on your mind, Guildmaster? Need me to kill something? 
I've heard that Jantus Brolus is skilled with both magic and steel. 
I would prefer you leave, friend. Please. 
The Master will soon deal with you. 
Affirmative. They will fall before my sword. 
Thanks to me, things are going well here. 
I wouldn't miss it.  This time the sacrifice may finally be acceptable to the Brethren. 
You little sugar pie! You've done such a good job! Yes, you have! 
Welcome back, friend! It's a pleasure to serve you. 
Are you still trying to file a complaint against Audens Avidius? I thought I told you to take it up with Itius Hayn. 
My Lord rules strongly and without exhaustion. 
The Black Hand is trying to keep it very hush hush, but one of their own has been assassinated! It would seem the Brotherhood has been infiltrated. 
Sometimes, a woman has got to make her point using the tip of her sword, right? You'd better believe it! 
He's pretty scary, isn't he? Let's watch him in action. 
Stay sharp! 
You're not from around here, are you? Just a warning... be careful if you go swimming. It's the slaughterfish. They'll swarm you. 
Any word of Aleron? 
I salute you for your daring, Hero of Kvatch! You've proven yourself once again here at Skingrad. 
It is my honor to welcome you into our ranks as a Knight Brother of the Blades. 
Yes, indeed. Legend has it that Garridan found the Ewer, and that it was guarded by a fearsome creature. It is also said that the creature froze him. 
Strike me down, if you can! 
Since the runestones have lost their enchantments, however, we may never know why they were moved, or what function they served at First Era sites. 
That would be Falcar's responsibility. Good luck. 
Yes, I have heard of you. Tell me, is it true? Has Sheogorath sent you to kill Ciirta for her vendetta against Him? 
All this time it was merely an illusion, how clever. 
I could not abide Sheogorath's betrayal. He brought disharmony. He allowed the Greymarch to take us. 
So, the armies have been restored. They'd better not show up here looking to procure my crops. 
Okay, okay. I'll get the names, and then you'll see. It will be worth it, I promise you! 
Two people lie dead. Primo could have done it, I know. He's young, and strong. Still, I don't want to believe that.   
If you're looking for luxury, there's no better place to stay. 
They make armor and weapons. Magical ones, if you have the correct matrix. 
And now we can't even get back into the city to help them, with that damned Oblivion Gate blocking the way. 
Order will rule this Realm! It is foreordained! 
So clumsy, all my fault. 
Those creatures in the Fringe are scary. Not like you, you fuzzy little rascal! 
You look like you've seen some travel. 
Sorry, I am not used to this kind of meeting. It always makes me nervous. 
Some new person has arrived. It'd be polite to introduce myself, but I'm feeling more tired than usual. 
Whatever you want. 
I heard she's been stockpiling magic items... "just in case." 
Let me know as soon as Cropsford is cleared of goblins, so we can get back to building our new settlement. 
I'll wait here until the tavern deck is clear. 
The Everscamp is unique. Not quite as powerful as a regular scamp, it can barely use magic and is more of an annoyance than a threat. 
I understand Carahil knows more about Illusion than any other mage in Anvil. Of course, she only shares that knowledge with the Mages Guild. 
Yes. My name is Umbacano. 
Can't wait to get my hands on you... 
It's at least worth a try. I know I don't want to find out what terrible power Umbacano could unleash using the Crown of Nenalata. 
Thanks again. 
You may take that with you for now, if you wish. The Council may have use for it. Please ask them to return it quickly, as I may need it again. 
I see you are with the Gray Fox. Do you need a fence? 
After a person performs the ritual, they are contacted by a Speaker. Gold is exchanged, and the details worked out. So it has always been. 
Get away from me.... 
Return when you possess a cure. Then I shall take you to the Count. 
And a good day to you, madam! 
All that stuff about having to set trolls on fire is a bunch of hooey. They don't like fire, but a good sword will cut them up fine. 
The moths are almost done spinning. 
Hmph... 
I have dedicated our royal hunting retreat, the White Stallion Lodge, to the exclusive use of White Stallion Knights. 
Know that you have my complete confidence. I would not entrust this job to you if I did not feel you were prepared for it. Now, go. 
I'm looking forward to my retirement -- long days in the stable with the horses, long mornings in bed, and best of all: no more fish. 
We must not relax our guard, not even for a second. We'll talk more about this later.   
Away, mortal. I haven't time for your chatter. 
I will rest, but I must take care of our guest first. 
I'm sorry, there's been no sighting of him yet. Don't know if there ever will be... 
The Gardens of Flesh and Bone are where Sorceress Verenim lived and worked for many years. 
Come, my father is waiting to welcome you to Carac Agaialor. 
How sweet! You truly are a patron of the Odd! 
You'll be back. They always come back. 
Well, since I like you ... I think there's somebody staying with Jearl. 
If you're looking to learn a bit about Conjuration, Sulinus Vassinus is a good person to talk to. 
I hear Adrienne is sending you out to get Erthor. Is that right? 
Have you been to Skingrad, and seen Count Hassildor? 
The cavern is silent once more. I would be foolish to think that this might send a message to those who would encroach on my territory. 
It has come! We're doomed! Doomed! Run while you can, stranger. Get out! 
The Arena's faked. You think those guys are getting killed? Really? It's just berry syrup and ham-acting. 
Ahhh, but it was. As the bacchanal reached a crescendo, the people began to clutch their chests as their very hearts exploded! 
Even Sheogorath knows it's not safe here. Probably afraid of the buildings falling in on him. 
I'll continue to study the problem. Come by tomorrow if you like. I may think of something else. 
I'll assume you're back for more work, because I don't see a big need to chat with you. 
All right, I admit it. I took it from her. I... I don't know what I was thinking, honestly. 
Hello, Sister. Can I help you with something? 
If I don't find something soon, I'm going to have to try my luck at adventuring. My pals say there's a lot of caves and ruins west towards Skingrad. 
Perhaps we can convince someone else in Crucible to tell us a bit more about his recent activities. That might loosen his tongue. 
I'm afraid I have no idea what you're talking about. 
If you're looking for a staff, that's the place to go. 
Change your mind? 
I'd steer clear of any newcomers. 
Stranger, you chose a bad day to take up with the cause of the Septims. 
Later, then. 
There were others, sir. But they refused to stay put. We tried to convince them it was dangerous, but they left anyway. I guess they didn't make it. 
Hello, fellow Speaker. Welcome to the Black Hand. So nice to see you're in one piece. 
The pirates have been moving a lot of cargo onboard lately. You may be able to smuggle yourself onboard in one of the packing crates.   
Every day is like being born. So new and so alive! 
You are not a member of the society. Watch if you must, but don't get in the way. 
No, my anger lies with the rest of my children. You see, I have known of Mathieu Bellamont's intentions since he was just a boy.           
I'm not saying I couldn't do a better job, but at least someone is in charge who can get things done. 
Shadow hide you. 
I hear our gold soldier paid her debt, but the hard hand also kept her family sword and armor. 
I like it here. People are very friendly. Much nicer than in the Imperial City. 
Attacks in Passwall? Invaders roaming the lands? You see, this is what happens when leadership is lax. 
Amusei sends his regards. 
It's a pretty town, and everyone is really friendly, except maybe some Khajiit and Argonians who are upset about the Trans-Niben. 
Do you think Sheogorath died? I know He's missing. I want to see His corpse if He's dead. 
You're back! Have a seat and tell me everything. 
Most of the time, they lounge around the tavern drinking and making up stories of epic battles with impossible odds that they won. 
My friend! 
Perhaps you can help me. My husband's name is Bjalfi the Contemptible. My father said I was a fool to marry him, but I didn't listen. 
What if there was another way? What if he thought I was dead, but I wasn't. Then he'd tell you the location of the gold! What did he need as proof? 
You dare challenge the power of Oblivion? 
Stop! You violated the law. Since you lack the funds to pay the court, you must serve out your sentence. Your stolen goods are now forfeit.  
What that poor girl sees in him I'll never know. Atraena pays for their room, their food, everything. She's quite wealthy, I believe.                 
A new Gatekeeper is in the Fringe now. That's good. Fewer adventurers means more creatures for me to hunt. 
What do you want? Is it time for torture? Hah! Do your worst. 
The armies of Sheogorath are renewed. Let them march now on the horrible cats! Wipe them from the Isles! 
Fine. You made your point. Contact me when you have the items, and we'll meet again. 
I wouldn't recommend it, sir. You don't want to put yourselves in the middle of a goblin war. 
It's so difficult to be here and watch him not knowing how much he may be suffering. 
Gods. I don't even notice any more. I guess you can get used to anything. 
Oh, please. 
It would be a privilege, Arch-Mage. 
Hundreds of years ago, this very building once served as a temple in Cyrodiil that sought to "cure" the mad.  
We celebrate him with the Ritual of Accession... the path to Maniac Bliss. 
Only those who break the law. 
Yaaaa! 
Go with Akatosh. 
They say there are a bunch of people holed up in Summitmist Manor. Locked in. Some kind of weird party or something. 
If you need more training, you'd better head to Bravil and track down Andragil. She taught me a few things I didn't know. 
As much as I like you, friend, I'm just not willing to part with that staff. It's nothing personal. 
After we exchanged words, I followed them out to a farmhouse. Inside, they asked me to remove my clothes and items. 
Why? Why would you light the Great Torch for Dementia? 
I've told you, I don't know anything. You can't prove a thing! 
I've stood right next to you, and you didn't even know it. I cried out to you "Here I am! It's me, Corvus!" but you just looked at me, confused. 
3, 4... I sure don't like my double. 5, 6... She doesn't count right. 
I'm going to need you to find Maglir again. The little fetcher. 
I see you've accepted the contract from Vicente. Very good. With every life you take, Sithis grows stronger, and the Brotherhood flourishes. 
I'm Mogens Wind-Shifter. I'm having a look around. You mind? 
I heard him tell the joke. I understood it. It just wasn't funny. 
As a vampire you must feed regularly. The longer you go without blood, the stronger you will become, but there are dramatic adverse effects as well. 
Jobs? We're thieves, not masons or scribes. 
The Dividing Line is a good place to buy a sharp blade. Of course, you're likely to hear some of Tun-Zeeus' stories if you hang around. 
It seems like they've been here forever, and now this? 
Your reputation precedes you, Hero of Kvatch! You have done my city a great service by closing the Oblivion Gate. 
Good to see you again, sir. Martin was worried, but I knew you would bring back the Amulet of Kings for him. 
Thank you for closing the Oblivion Gate that was threatening Bravil. I will send my guard captain, Viera Lerus, to Bruma's aid. 
Grave robber! 
My favorite customer! Whaddrya got? 
I'm hoping you'll do better with this one than your last one. That really wasn't good. 
Has the Council gone mad, sending you here alone? 
I can hear the bones talking. 
Never mind. I'll find someone else to help me with my research. 
Let's go! 
I don't like that Danus Artellian. He's a bit stuck-up for my tastes. 
Come, then. Try your luck. Feel the bite of Umbra. 
Have you ever heard Alga tell her tales? 
When S'drassa isn't teaching alchemy, he spends all of his time researching a cure for skooma addiction. 
A Light Raiment, huh? You sure? I figured you for the Heavy Raiment type. You know, hide behind a skin of steel? Hmph. Okay then, here. 
He loves the place. I've also heard he's quite an accomplished alchemist. 
Sorry, no time to talk! I have copies of the Black Horse Courier to deliver! Here's one of the latest! The Imperial Legion commander's been murdered! 
What are you doing? Trying to turn me against her? What's the matter, trying to cover your tracks?  
I like him a lot. He has a great sense of humor. 
Incredible, we've been trying to solve this for months. A job well done. 
Werewolves? Where? Wolves? Men that are wolves? Many wolves. Everywhere. Many men. That is enough for M'aiq. 
I think poor Primo was tricked, just like the rest of us. If we're not careful we'll end up dead too. You mark my words. 
I don't understand it. Some ridiculous male thing, I suppose. He's been bothering Ardaline every day for a while now. 
Well, there's one man who seems to care: Garrus Darelliun, the second in command of the guard. I hear he isn't happy with Ulrich. 
There's fifty gold pieces in it for you, friend... right then. Off you go. 
So hungry! Aggghhh! 
The Dark Brotherhood is not in the business of staging deaths, no matter how much gold is offered. Sithis demands blood, and blood must be paid. 
You again, huh? Look, I told you, if you want to challenge the Gray Prince that's your right. But don't say I didn't warn you.  
Last I heard he was in the slums by the north end of the docks, overseeing the operation. 
Please just follow me. 
Hmmm... I suppose there's always room for fresh meat. Of course, we like our meat to be clean -- good reputation, not wanted by the law. You in? 
We must go. 
By the Nine Divines, you're an ugly one. And female, no less. But then, all Orcs are ugly. The most repulsive race in all of Tamriel, really. 
Be glad to. Here, let me have your map and I'll mark the spot for you. 
The Madgod graces us! 
Dark and deep! 
Hooray! 
So many strange noises here. People screaming, animals dying. But I've learned so much... so much. 
Another adventurer is trying to get into the Shivering Isles. If it's a Breton, it'll be the first one in 3.7 years. 
Over here! 
You're a real friend of the working stiff, you know that? Maybe I'll see you there tonight, and we can drink to your generosity. 
I just don't know. Is the medicine sustaining Roderick's life, or just postponing his death? How can he survive for so long with a fever so high? 
Have you found it? Have you brought back the Stone of St. Alessia? 
Prior Dreth met with the Fanatics to turn them away. They did not see the wisdom of his words. 
In Harcane Grove is a quarry worthy of the chase. First named, last tamed, the unicorn runs wild there. 
The more people that drop dead, the more annoying Matilde becomes. She keeps watching over me like some kind of worried grandmother.  
That was my job. They said it was in Fallen Rock Cave. You ever been in there? Didn't think so. I'm not going back. Not for that kind of money. 
A blade. Fantastic! Let us take the fight to these vile creatures. 
Arch-Mage Traven lives there, in the tower. It's a fabulous place - you really should see it some day. I've been there many times myself. 
Well, go on, press one. They won't bite you. At least, I think they won't. 
Have you met Modryn Oreyn? Quiet man, but apparently he's an incredible fighter. 
What is it, Silencer? 
You know, sometimes I get thirsty during the night shift. Duck out to the Tiber Septim for a quick drink. 
Bless you! There's none in this town, but you could try the Imperial City. 
Okay, what do you need translated? 
Your Speaker should look for this person in the city of Sentinel, in the Redguard homeland of Hammerfell. 
Actually, I'm not much of a healer. I can blow the meat off you, but I'm not much good at sticking it back on. 
Surrounded by traitors and spies, I am. Always, always. They watch and wait, eager to slip a knife into my spine when I'm not looking. 
You would dare to approach the King of Worms? 
Raminus Polus will want to speak with you. I must say, you will be a credit to the guild. Arch-Mage Traven will be lucky to have you there. 
I will be happy to describe each chamber and explain the event that unfolds as we proceed through Xedilian. 
All that had come before - meaningless. Pointless frivolity. 
I'm overjoyed to hear that you were able to cleanse the manor. Well done my friend, well done! 
You remind me of a character from a book I'm reading. 
Not that I think anything will go wrong. Serious side effects are highly unlikely. 
He failed, of course. His body's around here somewhere. But he got in a pretty good hit. If I don't get some rest I'm probably dead anyway. 
Yes, you understand now. 
Show me the proof. 
Hello again! 
Ulf the Bleaker settled here before Rayno Dalvilu and his family arrived. But the families have long lived together in peace. 
To think, all of those items on Thoronir's shelves were only recently buried. Such blasphemy. 
I can taste it already! Sweet, sweet Skooma.  
Then you are wasting my time. 
And, if you can keep this our little secret, I can make it worth your while. There's a bit about acrobatics I can teach you. Give it some thought. 
The Resonator is active once again? Perhaps it will draw the disease from my body. 
A new ruler for Mania? Great. They don't have the same cat problems we have in Dementia. 
I'm ready. 
Do you want me to stay back, or stay up nearer to the door? 
Do try to use your power sparingly. I have duties to which I must attend. Rather more important than shepherding you around, I'm sure. 
If you don't mind, I have things to do. Would you leave now, please? 
You have completed your task, and so your privileges in the guild will be restored. 
Don't screw this one, though. After the dust settles, look for S'razirr in the Tiber Septim Inn in the Imperial City. Full payment is expected. 
Marc Gulitte knows more about how to cast a fireball than anyone in Anvil. I try to stay on his good side. 
Ours is not the only Dark Brotherhood Sanctuary. There are others, hidden throughout Cyrodiil, each one overseen by a Speaker of the Black Hand.   
While the Dragonfires burned, the divine barriers kept the daedra from making more than fleeting visits to our world. 
Looks like we've got a thief in our midst! 
If only I had seen it sooner. My beloved Syl might stand here next to me. 
I've created versions of each appendage, with various enhancements. You must choose one of each. I am attached to them all. Artist's prerogative. 
Wait. I know who you must be. You're the one who killed Raven and Ruma. They told me about you, when I was still in their father's favor... 
You got her back in one piece? Good work! I've always liked that girl. May have to look her up sometime. Here's your payment. 
This fortress is well-supplied with arms and armor. Use what you need from the armory in the east wing. 
Vampire! Unclean beast! Die! 
I am honored to assist Lord Sheogorath's emissary. 
An escaped prisoner! I'll separate your head from your shoulders! 
Chorrol breathes easier thanks to you. We are all in your debt. 
The poor woman's rather upset. Someone of her bearing isn't accustomed to the horror of murder. 
I... I don't understand. You're the only one left. Why weren't you killed? No... no... it can't be...  
Though I must say, I doubt it will do you much good in the end. You'd be surprised how easily they forget about the little people. 
Enchanting city. A real eye-full. Just walk and gawk. Stroll along the Greenway and around the Palace. 
At the time, it was believed there was no reason to inform you, since it was not crucial to the task you were given. 
Brother? Wow... hope he's got a wine cellar! 
Didier Aumilie, ship's clerk. At present, I'm spending my time and gold on the pleasures of the Gold Coast. 
I have no idea where he'd be. Just find him, and make him tell you the truth. I swear, he's a liar! 
Well, well! What a turn of events this is! It's new, and I like new, even if it's bad. And this is bad, isn't it? My, my. 
Someone told me that Hieronymus Lex is gone. Reassigned to Anvil. That can't be true! 
Our own Duke, aligned with the forces of Order? An infuriating thought! 
Stay back! We mustn't be seen! 
A bad day? A bad day? Try a miserable existence! 
You are not worthy. 
Hey! You aren't one of us! 
Congratulations on creating the Gatekeeper, Your Grace. 
Here. You'll need this key for the last door into the sewers. 
You will answer for that with your blood, mortal! 
The Lord Hermaeus has set you on a new path. Follow it and return to him. 
I know you must have many questions... speak with Farwil and he'll answer them for you. 
[SIGH] 
Erina Jeranus isn't the most social inkeeper in the world, but she runs a good, clean house. 
There is no need to speak of that place. It is a bad place. 
But you must hurry! I'm afraid of what might happen if the daedra are able to get a foothold here. 
But it is gone. Gone, gone, gone. No more singing. No more ringing. Taken from Big-Head, never returned. 
Uravasa Othrelas has a way with words. I wish she could teach me how to speak that well. 
I hope you enjoy it. I can't seem to taste anything these days. 
My good friends, a most jubilant time is once again at hand. The Flame of the Maniacs burns bright, and we must celebrate! 
Here. Take this. The reward you have earned. Quickly now. It's best if no one knows you wear this. 
Ah... New Sheoth. My home away from places that aren't my home. The current location is much better than some of the prior ones. Don't you think? 
We're all on edge, and for good reason. But we can't give in to panic. Let's deal with this together, as the Blades always have. 
Now is a time for sleep. How I wish I could go with you! 
You already bought the manor, and I have nothing more to say about it. 
You honor us with your presence. 
Calm yourself, Thadon. You're making my teeth itch. You still hold your office. I suggest you see to your duties. 
I... I wanted to get to know him. Be his friend. Maybe... maybe more. I can't believe he's gone.   
Hmmph. 
About time. 
Hmm. 
He's young, rich and handsome. Basically the complete opposite of you. 
How could you stand sharing a cell with that imbecile? 
Good. Find out where he's keeping the taxes and bring them to me. I'll also need the tax records of what each citizen paid so we can return it. 
The girl hasn't seemed herself lately. I have no idea what's wrong, but something's really bothering her. 
He can help us. He must help us. 
Her Gatekeeper is flawed! Her tears hurt him!  
Magic items are no good without a charge. 
You don't really need to do anything else. The Cracked Wood tribe will stop attacking Timberscar Cave once they figure out the head is gone. 
Impossible! 
That's been the state of things since the Blackwood Company began moving in. 
You are unlike any other mortal I have encountered. You serve me, and then you spurn the reward for your service. 
Take care venturing into the ruined city of Vitharn. 
But she is never to set foot in Chorrol again. Congratulations on a job well done. 
I believe he's working at the West Weald Inn, over in Skingrad. I think Erina tries to keep him out of sight. 
I can't believe the Gatekeeper is gone. He kept out all those other men. 
Still here, stranger? You're not actually renting a room, are you? 
Are you staying for a while, or simply just passing through? 
Oh, I wouldn't say that. How long is an eon, when you're ten thousand feet tall? Or if you're purple? It's all relative, you see. 
To reactivate Xedilian for my Lord's pleasure, you'll need to find three Focus Crystals and return them to their resting place. 
Pleasure and pain, my lady. 
Don't be shy. I'm really very approachable. You wanted an autograph, is that it? 
A wealthy gentleman in the Talos Plaza district named Umbacano collects Ayleid artifacts. Perhaps he has use for someone like you. 
You are indeed...a bastard. 
Shamans have wicked magics... drains, paralyze... bad stuff. Stand off and shoot or spell shamans down if you can. 
*Gasp!* Listener! How may I serve you? 
Thadon has too many enemies that may turn that knowledge against him. He depends on me quite dearly. 
Speak with Oleta, at the Chapel of Akatosh in Kvatch. She will be able to train you further. 
There are seven of us here, including myself. 
Weebam-Na won't take me to Fisherman's Rock. 
He's one of your Fighters Guild brothers, but he's defaulted on a contract. We can't allow that. Makes us all look bad. 
Then we can at last rest. I feared had he somehow bested you, I'd be next.  It is fortunate that your skills exceeded his. 
Let's drink to the health of the new Gatekeeper! 
I've been meaning to speak with you. 
Arden-Sul preserve us! The Fringe has been destroyed! 
We'll talk later. Meet me at my house after dark. 
Avoid the noxious Elytra, its stinger filled with bane. One dose of this in your blood and your life begins to wane. 
How sad. The Argonian was a poor thing. Let her go. 
Order's victory is inevitable. 
I was trying to tell her how I feel.... again... and she wouldn't even stop to talk to me. I just got so angry! 
No. We'll pick him up on the way out. He must fend for himself. 
I'm the chapel healer, Gureryne Selvilo. We're glad to see you paying your respects here at the chapel. 
There is one path from the Savage Garden. I guard that path. In return for your service, I offer you the key to that path. 
I think they've lived in the wild for too long. 
Let's do business. 
Greetings and salutations. 
Two years ago I made a fool out of him when he tried to arrest me. Lex has never forgotten it. 
I wonder...  now that the Gatekeeper is dead, perhaps my fame will finally spread far beyond the Shivering Isles! 
I hope you find the room to your liking. 
Knock, knock. Who's there? Not Sheogorath. 
The Emperor and his three sons, dead, right under the noses of the Imperial Guard. It's a disgrace. 
For Uriel Septim! 
I've heard they drain the health and magicka from a body. 
Sithis is Master! All hail the Dread Father! 
Fresh game. 
Adrienne may read too much, but you should see the Summon spell she taught Vigge. He might teach you, if you're skilled enough. 
The Flame of Agnon can only be lit by the immortal servants of Sheogorath: the Golden Saints and Dark Seducers of His creation. 
I'm not going to the top deck until it's safe. 
We must get to the Temple! Drive them back! 
Oh, have you heard? About old Baenlin? It was a horrible accident. A stuffed minotaur head fell off the wall and crushed him to death! Tragic... 
I'm not surprised you were found the way you were. I imagine those men have built up a tolerance to the stuff. 
Oh, my poor little rats! 
In return, the Society has decided not to press charges. His name will be absconded from the records of this crime. 
You would seek to better yourself? First, I would ask that you look to the poor and the suffering around Cyrodiil. 
Come see me when you've spoken to Jeanne. 
All right, then. There's an Argonian named Weebam-Na in town. Go get him for me. 
I don't think that Gilgondrin really wants to run Silverhome-on-the-Water. He never seems happy when he's there. 
I beg of you... kill the Master... destroy this place... 
I never had time to properly thank you for your help back in the Imperial City. I wouldn't have made it back here if it weren't for you. 
I can... rest? Truly? 
It's the captain's enchanted cutlass. I managed to grab it when I was in his cabin, before his spirit chased me out! Oh, thank you so very much!  
And if you find out anything about what happened to Vidkun, let me know, will you? 
Fine, then best be on your way. 
She's a disgrace to our whole city. Poor Olfand. 
And "confiscate" her notebook. She carries it wherever she goes, recording all our secret thoughts. I need that book! My thoughts belong to me! 
You look skilled in Alteration. Maybe you can teach me something. 
Okay, so you killed the Breton. Don't get a big head. Here's your payout. 
She'd always been fair with a sword, but she began looking for fights. Became bloodthirsty. Then started calling herself Umbra, after the sword. 
My Lord! 
Please, I don't think he's ever coming back, and I'd hate to lose such a precious heirloom to a gang of thugs. 
I trust that the stipend Tolgan gave you whetted your appetite? 
One man's trash soon becomes another man's trash, I suppose. 
See, when they swing at you sidearm, you twist your wrist like this... exactly! You're a natural at this. Let me show you another one... 
All sources indicate that you will fail. It is a certainty. However, I also predict that this will not stop you from trying. 
Their fate is in your hands. Choose Mania or Dementia. Either way, they aren't getting out of Xedilian. 
Hail. 
There are whispers in the halls of the Sanctuary. Some say there is a traitor among us. That the Brotherhood has been... compromised. 
It would seem that direct torture may not always yield the results you seek. You may need to try a different approach, Inquisitor. 
I once saw Lucien deal with an insubordinate Brother, someone who had broken the Tenets. It took me a week to get the blood off my boots. 
What can Lord Farwil do for you? 
The Iron Maiden, huh? I like it! Yeah, that'll do nicely. All right, it's time to see if you're crazy good or just plain crazy.  
I am in the Dark Brotherhood. 
You spoke to the Emperor before he died? And he told you to find me? 
I have another message from the Gray Fox. 
Rumor has it the Nerevarine has left Morrowind on an expedition to Akavir, and has not been heard from since. 
A pleasure to make your acquaintance. I'm Athragar of the Mages Guild. How can I serve you? 
They are a key part of the ceremony for restoring fallen comrades. 
Now, what do you say? 
Foul-smelling ape... 
Seeing you again is like a blessing from the Night Mother herself! 
You're back. Good. You have important duties to attend to. 
Oh, I don't think so. As much as I enjoy helping those less fortunate than I, I just can't bring myself to do it. 
Good evening, sister. 
Now that this is all over, I feel like celebrating. Care to take a number? 
You wear the trappings, but you are not the Madgod! 
Then you know why I want it back! Can you imagine trying to eat Felldew without it? Disastrous! Curse that woman! 
Excellent. Now listen closely. Nestled in the mountains to the west lies Fort Sutch. It is the home of the warlord Roderick and his mercenaries. 
Oh, how horrible! You know Caelia Draconis? That nice Watch officer stationed at the castle? She's been murdered! 
... and Dawn's Beauty, the Princedom of Lorkhan... misnamed 'Tamriel' by deluded mortals. 
Well, that's just my opinion. 
Did you hear that the Earl of Imbel's house was robbed? 
They started appearing a few nights ago. Odd, flickering lights. In the morning, there was nothing to see. But they were there at night. 
You'll know you're done when they lie dead on the ground, or they are out of their minds. 
Armies restored or not, I will not let an enemy of the Maniacs set foot in the Sacellum. 
He's disappeared. 
You! What do you want? If you're looking for something to drink, I can't help you. It's mine. It's all mine. It's the only thing I have... 
It's about time someone got here. What took you so long? 
I can't stop thinking about... about the Emperor. We failed. We failed because we got complacent. We got arrogant. Now the Empire's paying the price. 
This makes for grim reading. The Mythic Dawn did not take long to locate Martin again. 
I've heard that Hil the Tall knows a lot about Alteration, how to cast shields and that sort of thing. 
She takes all the complaints, but nothing ever seems to happen. 
That's it. That's what you want, isn't it? Now leave me alone! 
Please, you must help me find them! If I don't have them for the next batch of my Famous Potato Bread, I don't know what I'll do! 
Hello! You must be from the Fighters Guild. I'm glad you're here. I need your help to repay a debt. 
You, too. 
Apparently, she was wanted in Skyrim for murder. Shot a man dead from over 300 yards. Hard to believe. 
I bet you hear this all the time, but thanks for closing that Oblivion Gate! We were all so worried. 
Do you like parties? Because you've been invited to one. Of course, you'll be killing all the other guests. Are you ready to attend? 
Etira, she's the one that found them old books. Learned the runes, how to speak to them again. But they want blood, she says, or they'll not help us. 
Ah! You must be the Arcane University's newest addition! This humble Battlemage bids you welcome! 
The Torch is relit. Wonderful. Just makes it a bit tougher to sneak around. 
A new ruler in Bliss? It doesn't concern me. 
Back so soon, and glowing with success, I see! 
Kvatch? Kvatch was just the beginning! Those damned Gates have opened up everywhere! Cheydinhal, Chorrol, Leyawiin -- no city is safe.  
With the Greymarch ended, I need to devote some serious study to the obelisks. They have proven more interesting than I had thought. 
Well, that was humbling. 
Thadon must be back on the Felldew... he's never tried the skooma though. Say, you got any skooma you can spare, friend? 
If you do a little something for me, I'll help you. How does that sound? 
I thank you again for speaking with me, my lord. I'll leave you alone now. I know you're very busy. Until next time. 
What brings you to me this day? 
Move outta' my way. 
Is there a tougher person to get a deal from than Palonirya? 
Yuck. Look at all the blood and gore. I'm getting out of here. 
Have you ever spoken with Nahsi about hand-to-hand combat? 
That's good to know. You can never be too careful. 
I just don't know what to think anymore, or who to trust. Neville seems like such a decent man, but how can I know for sure? 
They imprisoned Dylora somewhere within Pinnacle Rock. If they killed her, she could return to us, so they keep her hostage. 
What do you have? 
Three of the afternoon watch, and all's well. The way I like it, sir.  
I'm sure Erline is very upset. She'll be safe though; Raynil has confirmed with us that she isn't infected. 
I know that skill with a shield can be invaluable. I don't think I want to join the Fighters Guild to learn, though. 
Ah, you must be from the Fighters Guild. Excellent! I'm looking forward to our investigation. Fascinating subject, these Daedra. 
Hail, Cyrus. 
I have heard things are bad in Vvardenfell. The Telvanni do their best to close the gates, but it is to no avail. 
Let me handle this. 
No, you'll never get to swim again, Argonian. But don't worry, you'll be dead soon enough. That's right. You're going to die in here! 
This is no joke, Antus, and it's nothing to be excited about. 
We all love Count Marius, and his father before him... Arkay bless his soul... such a fine young man... 
He's still around. I've seen him skulking like the filthy cat he is. 
How goes it, friend? Keeping the killers and cutpurses at bay? 
You've already talked to me if you see this. Also, you should see generic greetings about 50% of the time instead of this greeting. 
Take that you sack of rotting meat! 
Oh, Azura, no! It's Primo! He's the only one left! He killed them... killed them all! We have to protect ourselves! We have to kill him first!    
The Captain is still holding the barricade? I figured I was the last one left alive. 
I don't know what Arch-Mage Traven has against Necromancy, but the first thing he did after taking over the Mages Guild was to ban its practice. 
Sithis will feast on your soul! 
This is kind of exciting, don't you think? 
Timothee LaRouche, late of the Black Dog, able seaman. I'll be staying ashore 'til my stash runs out, then it's off to sea once more. 
The new Duke is really taking charge of things. Maybe there is hope for the Realm. 
First a theft, and now a murder. Your crimes are escalating. You have one final chance. Go out and collect the horns of twenty minotaurs. 
You've confessed to attempting to kill me, I understand. The penalty for this treachery is death, and is to be carried out immediately. 
The Rose of Sithis! Such an honor! Just make sure your marksmanship is up to the task. If you miss the target, the enchantment will be wasted. 
Thanks for the help, I suppose. Although you seem to be doing your best to get me killed. 
They sometimes need folks to work in the castle. Most are afraid to go up there though. Try asking the butler, Shum gro-Yarug. 
You've done it! This letter will spell his undoing when I present it to Count Indarys. Splendid work, splendid work indeed! 
Is it necessary that you speak with ME? 
Thanks for your help closing that Gate. Don't worry, we can handle anything else they throw at us. 
Something is just a bit off about Glarthir. Someone needs to keep an eye on him. 
Like I said... meet me in two hours at the Cheydinhal Bridge Inn. 
Prisoner! Get over by the window, now! 
I'll do anything to suck down some sweet Skooma. Anything. You got some? 
Who is to say? There are always choices to be made. The Realm of Madness is no different in that regard. Your choices are your own. 
Congratulations! 
You must not release him, for pity's sake! 
You wish an escort, Lord? 
You don't say. 
You may continue to do your worst, Inquisitor, but unless you have some evidence of this preposterous conspiracy, you'll get nothing from me. 
We arrested that miscreant. The stupid lizard tried to blackmail the Countess. I wouldn't waste much time thinking about him any more. 
Get outta here! We don't need you around. 
Oh... very well. If you change your mind, I'll be around. 
Quite satisfactory. 
Please! I've got to get to work. If I don't... who knows what those ogres will do to me! 
Remember, secrecy is our greatest ally. We of the Black Hand avoid direct communication whenever possible.                                            
Remarkable. 
I can tell you that while she stays out of the public eye these days, she does still hold audience in her court during the day. 
Just as long as we don't catch any of their diseases. Adventurers always get strange diseases. 
You are summoned by the Lord Hermaeus Mora. He sees your path as he sees all things. Make your way to his shrine. 
Back again? You still want to help my good-for-nothing husband? 
I've never used his services. I mean, how many people have enchanted things just lying around? Outside of the guild, of course. 
And not a word of this to the Guildmaster! Go find him. He'll be in the Donton house, most likely. And bring him back in one piece! 
I have no doubt that Matilde is capable of murder. But what about you? You're as much suspect in my eyes as she is. 
I've heard he's a talented mage. 
Refined frost salts sounds like something that Julienne would specialize in. You may want to go back to the University and speak to her. 
Well, they're all taken care of now. I can't believe we lost Elidor and Brag. Head back to gro-Khash. He won't be happy, but these things happen. 
When... When Hides-His-Heart gets here, I'll put on a little act. You'll cut me with your poison knife, and that idiot will think I'm dead! Okay? 
Before we continue, you should speak to Raminus Polus about your advancement within the guild. 
The world could come crashing down around us any day now. Never know what might save your hide, so I've got a bit of everything. 
There's trouble ahead. 
Greetings, Goldbrand. 
I don't know what she does in there; frankly, I don't want to know. However, I do know that after she arrived, the woods at night became unsafe. 
There's been trouble with smugglers and Khajiit bandits in the Trans-Niben, but Marius Caro is taking steps to deal with the problem. 
Then you'll be eager to be on your way. I won't keep you.... 
It must be exhausting messing up the way you do. Nice work. 
Ha ha ha ha ha! Yes! Yes! The Black Hand has sanctioned the Rose of Sithis. It is an enchanted arrow that will kill Phillida... instantly! 
Have you heard about why Hil the Tall joined the priesthood? 
Her room should be easy to find. It's the only one upstairs that has a door. Just one more privilege she doesn't deserve. 
Let me know when you have something for me. Not much time left, I'm afraid. Not much time at all. 
Show me your stuff. 
You've come this far with us; will you go further? If we're truly going to succeed, I'll need much more of your help. 
Those Golden Saint and Dark Seducer men are dreamy aren't they? Glad to have them back. 
I'm very disappointed at the decision you've made. 
Has that mouth of yours stopped flapping? Good. 
I could have sworn I saw him outside in the daylight before. Unless he just got that disease very recently, I'd say they were mistaken. 
I wish there were children here. Scrumptious, darling children. I haven't eaten in so long. Ravel will tell me what to do. You, too. 
The Nine say each of us is special, but that's just a lie. I don't mind, but it just sounds stupid. 
By the gods, what do you want? 
I am Mara's Primate, Chana Mona. I  take care of the Chapel's affairs in Bravil Parish, and speak for Mara in the Council of the Nine. 
You need to get the Mysterium Xarxes from the Mythic Dawn's Shrine of Dagon. It is our only hope to retrieve the Amulet of Kings. 
Keep in mind that Anya is cowardly, and may require persuasion to tell you what she knows.  
I feel I can truly share with you, without fear. 
If you have anything else to sell, I'd gladly consider an offer. 
Odd. A cabin is an unusual hideout for a vampire. They prefer dank caves and the like. Much darker and no need to block out windows. 
I'm Agarmir. And I'm a very busy man. Are you just fishing around, or do you have business with me? 
Take care of Lelles. He needs the help. 
Maybe you could do me a favor? If you speak with her, put in a good word for me, would you? I would be forever in your debt. 
Why do wizards write books? Because they're good at spelling! Ahahaha! 
Why should I help defend Vitharn? Isn't that was the soldiers are paid to do? 
That is good. Go to Skingrad. The trail starts there. 
A Chalice for Thadon! I like chalices. And mugs. And steins. Cups are good, too. 
Well, you do get around, don't you? You've seen a good bit of what the world has to offer, which is more than can be said for most people. 
It is good the people wear clothing. M'aiq wears clothing. Who would want to see M'aiq naked? Sick, sick people. Very sad. 
Oh, go on! Leave me then! 
It's all starting to make sense now. Primo didn't need the money. He has more than any of us. Enough, in fact, to give away an entire chest of gold! 
Skaleel might have a book that would be useful, but she's been sulking over the way Irlav's been treating her. Perhaps you could ask her for it? 
No question about it. And Seed-Neeus is an excellent proprietor. 
I'd lay odds that the war between the two tribes is because of a stolen Tribal Head. No other reason for a war to go on this long. 
The women in the gang picked married men to seduce for just that reason. It was decided the only way to stop this gang was to send in a stranger. 
Selene no longer holds the Bloated Float. Once we get to the Imperial City, I intend to make sure she is prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law. 
Aureals! We attack through the Underdeep! The Mazken will be destroyed before they awake to their danger. Follow me! 
Release! Sweet Release! After all these years, these decades, I am finally free! And you! So... so fresh! I must feed! I must feed! Agghhhhh! 
Lord Sheogorath, up off his throne and slumming it with us little folk, eh? Well, it's good to see you. What can I possibly do for you, My Lord? 
In these difficult times, we must count on persons such as you to secure our borders from bandits and rabble-rousers. 
Don't you have something to find? 
Hello there. Have you reconsidered my offer? 
Opposites repel, strangely enough. All that pleasure and pain locked away now, as if it never happened. 
I'm afraid we aren't very wealthy, but here is all I can offer you at this time. Please, visit us again soon. 
You just couldn't wait, could you? So impatient... 
Have you come to cheer me up? I'm worried about Lord Sheogorath. Are you worried, you little darling?  
The Five Tenets are as follows:  
I saw Rena Bruiant talking to her dogs the other day. I think she thinks they understand her. 
Feel free to browse, friend. It's nice to see a new shopper. I was afraid I lost any hope of new business ever since Thoronir opened up. 
The prophecies are vague on this point. Cross check it. 
I've heard that Gnarl get stronger when hit by some spells. 
Countess Carvain's collection of Akaviri Artifacts is known far and wide as one of the most complete. It's unsurpassed even by museum standards. 
Yes... you might do. 
That's Ysabel Andronicus, crabby old woman who sits over there. She's dear to me, so if you wrong her in any way, I'll rip your damn liver out. 
For nearly a hundred years I hunted in secret, until the Dark Brotherhood found me. Now I have a family that accepts and even values my unique gifts. 
You get any closer and I'll turn your bones to ash. Back off. 
The guild lost a good number of members when Traven banned the practice of Necromancy, but some of us stayed behind. 
Please! Stop! Ahhieayah! 
The manor is finally cleansed. 
Well, she does seem genuinely upset that someone's been killed. Not that I'm ruling her out as a suspect, mind you.   
You've done well. Because of your efforts, you have achieved the rank of Swordsman of the Fighters Guild. 
Uzul gro-Grulam. I'm courting Myvryna Arano, so stay away from her. I got matrimony on my mind. 
I'll have you arrested if you don't leave! Now! 
Daedra Lords demand offerings and services. If you won't do as you're told, just forget about it. 
Your name shall be revered and your deeds placed into song to be performed by the greatest bards for generations to come. Congratulations! 
You should check his room in the living quarters. If you see the note, or anything else unusual, let me know. I'll gladly send it to the Council. 
I'm so hungry. 
After a while, I decided to go into the dining area just off the Great Hall. 
Hello there. Hmm... you might do nicely. Are you interested in some work? I have a small task that needs accomplishing. You may be up to it. 
Go now, dear family member, and may the Night Mother wrap you in her cold, loving embrace. 
Watch for them. 
Too much. Too much. 
Back for more work, are you? Good. Some of our boys are causing trouble in Leyawiin. Looks bad for the guild.  
Lady Narina Carvain, Countess Bruma. Welcome. You'll excuse me if I keep this brief, but affairs of the county await me. 
It's a quaint building, small but tidy. 
Hey... 
Be wary, I fear that her escape may be a ruse to lure you into an ambush. 
Looking to lighten your load, but fill up your coin purse? 
This doesn't concern you, prisoner. 
I'll take that, and thank you very much. 
How many J'zidzos does it take to light a torch? One, dammit! And I'm tired of the other one. Terrible straight man. 
Well. 
Over time they soak in magical energies from the world around them. Like you suck blood from a cut. 
Take that you bastard! 
He might appear. Because it's raining. He loves the rain. Because it's wet. Or because it's rainy. Not so sure. 
You don't think he would dig up another... oh no, he wouldn't. But I guess he has been. Oh my. What have I done? 
His will is His own; His reality follows suit. You are here because you chose to enter; you were not summoned. 
Good to see you, sir. We won't forget how you helped Anvil. 
What treachery? The traitor still lives! It is Mathieu Bellamont! Do not let him harm the Night Mother! Kill him! 
This is most disturbing. We can only hope this madness is over soon. 
I've been looking for one of those to replace the one I used to have on display. At least I think I did. I truly wish I could afford to buy it... 
The Tiber Septim Hotel is a nice place. It's not cheap, though. 
And to think I trusted you! 
Seven of the morning watch, and all's well. Top of the morning to you, sir.  
I can hardly believe you're standing here in front of me! The Listener herself! This is such an honor! 
I will not accept your accusations without evidence. 
I'll take my chances in prison rather than fight you. Someday I'll get out and the weasel that turned me in will pay! 
I never thought I would have a chance to redeem myself, waiting helplessly here in eternity. 
Who is the fairest of them all? Other than myself? The proprietor of the Grey Mare is lovely. She and the guard captain would be a nice couple.... 
Be careful... 
Survive, and you will be rewarded. Fail, and your soul belongs to me. 
You're trespassing! Leave now, or I call the guards! 
Isn't Ida Vlinorman an agile one? 
Perhaps only the Princes themselves know why it is so. I do not. I know only that Sheogorath wishes for you to succeed. Of this, I am certain. 
You've got the gem? 
Now... with the daedra invading our world, Kvatch in ruins, the Emperor and his sons assassinated... anything seems possible. 
What can I do for you today? 
Have to watch for those Scalons. I hear they carry disease. 
I can't stop to talk now. I've got to go meet my brother! 
There are two good locations to hide; one near here, and one closer to the door. Where do you want me to wait? 
Do you know where Sheogorath keeps his armies? In his sleevies! Ah hahaha! 
He is the Prince of Madness. The ruler of the Shivering Isles.  
Show me to them. 
How can I assist you, Champion? 
It's about time someone restores some order around here. 
Once you have the disease for several days, rest and let the effects take hold. And please, be careful. Good luck. 
Ah, Azura's Star .. as beautiful as all the tales tell. 
I've heard the same. Still, best to just avoid them. 
Good hunting, Hide-Wearer. 
The Enemy has won, and we are destroyed. 
Ask? ASK? I don't ask. I tell. This is My Realm, remember? My creation, My place, My rules. 
Ah, most excellent! Here is what you must do. Simply go to sleep here in the Sanctuary, at any time, and I will visit you as you slumber. 
Oh, the misery of being me. Someone end me! And be quick about it, please! 
Do you know Davide Surilie? Yes, of the famous Surilie Vineyards. Pillar of the community, et cetera. Who would ever suspect him? 
It appears to be a source of power for these invaders. A... portal, or some sort of gate. I don't know. 
Have you recovered the book yet? 
I'm not surprised, with the way she handles a bow. 
Thank you for visiting me. 
When you visit a Wayshrine of Zenithar, and you've lived a good life by the Nine, you may receive a Blessing of Luck. 
I knew he was the ringleader of the whole conspiracy! You may have helped save my life! 
How did you get it? Do you know his whereabouts? Why are you showing it to me? 
Hey, got any apples? Or carrots? Anything at all crunchy and yummy to eat? 
I knew it! I knew a man like Bittneld wouldn't be interested in those other women!  
You did the right thing showing us that note. My brother and I will take care of him, don't worry. 
Be warned though. While you wear the helm, it is as if you are one of us. You are trapped in these ruins until you lift our curse. 
Be careful. I don't know what dangers may lurk in the Great Forest. 
We're being stalked, like animals in the forest. I'm still not sure if the killer is one of the other guests, or is hiding somewhere in the house. 
The sacred stones! You've desecrated them with your touch. You're on the list for sure now. 
Thank you for sparing me. 
Anyway, have fun looking around, and when you are ready to buy, give me a shout. 
The Sisters of Gottlesfont gather Steel Blue Entoloma and Lady's Mantle Leaves. Take what you need, and you're welcome to gather mushrooms nearby. 
Then why are we speaking? We have nothing to discuss unless you bring me that book. Now go away. 
Warmest welcomes to you. I am Telaendril, Wood Elf and loyal daughter of Sithis. I hope you find our Sanctuary to your liking. 
The Dark Brotherhood? Oh, you have been a naughty boy, Motierre, haven't you? Stand aside, assassin! Motierre is mine! My employers demand it! 
Why would one want to swing a staff? A mace hurts more. Or a sword. Can't shoot a fireball from a sword, though. 
Ha! Those will be the last words that leave your lips! 
Oh my! Are you an adventurer? 
Welcome to Newlands Lodge, the best place to drink in Cheydinhal. Not counting the Chapel... haha. I'm Dervera Romalen. 
I believe Mankar Camoran used it to create his Paradise. It should give us the means to open a gate there ourselves. I will continue studying it. 
You spoiled everything, you idiot! 
What is it, sir? 
This is worse than I thought. 
Emperors have been assassinated before, but this time... I don't know. It's different. Can't you feel it? A shadow has fallen across all of Tamriel. 
Fight like you mean it! 
Ah... a hammer. Well, it seems you don't have one. However I see that you have a longsword.... 
Hail, good citizen! How can I be of service? 
While that infernal Oblivion Gate still stands, I don't dare leave the camp undefended. Are you willing to try and close it? 
I've heard there are a number of diseases they carry. 
Hello, Associate. If you need anything, just let me know. 
They're all fake! Just come with me now! 
We shall celebrate our love tonight, my darling. 
I'm so full. Not the least bit hungry. 
And stay away from us Manics! You kill any of us by accident, you won't be getting anything from me. 
Greetings, Wizard. 
Hold on. There's a dinner party here tonight, and no one gets in the room until it's prepared. 
I fear that whilst out rock-picking, she was apprehensive. Stolen away! My suspension is that ogres have abjected her!  
You've returned! So, have you been to Crowhaven? Have you... What's this? The Journal of Lord Lovidicus? My friend, you've done it! 
Akatosh bless you and keep you. 
None too soon. We have lived too long as the playthings of the Madgod. 
Fine. You know what's wrong. How about you go and fix it? NOW!!! 
I have no time for guild recruits that are useless in the field. This will be an excellent way for you to prove yourself. 
It is best not to make Lord Sheogorath wait. His whims are fleeting, and should He decide you are no longer necessary, it would be to your detriment. 
When I receive word that Savilla's Stone is missing, I will be here waiting for you. 
She's the best bard I've ever met. Of course, being a bard is almost as bad as being a pilgrim. There's no future in it. 
If those Knights come back to Passwall, we'll be ready for 'em. 
I welcome you, Your Grace. 
I have an arrest warrant for the Gray Fox. Do you know where he is? 
I've also heard that they become weak to the type of spell that hits them. 
Free Anaxes and restore order to the Garden, and you shall have the Bands of the Chosen. 
Excellent. Here, take a look at this sketch. The ancient texts refer to this site only as "The High Fane." Do you know it? 
Look, you may be a scamp's ass, but I'm offering you the chance to be the hero of Passwall. 
What other choice did I have? We were too exposed, standing around outside the door. I lost one of my men already, and I wasn't willing to lose more. 
Once they've seen how it's done, they should be able to handle any new gates on their own. 
The prey approaches. 
So, I assume you've dealt with Maglir. Tell me about why he defaulted on his contract. 
We saw the smoke from the Gold Road while out on patrol. How can we help? 
May luck be always on your side. 
Very well. If there's anything else I can do for you, let me know. 
One last time. 
I can't wait to be back in Skingrad, safe and sound. 
All honor to the Hide and the Wearer. 
It's good to know we've got such a strong Fighters Guild presence here in town. 
I joined for the parties. And stayed for the parties. Why would I go back to work? That life is for suckers and fools. 
I believe I read that some time ago. I'll have to give it another read. 
Have you seen my horse? I can't leave her here! 
Six cloves, just like I asked for. Very good. 
The Inn lies north of Anvil. Speak with Arielle Jurard when you arrive. She will give you further instructions. 
No. You didn't know. It was my fault. But now you know everything. And you helped me, and I won't forget. 
He runs Lelles' Quality "Mercandise." Ha! Not a bad sort. You can usually find him in his store. 
I heard the Gray Fox personally humiliated Lex years ago when he tried to arrest Armand Christophe for theft. Lex has never forgotten it. 
You need to go now. 
You're at the end of a long road, Hero. This is the last time you'll face off against the Yellow Team before being named Champion. 
May the bones of your enemies be warm with blood, Lord. 
I'll sell you equipment, but only because Ocheeva is making me. This family doesn't need any... outsiders. 
Please, return the helm here before any harm comes to it, or those who are using it. 
It was a good idea, wasn't it? I wonder how long she'll spend trying to figure out where she put it down. 
Oh dear me, are those old stories still going around? 
Thalfin's in charge. She's been waiting for you. 
The smith, alchemist, and general trader are centrally located inside the north walls. 
What, you don't think Neville is the killer, do you? That's absurd! He's a gentleman and a retired soldier, not a murderer! 
Shall I open the portal to Paradise? Are you ready? 
Those Odiil boys ought to know better. Leave troubles like that to the town guard. That's what they're paid for.  
Good deeds and moral fiber. Bah! 
Are you talking to me? Don't. 
I wish we had a Resonator of something-or-other. We're certainly not safe as it is. 
While I do not know for quite what purpose he has arrived, I believe the Guild of Mages is in great danger. Mannimarco has returned. 
If Emer Dareloth had not stolen Nocturnal's Cowl, the Thieves Guild would never have fallen on such hard times. 
Clever. You've summoned me again. My Lord has made quite a choice for his champion. 
Ugak has some good horses to sell. I sometimes can't tell her from her sister, though. 
Well, well, if it isn't the Crimson Blade! How's our new Grand Champion, huh? You ready to make me some money? Ha ha ha ha ha!  Ahem...  
I'm Azzan, head of the Anvil Fighters Guild chapter, and Advanced Blunt Weapons trainer. 
Now, I have business to attend to. Run along. Perhaps I'll be looking for you again.... 
I'll stay here to guard the Emperor's body, and make sure no one follows you. You'd better get moving. May Talos guide you. 
You are brave. Or suicidal. Approach then, and make an offering. Boethia demands a daedra's heart. 
The Watch can't touch me. I'm careful, private-like. Don't like people following me. Sure, it makes people nervous, seeing me sneak around. Too bad. 
Go. Tell Garrus what I've done. I've nothing to hide. 
Darkness may be upon us all, but the people of the Empire -- my Empire -- are worth fighting for! I just wanted you to know... I won't let you down. 
Maybe the Fighters Guild will recover from its troubles. And maybe not. 
Hello again, citizen. 
Oh, how could anyone have a problem with me? Come now! 
Look at you wag your tail! You're happy Jyggalag is gone too, aren't you? Yes you are! Yes you are! 
What chance do we have without Oreyn? Poor Vilena is completely useless. I don't see how we survive this. 
Training? Goodness me, I'm retired! I'm afraid combat doesn't interest me any more. All that matters to me now is Malene. 
Sorry. I'm looking for someone with a bit more renown. If you become suddenly famous,  I would be glad to reconsider. 
Good that things are settled. We can get back to work. 
What a bother. Don't be too long about it. I gotta stay with you so there isn't any funny business. 
It is a minor situation, to be sure, but neither I nor my guards can become directly involved. 
It was truly shocking. The guards just dropped dead, all across the city! I'm glad it's over, but it makes you wonder, doesn't it? 
I must make my way to The Fringe and capture its destruction on canvas. We can't let history be forgotten. 
Ah, one of you again, eh? You Dark Brotherhood types are all the same. All sneak and no swing! You'll meet the same fate as the others! En garde! 
Another fine day in Mania, is it not? 
You've done us a great service, stranger. We're all grateful. 
Don't you find Fathis Aren's skill in Conjuration impressive? 
We will catch her, and will turn her over ourselves. Her treachery cannot be allowed to stand. 
No problem. I'll see to it. 
Well, aren't you just the cutest little thing! 
I feel safer now that the Resonator of Judgment has been restored. I was beginning to worry. 
Get out of here. 
Just perform the task you've been given. We'll talk more once you're done. 
With Thadon dead and Syl gone, there's only one Duke left in the city. 
I was no equal to Seridur. He knocked me down in one quick movement. As I lost consciousness, I saw him laugh and then run away. 
I'd like you to have this keepsake. My father gave it to me when I was but a lad. I think you should have it. 
Back again so soon I see. 
No ... that was the dream. I am awake now. I must fulfill my oath to the Emperor before I can finally rest. 
It's your own fault. You had two chances to help them. I'm sure they'll get used to being invisible eventually. 
Something seems... amiss with you, milady. 
Wait! I must speak! Halt! Cease! Desist! 
You and I have even met before, when I was not wearing the cowl. To your clouded memory he and I are two different people. 
Cicero, Sergius, and Tertullian run a good shop. 
I'm Carmana Sintav. Cyronin is my husband. Excuse him, please. He's a little irritable. 
The Resonator works by drawing adventurers to itself with a sort of magical "siren's call". 
What is your desire? 
I've shopped with Tilse many times. 
The livestock are dead! Dead! The second sign! Look to the skies! Look to the skies! 
He must realize he'll be ruling Cheydinhal one day. That's a responsibility I aim to make him ready for. 
Do keep in mind that some Elytra will not consider you a threat while you are feeling the effects of Felldew Euphoria. 
You should get this about 1/4 the time, too. The best way to test this is the click about 10 times and just jot down on notebook what you get. 
I'm glad you're here. We wouldn't have a chance otherwise. What's our next move? 
You can find him roaming the County Hall of the castle most of the time. 
Are you a gruff little dog, are you? Well, come curl up here by my feet then. 
So, I have your rapt attention. Splendid. Now listen closely. On the Green Road to the north of Bravil lies the Inn of Ill Omen. 
Grab the Sigil Stone and let's get out of here! 
Cylarne shall be ours. 
What do you want, you... you... rat? 
You did WHAT? 
Were you followed? 
If you want training from me, you're going to have to get something for me first. 
Go ahead, do what you will. Nothing matters now. 
Bringer of Light, bless these wretches that they may see the path to your glory. 
I think you still need to do some exploring before you're ready to learn more. Discover a few new places on your own, then come see me. 
Help me get past Dagon and into the Temple of the One! I'll do the rest! 
I'd love a hammer. Too bad you don't have one! 
You've got it. I'll have the two Minotaurs brought out to the Arena. Now get up there and give the people what they paid for!  
When they attacked, I ran from Passwall. They didn't say a word, they just started killing! The screams! By the staff, you can't imagine the screams! 
No offense to you or your friend, of course. Last I heard, they were holed up in Hrota Cave, not too far from here. 
If perhaps you can clear up a small matter involving Earana, you can prove your loyalty to the guild and earn my recommendation. 
I don't mean to sound like a ghoul, but with two people murdered and Dovesi obviously upset, this may be my chance to get close to her.  
You do, however. I believe the key he used for the well should also work on his quarters. 
You're certainly a cute little thing aren't you? Did you fly a long way? You did? Come here and perch on my shoulder for awhile. 
I don't like the look of you. Keep moving. 
Okay. If I see you reach for a weapon, I'm calling it off. And if you can actually hurt me, I'll tell you to stop. 
Skinned hounds are by far the most nasty dogs around. The best place for these poison-loving pups is six feet underground. 
The Gatekeeper's return can only mean one thing... time to begin a new painting of him. 
Want to hear a Khajiit joke? 
Looking for anything to purchase today? 
So, what brings you here today? 
Hurry, get that key... it's our only way out. 
If we had some sort of reference, something to compare them to, we might be able to decipher them. But we lack anything like that. 
The explosions are scaring the sheep or "A plague of rats ate all our crops." Every day another complaint! 
Horrid beasts. I hate the things. 
Cirroc is a good healer. He's a Redguard, but you'd think he was a Nord, the way he acts. 
Mannimarco will have what he seeks, but it will be his undoing at your hands. 
Are you well? 
Hahaha! Knights of the Thorn! 
It's a might devoid of furnishings, so you may want to pay a visit to Gundalas at Best Goods and Guarantees. He can fix you up. 
Quaint, isn't it? Passwall sits in the Fringe of the Shivering Isles. It's where the supplicants wait while the Blessing of Sheogorath takes hold. 
The Inquisitor now has significant evidence pointing towards Muurine. Perhaps a talk with her is in order. 
If only we could speak more often. 
Can't thank you enough for your help. What do you need? 
However, what comes next is now unclear. If you wish to confront what is to come, I shall create the Staff for you. 
My aim will be true. 
You seek wisdom from me, child? Ah, no. You seek words. 
He hasn't shown up here in a while. I assumed he was still out at Bleak Flats Cave, where he usually stays. 
I'm keeping Vitharn's weapons and armor safe from thieves and miscreants. 
You want more training? Then you'll have to go to the best. Marana Rian, here in the Imperial City. She can help you better than I. 
And who in Shinji's name might you be? Look, if you're a spectator, go upstairs and talk to the Gatekeeper. This ain't no damned peep show. 
Well, the list of suspects is certainly getting smaller. I didn't think the swine had it in him, but now I'm not so sure.    
Enchanted to meet you. Delmar, Enchanter Extraordinaire to the Mages Guild! At your service. Got some enchanting in mind? 
Welcome home. 
It will draw its power from the waters of the Font of Madness in the Palace.  
I'll never serve you! 
I will soon earn the Master's favor and be granted entry into the Forbidden Grotto. 
Tenet 2: Never betray the Dark Brotherhood or its secrets. To do so is to invoke the Wrath of Sithis. 
Apparently it only exists at the bottom of Knotty Bramble... ah well. So close, yet so far. 
Welcome, child, to the Guild of Mages. You shall be called Associate by all. 
Thadon, how dare you interrupt me! Only I interrupt me. Like just then. 
Perhaps when you've finished your slaughtering and washed the blood off your hands, we can chat again. 
It seems his horse lost its footing in the heavy rain we had that night and the shipment of port that it was carrying slipped to the ground. 
I want him there guarding those Gates. If any of Jyggalag's forces show up, he should be ready for them. 
Darkfathom Cave awaits you. 
You have been found guilty of breaking guild rules, and have been suspended. Should you wish to clear your name, speak with Raminus Polus at once. 
Very well, then. You leave me no choice... 
Look! More Aureals join the battle! Now we shall drive them back! 
You're to accompany him, and make sure he succeeds. He needs some time in the field, to get his confidence up, or he'll never become a good warrior. 
Those are dangerous skills for a novice. I hope he trains people well. 
Pfft! I ain't afraid of no one. Courage is my middle name! I... Oh, nevermind. 
Running Crucible must take a lot of energy. I'd rather just sit here. No reason to do anything else. 
Praise Arkay, and all her little woodland creatures! I'm Hil the Tall, Priest of Arkay.  
I wish I could help. I understand the need to help defend the heir to the throne. It is a duty we all share. 
I'm Felas Sarandas. Don't breathe on me. 
My neighbors grumble a lot, but what can they do? No law against practicing my skills. 
I presumed it was only a matter of time before you'd be expelled. Once again, I am proven correct. 
I'm the cook of Riverside, Rogmesh gra-Coblug. I don't get paid to chat, if you don't mind. 
These are troubling signs. 
If you want to learn about heavy armor, Varnado is the one to talk to. 
You should really get to a healer. You're looking rather pale. 
Don't give the enemy a chance to recover from their defeat. 
My friend, I am truly worried! Neville was a strong and capable man, a soldier of twenty years! The rest of us will be easy prey for the killer now! 
I have recently become interested in obtaining the complete set of these ancient statues. I believe that ten still exist. 
Your Grace! I am sorry, I did not realize... 
Have you ever spoken to Ganredhel about dog training? 
My scales grow cold whenever you approach. 
I've sent Captain Lerus to Bruma. She is one of my best soldiers. I'm glad to be able to help defend the heir to the throne. 
Nothing! I knew it! Azani Blackheart isn't here, alive or dead. 
A valiant effort, Dark Elf, but take comfort. Your spirit is mine. 
Safe travels. 
I go now to complete my duty to my lord Tiber Septim. Free my brothers, and together we may be able to lift the Underking's curse. Farewell! 
I'm Rimalus Bruiant. Perhaps you've met my wife, Rena? And our dogs, Bailey and Kezu? 
We've been hard at work. Caranya is very determined. You should go talk to her. 
Wish I knew what happened. He had a contract for a local mage in Bravil. Didn't seem like a particularly difficult assignment. 
You may join us for morning prayers in the chapel. 
Doesn't look like you have it yet. Let me know when you do. 
Khajiit has no words for you. 
Welcome to the Oak and Crosier. This one is Talasma, your hostess. Our rooms and food are at your disposal. 
What? Who are you to come into my home, to speak to me like a petulant child? Do you know who I am? Do you have any idea what you're dealing with? 
I wouldn't be caught dead at Sickly Bernice's... though I imagine her customers might. 
Excellent! Another vampire has been slain. Here's your reward. 
It's a fight to the death, so if you progress that far and want a shot at the Grand Championship, you'll have to try and kill me.   
Excuse me. I stay to myself. I have always found the wrong sort of friends. Now I do without. 
May the Lady guide your steps. 
If you were to know of its whereabouts, I trust that you would bring it to me immediately. 
Threatened? Who threatened you, my dear? 
That would be me. I am so glad you are here to save me from the vampire! 
The guards seemed to know about Raynil, and after a search of the house, the body of some beggar was found stashed in our basement. 
According to Miss Herrick, Ma'zaddha has been pressuring her. He would be our next target, if you will. 
The Dark Brotherhood must seek out a Wood Elf named Urunil. He has need of our services, and we are only too happy to oblige. 
So both the recruits got back alive, at least. I haven't heard the report. 
I know he's a retired soldier. But not just a soldier -- he was an officer in the Imperial Legion. I hate the Legion and everything it stands for.  
I don't have time to deal with adventurers entering the Isles, I have a painting to finish! 
Neville is a trained killer! That fascist pig killed those people, I just know it!   
He lives in the Talos Plaza district of the Imperial City. He's the one who has Ardaline's staff now. 
I don't know. What could we have done to deserve this? 
He's a good man, but Council matters have distracted him lately, and he's been neglecting his other work. 
I shall never forget the talk we had. Your very presence in the Sanctuary is a blessing from the Dread Father himself! 
Stop, criminal! I've heard of you. Your criminal exploits are well-known. Pay the fine or serve your sentence. Your stolen goods are forfeit. 
All I can tell you is that the best place to start is at The Flowing Bowl. It's a tavern located outside the city walls near the waterfront. 
Have you ever talked to Marz at the chapel? She seems sad to me. 
They call me 'Wilhelm the Worm,' because dirt suits me fine. Town lets me live in the warehouse to keep out the rats. 
No matter what happens, you must know... You must all know, that I am eternally grateful for the service you Blades have provided.  
Can I help you, Pickpocket? 
Well, isn't that sweet of you? 
Halt, scofflaw! You can't afford to pay reparations for your crimes, so it's off to the dungeon for you. Your stolen goods are now forfeit.  
You should have stayed hidden. Now you will taste my Lord's power. 
Come with me to the Chapel of Talos. I wish to speak with your lord. 
1, 2, 3. Hi, I'm Jastira Nanus... 4, 5, 6... As you can see, 7, 8, 9, 10... I'm a little busy counting at the moment... 11, 12, 13. 
Then stop wasting my time. 
Any time now. 
Have you provided the soldiers with aid? We have little in the way of supplies here. No healing. No restoration.  
Prompt attention to this matter will be rewarded. 
After I shape them into the Staff, you must take it to the seat of power in the Shivering Isles -- the Palace of Sheogorath. 
Well, hello stranger. 
I now intend to put your talents to a more direct test. I have a difficult task that you can, perhaps, assist with. 
Rasheda does a good job keeping Fire and Steel stocked with good weapons. Maybe not the best in Tamriel, but good. 
You're not supposed to be in here... 
They say books aren't all Sontaire will sell, but I'm not one to kiss and tell. 
My great-great-great grandfather, K'Sharra, foretold of a time when we would receive three signs from the gods, signalling the end of the world. 
Xeddefen is the goal, Your Grace. We will hold the town as long as we can. 
Have pity sir. I gots nothin' ta eat. 
Optimism! How adorable! I love it! Even at the end, you make me laugh. I'm lying. That wasn't funny at all. 
Yes, my love. I am ready to begin another day anew with you. That's all I need. 
I pity the poor Khajiit that tries to steal dog food from Ushnar. 
He's Captain of the Chorrol Guard. During the day, you can usually find him on patrol with us around the city. 
You'd think he was Saint Nerevar the way they talk about him. 
Farewell, citizen. 
The Blades are sworn to the service of the Emperor, as the mortal representative of the Dragon Blood of the divine Talos. 
Gods' blood! 
He guards the Gates of Madness. Don't get too close to him. He'll kill you, and it will leave a mess in my town. 
What of it? Varon hasn't sent you, has he? I've told him several times now that I simply can't just give it back to him. 
This prisoner, why give him a chance to escape, or fight back? Pierce his heart with an arrow, right through the bars of the cell. Quick and easy.  
I killed a pirate once. Of course the ship was out to sea at the time. Somewhere between Vvardenfell and Solstheim. Now those were the days.  
The Mazken no longer defile holy Cylarne, thanks to you. 
If you find a special Fork to Big-Head you should go. He isn't the sharpest blade in the drawer; you have more smarts within your toe. 
Using your gift service was the smartest thing I've ever done. My children are spread across Cyrodiil, and it's so hard to shop for them all! 
How do you plan on entering this man's house? Through the front door? Be smart and look for a more inconspicuous way in, like a cellar entrance. 
He's around here somewhere. Has been for days. No trouble, really. 
Welcome! Welcome to the family! I'd hug you, but Ocheeva told me not to. 
It was kind of you to escort the Jemanes back to Weatherleah. However, the original owner of Weatherleah left them an even greater legacy. 
Go up there now. The Gatekeeper is about to turn some adventurers into bones. I'll collect those later. 
Well done, hunter! Hieronymus Lex will no longer be a thorn in the paw of the Thieves Guild. The Gray Fox shows his gratitude. 
Have a fine journey, and keep yourself safe. 
Your Grace, you have committed a crime. Only the Lord Sheogorath is above the laws of this Realm. 
There's some strange Dark Elf in town, asking about Reynald Jemane and his brother. 
I'll let you live this time, cur! 
The Imperial City just wouldn't be the same without it. Maybe, some day, if you know the right people, you might get a chance to see it. 
You should know, that in addition to the adulation of the people of Bliss, there is also a more... earthly reward. 
But it is clear that Mankar Camoran will soon bring all his power to bear against Bruma. I will warn the Countess of the danger. 
Daedra Lords, sure. They exist. They do things. Bad things, mostly, but things you can see. The gods? They don't do a damn thing. 
I've been gathering things for quite a while, but there are still a few I'm missing. Perhaps you'd bring them to me? 
Umbra shall feed! 
Don't play games with me. This isn't the time for it. 
Dirt, dirt, dirt, dirt, dirt. Everywhere dirt. 
Hold there! Stop fighting! I surrender! I'll give you the carving! 
Good that we have a healer in town. Cirroc can fix most anything that ails you. After all these years, he almost seems like a Nord himself. 
I maintain a close watch on her. She fears that Sheogorath no longer favors her presence and wants her replaced. 
Shouldn't you be feeding the prisoners, slop drudge? 
Few know that the Hero who lights the Torch for Dementia is granted the Ring of Intrigue, a boon for those who would gain access to hidden knowledge. 
I suppose I have a moment. What is it? 
Fimmion sad. Want sweetroll. No pants for you. Fimmion hungry. 
There are more around. Look in the houses. 
Another mortal come to do my bidding. I only wish suffering and death. You will bring me both. I want to see a man brought to the edge. And pushed. 
Why are you still here? You're supposed to go speak with my father! 
You're supposed to be helping out the folks at Harlun's Watch. What's the status? 
What do you mean, gone? 
Hafid has a nice inn. I wonder if he doesn't drink away most of his profits, though. 
Really? He's really dead?! Thank you, thank you, thank you! I'm free, I'm finally FREE! 
Say, do you think you could help us? We need to get the goblins off our land so we can start building our new settlement. 
You know, I haven't seen him around for a while. But I'm still getting paid, so what do I care? 
Such a benefactor! I'll be sure to mention your generosity to all my other patrons. 
I'm not sure it even exists. He'll never stop looking, though. 
The guild is a wonderful resource for those interested in magic. Talk to Falcar if you wish to join, or any other local guild leader. 
Ah. S'krivva hears of you. Welcome, and well-fare in your craft and trade. 
Goodbye. Please, come again. 
Thank you. You're truly kind to help someone you've just met. The only thing standing in our way are the painted trolls. 
Excellent work. I believe this will be of use to the Council. I shall make sure they're made aware of its contents. 
Excellent work, my friend. May the manor give you many years of happiness. I'm now off to the Imperial City once more. Farewell! 
You're right. It's shameful. Still, what is anyone supposed to do? It's her life. 
My master, Umbacano, is known across Cyrodiil as a collector of Ayleid antiquities. He is always interested in rare artifacts from that era. 
Why, Sister? Why? 
This Chalice of Reversal sounds like a horrid device. Who would want to spend their time under the effects of some... chemical? 
If you head to Colovian Traders, Gunder can provide all sorts of great furnishings for your new home. Good luck! 
I hope those Knights of Order stay away from my garden. I'd hate to have to start all over again. 
Only the Chosen will survive the Cleansing. 
You'll have to forgive me... I seem to have misplaced something. Hmm. Yes, well, let's nevermind that. 
Victory! 
I must save my Beloved! 
Hmmm. You may be just what we've been looking for. 
Wrath? I told him to guard the wheel and not talk to anybody. Who are you? 
You will pose as a traveling merchant, and will spend a night at the Inn, which is north of Anvil. After that, continue east along the road. 
I haven't needed anything there in a while. I'm sure I will soon, though. 
Uungor, he say no crazy. But he is. He say he going. Away. Far. Your friend sleep there when Uungor goes. But Fimmion no think Uungor really leave. 
Led by a young upstart named Carahil, the Mages Guild stormed Benirus Manor and slew Lorgren. However, amid the chaos, his body vanished. 
Instead, he is dead, at your hand. And Sheogorath's command! 
Songs of forks follow you. 
By the way, I heard that Faelian was killed. You didn't know him, did you? 
What is it, citizen? 
Sithis be with you, Brother. 
Yes, Sister? What can old Gogron do for you? 
Let the soldiers fight the Fanatics. I have better things to do. 
Rosentia sent word ahead that she has you to thank for freeing her of those accursed little beasts. 
The name of the book is "Necromancer's Moon." I'm unclear on the origins of the text, but it does involve these gems you're interested in. 
They imprisoned Staada somewhere within Brellach. If they killed her, she could return to us through the Wellspring, so they keep her hostage. 
Beautiful gems, they are. They can be found all over the Shivering Isles in treasure chests and the like. 
Good evening, milady. 
So, you've brought something for me to examine? 
You shouldn't have come after us! 
All he wants to do is please his father. I've known him since he was a lad, and fighting to defend Cheydinhal is in his heart. 
I really do loathe talking to you. 
I've heard the Count of Cheydinhal knows about this Sanctuary. But he is offered much gold, as well as other... incentives, to keep his mouth shut.  
None of the other cities have sent aid. Bruma stands alone. 
Greetings, Argonian. 
I'm captain of the Castle Guard, and Dion is captain of the town guard. It's simple. I don't care what goes on in town... that's Dion's problem. 
I heard she was put in charge of the Leyawiin guild hall as a favor, not because she deserved it. That doesn't seem right, does it? 
She hasn't been focused on her work recently. It's annoying, frankly. 
Can't give you any better directions, unfortunately. Traveled mostly at night with a guide, and didn't see much on the way. 
We may be in the Choosy Beggar, but here you can eat like a king. 
If you are truly the hero of destiny, as I hope, the Garden will not hold you for long. 
Have you ever shopped at The Main Ingredient? 
Well? Have you made up your mind? The tension is almost palpable. 
No one defeats Grommok! No one! 
The damn "Order" insisted we get you into the picture. I think after I'm done with Roland, Gilen and Grey-Throat will have to be dealt with. 
Various naturally occurring minerals and crystals, like glass and ebony, glow in the dark by their own light -- without being magical. 
Sorry, sorry, sorry. Got to get cooking. I'm the cooking sister. I'm Shomara. The cooking sister. 
Approach, Duchess of Mania. The time is near and I am fading... 
She's very dedicated. We would be lucky to have more people like her around. 
Approach, Duke of Mania. The time is near and I am fading... 
No touching the locks. 
We have much to discuss, but if you have time, I'd beg you stay a moment longer and hear about our home, Weatherleah. 
Well, to be honest, I don't think we have much of a team in the Cheydinhal guildhall. We lack leadership, and individually, we aren't very skilled. 
I cannot spare any soldiers as long as Chorrol remains under threat from the Oblivion Gate outside our walls. 
A brilliant idea! Oreyn only sends his best these days. Tell you what. You go find us some paying work, and we'll happily go about it. 
A contract for you? I think I've got something that suits your experience. Arvena Thelas has some problem with rats in her house. 
If you wait around long enough, I'm sure they'll show up. 
You can see the marks on the ground where they were, with the Great Gate right in the middle. 
When did all this happen? 
Our goal is the Castle gate. We should be able to use this door to get out to the plaza in front of the Castle gatehouse. 
Defend the Palace! 
Who is Umbra? I can tell you who Umbra used to be. Lenwin. She's my apprentice. Or at least she was, until she found that sword. 
Althel brought us the news of the invaders. I ran to the wall to see for myself. That's where I danced for the rain. 
I ran into some goblins in the woods not long ago. Nasty little beasts. 
I only provide work for less skillful thieves. If you take their jobs, what will they do for a living? 
She can drink all she wants as long as she keeps doing such fine work. 
Good work. Good times! Here's a little reward for your efforts. One of my toys. Now, back to business. Before I forget myself. 
Damn the Tenets! I'll cleave you in two if you don't get out of my face! 
You are not one of us. 
So once again you have choices; to sneak or to kill. Be cautious, these Saints are some of his most elite. 
Someone should put Hirrus Clutumnus out of his misery. 
Keep far from the Grummite with skin a greenish-jet. If your paths should accidentally cross, don't ever get it wet. 
Something you need? So many things to need. 
You say you've found it, but you no longer have it? What madness is this? Please, you must return it to us immediately! 
I hear them all. Sometimes. But not right now. They're all quiet. Did you frighten them away? 
What's a Gladiator without an Arena to fight in? So get up there and start cracking some skulls! Besides, one more fight and you advance again. 
He's an obnoxious drunkard, I know, but I'm not sure if I see him as the murdering type.   
If the Wellspring can be restored, your allies can return to aid you. 
Until we meet again. 
It seems Summerset Isle has become a much more dangerous place. 
Come with me. I have a few things here that I keep for visiting Blades agents. Help yourself to whatever you need. 
I keep a few things here in my chest to resupply traveling Blades. Help yourself to whatever you need. 
The Chalice of Reversal is back in Thadon's hands, I hear. Wonder if it could be used as a blunt weapon. 
I don't know what it was, but something important was taken away from Mannimarco. Maybe there is a chance he can be defeated. 
If they all ring at the same time, that may shatter the crystals that have polluted the Wellspring. 
I'm Phebe Jeanard, a charity sister of Gottlesfont Priory. Are you looking for alchemical ingredients? 
Talos preserve us! 
It was kind of you to accept such a noble task. 
We can't talk here. Too public. Meet me behind the Great Chapel at midnight. Don't let anyone follow you. I'll make it worth your while. 
At this point, Count Indarys is offering a reward for the recovery of his son from inside the gate... or confirmed news of his demise. 
I wouldn't mind making a few bets, but I'm not sure about Graklak. He seems a bit slick to me. 
Sweet! 
You should be taking care of this, shouldn't you? 
I'm just glad to know you came out of it all unscathed. Not that I doubted your abilities, but you know me. I worry.  
It means "Magicka Darkens." Considering the other inscription, it could be translated to mean "Magicka wanes," along with "Magicka waxes." 
I've nothing more to say to you. 
Speak with me again when you have made up your mind. The anticipation is almost too much to bear. 
I'm Mog gra-Mogakh, proprietor of Two Sisters Lodge. My sister and I own the place... 'Two Sisters', see? Need a bed? Good food? 
Now I can teach you properly. 
My duties are primarily... administrative. They keep me busy here in the Leyawiin barracks. 
When he gets there, we make him take off all his clothes, which is very easy by the way. While they're helpless, that's when we spring the trap. 
I can't teach you anything more. You'll need to train with the best, and the best I know of is Helvius Cecia. If you can get him to agree to it... 
Go inside and talk to Petrine if you want to buy a horse. I can't help you. 
Well, well. This is quite a surprise. I thought you were Traven's lapdog, doing whatever he said, and yet here you are. 
Welcome to Xedilian, I'm the dungeon caretaker, Kiliban Nyrandil. 
Congratulations! You have returned with the diary. 
I guess we won't be going back to High Rock after all. Cropsford is going to be our home now, for better or worse. 
I don't know how you did it, but I thank you. Now, we must wake from this dream and take our places in the real world again. Farewell. 
Once a week, place a single ingredient in the chest. After twenty-four hours, you'll find a sizable quantity of the ingredient available for use. 
Go speak with Sheogorath now. 
Step back, plague bearer. 
I told her she was crazy, but she insisted. Women have a way of getting men to do what they want. So we did it. We ambushed the shipment. 
As I said, I'll need you to stop these thieves from breaking into my store. It only seems to happen at night. 
My Lord, what is mine is yours. 
Not much farther. 
She is not well. I hope her amulet can be found soon. 
Ranarr-Jo is in need of a hero, but I'm not certain you are to be that one. First, you must earn his trust. 
I don't know... first the emperor and his sons murdered, now this... yet I fear that the worst is still to come. 
The Dark Brotherhood must seek out a High Elf named Alwaen. She has need of our services, and we are only too happy to oblige. 
Knowledge is the key to success in any endeavor. 
Training? From me? Ha ha, you must be joking! 
Can't go into battle with broken equipment. 
I need to get to the Temple of the One. It's our only chance to stop Mehrunes Dagon. 
You have pleased Molag Bal. Blessed is the one who spreads the seeds of dissent. 
I'll just take that dagger back from you. It should have more than enough blood for my needs. 
I'd buy my weapons at Cutter's. She has... a way with blades. 
It's too bad nobody stopped Glarthir before he went on his killing spree. I guess no one knew how crazy he really was. 
I've heard that Mirabelle spends a lot of time with the sailors. A lot of personal time with them. 
Oh, a Ring of Desiccation! That's one of my... well, was one of my favorite Oddities. If I had the money, I'd buy it off you right now. 
The body on the bed isn't Syl, but merely an impersonator. The real Syl uses many such decoys to throw would-be killers off her trail. 
Oh! You startled me! 
We scrape by, not that we've ever had nought but trouble from outsiders like you.  You'd best be moving on, if you know what's good for you. 
I heard Thadon is dead. Nothing wrong with that. 
I wish we had more real soldiers. 
You've seen the Spire in Passwall. It is believed to be a monument from times past but its true purpose appears to be more sinister. 
When Garridan realized his quest was a failure, and he wouldn't be able to return and save the farmers, he began to shed some tears. 
I'm hoping you bring me good news. 
Alive and kicking, are you? Welcome back. 
I myself have been here for some time, hoping to find out what's going on. No luck yet, though. 
Last night I... I heard screaming coming from the Abandoned House! Do you think it's haunted, like they say? 
What about her? She's a Dark Elf, and that's bad enough. I may even like her less than you, if that's possible.    
Remember, come to me for all your crafting needs. 
Stranger's in town. 
You! Prisoner! Stand aside. Over by the window. Stay out of the way, and you won't get hurt. 
The stench of fresh blood in the air is thick. 
Make haste! The Sanctuary must be Purified, if this treachery is to be undone! 
Crazy as a rat in a catbox. Just leave him alone. He's not hurting anybody. 
Reputedly the crown worn by the last king of the Ayleids. It deserves to be part of my collection. 
Your stars are not mine. Today the Lady shall fortify you in your quest for glory. 
If you think you've got what it takes, go talk to Owyn, the Blademaster. You'll find him in the Bloodworks, day and night. 
Join the Guild. You won't regret it. 
You'll have to do better than that, you ashen-faced god-cursed product of a Daedra's bowels. 
What is it, Arch-Mage? 
I'm surprised Itius. I didn't think even you would stoop to arresting a fellow Captain. 
What the... ? 
See? Was that hard? 
So, it's to be five against one, is it? The odds are against you. With any luck, you'll be dead within an hour. 
Die, pretender! 
Aryarie. Your friendly Guild Alchemist. Satisfaction guaranteed. No free samples. 
All right, dearie, I understand. If you change your mind, just let me know. 
Place the Dermis Membrane into the cistern. 
I'll send your bloody soul straight to Sovngarde! 
While you were gone, I sent a messenger to Chancellor Ocato. He waits for us in the Imperial City. 
I've won the competition! My membership into the guild is assured. 
New people in the Isles usually means trouble. 
So, what are your first orders, Guildmaster? 
Lord Sheogorath. I'll bet your palace is always neat and tidy. 
Farewell, my friend. Our fate is in your hands. Bring back the Amulet of Kings. 
The Chapel is cast down, and the faithful... my friends... all dead. 
This time, I'll beat him. I can't stand losing. And I don't mind cheating. 
I don't know, My Lord. She only said it was a matter of the gravest import to the security of the Realm. 
You have returned with all the components? Excellent. All that remains is to choose the body parts. 
The Count of Skingrad and I are not social intimates. In fact, I don't believe Janus Hassildor has any social intimates. 
Your Grace has noted the chimes around the Wellspring, I assume. If one chime is insufficient, perhaps all four chimes may be enough. 
Fellmoor can still use your assistance, assuming you can find time in your schedule. 
It is my honor to welcome you into our ranks as a Knight Sister of the Blades. 
You can do it, Antus. You can do it... just follow big brother's lead... 
I've got nothing else. Don't believe Azzan does either. I think you had better go talk to our friend in Chorrol. You know who. 
It's a bit strange, but Castle Skingrad is an odd place. 
Tove the Unrestful in Bliss is collecting useless items to build something. 
Happy times! Happy days! 
What should we do now? 
The Prince of Destruction, Mehrunes Dagon, is one of the lords of Oblivion. 
What do you need, comrade? My ear, my sword? Name it. 
You've been through quite a bit, haven't you? Well, I think you have proven yourself worthy. The Arcane University awaits you now. 
Those things hate the water.  
Here, take this. I don't need it's protection against her mind control anymore. Go now! Pretend we don't know each other. 
Tertius Favonius. Romana and me have set up housekeeping. She's a real doll, isn't she? 
Adamus Phillida will find no rest in retirement. No, his soul will endure a kind of eternal suffering known only to those who have angered Sithis. 
Oh no... 
A whole army restored, and still these Scalons run free. Must I do everything myself? 
Yeah, true enough. Ah, well, I best be getting back to my watch. Hey, don't forget, we're meeting for drinks later at the Bloated Float. 
Your stars are not mine. Today the Tower shall prove a stout refuge in time of need. 
In case it may be useful, she was with Blossom -- her horse, I mean.  Dar-Ma loves that animal, and would never willingly abandon her. 
Ah, greetings. 
Are all males so obstinate? Have I not already told you that I consider that route too risky? 
Every last Dark Elf in Bleaker's Way is dead. Such madness... how did it ever start? 
It's a nice enough place. Less dirty than others. I feel like I belong. That old man, in the room made out of butterflies, he said to wait here. 
Speak, snowman, and stop wasting my time. 
Down with the Mazken! 
The farmers appealed to Garridan to discover a solution. He spent a week consulting with sages, until one of them mentioned a possibility. 
Who will prevail, the Pit Dog from the Yellow Team, or the Pit Dog from the Blue Team? Let's find out! Lower the gates! 
Many wish to join our ranks, as we are of the highest echelon. Only a select few may join the finest force ever to grace the lands of Cyrodiil. 
Hello... don't mind me... I'm a little tired. Can't sleep at home, you know. The walls. They aren't safe. 
Hmm, could you, in fact, imagine just how long I've been waiting? I don't think you could, but I might be wrong. I might also not care. Which is it? 
The Great Torch is lit in the city. Do you hear it? I do. 
Thadon is gone! Perhaps things are looking up. 
Right then. Head up the stairs, and it's the first door on your right. Remember, I didn't say it was clean. I said it was cheap. 
It's about time someone did something. These guys are killing my business! 
Anyway, sorry to ramble. You better get below now and rest until we arrive safely at the Imperial City docks. 
Last time I saw Alawen, she was out in the forest east of Anvil, and south of Kvatch. If you look carefully, you might find her there. 
The smith is near the harbor. The general trader is to the east, by the river. The mage's shop is between the castle bridge and the harbor bridge. 
The bed's comfortable, right? 
I had a copy of Volume Three, but I am sorry to say that it was stolen recently. The thieves in the Market District get more brazen by the day! 
Back so soon? And here I was hoping you'd manage to get killed. 
I don't know about her past. All I know is that she's really good with a bow. I wouldn't mind learning a bit from her. 
Take whatever you want! Just don't hurt me! 
My services are not for such as you. Go peddle your paltry wares to Ongar in Bruma, or one of the other lesser fences. 
What is it, Associate? 
Indeed. The Font is being Ordered. As goes the Font of Madness, so goes the Realm. Soon we will all be serving a new master. 
I'm afraid I don't know anything about it. I heard it was missing, though. 
He's never around when you need him. And he never attends services anymore. If he's not careful, he may find himself on the altar one day soon. 
He outright refuses to join the Society or even discuss the matter. We are convinced he is up to no good. 
Oh. You... Hi. 
The Dark Brotherhood must seek out a Breton named Annabelle. She has need of our services, and we are only too happy to oblige. 
The others... taken... they were taken to the tower! 
Let's get rid of these guys, so we can get paid. 
Locked inside a house with five strangers. It sounded like  a trap when I read the invitation. Looks like I was right!   
It appears as though Kurdan has tricked another poor soul with his "axe" story. 
We're not about to let the Guild interfere with our plans, for the Count or otherwise.  
Lift your eyes to Carac Agaialor, my seat at the pinnacle of Paradise. I shall await you there. 
Sister, you are truly an asset to this Sanctuary. Here's hoping all of our contracts work out that well! 
I am impressed. 
All right, all right! 
Thanks. Kvatch is safer for all of us, now you've closed the gate. 
A bed? Well of course! Of course! I've got a small room available right upstairs, first door on the left. Only 10 gold. What do you say? 
It's so very nice to see you again. 
Oh, hello, dear friend! Let me just say once more how happy I am to have my crystal ball back. I'll never forget your selflessness and bravery! 
All I know for sure is that they'll accept any contract, and they'll do anything to complete it. And they don't care who gets in the way. 
Of course, local Dark Elves tend to be money-grubbing, alcoholic low-brows with little education or culture. 
In your strong hands, a few good blows with this, and your foe will be dead in no time. 
Aggh! What are you doing? No, no... you must use the POISONED blade! 
The Anvil guild has made quite a name for itself under Carahil. Did you hear about the recent murderer they caught? 
Excellent. You have become most reliable, and I assure you that the Council appreciates it. Now, to the matter at hand. 
Alessia, hear our prayer. 
Take your time with this one. Observe the other guests. Learn their schedules and behaviors, and strike each one when they're alone.  
Get me that ring. Steal it from Alessia Caro if necessary. Just bring me the ring. I will pay double! 
Uh, yeah, maybe I remember a young Argonian lass.  Sure, she stayed for a night and then she left. 
He's a good boy, but he's hot-headed. Keep a close eye on him, will you? 
Now that I've seen you myself, I can't say that I blame him. 
Thank you for your assistance in my research. 
You have the eyes of a trained marksman. 
Hail, traveler. You are welcome in Bleaker's Way. 
Duties for you. Fine. I'll speak slowly so you can keep up. I want you to contact Maglir. 
We must find Dylora and free her! 
Who will guide us, now that she is gone? 
Hey! Keep your thieving paws to yourself! 
I'm Adamus Phillida, prison administrator and commander of the Imperial Legion forces here in the Imperial City. Have we met? You look familiar. 
Yes. Of course! I don't want anyone to think I had anything to do with their insane plots! 
You will receive a bonus if you fulfill the contract without killing any of the prison guards. Now go, and may the Night Mother go with you. 
I'm sorry, do I know you? I have a copy waiting for me at a bookstore, but it is not for sale. I've waited a long time to get that book. 
All right, I think I can help with that. But you have to agree to do something for me, first. 
They're dangerous. That's certain. 
Why doesn't the Elder Council send the Legion to help us? There's no telling when another Oblivion Gate will open! 
Gloomy fellow. I've heard he consorts with daedra. I'd steer clear of him if I were you. 
Amazing, I've never seen a root quite like that before. If you wish to find out a bit more about it, I know just the person you need to speak to. 
You must have been hiding down there and made your way up here. How did you get past Minx, Wrath and Lynch? 
With the Gatekeeper gone, the Knights of Order have been causing trouble in the Fringe. 
Are you kidding? I came here to get away from the mountains and snow. You ever spent a winter in Skyrim? Or Bruma? Give me the Gold Coast any day. 
This case is waiting for something especially Odd. If you run across anything Odd, be sure to bring it by and it might end up on display here! 
It's... It's you! The Hero of Kvatch! This is truly an honor! 
Chanel? I find that very hard to believe. Until you obtain a full confession from her, I cannot accept your accusation. 
What's the matter, can't handle the pressure? Or maybe you're just... weak. 
Run into the water to escape a Scalon. They won't follow you. 
Drad's a fancy pants who lives in a pretty house with a pretty wife because he screws over folks like you and me. He makes us puke. 
You haven't gone to the cave yet? Well, what are you still doing here? 
Ulrich, how dare you walk in here like you don't know what's going on. 
My followers seek to perform a divination. For this, they need souls, one of each of the sentient races. You will provide these. 
These scrolls should provide sufficient resistance to frost magic, when and if you do encounter this rogue mage. Use them wisely. 
I'm sorry to tell you, but there are no more contracts to be had. As you know, business hasn't been good due to the Blackwood Company. 
Sheogorath has abandoned the Realm. We're doomed. 
Your predecessor cursed me with immortality and placed me in this remote location in order to "protect His Realm from my knowledge." 
Imagine that the power of these runestones might have diminished -- weakened, then extinguished -- by the sins of the Potentates. 
Bless you! Ongar lives behind the temple. 
You actually found them? Interesting. I'll have to make a note of that. 
The Greymarch is over. Sheogorath has defeated Jyggalag! The whole world almost collapsed on us! But it didn't! 
Sure, I know what that is. Any sailor worth his weight in sea salt could tell you. 
Tell me where you would have me serve, Your Grace. 
Ma'zaddha has been most helpful! We'll have to see what he comes back with. In the meantime, you might consider speaking with Nelrene. 
So she says, "Is that a Great Torch in your pocket, or are you just happy to see me?" Ha! 
I know this is all very overwhelming, dear child. Just follow along, and you'll be fine. Now, let's go see what the future holds, shall we? 
All right, all right... please, just stop. I don't know anything specific, but Anya has been looking scared lately. 
The training of thousands has passed through me. 
Daedra are the embodiment of change. Change and permanency. I'm no different, except in the ways that I am. 
Nothing really matters here anyway. 
Thadon better not drink out of that Chalice. Who knows how many people have used it while it was missing? Reusing cups is the best way to get sick. 
Why are you here? I thought I gave you a task to complete. 
When the sun has left the sky, to the Choosy Beggar I would fly. 
So, here we all are. It certainly is a nice house. 
Very good! You are now an Associate of the Mages Guild. What a wonderful opportunity for you! 
Sorry to break it to you like that, but if it wasn't for that annoying thief, we wouldn't be in this predicament. 
M'aiq wishes you well. 
Before the body turned up, I got the sense that Nels was a bit of a drunkard. But he seems truly unnerved now, and is drinking rather excessively.  
Una Armina has all the pieces she needs to fill her collection. Nothing's missing.  
And do hurry, that heart is beginning to smell. 
Welcome to the Chironasium. Can I help you? 
How can you be here? The Master said you were dead! 
No! You filthy guttersnipe! You won't get away with this! By Sithis, if I could only move my arms, I'd rip that smile right off your face! 
Hey, you hear that? The guards are coming... for you!  He he he he he.  
I do have need of a skilled operative. Perhaps if you were to get more experience I could use you. 
Best way to kill a Skinned Hound is with a fireball, or a good weapon. 
All gone now, though. Just smoke and mud and rubble. 
Strangers. Probably causing trouble. 
You were right. The bust is here and Myvryna is guilty. 
If you are working to help Thadon, I'll tell you whatever I can. 
Singings and ringings to you, Lord Sheogorath. 
May all your travels be safe. 
Don't be afraid. My guardians will not harm you. 
She lives on the west side of town. She is fond of the Three Sisters Lodge in the evening, but takes her midday meal at the Five Claws. 
I have it on good account that the Forlorn Watchman is gone for good. The stories about his fate were true, but now the curse has been broken. 
You probably want to do it without spectators though, so you don't get in trouble. Best to make it look like an accident. 
Varon Vamori seems very glum lately. I guess things aren't going well with Ardaline. 
Crush the skulls of the fallen under your boots. Stomp out their eyeballs with your heel. Paint the floor red in a bloody dance. 
Better not close this one. There's no way to open it from the other side. 
The kind of Gate the Mythic Dawn wants to open here to destroy Bruma. 
I presume you're satisfied with the room. 
Not surprising, I suppose. He does enjoy his toys. Last I heard, some Heretics had gotten hold of the item in question. 
This Realm is yours. Perhaps you will grow to your station. Fare thee well, Sheogorath, Prince of Madness.  
Few records survive from the Dark Ages of the Potentates. Thus might the secrets of the runestones be lost... in wickedness, vainglory, and neglect. 
Very well, but do return quickly, I fear he's in more trouble than you realize. 
From what I hear, you'll appear back where you entered, safe and sound. 
Do not fear. I will assist you however I can. 
He's shaken down most of the shopkeepers in the Market District. They're all too afraid of him to do anything. Jensine wouldn't even talk about it. 
Meet me in my house tomorrow at midnight. I'll have the information for you. 
Let the Countess know I'll be waiting for her in the Chapel of Talos.  
I'm not like them. Are you? Are you one of them? 
Sevarius Atius. We will comply with the Watch's orders. The Atius family will stay clear of the Sintavs... if they stay clear of us. 
So you found your way to Gaiar Alata at last. Don't we have enough troubles here, without you adding to them? 
Eight of the evening watch, and all's well. And you, too, ma'am.  
I am sure Lord Sheogorath will be thrilled to hear whatever pressing matter you have to discuss with Him. 
Isn't that abandoned house awful? 
Oh? 
In any case, if you come back in about 24 hours, I should have the weaker Elixir ready for you. 
My mother? No! What have you done to her! I'll kill you! Agghh! 
What's the hold up? I don't have all day. 
I have not found it convenient to visit Count Bravil. Travel is so difficult there at this time of the year. Indeed, almost any time of year. 
Leave. Now. You're trespassing. 
I'm warning you! Get out, or I'll call the guards! 
Unfortunately, it seems to be an item of great importance for some of the Zealots as well. They've been fighting over it for some time now. 
The Necromancers are a sign of things to come. An old acquaintance of the guild has come to Cyrodiil, and they are answering his call. 
The Black Hand is most pleased with your progress. You have been invited to share in secrets that few within the Dark Brotherhood even know exist. 
Gunder took me in when I was but a teen, and I've lived there ever since. We've... shared a bed... but were never married. 
Sell more stolen treasures to the fences. They will let me know when you have proven skillful enough. 
This one turns her back on the hunter. Return when the fine can be paid. 
We had to pay his "fine" or go to jail. 
I beg your pardon? You presume to tell me about daedric cults? 
Thadon is dead. Quite a tragedy. Perhaps someone will write about it. 
Under your leadership, the Black Hand will reign eternal! 
Any luck finding J'skar? 
Oh, that. When you kill me, take the key to my house. Nothing really worth taking, except what's locked up in the jewelry box. You can have that. 
I doubt you really mean that. 
Tertullian, Sergius, and Cicero... the Three Verus Brothers. I'm Tertullian. 
I'd love to have the Tears added to my collection. 
We are from Anvil. 
You don't listen? You stupid? Crot. I'm wasting my breath. Then go ahead. Stand there. Talk all you want. You're a fly. Go ahead and buzz. 
Capital! I have worked for eleven years planning this heist. Savilla's Stone provided the last bit of information I needed. 
Doesn't something seem wrong with that abandoned house in town? 
Now that Selene is locked up safely below, I think we can all breathe a little easier. I can't thank you enough. 
Seridur said we should meet without him for a few days. He said something about doing field research? I'm sure he'll return soon. 
That's right, my daughter Dar-Ma never came back from Hackdirt. I'm dreadfully worried something may have happened to her. Can you help? 
I don't know. I don't see any good options here. 
I know His secret. I have seen His empty throne -- seen it with my own eyes while New Sheoth burned in the grey fires of Order. 
What proof of your outlandish accusations have you brought me? 
My feelings toward her are really none of your business.  
What? Who ...? Damn, not this again. Wake up! Wake up!! 
I had heard he was looking for some help. 
Ongar the World-Weary, they call me. I've been everywhere, and done everything. Now I'm settled down for a good long rest. 
It's tavern time! 
I am yours to command, Your Grace. 
I've never found anything myself, but Una's always looking for more. 
Any of the local guild heads can get you into the guild. If you're in a hurry, speak with Carahil. She should be somewhere around here. 
Greetings, brother! Greetings! I am Ocheeva, mistress of this Sanctuary. Lucien has told me all about you. I welcome you to the Dark Brotherhood! 
Who am I? I'm shocked you don't know. 
You have returned, and you are not a corpse. Boethia may be pleased by this. 
Just don't get any blood on me! 
The Company provides expert jihatt for selected customers. Very discreet. 
Well, well, if it isn't the Divine Avenger! How's our new Grand Champion, huh? You ready to make me some money? Ha ha ha ha ha!  Ahem... 
Plenty of mineral desposits in the Jerall Mountains. I'm out for weeks at a time by myself, but I don't mind it. 
I do have a bed available, for 20 gold a night. Would you like to rent it? 
If you'll just follow me, I will take you directly to my master. 
You haven't spoken to both Priests. You'll end up making a stupid decision, and you won't live to regret it. Don't do that. 
Have you heard my story about the time I beat seven Orcs in a drinking contest? I'm famous for it! 
Get to it, rat boy. 
Don't you have a rat problem to be handling, boot? 
This Undercroft is... well... quite cursed. Any desecration will cause my ancestors to rise from their graves and defend their resting place. 
I'll have you know that I've visited the Shrine of Sheogorath during the Festival of the Mad! 
Time and place are nothing. Constructs of a feeble mortal mind attempting to categorize and understand the world around it. 
Hmmmm. Very well. I don't take you for a liar. Here is your reward, as promised. 
Two of us, dead! Who would do this? And why? Is that why we're all here? To be killed like vermin? I feel like I'm going mad! 
In the last week or so, we've found two bodies stashed in shallow graves outside the city walls. The bodies had puncture wounds on their necks. 
Rhano is quite the swordsman. I've heard he'll train you for the right amount of money. 
Too long Ciirta has led us here. Always against Sheogorath! Always! But we are tired of her vendetta.  
It is the substance that shapes our imagination and makes every day a joyful, waking dream. 
I might have something, but I don't know you well enough to trust you'll do it. 
Since you are here, and since you want something, you are useful to me. Travel to Bravil, and speak with S'Krivva. She should have a message for me. 
Tooth-in-the-Sea can teach you more than I. Search for him north of Bravil, along the coast of Niben Bay. Or perhaps in it, depending on his mood. 
Thadon has his Chalice back. I wonder if he'll let me take a look at it.... 
Hmm? Oh, yes, of course. What is it? 
This is your last warning! Get out, or I'll arrest you! 
I believe her name was Bradus? Runia, or Rulia... something like that. If the stories are true, she might be able to train you further. 
Excuse me. My name is Angalmo. Can I help you? 
So you did, my child. So you did! Ha ha ha ha ha! You obeyed your orders and showed no mercy or remorse. How could I ask for a better servant? 
Oh, that's just the thing! 
Hello, my Sister. 
The Mythic Dawn murdered the Emperor and led those damn Daedra right into the heart of the Empire! They'll pay for their treachery!  
The Zealots in the lands of Dementia believe they worship Arden-Sul. Poor, deluded souls. 
Let's get to training. 
The Emperor's death was a harsh lesson to learn. We can never be too vigilant. But now is the time for action, not talk. There is work to be done. 
Talk to Captain Matius if you need something. I'm just following his orders. 
The Blackwood Company gets the contracts because the Fighters Guild is coming apart at the seams. 
Souless Knights on the prowl, they say. Better carry a weapon with you. Wouldn't want you to get hurt. 
Do you need something? Otherwise I should make my preparations for the ritual. There's no time to lose. 
The Gatekeeper should take care of anyone who doesn't belong. 
Be careful of Relmyna's temper. She... she has ways of extracting obedience. 
Sorry. I have things to do. You'll have to leave now. 
I don't answer questions about royal jewelry from riffraff like you. 
For Sheogorath's glory. 
We will defend the Palace to the end of our strength, and will cast ourselves in the path of cursed Jyggalag himself should he come here. 
If I don't have what you need, try Claudette Perrick at 'The Gilded Carafe'. That's right here in the Market District. 
My services are reserved for more important members of the Thieves Guild. You can always use Ongar in Bruma. 
Pirates, eh? They tend to be quick, and good with a blade, but don't favor armor. They're not fond of bows or spells, either. 
There happens to be a small home for sale in the middle of town. 
What do you say, pal? Seen any action? 
Either way, it's over. You didn't really think I'd trust the likes of you for very long? 
Oh, Sithis needs my soul does he? Well, you can tell your Dread Father that he can kiss my wrinkled arse! Defend yourself, Dark Brotherhood dog! 
Whelp of a Shadowfoot! You had better learn respect if you want to advance in the Thieves Guild. 
We have been contracted by the town of Water's Edge to rid their town of goblins. They've been raiding for days, and appear to be in large numbers. 
Shum gro-Yarug is the butler in Castle Skingrad. Who ever heard of an Orc butler. Plus, he's in that "Orc Social Club." What a joke. 
I'm a bit busy here! 
Oh no, that's Adrienne's job, not mine. If you ask about it, don't be surprised if she's annoyed. She doesn't like being interrupted. 
He's not the smartest man, but he's a nice guy. I just hope he can keep his business afloat. 
I suppose I like her well enough.  
I have sworn not to raise a weapon in anger, but you have offended my honor in this most holy place. Prepare to die, devil. 
It was you that closed that Oblivion Gate, wasn't it? That was a brave thing to do! 
Stay away, you monster! I know what you're up to! 
If we were to lose it... my kind would be doomed. 
Well now, I didn't expect to see anyone else foolish enough to venture out here in the rain! How do you fare, citizen? 
Bastards. If I ever got a hold of one of them, I'd put 'em in the fire, like the old days. 
I am quite busy, but there is always time for you, Lord Sheogorath. What may I do for you? 
You have been given a task. Do it. 
So this tale has a happy ending after all, at least for you. Money cannot buy happiness, they say, but we know better. 
According to the plans you captured from those spies, they need three lesser Gates open before they can open a Great Gate. 
Oh, boy. Good luck getting that. 
Everyone calls me Sten the Ugly. I got tired of beating people up for it. So go ahead. Live it up. 
What a shame. 
Did you hear? The Fringe was attacked! How horrible! 
My house is yours, friend. Please, come back to visit us anytime. 
You're already staying in one room, and I don't rent multiple rooms to a single customer. 
No... you're dead! I killed you myself! What manner of creature are you? Will I be tormented with your image forever? 
They're gone now. Fighters Guild took care of them. And about time the Guild showed some sand. They are 'fighters', aren't they? 
Why won't you just leave me alone? What do you want? 
Explain yourself or leave me alone. There are many others here who actually need your help. 
I've made no progress on the fourth item. And every day that passes brings the Mythic Dawn closer to victory. 
The only other people who had access to the chamber and were unaccounted for are the court mage, Chanel and the porter Orgnolf. 
Just don't tell her I said anything. I might get another lesson in the nature of Pain. I don't like those lessons very much. 
Please, you must speak with Henantier. He has the reward I offered. 
Since we don't have any Argonians, I can allow it. The Countess won't allow visitors to Argonian prisoners. I'll be watching though. 
The Five Claws Lodge is a nice, clean place. Witseidutsei makes sure of it. 
If its spells you seek, this place supplies, use Earil's for all your magic buys. 
Thadon is dead. Bliss will be even more of a mess than before. 
Well done! You've put in good work for me. I only wish I had more. Things are a little lean right now, as I'm sure you know. Here's your payment. 
Well, look at that! You should take that to Teekeeus right away - he'll want to see it. 
Find me in a few hours. We'll kill the Gatekeeper. 
Have you seen Glistel and Malintus Ancrus together? Isn't it awful? 
I don't feel like talking right now. 
You have done a great service to the Dark Brotherhood today, Assassin. Your reward is well earned. 
I thought it would've died down by now, what with the ban on the practice of Necromancy in the guild being in place for as long as it has. 
You will find her in her Sanctum, hidden away in the dungeon of Xaselm. 
Oh yes, I suppose Teinaava wants proof that I'm dead, eh? Let me guess -- my heart? I suggest you take the heart of the dead Argonian Agent. 
It's a nice store, at least for alchemists. 
Raynil is staying in the last room down the hall upstairs. Here's the key. 
I'll let you in on a little secret. If I find the chest of gold, I'm going to open a tavern.  The Hoary Boar! It's been my dream since I was a boy. 
Very bad. I've been bad. I thought I was good, but I was bad. I've been punished. They'll all be punished. 
Someone will need to see where this goes. I think you should go; you've done all the hard work, after all. 
And what good will money do me when they come to stretch my neck? Find a way to get me out of here. Then we'll talk. 
Your guild does not fully appreciate the danger which quickly approaches. Hopefully when you return to them, their eyes will be opened. 
Have you no compassion? There are two bloody corpses lying in this place, and all you can do is question me about that old woman? 
Good that you want to get better. 
Wait. Yes. The Amulet was given to mortals by Akatosh... it contains His divine power... 
I'll show you where you can put that fancy sword! 
Good to see you, ma'am. We won't forget how you helped Anvil. 
Common Treasures is full of junk. That's all Tilse Areleth collects. 
Then sometimes he buys a few books. I asked him once about it, and he said that he goes out of the city on business trips. 
Have you heard the odd noises coming from Eugal Belette's place? 
I'm sorry this happened, but those are the Guildmaster's orders. I'm sure you can gain your rank back, in time. 
Then I'll have to ask you to leave the way you came in. The guild is conducting official research here, and I can't have anyone interfering. 
Shall we get to work? There's much to be done. So many people to visit. 
We... we did it? And I'm still in one piece! I mean, of course we did it. I never doubted us for a second. 
They cleared out the Desolate Mine, all right, but the other guys didn't make it, did they. 
Don't forget, Captain Burd needs your help to close the Oblivion Gate outside of Bruma. 
From the Blades, did you say? Jauffre sent you? What's this about? Quickly, now. 
Of course, Listener! I will remain here until you say otherwise! 
Thanks so much for sticking with them and helping a foolish old man. Please, take this... I won't be needing it any longer. My battles are over. 
Next time, on time, please. 
All visitors to the Imperial Palace are asked to keep their voices down, especially if the Council is in session. 
Are you prepared to begin? 
I hope you learn something from Tar-Meena about that book. This might just be the break we need. 
Yes? Speaking to me? I'm he. He's me. And others, as well. Or, they were. Weren't they? 
You will enter soon, I imagine, through the Gates of Madness and into the lands of Mania and Dementia. 
If I were you, after you're released, I'd get out of Bruma fast before the guards catch on that they let a murderer free. 
Between you and me? Ysabel is completely in love with me. But I'm just not a one-woman guy. Nope, the life of the bachelor suits me just fine...    
Good luck. And don't underestimate the goblins. They're more dangerous than they look. 
Are we there yet? 
I've heard Azzan is an excellent fighter. I'm not planning on joining up, but if I did, I'd like to work for him. 
Unfortunately, you were stupid enough to kill Amantius Allectus in the process!  
The new owner sure has turned Benirus Manor around. It's now a welcome addition to our city. 
That's a real shame. With just a little help, I think we would have a chance. But I can't risk leaving the camp defenseless. 
Mmmmm. Is that fresh bread I smell? 
I'm Brielus Gawey. And no, we don't sell horses. But we do eat well. The stables are owned by an Orc. And you know... Orcs and horses. 
Anyone can wear clothes. But the RIGHT clothes? That is not so easy. Go to any castle. They wear Palonirya's designs, or they're nobody. 
My mother died recently. Before she passed, she gave me this key, and told me it would "unlock the truth," at the place of my birth, Crowhaven. 
I might swim more if it weren't for the slaughterfish. Sharp teeth, and some carry disease. 
Bow before the might of my Lord Jyggalag! 
He's always got some scam going with Bejeen, his partner. You might find them both at Weebum-Na's house. 
Now, I'm sure you are waiting to hear about your reward. The Society thanks you for everything you have done. Please, take this gold. 
Gaston Surilie and his brother Davide own one of the finest vineyards in all of Cyrodiil. 
My Lord? Are you aware we are suffering a Skooma shortage? 
To greet you? Or eat you? 
Get some rest. 
I think Teekeeus was the one who finally blew the whistle on her. That'd be just like him too; always playing by the rules. 
I don't know, my Lord. She only said it was a matter of the gravest import to the security of the realm. 
Ah, so it's Bloodletter now, is it? I remember when I achieved that rank, so very long ago. I showed such promise... unlike yourself.  
You should be looking for Pinarus! What are you doing here? 
Talk to Faustina. She's got a proposition for you. 
I'm amazed the Gatekeeper was killed. 
Una Armina runs the museum. She's always looking for new pieces for her collection. 
The Count and I thank you for helping bring Ulrich's hold on Cheydinhal to an end, though we would have preferred having him brought up on charges. 
Sounds like he wants your help stopping the theft at his store. What are you doing here talking to me? 
You dare come here to the shrine of our lord? You are not one of us. 
I do so admire good books, they fill my mind with such fantastic images. 
What makes you think I'd know anything about that... 
Suit yourself. I'm sure it isn't anything important. 
You think I can't take that kind of pain? I've had worse. I won't tell you anything. There's nothing going on! 
Give yourself to love, pilgrim. I'm Trevaia, priestess of Dibella, and this is Anvil's Chapel of Dibella. 
She tends to keep to herself, that's for sure. That's too bad. 
Touched by the gods. He hears things. Who knows? He's happy... let him be. 
Please, sit. 
Thank the Nine! I never thought I'd see another friendly face... 
Martin has made his decision. The Blades stand beside him. 
Not wise for me to be outside late at night; too easy to catch another cold. But if the rumors are true, you should keep an eye out for them. 
I've been reading "Fundaments of Alchemy." I figure it can't hurt to learn something new. 
Don't provoke them. They don't trust you. 
Drad purchased the land and title from Council. It cost him a fortune, and he's determined to make it pay. 
Ah, yes. Thank you. 
You came. Good. I don't have much time. I have to get to the Gathering before I'm missed. 
Here about Vahtacen, are you? 
You don't? Oh! Well good! Very good indeed! Maybe after you've helped me out, eh? So please, make haste to Crowhaven! This waiting is unbearable! 
Think of me when you send arrows to bite into your foe. 
Well, here we both are. Retired Imperial Legion officer and hired assassin. So, who do you work for? The Dark Brotherhood? The Morag Tong? No matter. 
Ushnar in Crucible is afraid of cats. Cats! 
Keep leading. 
Just as I thought, just as I thought. Excellent work. There will be a bonus in this for you, don't worry. 
They say that when you murder someone, the Dark Brotherhood comes to you in your sleep. It's how they recruit new members. 
Delmar at the Chironasium can help you with the staff. See him right away. 
Do you believe any of that talk about more Oblivion Gates opening all over the place? 
You've not heard the legends? How could that be? 
Take a chance on the Warlock's Luck! 
I knew you'd make the smarter decision. Good. Here's the key to the chest by my bed. Inside you'll find the amulet Jorundr wants. 
I'm rather busy. 
If you wish to learn more about Alteration, you'd be wise to consult Tooth-in-the-Sea. If you can find him, that is. 
Give my warm regards to Baurus. Tell him he should not blame himself for the Emperor's death. He did well to send you to me. 
Welcome back, traveler. 
I've found a new kind of comforting inner peace here away from the chaos of Cyrodiil. I'm tired of the battles and the politics. 
Let me take a look at what you've got. 
Finally, I'll be able to retire. 
Fine, but don't be gone too long. 
I think Oreyn is planning to send Viranus out on the Blankenmarch contract. I'm betting Vilena is not happy about it... if she knows. 
The Captain's in charge. I'll follow his orders. 
You ever talk to Honditar? Odd fellow, but he seems to know his way around these parts. 
Well, you've got the ectoplasm! Seems you Fighters Guild types can do a job when you put your mind to it. 
My name is Farwil Indarys, son of Count Andel Indarys of Cheydinhal. The wounded one is Bremman Senyan. We are members of the Knights of the Thorn. 
I might be willing to part with a few things, if the price is right. 
People, I teach them Advanced Acrobatics. Up and jump. Dogs, I teach them to bite people. 
I'm pleased to finally meet the savior of Cheydinhal. And although the death of Farwil saddens me, I know you did the best you could. 
So, the bloody-handed Duchess comes to claim another victim! 
Are you ready to help us defend the Altar of Despair from the Aureals' attack? 
Madness shall be purged from this realm! 
You remain faithful. That is good. I will cut your throat if you visit that other smith. 
I was at the sack of Kvatch. They had no chance. We took them by surprise, and we carried the walls in the first assault. 
I doubt it. 
Die, Blue Team coward! 
I shall wait here until you return, Arch-Mage. 
Where is the amulet? I would like to see it again before I can tell you of its true nature. 
You must go to the city of Chorrol and break into the house of Francois Motierre. Inside you will find Motierre waiting for you. Do not kill him!  
So, the mighty Syl has fallen. Well then, that's one less woman to worry about... more men for me! 
Terrible drain on productivity. Never know who's who. It's been a problem for too long. 
Please, hear me out. 
I'm Jearl. I spend most of my time down south, but I keep a house in Bruma for the mountain air. 
That's too bad. I was hoping you'd resist arrest. 
You've done it! The Ritual is complete, and you've survived! A shame about Thadon, but it's how he would have wanted to go. Now, on to other... 
Two halves, two rulers, two places. Meet and greet. Do what they will, so you know what they're about. 
That fool Big Head is always looking for the Fork of Horripilation. 
Blackwood isn't so bad, once you get used to the flies. And being lost all the time. And the zombies and will-o-the-wisps. 
What can I do for you, Savior of Tamriel? 
You too seek wealth, do you not? May you find it, and may tales of your journey be legendary.  
The Amulet of Disintegration! Thank you! It's one of the keys to my safety in the coming times. 
Uravasa is an excellent speaker. Her sermons are always quite enlightening. 
I do miss him so. And when he gets back, I'm gonna kill him for making me worry like this! 
A more pungent cheese you'll never find. It looks smooth, but it stinks to the heavens and beyond! 
Dearest Night Mother! Most Unholy Maiden! Please, we beg your mercy in this, our time of need! The Black Hand seeks your guidance! 
Will you pay the blood price? 
It's true. Some fine horses he has. 
Are my eyes playing tricks, or is the creature growing? 
Well. That's nice. I set Brugo up for you, and you get the reward? 
Don't give me a reason to kill you. 
It's funny. I like just about everyone, but the very sight of you makes me sick. Why don't you go look for the gold someplace else, friend.  
It is a glorious daedra, worthy of the Madgod. 
Thadon is addicted to Felldew. I stay away from drugs. A sorceress needs a clear mind. Hey, do you hear those dogs barking? They're so loud! 
Hey, I don't read them. I just deliver them. 
You should get this about 1/4 the time. 
It's well hidden, so don't even think about trying to steal it back from me! 
Sure, friend, I've got a bed you can rent. It's upstairs at the end of the hall, last door on your right. Just 20 Gold. Sound good? 
Good times. Good times. I hope you had as much fun as I did. Here, take this. It's a fun little toy. Now, go away. Before I kill you. 
I don't know what you're talking about. 
Return here when you've made your discovery. You'll find that Seridur is the liar, not I. 
You can do this. 
Where does our food come from? The Heartlands. And the Nibenean Valley. And Skingrad? Great wines, cheeses, and tomatoes. 
Nothing much more I can help with. I'm afraid you'll have to ask Gogan, my lout of a husband, if you need to know anything else. 
Greetings, Imperial sister. 
My head is positively throbbing now... can you see it? I need to lie down. Find someone to tell you the rest of the story. Get the Chalice. 
Wayshrines of Arkay confer Blessings of Health on those who've pleased the Nine by righteous acts. 
At this rate, I don't know if I can keep my doors open. All the people are spending their money there. Bah. 
I don't know his name, and his face was in shadow. He called to me yesterday as I walked by the lighthouse. I think he lives there!  
Give me twenty-four hours. I shall have the potion ready for you then. 
Matilde's murder saddens me friend, but not for the reason you may think. Ten years ago, when I was in my prime, this never would have happened. 
I shall await further summons. No doubt you will have need of me. 
7, 8... There's a new Gatekeeper in the Fringe. 9, 10. 
You should dress appropriately. The Deceiver's Finery, your recent quest reward, would serve this purpose nicely. If you earned it, that is... 
Forgive me, Your Grace, but you are not permitted to pass within Pinnacle Rock. 
If you've got a complaint, tell it to the Watch Captain. I've got better things to do than listen to you whine. 
Hmm... I could have sworn that I used to keep something very Odd on this shelf. Oh well. Let's move on. 
Now was it Mandrake Root first, then the Void Salts, or the other way around. Hmmm.... 
I have heard that Nord warriors have travelled from Skyrim with Orc mercenaries to assault the Redoran of Morrowind. 
There's an air of Mysticism about you. 
You there, stop! 
I'm pleased to call him brother. 
I found some good pauldrons at the armorer. 
Well, now they shall have it. 
Indeed. You'd best leave this place at once. 
I don't know what to make of all this, but I'm not sure I see Nels as a murderer.     
I want you to liven it up. Use this spell on the Countess and her guests. I think it will make the party much more interesting. 
Are you ready to show us the way to Weatherleah yet? 
You may rule Mania, but you will learn that Lord Sheogorath's justice still applies to you! 
Damn it, now they're into my pantry! 
Well... maybe you're not lying after all. 
Ah, sorry, I have no idea what time it is. 
But... You don't need to hear that. You need to know. You need to know what he's asked of you. The Chalice, yes? 
Aggh! Not yet! You must wait until Hides-His-Heart gets here! You must cut me with the knife in his presence, so he thinks you've killed me! 
I do not know what Lucien sees in you, but this Sanctuary is cursed by your presence. 
Need a place to rest? I have a room available, if you'd care to rent it for a night. 
I think we could all sleep better if you brought him Lindai's crown instead of the Crown of Nenalata. 
I got out while I still had the original set of legs, arms, and eyes. Fighters Guild is a perfect place for me now. 
I knew the lure of gold couldn't keep you away long. 
I fear my own greed got the better of my judgment. I hope you weren't hurt badly in that horrible place. 
Ah, of course. The gold. Here. But there is someone else I need you to investigate. 
Die, you Orc filth! 
Yes, he's the one. Isn't he scary? I wish someone would just make him disappear. 
Thoronir welcomes you to The Copious Coinpurse. Such a pleasure. How can I serve you? 
All that remains is to watch the soon to be late Thadon eat his food and smile with glee as his heart goes "boom." 
I... I need a drink to calm my nerves. Please, excuse me. 
I'm in your debt. 
Excuse me, sir. 
What a shame. One Sheogorath-shaped amber lump is Odd; two are simply boring. Maybe next time you'll find something really Odd. 
Approach, Duke of Dementia. The time is near and I am fading... 
Oh, all right then. 
The best armor in the city is at The Missing Pauldron. 
Keep walking, stranger. 
By chance, the entrance to that escape route leads through your cell. 
They were also brave, and necessary. Because of this, I am hereby naming you Master of the Fighters Guild, effective immediately. 
12, 3, 2, 2. It's hopeless. 15, 5, 3. The town is lost. 0, 0, 0. 
Barkeep! A drink for my friend! 
Hmmm. He must have known we'd look there. Search around town and see if you can find any more information. 
That's none of your concern, outsider. 
I don't know how the fire started, but it burned Kvatch to the ground. 
That's three more that won't be reporting back to their Master. 
I heard there's a new Arena Champion. Sure it takes a lot of skill to make it that far, but they'd be crazy to challenge the Gray Prince. 
Ah, wonderful! I shall be most pleased to return this to its rightful owner. Thank you. 
Patience. We will see Lord Dagon walk the earth with our own eyes. Nothing can stop us now. 
Hrmph. I once killed a minotaur with a spoon! I don't really need your help anyway. Leave me alone. 
He's been living with Zoe Malene, looking for some amulet. 
Armies are well and good, but only if you know who you're fighting. 
Let's go home. 
Do as you're told, and you'll be all right. 
Our Countess will never let Chorrol fall to the daedra! Oblivion Gates be damned! 
Haven't you taken care of that weapons shipment yet? Those weapons won't deliver themselves! 
Ah, there you are. It seems that we have a... bit of a problem. It's the Font of Madness... no doubt you were on your way there just now. 
Thadon... dead? You've done this. It was you all along! 
I am a vampire, a Lord of Blood! 
Books of Bliss has quite a selection. 
Now we can get back to building our new lives at Cropsford! Please, be sure to come visit us in a month or so. You have earned a hero's welcome! 
Be careful out there. The Rumare slaughterfish are all around this area.  
I'm relying on you. 
The local tavern is a good place to find work. 
People say he's very familiar with the area. 
Did you ever meet Dar-Ma? Young Argonian lass, popular around town. She's disappeared, and her mother is worried sick about it. 
Are you ready for one last great heist? 
We lost a lot of good men that day. But Bruma is still standing. That's what counts. 
It's not always easy to find a good trainer. That's a good place to look. 
If you happen upon a lonely soul who goes by the name of Hirrus, take his word as truth be told, I'm afraid he is deadly serious. 
Someone killed the Gatekeeper? Do you know who? Maybe he'll kill me too. Do you think? I hope so. Someone put me out of my misery, please! 
Armor and weapons. Maybe not pretty, but they get the job done. 
Perhaps I should dedicate a portrait to the Gatekeeper in honor of his death. 
So you brand me a villain, and make vain attempts to destroy me. I watch, and I wait, and I collect you when you come for me. 
They always come at night, after I've gone to bed. Maybe a mage transports them inside! You can just stay in the shop overnight. Good luck! 
Can't you take a hint? 
Hmm? Oh, yes, maybe we'll speak again later. 
Excuse me. I see something I need to clean. 
I hope I live to speak with you again, Lord Sheogorath. 
Here, we make sacrifice to the Lord Hircine. We pray for a True Hunt. We beg to be Honored Prey. 
Oh, have you heard? Old Baenlin is dead! They say he was murdered! Right in his own home! 
I hope you're enjoying the copy I sold you. Gwinas was terribly upset when he found out, poor fellow. 
If you've got calipers or tongs, he'll steal them from you. He certainly won't buy them. 
Brother Hjar, we must clean the chapel soon. 
He may have more tricks up his sleeve. 
A wise choice, indeed. You've never had a night's rest like this, I assure you. 
At the last Imperial Alchemy Symposium, I heard Sinderion mention something about a strange glowing root. 
Let's get out of this place! 
I never suspected Umbacano might be up to no good. Apparently he was as mad as he was rich! 
You have approached the shrine and spoken with Boethia. Enter the portal or do not. 
Order has kept her hostage so that she cannot return to us and lead us. If we can free her, she may know how best to defeat them. 
I'm Parwen of the Fighters Guild. I'm not a great archer, but I seem to have a knack for teaching. And I've bagged my share of goblins. 
I've fought mudcrabs more fearsome than you! 
And I hope you've taken everything you desire from my crypt. Once you leave, you will be unable to return. Now, are you ready to begin your new life? 
You can pay your fines to the guards, serve your time, or pay me half and I'll fix them all. 
Ah, the Gray Mare! From here I will be able to arrange for transportation out of Cyrodiil! You have served me well, assassin. 
It's a beautiful city. But stay away from the Waterfront. It's not dangerous, but it's dirty, and the beggars are a nuisance. 
Why are you still here? Leave this house, before my anger gets the best of me. 
I can't believe you did that. Maelona is furious. 
Don't go back in there. I'm warning you. You'll end up like the others. 
You've been to all the guild halls, haven't you? Well, then you're all set! Congratulations! 
It seems the world is safe again... unless you're going to eat me. You're not going to eat me, are you? Are you? Please don't! 
With the Amulet taken by the enemy, we must get Martin to safety at Cloud Ruler Temple. 
Bring the sword to me, and I'll reward you with my Masque. You'll not find a better bargain, mortal. Begin your search in Pell's Gate. 
Then best be on your way. You won't find it by standing around in here. 
I suppose I should be grateful working in the palace with her, but I can't stand having to constantly look over my shoulder. 
You should talk to Jauffre. He needs your help. Trouble down in Bruma, I think. 
Burns.... 
Like I said, I'm not moving the Float until Ormil is safe. 
If you are looking to buy a horse, go inside and talk to Clesa. 
Naw. But it will earn ya two years in Skingrad's dungeon. Now get lost before I decide ta report ya. 
You've done a great service for the Imperial City, and you should be proud. 
I also fear their numbers may be greater than we believed. 
Everyone's saying there's trouble in Kvatch. The whole town destroyed. Only a few survivors. 
I suppose you think we should celebrate Jyggalag's defeat? The enemy of my enemy and all that? You're wrong. 
Excellent! Now please, accept this token from the Dark Brotherhood. It is a virgin blade, and thirsts for blood. May it serve your endeavors well.  
What in Oblivion is Ulrich doing with all that money anyway? I'm sure he's lining his pockets with the gold of the good citizens of Cheydinhal. 
For Jyggalag and Order! 
My ring! All thanks to the claws of the Clan Mother. You have recovered it. 
Believe me, he'll need all the help he can get to worm his way out of this one. To think he'd fall for the gang's scheme... agh! I could kill him! 
I believe that Grey-Throat and Gilen may have more information for you regarding these creatures. 
Go and fetch the Flame. Bring it to the Sacellum. Light the Great Torch. How are you going to be Me if you can't even do what Me tells you? 
Fortunately for me, you found them. Allow me to compensate you for the time it took you to travel here. 
I haven't tasked you to bring the amulet back to me, and yet you have. I don't know which of the Divines sent you, but I appreciate what you've done. 
I must put this book in a safe place. I have no time to talk now. 
It was Savlian Matius... some of the other guards... helped some of us escape... they cut their way out, right through the city gates. 
Undena Orethi has got some fine tomatoes. Some of the finest in Cyrodiil. 
There are two of everything in Split. Even the residents. 
This you already know. What is not commonly known among our family members is that the Black Hand employs a few... additional numbers. 
The Great Torch in New Sheoth is lit. Should be easier to count the dead bodies that get dumped on the city street at night now. 
Until later, then. 
Ahh... you've got the weapons. Let's talk about that weapons shipment you brought. 
But don't worry. I will solve it. I must. I am close, I'm sure of it. 
You bring me 10 samples of Nirnroot, and I'll make the Elixir available to you at a huge discount as well as give you one for free. 
Accept these robes, and wear them with pride. 
Ah, I sense a woman of chance! 
Wonderful! Looking at the tentacle, I'm not sure whether to be disgusted or terrified. Just the kind of thing I'm looking for! 
Scalons carry diseases. Lots of them. 
I heard the Fringe was under attack. Sheer-Meedish is probably worried. I should talk to her. 
It's cute, really. Such a genius, and can't find his own socks. It's a full-time job keeping him in matching outfits. 
I'm your relief. 
I'd give just about anything to sleep in a real bed again. 
But I believe it can be done. I will continue working to decipher the arcane items needed for the binding ritual. 
Hey! What did you do that for? You some kind of maniac? 
If we make it through this alive, I'll be amazed. 
With his Chalice returned, Thadon seems to smile at least four times as often. That's just an estimation, of course. 
High mountain ranges rise to the borders in the north and east, and marshes and rainforests extend to the southeast borders. 
Eight of the evening watch, and all's well. And you, too, sir.  
Oh. What a pity. Well, then. 
Naturally, my associates and I believed he had perished. The wilderness is, after all, a dangerous place. No place to take your family. 
We lost Vitellus and a lot of good men against Blackheart. Somebody must be pretty good to take him and all his people. 
Dear friend, have you heard? Two of the guests now lie dead! If I find out who did it, I may have to take matters into my own hands.  
Right. I'll get to work. You come see me tomorrow, and I'll have your staff ready. 
Nevertheless, you have done your part. Now, if you wish to learn from me, I have much I can teach you. 
I assume you've taken care of this issue. So, tell me what happened. Why were our men causing trouble? And what did you do? 
They tore me to pieces, although I have no doubt they were immediately killed by my companions. 
Sorry. All I have is paints. Serviceable beasts, but nothing special. We Nords are no great fanciers of horse flesh, except in stews, I'm afraid. 
I thought I heard an Imperial woman's voice while I was blindfolded. Other than that, I don't know much more about her. 
This is not something I would tell the likes of you. 
Very well. I shall mark a fast way to travel there on your map. 
So many bottles to collect. 
Amusei you say? I thought you wanted to see Amuday. He's off limits. Amusei though is just down the hall. Make it quick. 
Would you like a tour of the Museum? 
Oh, please, no! I can pay you! Name your price! Anything! Anything! Please, just let me live! 
The gate may be closed, but some say you slew the Count's son in the process. Is this what defines a hero? 
Quite a shame that there's a new Gatekeeper. I'd been hoping to meet a few more friendly faces. 
So? 
Find these thieves in the city that spans the waters. Learn where they hide my Eye. 
Back again, huh? What is it? 
You're back! And you've brought my sons with you! How wonderful! 
By the detritus of the profane, I am brought forth. And by your offering, you have made the profane your interest, mortal. 
Yes. Bravil. How clever of you. You've already learned the name of the town and county. I see a great future for you in public service. 
He was mostly harmless, until the fateful day he came across a tome bearing the evil magic of necromancy. 
I've got my men scattered all over town. 
Don't get on J'skar's bad side. You'll likely get a fireball in your face for your troubles. 
Hah! You are too late. I have the diary! 
Hello? Hey! Pay attention! In your pack. The dog. I swear, you heroes aren't particularly quick on the uptake.... 
Kurdan is treacherous... be wary, friend. 
You've got to have the know-how, or else I can't teach you anything at all. Do you have what it takes? Do you even know what it takes? 
You seem in good spirits... do you have good news? 
Retrieve the Eye of Nocturnal, mortal, and return it to me, and I shall look favorably upon you. 
From where do you hail? 
I hope I made myself clear the first time. If you get near that ship, you'll end up dead. Now get out of my face. 
I can't help but smile when I see you, friend. 
I'll be honest, Hero. With the kinds of victories you've been having, I knew that Elf didn't stand a chance. Here's your gold. 
Hello, Associate. 
Welcome to our humble village. 
It's upstairs on the top floor. Only room I've got. I think both beds should be clean enough, so use whichever you prefer. 
She was a good woman, and Melus loved her as best he could. He was off fighting when she died. A sudden fever, and she was gone. 
You found a way back! Does this mean... ? 
Oh... well... it would seem you don't have the 50 gold required to place a bet. Best come back when you've got enough coin. 
Of course. What is it? 
Perhaps you should seek out a priest. Perhaps a beggar. Or guardsman. You and I, we have nothing common. What could we possibly talk about? 
Then make your preparations. I will expect you to return soon. 
Strangers are bad news. 
Hello there! Are you here to join the Mages Guild? 
I'm the Wizard Carahil, Mages Guild, master of the Anvil chapter. 
This matter will have to wait. I hold court in the great hall in the morning. 
Uuras the Shepherd sure takes care of his sheep. And, boy, does he like cheese! I mean, he really likes cheese. 
Ah, it's you. I figured you'd be by soon. 
Orc named Mazoga says she's a knight. I doubt it. The Count wants it looked into. Why don't you talk to him? 
I saw Huurwen practicing shield technique at the Fighters Guild the other day. She could teach me a thing or two. 
Man down! Man down! 
Now it is my even greater honor to die in my Lord's service. Farewell! 
Lady Syl will be quite pleased to hear that her concerns have been proven valid. You shouldn't keep her waiting. 
I read "The Real Barenziah" recently. Quite a piece of work. 
Not wishing to find himself on the wrong end of a blade, he gathered his flock here in the Sacellum. 
He has a good selection of soul gems and other things. 
Impossible! This is impossible... Grommok has never lost a fight! Never! 
If you have to fight a Flesh Atronach, a good shock spell is the way to go. 
Everyone's talking about the assassination, of course. Here. Take my copy of the new Black Horse Courier. Go ahead. Keep it. 
You've got it. I'll have the two Ogres and the Land Dreugh brought out to the Arena. Now get up there and give the people what they paid for!  
You're trespassing here. You'll have to leave. 
I would love to get a piece of the old Gatekeeper for my Museum. His head maybe, or an arm... he certainly was a unique specimen. 
You have restored the honor of the Thieves Guild. This one welcomes you back into the guild. I am promoting you to Cat Burglar. 
Don't try to manipulate me. 
Malada? Really? I confess, I had never made the connection. But, yes... it makes sense... 
Thank you. I know that delay is dangerous, but it is all for naught if we lose the battle before you can recover the Great Sigil Stone. 
If you are successful, perhaps you shall. For now, that is not necessary. I have no wish to endanger her. 
I've heard Cindanwe works the other residents day and night. They're none too happy. 
Speak, dog. 
As soon as you get those doors unlocked, I'm going in! 
I will explain once you have returned with it. Until then, discussion is useless. 
She's got no business poking around in Brittlerock Cave, but the customer is always right, eh? 
There's at least one person in every guild hall who offers spells; check at every hall to make sure you don't miss any. 
No gold, no room. Sorry, but that's the way it goes. I don't make exceptions. 
Martin Septim, on behalf of the Elder Council, I accept your claim to the Imperial Throne. We should arrange the coronation ceremony as soon as ... 
Before you go, however, I intend to make good on an offer I made some time ago. As a vampire, I may pass my gift on to others as I see fit. 
Yes, you'll do just fine. Signy will tell you all the details. 
Be patient, all will be explained. 
No... I have need of it. I believe it may be instrumental in saving our guild. 
Some have said they're will-o-the-wisps, though I've never heard of one killing a full-grown man. 
Excellent! Let me see that.... A-ha! It's right here. Written in her own hand. She is planning to murder us all. I knew it! 
What are you asking me for? Do I look like Vile's dog or something? Go on. Knit a doily or play a flute or something. 
Hey, you're the one made us visible again, right? Good show! 
I haven't seen that before. 
I wonder how many corpses line the palace grounds. Perhaps I should count them. 
There's no time. The others... they were waiting for us. They knew we were coming! 
Really, Inquisitor. Are you not supposed to be the one in charge here? I can't do all your work for you. 
The Gray Prince is the best fighter the Arena has ever seen. He can't be beaten. Not by you. But hey, it's your right.   
No... Talos save us... 
I'm Captain Burd, commander of the Bruma Guard. 
If you refuse a gift from an enemy, you may choose instead to prove your honor upon me in combat. 
Luckily, I haven't had to make use of their services. Still, it's good to know the Chapel is there. 
We don't like strangers poking their noses into our business. 
I began a painting of the Resonator of Judgment many years ago. I wonder if I ever finished it? 
Stop! Please! What is it? What more do you want? 
It's annoying, to tell the truth. A bit hurtful. But they do it every time. Join up with the enemy, and become Priests of Order. 
That's all he told me to say. 
Sure. I've heard about it. What's it worth to ya? 
I've been meaning to ask you about your last contract. I heard there were some... complications. 
The Doyen are the hands and eyes of the guildmaster. You take your orders from them. You get your favors from them. 
Perhaps the Torch is a sign of hope. 
Please! Help me! 
Dear Sister, I do not spread rumors. I create them. 
Enough! Enough of this! You will all suffer for the pain you have caused me! I will destroy your Night Mother, and the Dark Brotherhood will fall! 
Oh... I see. Then it was you that...  
Adeo sent me as a messenger to find you. Pinnacle Rock is under attack, and she needs your assistance at once! 
Count Hassildor awaits your arrival. 
Be seeing you. 
Ugghh! 
A small token of your appreciation might clear this up, or perhaps it's better if we leave at this time. 
If you're an alchemist, The Main Ingredient is a good place to shop. 
Sorry to hear that. If you change your mind, let me know. 
Hi there. Not to be rude or anything, but I'm anxious to get back to my book. 
Hail, friend. I don't believe I've ever seen you down here in the Bloodworks before. Allow me to introduce myself. My name is Agronak gro-Malog. 
He doesn't seem particularly happy. I think he'd rather spend his time painting. 
Now, if you're ready to get to work, I can provide you with your first contract.   
There's more work to be done. 
Ha! Let's see them stop me after I rip this gate from its hinges! 
Don't I? I thought I did. But then I also thought that you would be heavier. Look at you, you're light as a chair. How DO you walk around like that? 
I've put myself in your hands. 
Who now will save us from the coming darkness? 
He... he did? Oh my goodness, what should I do? Should I talk to him? Or maybe play hard to get? Or should I, you know? Or would that be too forward? 
I'm a Redguard, though I've never actually been to Hammerfell. I was born here in Cyrodiil. My family has been in the Legion for three generations. 
We come to the real work at last. 
I knew I'd recognized Raynil! I think when I first met Bradon many many years ago, he introduced me to him. 
I just don't know what to make of Nels anymore. He plays the bumbling drunkard, but he could very well be the killer.  
Take up the dagger and offer Lord Dagon the sacrificial red-drink as pledge of your own life's blood, which shall be his in the end. 
There are three options for Illusion magic. They are Charm, Paralyze, and Silence. Which would you like? 
I'm working on a new act where I juggle arms and legs -- in honor of the new Gatekeeper, you see. 
Why don't you and that barbarian climb back under your rock. 
Only Fathis can open the door to the tower, but there is supposed to be a secret passage somewhere in the castle that leads him to his tower. 
Did you hear? He went crazy and started attacking people with an axe! Luckily the guards stopped him before he killed anyone. 
You may speak. 
State your business. 
Well, I should return to my duties. Till next time, then. 
Why isn't father here? He knows how important this is! 
Get out of here while you can. 
I appreciate all of your help. Thank you. 
You're not even worthy enough to mention her name, you low-born parasite. Now get away from me before YOU wind up dead! 
Oh, and this is really interesting -- wait! Never mind. My big mouth almost just got me in trouble again. 
Why do the guards insist on letting you rabble inside University grounds? Take your pedestrian gawkery to the Arena! Begone!  
I'm Isolde, mate... not that it's any of your business. 
Hmmm? Oh, yes. The choice. Well, it's about time! 
To be honest, my instincts tell me the kid isn't the killer. Sure he's a bit obnoxious, but that doesn't make him capable of murder. 
Well done. You are now a member of the Order of the Mythic Dawn, one of the Chosen. Your life belongs to Lord Dagon. 
Does this hurt more or less than last time? 
A den of thieves? Near Anvil? Like that's news? There must be a dozen of them. 
We're a mountain people, tough, independent. County Chorrol is rich in mines and timber, wool and mutton, and hard-working people. 
Hey! Good to see you again! 
I can't teach you anything you don't already know. Aerin could, though. She's a brilliant acrobat. 
I've heard a number of stories, none of them good. I understand she might have been a hired assassin. 
I cannot stress how important it is that our relationship with Hassildor be preserved. I expect you to visit him immediately. 
A group of mages led by Irlav Jarol took the Helm, and have retreated to Fort Teleman, in an effort to study it further. 
Welkynd stones contain the concentrated power of Mundus; their counterparts are Sigil stones, which are used to hold open Oblivion Gates. 
The Fringe can fend for itself. We have our own problems. 
Aggh! Sithis save me! 
You'll be on your own. Steer clear of me and all of your Fighters Guild brothers. It'll be rough going, but you can do it. 
I fear that our informant is in danger, and that is why I have called you here. 
I am all that remains of the knowledge contained within the great library of Jyggalag. 
I've heard that about Fadus. He's quite impressive. 
Why would one of us kill Neville? What if they try to get the rest of us? You'll protect me, won't you?  
They say syndicates of wizards have led a boycott of Imperial goods in the land of the Altmer. 
Each local guild hall has its own way of doing things. That means each hall has its own set of problems. 
However, the wizards are not to be trusted. I'm sure they are watching for us to put it back where you got it. 
I don't know who you are, nor do I care. All I know is that I want you to leave. 
Very well. We'll risk it. The Underdeep it is. May Sheogorath's divine madness possess us today! 
I want you to take this. May it serve you well. Now, you should tell Vilena Donton what has happened. 
The sacred symbol of the Empire. Only those of Septim blood can wear it, they say. 
It is our home. It is where our numbers are strengthened, and where we return to the realm from the Waters of Oblivion. 
Hold your tongue, little Duchess, or I'll tear it from your mouth. 
Now, you may continue about your business. 
You have done much to prevent the flow of Oblivion into Tamriel. The world is in your debt, and I am at your service. My knowledge is yours. 
Here, take this. I have no use for it; I'm tired of fighting. It may serve you well in days to come. 
I suppose you think you know why we've taken over the Bloated Float as well! 
Just when I look forward to company, they activate the Resonator. Tall-Trees-Falling is so alone. 
Yikes! Get away from me you foul beast! 
Aloys, Callia! He's cleared the goblins from Cropsford for us! It's safe for us to build the settlement! 
Very well. Keep looking. We must uncover those spies and find out what they know. 
You would do that for me? I would do just about anything for you if you make him go away. Permanently. For good. Never to be seen again. 
Nice work. 
Wonderful to have it back. Really, truly. I can't thank you enough. Oh, wait. I already did. 
I've never seen my own double. And I certainly don't want to talk about it. 
My, my, my. Seems we're all anxious to know something, even if we already know it. Or, Syl knows it. Or not. 
They oughta just give you guys a key. But no. I have to keep locking and unlocking the door for the slop drudges. Follow me. 
To employ the services of the Dark Brotherhood, one must perform a ritual to the Night Mother. Only then will she heed their prayers for murder. 
I was only a boy when the soldiers came. We hid, vowed revenge. But the Deep Ones never came back. 
Long ago, in an age now forgotten, Sithis came to the Night Mother and begat her five sons. So you see, his love gave birth to the Dark Brotherhood. 
Hey! You don't belong here! 
This should be good! 
But... if you find me a good place to sleep, a safe place -- outside -- I'll reward you! 
It's the least I can do to say thank you. Now, don't be a stranger! The Copious Coinpurse is still in business. 
Again, I thank you for doing my field work. I look forward to getting more Nirnroot from you. And yes, in 24 hours, I'll have the Elixir ready. 
I don't have a lot of interest in Conjuration, myself. I suppose if I did, I'd want to talk to Fathis. 
Brotch Calus, Alchemist. Advanced Training, available by appointment. 
Lead on, Your Grace. 
This one still waits for what he earned. Do you have a better answer than last time we spoke? 
The Aureal are yours to command. 
You were there. You saw his true nature. The blood of the Dragon was revealed for all to see. 
Ah ah ah... There is no turning back, now. 
You are most welcome. 
Welcome to the Flowing Bowl. I'm Caenlorn, the one in blue. My twin Maenlorn is the brown one. Can we rent you a bed? 
I worry sometimes I'll go soft here, training mostly, and living easy. So now and then I go out along the coast on my own, just to stay in shape. 
The Greenmote had taken its toll. The ground stained a deep crimson as the sanguine liquid flowed from their lifeless bodies. 
Speak, citizen. 
I'm Chanel, Chorrol Castle Mage. You'll tell me what you're here for. Right? 
Here, you take this. It's all I got. 
We'll speak again soon, no doubt. 
Good for you. 
I'm afraid she may take a bit more convincing than you. 
Y... Yes dear Listener! I... I will wait in the Sanctuary until you have further need of me! 
You may think so, in your ignorance. But I take a larger view. As a scholar of the Ayleids, I have no wish to see their evil power return. 
Come see me when I'm at the Chironasium, and we'll take care of that for you. 
Pale skin, snotty expression. You're a Breton! The masters of magicka, right? Hmph. Nothing but a bunch of stuck-up snobs with cheap parlor tricks. 
Goodbye... fare-thee-well... hic. 
I am honored to speak to the hero of the Battle of Bruma. What can I do for you? 
Please, go get Ulrich and convince him to follow you here. I'll do the rest. 
These adventurers are always causing trouble. 
That's fantastic! Not only can I tell Irlav we're back on track, but I can happily say we did it without his help! 
Try again. That's not good enough. 
It's the counterpart to the Great Welkynd Stone, just as the first two were the opposed powers of the daedra and the divines. 
Sure, I know where to find Hieronymus Lex. I sure am hungry though. 
Ah, excellent! I knew you were the gambling type! Well, you can bet on the Yellow Team or the Blue Team. 
You've pleased me, hunter. Take my token, and wear it well. Hereafter, take your prey, and whisper my name. 
Oh... I already have something in the Museum very similar. But don't give up, I'm sure something truly Odd will turn up soon. 
Hmm? Oh, yes, goodbye... 
Oh, the Gates are unlocked? Very good. I think I'll just rest my eyes for a moment, then I'll go through and see what's on the other side. 
This is where my journey ends. For you though, the road is long and dangerous. Now, give me your hand. 
I hate my life. 
You are about to witness the glorious rebirth of Ayleid civilization. Stand aside! 
Victory or death. 
So, you have the pearls? Or perhaps any other things of value I can have -- I mean, hold for you? 
Yep, we're in a real predicament. Do you think you might be able to help us by getting rid of the goblins on our land? 
I guess someone else has already told you the other details. Kill all the guests then leave, right? Well, you'd better get in there. Time to mingle.  
Can't you see that I'm busy? 
Looking for the steward, are you? Her office is in the private chambers. But she's not there much. 
Come back any time! 
I can truly consider you an equal, and so grant you the rank of Master-Wizard. There is no higher rank which I can bestow upon you. 
Relfina was the love of my life. For the first time, I had a positive outlook. Then I saw Seridur looking at her with those coveting eyes. 
Oh, hello. Can't you see I'm dozing off here? I was just daydreaming about how awful life is. I'd like to get back to that as soon as possible. 
You got a wife back home? Tell you what. I'm getting out of here in a couple of weeks. When I get back to Morrowind I'll look her up. 
He comes back every night to be with Atraena, but only for a few hours. I swear, that High Elf is going to wind up dead if he keeps living like this. 
We've got to stop them. 
MAZKEN! Form up! For the sake of your sorry male hides, move! MOVE! 
What a pity. If you change your mind, we have a fine selection of Chestnut horses. 
Thadon is dead. Lucky bastard. 
By the gods! 
Like I said, she's one of the brains over at the Arcane University. Supposed to know everything there is to know about daedric cults. 
I'm working on it. It'll be done soon. 
Just leave me alone -- go away! 
My steward will draw up the papers for me to sign. Here is the key to your new home. You can find it in the southwest corner of the city. 
This is incredible! I never thought to see this sword again! How did you ... never mind, one should not look a gift horse in the mouth. 
I got stuff to do. Don't bother me. 
Now, go tell him to sit down. If he tries to get up, I'll kill him myself. 
Excellent. I just don't have the time to search for him again, but I do need to consult him about some notes he borrowed. 
We need some law-and-order... bring in the Legions. 'Leyawiin for the Imperials,' I say. No sense coddling those Renrijra Krin bandits. 
Apprentice! Wait right there. We need to talk. 
We serve Her will. 
Vilena Donton just hasn't been the same since her eldest son died. Still, she does a good job of running the Fighters Guild. 
Whatever am I to do? 
Choices, choices. That took you long enough. 
A mountain lion? In my basement? But... how? That's not possible. But, it happened! What if there are more? What if it wasn't alone? 
No!! Get away from there! If I can just... 
Finish what you've started, friend. It'll do wonders for you. 
Did you hear? The lost heir of Uriel Septim rallied the Guard and smashed a horde of daedra outside Bruma! 
Hello, I heard you purchased the Servants Quarters for Rosethorn Hall, and I was wondering if you had anyone in mind to fill that position? 
This is not one of Mankar Camoran's chattels from the Garden. Who is he? 
I sing your praises and welcome you again. 
I don't know what idea appeals to me more: you getting killed by this Faelian person or the Imperial Legion using your corpse as a target dummy. 
This is neither the time nor the place. 
Leave here at once. You've no business being here! 
We threw ourselves into the riddles of daedric magic. We hungered for forbidden secrets. Knowledge and power were our gods. 
You may be wondering why you can't see me. We are all wondering the same thing. 
You've got to get me out of here! Come on, open the door! 
So. The Fighters Guild got Azani Blackheart. Blackwood Company said they did him, but apparently they were mistaken. Or stretching the truth, maybe? 
I'm also promoting you to the guild rank of Bandit, which will let you use Dar Jee of Leyawiin as your fence. Good work! 
If you could help Pyke, I think you'd make him very happy. 
We must shut down the Obelisks! 
I hope it is enough. Bruma must hold out until you can complete the ritual and retrieve the Amulet from Mankar Camoran. 
I do not believe you are prepared for that kind of knowledge. You are still a stranger to me. 
You have a short memory, Cat Burglar. Mine needs a little jogging too. 
The dragon will stand forever as a memorial to what you and Martin did for all of Tamriel. 
They began raiding our farm a few days ago. There are more now, and I have no idea where they're coming from. 
Do you have anything that you'd like to contribute to the Museum? 
You look like someone I might be able to help. 
Do not think about it. Dream about it! Let your mind soar on flights of fancy! I know you will choose well, in the end. 
Your poor memory is my good fortune. What's it worth to ya? 
No pressure. 
I'm Malintus Ancrus. How are you doing? 
Wait... I have much to tell you! 
How can I help? 
I will show you the void! 
Then she disappears to get "supplies." Suddenly the campsite gets raided by the Bruma City Guard. There's no way they could have found us. 
Mirili Ulven in Highcross thinks she can catalogue every creature in the Isles. 
I am your emperor, Uriel Septim. By the grace of the Gods, I serve Tamriel as her ruler. 
Ah, the Flame of Agnon shines again! Soon the Great Torch will flare with the pure light of Dementia! 
Who wants to be a mage? I hate books, spells, stinky bottles, writing, all that stuff, don't you? 
Your services to the guild have not gone unnoticed. As of this moment, you have gained the rank of Evoker. 
Those bones want out.  
My name is Numeen.  Have you seen that no-good rascal husband of mine, Mahei? Gods know what he is up to this time... 
You already know my part in this. There is nothing more to say. 
I believe the runestones date from the Dawn Era or Merethic Age, but they were moved to new sites by late First Era emperors. 
Before Tiber Septim, Cyrodiil's roads varied greatly in quality, and were often impassible in bad weather and winter seasons. 
Send a moron to do a man's job... 
Yes? How can I help you? 
Have you recovered the Bloodworm Helm? 
The Staff of Sheogorath holds the secrets of this Realm.  
Ah, yes. You are a Guild Mage, are you not? Yet, different from the others. Yes, yes -- this is good. 
I've heard what you do to dogs. 
Ah, greetings. I have been waiting for you. As Vicente surely told you, your time working with him has come to an end.   
Just out for a brisk walk. Helps clear the head. Any other information I can help with? 
Parry and strike. 
Hand it over, and some day we will both laugh about this over drinks at the Tiber Septim. I will give you one last chance. 
Relan hears there's a new ruler in Crucible. Relan finds this interesting. 
The scholars and priests can debate what happened to Martin in the end. 
Ah, have you reconsidered my offer? Do you wish to eliminate that treasonous Shadowscale for me? 
In accordance with the ancient tradition, receive now the Raiment of Arden-Sul in honor of your mighty deed in service to Mania. 
Jensine is running the show. She will get him but good. 
Any word on my Medallion? 
That should satisfy you. 
Arkay, bring light to these damned souls. 
Ahhh!! No! No! Make it stop, make it stop! Aaayiiee! 
I'm the shepherd here. Eronor's the name. And this is Weynon Priory. 
I think someone is watching me. I see figures in the shadows all the time. 
He can't be bothered to come check on his own project, so he sends someone who knows nothing about it. And this is supposed to help? 
More than 50 years ago, my wife Rona and I were both turned into vampires. While I came to embrace the changes in myself, she did not. 
Yes, I've noticed some of them in my establishment. They don't break the law while they're here so there's nothing I can do. 
The capital of one of the ancient Ayleid kingdoms which flourished in Cyrodiil before the rise of Men. 
Hey, there's my new pal! So what can I do for you? Need some items? Or maybe you're ready to unload something? Whatever you need! 
Let's see how much of this you can take before dying, shall we? 
My sons! Have you seen my sons? 
Look, I can't promote you. Not now. You'll need to get some contracts completed, and then I can do it. 
Is there anything else you'd care to reveal, as long as you're here? 
I need someone to go in there and put a stop to those fetchers. I don't care what it takes. We must get that poison they're selling off the street. 
If I'm not mistaken, that's the traitor Syl. Right there. I'm not normally a bloodthirsty man, but I wonder if killing her might be a good idea? 
By the Nine! This IS the Amulet of Kings! 
I'll be there.  Etira promised us some good sport tonight. 
She'll come out of that gate with a warhammer the size of a child, and she'll swing it until your head explodes! Don't let that happen! 
I will not forget your service to Cheydinhal. Closing the Oblivion Gate outside the city was a daring feat. 
You must get us out of here. 
I wonder if there are nice dogs in Bliss. I think I'll go see. 
Six of the day's dawn, and all's well. Good morning, sir.  
You served out the Mazken with their own medicine. Not the most glorious victory, perhaps, but Cylarne is ours at last thanks to you. 
I heard that someone broke into the wizard's tower. What kind of a fool would take on Fathis Aren? 
Oh. I'm prepared, of course. I'm sure there's no need to speak to Mother at all. Let's go. 
My collection is almost complete. All I need are five Flawless Pearls and I'm done. How hard could that be? 
It's your prison sentence, not mine. 
Your father was the one that got us into this mess! I'm tired of you always defending him. 
Such a pretty dog. Dead, dead, dead. Ushnar is sad. 
A fly in the ointment. A new cause for a different effect. We're going to change things. No... things will be different this time around. 
Aldos is living on the street now that his house has been seized. I begged Ulrich to give him more time, but he wouldn't. 
That is why I have sent for you. I'm afraid there is a... situation. The time has come to test both your skill and your loyalty to Sithis.  
Here's the Ring of... well now, where did it go? Things have a way of disappearing around here that's enough to drive a person insane! 
A true marksman is only as good as his bow. When you have a good, solid Elven bow, then I shall teach you what you need to know. 
Need a hand, Associate? 
Order. The taint appeared only a short time ago, but it has spread quickly. I fear that soon we will all be serving a new master. 
She was my wife, and I would rather not speak of her now. 
A place where many have perished seeking its Great Stone. But nothing else will do, so you must succeed where all others have failed. 
Is it always this cold up here? This weather would freeze the arse off an ogre. 
If you want to learn to fall off a building, she's the one to talk to. 
Oh, how wonderful! I can't thank you enough! I've been going out of my mind ever since my crew was murdered!  
My mistake - shouldn't you be on the other side of Cyrodiil by now?  
Never seen 'em, but I've heard her talking to someone, and I've seen somebody at the window when Jearl wasn't home. 
Jyggalag's forces have been defeated. Perhaps Order is simply an inferior element. 
Mazken! To arms! 
It's the Gray Fox! You're under arrest! 
The Tears are not just a namesake. They're literally the frozen tears of a knight named Garridan Stalrous who lived many years ago. 
Let's hope he's better than the last one. 
Perhaps this exercise will help you build character, or vent your murderous rage elsewhere. Or, you'll die, and you won't be our problem. Now, go. 
A little tip. People who ask a lot of questions around here tend to be not very popular. 
Hey, did you hear the Gatekeeper is dead? That's valuable information, don't you think? Worth a few coins? 
Can you spare some coins? I need a drink. 
Oh, how generous of you! This blind Watcher's Eye is sure to draw a crowd. 
I don't know. Maybe. 
So, Llevana, I hear you have something I'd want to see? 
This ring belonged to my husband! He has been missing for over 10 years. For some reason, his name and face escape me at the moment. 
You're paying for all of this! 
Oh. 
I can see that the scope of my research is far beyond the limited understanding of a cretin such as yourself. 
Well, just this once I don't suppose it would do any harm. Gwinas mentioned he was staying at the Tiber Septim Hotel. 
The Black Hand is the ruling body of the Dark Brotherhood. It is made up of one Listener and Four Speakers. Four fingers and a thumb, if you will. 
There is a man in Bliss who feels his doom comes soon. Some say he's wrong and others say he's right, but I say he's a loon. 
A final task awaits you, when you are ready. It is time for you to strike back at the King of Worms. 
For Akatosh! 
If you need a blade, go see Tun-Zeeus at the Dividing Line. Does repairs, too. He does go on and on, sometimes. But he's the Genuine Orc in Leyawiin. 
The Count, Andel Indarys, is a Hlaalu parvenu, but his steward, Naspia Cosma, does her best to coach him on the finer points of Imperial etiquette. 
We are not yet done with your test. When you have passed or failed, then we may have reason to speak. 
I see from your expression that you have grave news. 
He is in hiding. Armand is accused of stealing the bust of Llathasa Indarys from Cheyhindal. They say Count Indarys himself filed the charges. 
You have business here? Don't tell me Jarol sent you... 
I am glad to hear that he survived. A small bit of good news in these dark times. But he will take the Emperor's death very hard. 
Surely, you have something better to do. 
They mistook the Focus Crystals for some sort of religious symbols, and removed them from their rightful places. 
Shops, guilds, and inns are south of the chapel, and some shops are by the north wall. 
People pay him a great deal of money to hunt and kill living human prey. No questions asked, and he takes care of the bodies. 
Leyawiin stands alone. That's what Count Caro says. Only our brave Guardsmen to keep the hordes of Oblivion at bay. 
Get moving. 
I'd like to learn more about spellcasting. Might have to head over to the Mages Guild and see if they're accepting new members. 
Aureals! The cleansing of Cylarne begins now! Follow me! 
Syl has been replaced. I should tell Sheer-Meedish. 
I am here to serve, Lord. May I assist in Your great works? 
While Daedra still roam free in Kvatch, I can think of nothing else. When my city is safe, then I will train you. 
Trolls don't like water. Trolls don't swim. The Eye is perfectly safe in Tidewater Cave. So relax. 
We lost the damned city, that's what happened! 
Like I told you, I can use minotaur horn and ogre teeth. If your Guild brothers bring me some, I'll pay well. 
Welcome to Anvil. If you need a guard, just look around. 
Duty calls, citizen. Madgod's blessings upon you. 
Hello again... talk to me while you can. I don't think I've got too long. 
Watch yourself around the Fo'c's'le. Sailors despise landsmen, and won't hesitate to treat them to a good beating when they're in their cups. 
If you're looking for trouble, you're getting very warm. 
If you want to buy a horse, go inside and talk to Tovas. 
It seems the incident has been taken care of. Your subjects are appreciative, and have sent this as tribute. Well done, My Lord. 
All I heard is that she's looking for some sort of book. You'll have to talk to her if you want to know more. 
Lord Dagon shall walk Tamriel again. The world shall be remade. The new age shall rise from the ashes of the old. 
Excellent! I'll move in immediately! 
I can't imagine that there's a finer establishment in the entire city. 
I'm not a rich man, but if we get out of here alive, I'll do what I can to reward you. 
Looking for some reading material? You've come to the right place. 
I'm concerned about Water's Edge. I want you to go back there. Make sure the Company hasn't ousted the residents. Lay low. 
You've murdered the poor beasts! And ruined us! Leave us alone! 
I wish I could find a spot to sleep where the walls won't collapse on me. Can't have that. 
It is, of course, the capital of the Shivering Isles. It is divided into Bliss, Crucible, and the Palace districts. 
I heard that Soris Arenim made himself quite a bit of money recently. He seems very happy about it. 
Then get out of my sight until you do. 
I bid you greetings and cheer, with the grace of a noble stallion. You seem to be of fine temper and wit, says the poet known as Halion. 
A pleasure to see you. 
The Resonator draws adventurers to it once again. I suppose they won't need their belongings. 
You need something... special? Check out my wares. You won't find this stuff at your local general store, that's for damn sure.  
Alright. Give me a minute to talk to the men. Everyone's a bit jumpy right now. 
The Great Torch burns at a temperature 13 times hotter than the average fire. 
Argh! 
We're pals, right? So we'll kill Black Brugo and be knights! I'll wait right here until you ask me to follow you. 
You're back. And you've got the Great Stone... 
Get the weapons to the other men. Then we'll take care of the goblins. 
I'm afraid I haven't had time to prepare anything conventional. I'm very preoccupied with this situation concerning Ardaline. 
We'll be talking. 
Lord Hircine has sent you to hunt the Unicorn? Count yourself doubly blessed. 
Wellspring Cave lies to the northeast of the Imperial City. The mages there can assist you. 
Martin? He's back there, looking after the other survivors. 
The Lord of Order will claim your throne! 
Not practicing it, mind you. Wouldn't want anyone to think I was involved in that sort of thing. I simply meant researching it. 
Now, if you'll excuse me, all this talk has given me a powerful thirst. Thankee kindly. 
Tidewater Cave? I know of it. Down along the southern coast. Nasty place, from what I hear. Full of all sorts of critters. 
We all knew that's how Thadon would go. But, Syl? 
Excellent! But before you go, you're going to need to learn a bit more about Nirnoot. Otherwise you may walk in circles and never find any. 
Thank you for coming. You may recognize that statue over there on the table. The very one that you recently sold -- for less than its true worth. 
I understand he has light fingers and deep pockets. 
He leaves his house early each morning. Watch him and report back to me here, at midnight as usual. Make sure he doesn't notice you! 
As a young man, I grew impatient with Mages Guild restrictions, as did many of my fellow apprentices. 
As you wish, Inquisitor. 
Well, when you're ready, you know where to find me. 
You found my belabored daughter! I will tell Burz gro-Khash about your indentures! Take this. It has been passed in my family for many generators. 
You're the Gray Fox! I've been betrayed! 
We have to stay in our homes while the Watch searches for the Gray Fox. 
Filthy vermin! 
I like to walk. You can walk for hours in the city. Always something to look at, someone to talk to. 
It's about time you got here. 
It's unusual for us to have three potential recruits at the same time. Rather than the normal test of skill, I'm going to make this a contest. 
All I know is that travelling merchants found me in the wilderness by the body of my mother. I was raised by the monks at Weynon Priory. 
Akatosh speaks to us all, but we never listen. Go to the Temple of the One. Read the Covenants. Praise the Nine! 
You'd better talk to Caranya before you do anything else. 
Hammer and Tongs is a good place to get your armor repaired. Just don't go early in the morning. Agnete usually isn't feeling so well then. 
Most of my time is now spent on administrative duties. I have not had blood on my hands in far too long! Killing Lachance was pure ecstacy. 
Hey there, Chief. 
I haven't been to Cloud Ruler since I was a young trainee. It feels good to be back. The Blades have always been here, and always will be. 
My Lord. I didn't realize how powerful your presence would be. I will try to embody that majesty in my daily life. People respect me, you know. 
Do your worst! 
I can't imagine why someone would act the way he does. 
Do you want to learn about Alteration? Speak with Dovyn Aren. 
Ganredhel. I train dogs. And people. Prefer dogs.  
Well done, soldier. Your mission is complete, and you have my thanks. Now we may rest. Long live the Akavir! 
I might know him. I might not. I don't see how it's any of your business. 
The Count put the Guard on high alert. We'll be ready if the daedra decide to attack, don't worry. 
Try not to fight a Grummite in the water. Or in the rain. They seem to like that. 
Very true! My remote numerology apparatus picked up vibrations in the probability lines that continue to this day! 
A marvelous contraption. I've gotten it to float in water perfectly. Now if I can just get the water to fly through the air. 
I don't trust them. I've heard they're effective, but they're brutal. 
Be cautious... their leader sounds dangerous. 
Of course, any of their possessions you wish to keep are yours for the taking. I'll make sure you get them when you're done. 
All citizens are welcome in the Imperial Palace, at least on the first two floors.  
She can spin a yarn, that's for sure. 
Welcome to the Border Watch Inn. We don't get many visitors. Please feel free to stay a while. 
His name is Martin. He serves Akatosh in the Chapel in the city of Kvatch, south of here. 
It's pretty clear, isn't it? We failed once. We must not fail again. But let us discuss this no more. Come what may, the Blades will stand ready! 
Be quick about it, mortal. 
Where are the rest of the keep defenders? 
Here is the amulet back. It's as beautiful as it was the day I remember seeing it long ago. I want you to keep it, as I have no use for this anymore. 
He lives in Bruma. You should look for him there. 
If I were you, I'd go to the cabin in the daytime. That way, if he begins to overpower you, the outside can be a sanctuary. 
You should have paid the fine! 
Men are but flesh and blood. They know their doom, but not the hour. 
Of course. 
You should keep working on getting a hold of those other Mythic Dawn books. That's our best lead right now. 
As a Blade, my place is at Martin's side. 
Hey, did you hear about that murder in the Talos Plaza District? I think the man's name was Draconis. Yeah, cut down in the prime of his life. 
I love the Fighters Guild, and all its members, perhaps to a fault. I fear my concern for them has made me blind to what's been happening around me.  
I'm sure someone will be willing to help him out. 
Don't think for a second that this war is actually over. Stay on your guard. The agents of the enemy lurk everywhere. 
Thanks again for your help, we had no other place to turn. 
This lists several locations. The first is "The Dark Fissure," which I recognize; it's a cave in the mountains south of Cheydinhal. 
Argonians stick mostly to the river trade. We know boats and the water. We're not fussy about the sewers, either. Water cleans it all. 
That was disappointing at best. I was hoping for more from you. 
Should we continue on? 
Welcome to the Chironasium. 
They've got her down in the caverns. They're going to sacrifice her, you understand? You've got to save her! 
Do not delay. If the Font of Madness itself becomes Ordered, all your victories over Jyggalag will have been in vain. 
Count Leyawiin created a new order of knights -- the White Stallion -- for the ones who defeated Black Brugo. 
Not a bad idea if you're looking for work. 
Oh, here's a notion for ya. Uungor really gets on us nerves. You could kill -- or, persuade -- hisself to leave.  
Really? And it's a safe place? Not at the bottom of a tall wall? That's a great idea! That sounds perfect. 
I've nothing to tell the likes of you! 
Well yes, of course. Why are you asking me these silly questions twice? 
The roads near Anvil are safer now, thanks to Carahil and her guild hall. She's an example for us all. 
Can't you see that I'm upset? 
I recognize this type of parcel. It contains sealed orders. It's addressed to you... from Lucien Lachance. 
This one hopes the hunter enjoys the cage. 
Um... did you know that you're on fire? 
Cheydinhal is in your debt, friend. That Oblivion Gate had us all living in fear. 
Why isn't he dying? Keep fighting men! 
She's ridiculous. I don't know what her problem with Argonians is, but she's always trying to start something. 
I am nothing but a vile spawn of evil! Kill me! 
Claudette Perrick runs a fine alchemy shop. You should check out The Gilded Carafe. 
Welcome to the Foaming Flask. Good food, good drink. I'm Ernest Manis. Let me know what you need. 
Wait a moment... if you'll pardon my manners, you reek of the bogs. You must have been to the Fetid Grove! 
You have my ear, citizen. 
Don't speak to me further until you've rented a room. Then I'll come find you. 
I won't ask what you went through to obtain this, my friend. I know all too well the depravity of the princes of Oblivion. 
Wood Elves. Why? What's the point? 
I'm being watched. Just sit down. Don't say anything. 
Weebam-Na and Bejeen have been bragging about some big score they made recently. They claim it's a valuable jewel. Who knows with those two. 
I understand they're coming from the obelisks. 
The Septim blood may flow through my veins, but you have the soul of a hero. The Armor of Tiber Septim himself! Jauffre will be amazed to see it. 
Rumor has it that Oreyn's looking for you. You didn't hear it from me, though. Good work, and good luck. 
Try not to stand so close. 
I was just beginning to think I had something in common with the other guests. And then you showed up. 
You hardly seem worth talking to. 
The citizens are in my way. Should I kill them? No? Too bad. If only I had more magicka. I could kill the Fanatics and then rule this town! 
Look. I don't want to talk. So leave me alone. 
My, my, my... what big hands you have! 
I'm sure he never left that room. So I have no idea where he's gone. Please. Help me find Rythe. I love him dearly, and I am so worried. 
I can't believe it! The Gray Prince has been beaten! There's a new Arena Grand Champion now, someone called Sir Slaughter! 
Go ahead. Summon him. He loves it. 
They're Argonian prisoners, brought here from Black Marsh. They've been told they have to kill you in exchange for their freedom!                   
The Gray Cowl is now yours. You are the new guildmaster of the Thieves Guild. 
Don't the Verus brothers run a good shop? 
That seems fair to me. 
Here, let me show you where it is on your map. 
This is the perfect time. Will you help us? 
At least, you will if you want your reward. Now get moving! 
Perhaps I've misjudged you. Alright. I'll help. Just remember me when you take over her position. 
Don't keep us waiting. I hate to wait. 
The crystal obelisks that dot the Isles have recently started behaving strangely. 
It's awful. I feel terrible for her husband. He must be so ashamed. 
To the Missing Pauldron you should go for superior armor to thwart your foe. 
We have awaited your arrival. Tell us, what news do you bring from Akavir? 
Die, Imperial! Die! 
The Imperial City itself is a walled city, with separate inner walls protecting the Imperial palace. 
You'll be happy to know that Erthor is back in town.  
Blessings of Anu upon ye. 
A new face in the Isles. Brings the Fork, perhaps? 
Huh? What are you, some kind of preacher or somethin'? One of them crazies from the Church? I ain't got time for this.... 
What great news! 
You humans are all the same! Weak and worthless! 
Thank you kindly, Sir Knight. Sounds good. Damn good.  
You have things to do. Talking to me isn't one of them. 
I would be far too afraid to turn on Syl. But I couldn't turn them in, either, because they might come after me. Please, you must do something! 
You cannot stop Lord Dagon! 
Sit down. Don't say anything. Just do what I say. 
I don't know you well enough to talk about that. 
He's a nice fellow, but he couldn't even get the sign for his store spelled right. 
They argue a lot, but that's just their way. I don't think they're ever really angry with one another. 
You're not welcome here, stranger. 
You sleep rather soundly for a murderer. That's good. You'll need a clear conscience for what I'm about to propose.   
I'm not interested in speaking with you! 
Well ... carry on. 
Don't waste my time if you're not ready for this. Are you prepared to do what is necessary to gain a recommendation from me? 
Fellmoor must be a terrible place to live. 
Put on The Feed Bag! I'm Delos Fandas. We got food and drink, and lots of it. 
You closed the Gate? I knew you could do it! This is our chance to launch a counterattack! 
In short, you will become like me. Heh, yes, it's true. I'm quite the social pariah. After a few hundred years the change happened on its own.  
Some people wish to throw their weapons. That seems foolish to M'aiq. If you hold your weapon, you only need one. 
How can I help you this fine day? 
You may ask Gilen Norvalo or Grey-Throat about these creatures as well. They've learned much. 
The Elder Council has been governing the Empire since the Emperor's murder. They will be overjoyed to have an heir to crown. 
The Chapel of Julianos is always open for worship and contemplation. Perhaps you should speak to Marie Palielle, our healer and Restoration trainer. 
I hope that whatever's behind the door will truly lift the curse. I'd hate to risk harm for nothing. 
Oh, no. 
As a full-fledged member of the Mages' Guild, I now also promote you to the rank of Apprentice, and grant you the Robe of the Apprentice. 
Agronak is good, yeah. Too good. He says he's only half Orc. What I want to know is, what's the other half? Cause it sure ain't human... 
I didn't really need the Amulet to tell me that. I've known it was true since you first told me back in Kvatch. 
Help us hold the Altar against the Mazken's counterattack! 
I won't go back. I won't go back! You can't make me go back! I'll kill you all! You're all going to die! 
Hail, Duke of Dementia. 
I'm here on business, and you're not part of it. Take a hike. 
These warriors want nothing more than to please you, and if they fill their opponents with suffering and pain at the same time, all the better!  
I've never read that. Been meaning to pick it up, though. Perhaps I can read it when you're finished. 
Whoa, girl! Whoa! Easy now... It's all right. Sorry, civilian. My steed gets spooked a bit easily. It's all those damn goblins and trolls, you see.  
Oh no! They killed him? I can't believe this! Ever since his wife passed at the hands of the bandits, his life has been miserable. 
The barriers between worlds are weak. Close the doors to Oblivion, and then we shall speak of training. 
Ahjazda thinks the world is ending tomorrow. She's been saving magic items just in case. 
Have you ever spoken to Jantus Brolus? 
Aye. I know about those scum. Rotten bastards robbed me blind, they did. Stole a family heirloom. Bunch of Bosmer, if you can believe that! 
Tadrose is a fine smith, but I understand she only offers services to other Fighters Guild members. 
Brash child. Now look what he's gotten himself into. 
Shouldn't you be in Bravil? Being useful? 
He ran off with someone else, so now the ring belongs to you. The owner of the shop called it the Ring of Eidolon's Edge. I think you'll like it. 
What's this? 
Don't let her looks deceive you, friend. I've seen black widows like her before! Her crimes must not go unpunished! Justice is at hand! 
How could I be so careless? What's the matter with me? 
I used to be a knacker. That's how I fancy my horses. Ripe, stiff and silent. Hate it when they stare at me. Dumb beasts. 
Okay, if you say so. 
Wo! You SCARED me! I was off in my happy place, and you just popped in and wrecked my whole thing! 
As she aged, the visions became less coherent. Rather than cast her aside, the Council gave her a position here. 
Why build the Gatekeeper again, if he will one day fall? Seems so sad and pointless. 
You've returned. And with the little ones in tow. Lovely. 
S'Drassa of the Mages Guild, Evoker and Alchemist. And also, in his scant free time, a Trainer in Alchemy. 
There's no need to mourn. The Ritual has begun! Be happy! 
I'm afraid I don't know for sure. I wish I had a more persuasive answer, but hear me out. 
Do you have a proposition? 
I understand he's willing to train others, but it can cost more than a few gold. 
No time to chat. The ceiling looks like it's about to buckle. Got to move. 
Some say the Grummites are the original inhabitants of the Shivering Isles. 
Choices, choices. Well, now that you've liberated some Greenmote from the Silo, you need to add it to Thadon's food and wine. 
I'll tell you what. You give me at least a portion of what I paid for it, say two hundred gold, and I'll give you the staff. 
Good, you have found his source. Now, you must find where his source gets the materials if we are to truly bring this crime to justice. 
I am Lord Drad. 
Eleven! Eleven years in this rat-infested hole! But I'm getting out, and you'll still be stuck in here! Ha ha ha ha ha! 
I have no idea what you're talking about, but you have a sick mind. Get away from me. 
Know what I'd do? Talk to Faelian, learn who he is. Maybe then you can lead him to a secluded place. Then, when you're alone... you know! He he he! 
This humble Legion soldier is at your service. How can I help a fellow citizen of the Empire? 
For many years, I labored painstakingly in those Gardens, until my back bent and my soul became crooked. 
Yer botherin' me again? 
She works them too hard. I'm sure they're looking to do something about it. 
Stay warm, my friend. 
It is a marvelous example of a shrine. Let's be on our way, though. 
Things are really slow. You remember the last time we had a new contract? 
Are you prepared for battle, Your Grace? 
There is one way out of the Garden. I guard that path. You will travel that path, and it will bring me honor to defeat you. 
Did Thadon send you? Oh... I forgot he's happy again. Well, who sent you then? My word, your pinchers are huge! Stay back! 
All would be good if you had not killed to get it. The Thieves Guild has no use for you until you pay the blood price. 
There's a scholar at the Arcane University. Tar-Meena's her name. Supposed to be an expert on daedric cults. 
Take this as payment. 
I understand Bumph gra-Gash trains other Fighters Guild members on the proper use of heavy armors. 
I have few enough men to spare, but you have more than earned our help. 
They SAY the armies have been restored. But you think that's the whole story? Not by half, just you wait and see. 
During these terrible times, I think people need juggling more than ever to take their minds off their troubles. 
Hurts us.... 
Here's your payment for completion of the contract. I think it's time for us to discuss the Blackwood Company a bit. 
Find Olyn Seran. Look for him at a Daedric Shrine; that's where he probably is. 
I shall return the Helm to a secure place in the tower. It's the least I can do for Irlav. Thank you. 
If you raise a hand against him and strike him down, you'll be accused of murder. Even if Ulrich doesn't do things by the letter of the law, I do. 
Go ahead. I don't care. 
I'm Cylben Dolovas, assistant and bodyguard to Seridur. Let's leave it at that. 
You ready? 
You help me pull off a little prank, and I'll help you find J'skar. 
I've heard it's the best light armor in the city. 
Shhh. Not here. Keep following. 
Already I've heard that the Honorblade rests again in Castle Chorrol and the Escutcheon of Chorrol you have is all the proof I need. 
Yes, in fact, I do have a home for sale! 
No, friend. I'm afraid I don't know the way to Cheydhinhal, but good luck in your travels. Please excuse me. 
Oh yes, my pardons. But what can I give you? Hmmm... 
A merry dance for the Lord of Chance. 
All your charging needs... for a very small charge. 
Where are you going? What are you doing? We need to keep our eyes on each other! 
I... I don't want to stay here! Please stop hurting me! 
*Gasp* What's this? Oh, Dark Brotherhood assassin, please don't cut me with that wicked blade! It looks like this is the end of poor Francois! 
We already have one of those, I'm afraid. It wasn't all that Odd to begin with, honestly. We certainly can't have two. 
That wasn't so bad. 
Psst. Over here. 
Time is a strange thing in the Isles, so this may not set us back, and there is a task that needs to be performed. 
I shall do my best. 
A wise choice. 
Since I read a lot, and speak well, and don't drink brandy from milk pails, I guess I qualify as an Imperial. 
Please. Please help me. I don't want to die. I just want to go home. Go home... 
I can eat for a day with a single coin. 
You're full of it. 
Stay safe, citizen. These are dark times.... 
The new arrival to our land has slain the Gatekeeper! A fine candidate for the Demented! 
Anything I can do to help you. Really, you should speak with Uungor. He doesn't want to be here, anyway. Poor fellow believes himself sane! 
Which would you prefer? 
If you manage to actually receive the recommendations, you'll be eligible for entrance to the Arcane University. I shall be quite surprised, as well. 
Lose the key to your house? Find Mandil. He can get in, I'll bet. 
I'm sure that won't be necessary, Lord. Your Gatekeeper can handle it, I'm sure. 
You sure gave those damned daedra what for! It makes us all feel better to have someone like you around. 
It's good to know that there's a pawnbroker around. 
Please, allow me to teach you this spell, so that you may summon our kind to you in times of need. 
I'm running out of patience with Barthel. 
Give it here! Give it here! 
State your business, citizen. 
The offer still stands. You show me how well you can punch, and I'll think about training you. What do you say? 
The Blackwood Company has a terrible reputation. But with the Fighters Guild in trouble, who else is there? 
I'll go with you when we can all leave here together. 
A thousand thanks to you. 
They won't be the first to underestimate the Blades. 
Fine. If it be my Lord's will, then it is also my own. But, I am too distraught over the death of my child to return to his womb. This, you must do. 
Enter or do not, but make your decision. I've other duties to which I must attend. 
I have heard Argonia is a strange and treacherous place. It is no wonder odd things are happening there. 
The Emperor's heir lives! The bloodline is unbroken! Long live Martin Septim! 
He's desperately trying to control as much power as he can, and I'm a threat, because I don't want to see that power all in his hands. 
Rendil Drarara, chef extraordinaire at your service. 
Now that you have all four books, you should be able to handle things from here. 
No! I see what's going on. I should have seen it before. You conspire to destroy us all! You're a fool if you think I'll allow this to happen. 
It is a truly astonishing creature, though I prefer to avoid them. 
I know they're coming. They'll come for you. Like they came for my sister. Put her on the Hill of Suicides. 
It was a terrible night. I don't know how any of us survived. The whole city was burning. 
You need to take care of you problems with the guild before we can talk. 
It is my business.  Allow me to introduce myself: Captain Dion of the Count's Guard, at your service. 
If the world hasn't ended, I'll be here. Come back again. 
He's the Grandmaster of the Blades. As the eyes and ears of the Emperor, the Blades don't advertise themselves. 
Don't you see? The traitor somehow switched your orders, and has been sending you to the wrong dead drops! You and I have been deceived. 
The Wellspring is a cynosure, a place where the Animus of lost Aureal can return to this realm from the Waters of Oblivion. 
There are rats and goblins down there... but from what I've seen of you, I'm guessing you are an experienced Archer. Am I right? 
Faelian? Hey, that's my name! Yeah. I'm Faelian. 
Anon us most soon again, for sooth. 
Comrades, beware! 
The first words of each paragraph are the key, I'm sure of it! Well, I shouldn't keep you. Goodbye. 
You have some nerve! Where do you come off accusing me of something you know nothing about? 
The proof of your defeat lies there bleeding on the floor. 
The current Arch-Mage, Hannibal Traven, is true and bold to prohibit necromancy, reversing the Guild's shameful past policies of official tolerance. 
Your timing is excellent! I'll take the one on the right! 
I'm in possession of two fine weapons. They're both heirlooms of the Indarys family, held in the Castle for several generations. 
Oh! Hello, there. I'm sorry, you startled me. My nerves get rattled rather easily these days, I'm afraid. Living alone will do that to you. 
5, 4... Sheogorath has left us alone in this terrible time. 3, 2, 1. 
You... you will help me. Yes, yes. You will be most useful. 
Doesn't that noise bother anyone else? 
Don't fret, my love... I'm here. Be happy. 
Newcomers mean new pests. New pests mean more blood! More blood means a very busy Relan.... 
A primate has better things to do than provide tourist information. Beggars have plenty of time on their hands. I'm sure you'll have much in common. 
Should we do anything about...? 
I'm afraid I cannot. Leave me, and I will spare you. 
Did you find out why the Orc is here? 
Do you have the Mage's staff, Associate? 
Scar-Tail is a traitor to Argonia, and a blight upon Tamriel! Kill him, as my brother requests, and we will be forever in your debt. 
Ah! The triumphant Associate returns! 
Of the bumbling thief by the name of Brithaur of this I can only say. The man named Earil who owns a shop wishes he would go away. 
Quickly, worm. 
All right! 
I understand Daedra worship has become increasingly prevalent in the Summerset Isle. 
Now that you have the manifest, you'll need one more piece of evidence that proves the theory that links Agarmir directly to the crime. 
Please go away. I have no wish to speak to you. 
He's getting up in years, but he's still a good Alteration teacher. 
It's just to the southeast of here. Follow the path down the hill. But watch out for the invisible monsters that infest the ruins! 
Of course you will. You'd be silly not to. 
We'll speak again later, Apprentice. Now go! Your studies await! 
A cure? Yes... Yes, I believe it's possible. A mage named Raminus Polus has done some research. He's in the Imperial City, at the Arcane University. 
He has a grudge against the Thieves Guild and the Gray Fox in particular. Lex has made it his personal mission to capture him. 
I spoke to him recently. He really knows his way around. Knows every tree, rock, and cave in the area. 
We can't be seen talking!  I waited for you last night behind the Great Chapel, where WERE you?!  I'll meet you there tonight. 
After a bit of reading in the garden and running my special errand at noon, I like to shop at Books of Bliss. 
Maybe the ruler of Mania will fix all these walls that threaten to fall on top of us all the time. 
Jobs around here? Don't know that I trust you enough to recommend you to anyone. 
Any word from Jeanne in Bruma? 
We were all watching from the walls, and to be honest it was looking bad. I thought we were going to have to fight 'em street by street. 
I worry about the boy. What if the killer is after money? Primo is quite wealthy. He could be the next victim! 
Goodbye, magister.  
You... You killed Agronak. The Gray Prince is... dead. He... He was my friend, my mentor... Congratulations, Grand Champion. Hope it was worth it. 
Kastus Sintav. Uncle Iniel got us good jobs gardening. We're very grateful. 
I don't know why one would want to destroy a building. It takes time to make it. Much time. 
We're done here. Let's go get paid. 
You should think about joining the guild. If you're interested, talk to Jeanne Frasoric or one of the other local guild hall leaders. 
Welcome back to the world, convict! Hahaha. 
The Mazken do not forget their friends. 
You're going to have to leave. This is a crime scene and no one other than ourselves or Raynil Dralas will be allowed access. 
Is it true what I've heard about your most recent contract? You were forced to eliminate everyone? Even the... non-essentials? 
I shall do what I can in the meantime. Please, excuse me. I have other matters to attend to. 
I'm listening, please, go ahead. 
Go. Take a few moments to collect yourself. Meditate upon all that has transpired. Help yourself to any treasures this crypt may offer. 
Don't pay attention to those rumors. There is no such thing as a Thieves Guild. The Gray Fox is just a thief the Watch hasn't caught yet. 
Has Tar-Meena been of use in gathering information about the Necromancers? 
Did you hear about Ahdarji picking another fight with an Argonian? 
Fimmion gone. Bye bye. Go find pumpkin. 
If Countess Chorrol is any example, dignity and piety may indeed bring rich rewards from the Nine. 
Exercise your mind and body through working hard, each and every moment. 
The Gatekeeper is dead, you know. Now, that was a truly ugly creature. Perhaps now a handsome adventurer will come to steal me away. 
Please, sweetie, stay close to me.  The killer might strike again, whoever he... or she... is.  
Armand Christophe and S'krivva have special arrangements with the guards and judges throughout Cyrodiil. 
Now go, and may Sithis guide you in this new stage of your life's dark journey. 
My, my, you're a big one. A Nord, I'd guess, right? So strong... But you can't bend steel, can you boy? You can't do anything to get out of here. 
Ah, so you're an Arena combatant! It's always good to meet a fellow warrior, especially one who isn't here just to kill the Grand Champion! Ha ha ha! 
Outsiders should stay out of our home. 
It won't matter. Lord Dagon will soon be able to cross over. The Master's plan will have succeeded. 
So, it's a secret contract then, is it? You must be moving up in the world. Congratulations. 
Delmar at the Chironasium can help you with the staff. You still need wood from the grove before he can create your staff. Get it immediately. 
Did you hear about the pair of green recruits that cleaned out a den of thieves near Anvil? 
That's the last of them! 
I know the part of the sewers you were talking about. Follow me, I'll show you. 
This is terrible. Just terrible. 
As sickened as I am, I will not tell the City Watch until you have confirmed this theory and brought us the proof we need. 
But... how? What you say must be the truth... I feel strange... 
I could use a guar. Hell on my boots, though. 
Kneel, churl! 
Thank goodness someone that can help is here! 
I can manage with a weapon or with spells, but I've really been working on healing lately. I'm getting pretty good at it. 
The Mages Guild is, indeed, a fine organization. 
Me? I'm just Laralthir. I wish I were the Countess of Anvil, to tell you the truth. That Millona Umbranox, she's got it made... [Sigh.] 
Our work here is done. You should be on your way. 
I'm Caula Allectus. My job is making sure my husband Amantius doesn't go out with his clothes on backwards. 
Sweet and juicy! I can always count on you, my best pal! 
Roderick is dead, and Sithis is appeased. Unfortunately, the same is not true of the client who arranged this contract. 
Not many people would give up Spellbreaker for destruction, my friend. Your sacrifice honors me. 
Time need not slow you. Tell me, have you ever considered placing yourself on display? 
We're always on duty. 
By your crimes, you have been permanently expelled from the Fighters Guild. You have no further chance to atone for your actions. 
Don't tell me Falcar's given you the same task he gave Vidkun! 
Why not? What is it you are waiting for?  
WHAT? 
At Mankar Camoran's command, a favored few are given the Bands of the Chosen and may leave the Savage Garden. 
I've heard he knows more about Mysticism than almost anyone. Strange about the sheep, though. 
Greetings, Breton. 
I can't tell you how much your help means to me. Thank you again. 
Now, the shades of my people are cursed by Sheogorath to repeat the final moments of their failures, over and over again. 
I'm Tivela Lythandas. I apologize that I can't give you the respect a guest in my home would normally receive, but I am at my wit's end. 
May Uriel's spirit guide us in these troubled times. 
You've got the best room I can offer. If you start feeling ill for any reason, please consider shortening your stay. 
Words cannot express my gratification for your help. 
That's fine. I'll buy elsewhere. If you change your mind, you'll know where to find me. 
I will meet Martin at the Chapel. When all is ready, I will order my men to stop closing the Gates and prepare for battle. 
I no longer serve Lady Syl. Crucible has a new ruler. 
You've done it! 
I helped save the Fringe, you know. Not directly, really, but it was ultimately thanks to me. 
You need to find us work. You're supposed to be boss! 
May the Night Mother hold you in her cold embrace. 
You're not half the man your father was. 
Now it's all... ruined... I have to start everything over from the beginning! 
There are no quests for you right now, sir knight. Don't fret, though. The Knights will rise to the occasion once again! Huzzah! 
And I have LOTS of time on my hands, since I'm LOADED with gold. 
Now... take your treasure and leave me.  
Carahil inherited the Anvil Mages Guild chapter from Hannibal Traven, the Archmage. She runs a clean hall, just like Traven did. 
A fearsome weapon, and steeped in the ancient evil of its master. May its deadly power turn good, for once. 
Your pardon, citizen. I must return to my post. 
Finally! My collection is complete! 
Your lips to His ears. 
Stop right there, criminal scum! Nobody breaks the law on my watch! I'm confiscating your stolen goods. Now pay your fine or it's off to jail. 
The guilds are in a row, in the center of town below the terraces, north of the chapel. 
It's a shame, really. The Gatekeeper was a beautiful specimen. Now he'll just rot and fade like everything else. 
It's always 'rats' for the new associates. Is it some initiation test or something? 
I set out with the rest of the Knights to dispatch this blemish on the face of our fine world. When we arrived, we were overwhelmed. 
He is not known for his ability to remain hidden. 
A-again you have surprised me with your knowledge of our operation. I suspect Lynch didn't check all the inn rooms before we departed. 
Now, I bid you farewell. I do hope we'll meet again soon.   
I fear it won't be long until he makes his presence known. Without Sheogorath on His throne, the Realm is likely doomed. Again. 
Let's hear it. 
As you wish, Miss Herrick. Thank you for your time. And please, come back and see me some time. 
There are rats and goblins down there... but from what I've seen of you, I'm guessing you are an experienced Battlemage. Am I right? 
Here you must find your own path. 
It is just Ra'qanar, the poor porter. Do you wish to beat me? Punish me? Of course,  Ra'qanar deserves your scorn... but pity this one, please. 
A local gentleman has been looking to sell his manor. A bit run-down, but a magnificent place, and priced to move. 
Why can't they send someone here to torture the Scalons? More important than courtiers, if you ask me. 
Bless you! There's none in this town, but you could try Anvil. 
The Two Sisters is a fine place, and the two sisters themselves are nice people, too. 
The Fork! Songs of bringing? The Fork for Big-Head? 
I have a new task for you. 
Listen. S'razirr has an idea of how we can both come out of this ahead. 
I'm sure you are familiar with those despicable beings. Feeding on the innocent as if they were cattle. Well, this group was formed to combat them. 
I am Count Cirion. What does the mighty Lord Sheogorath need here among the shades of Vitharn? Have you come to mock us? 
What brings you to this delightful corner of the House of Dementia? How may I help you? 
All we want is work to do. 
Beyond that, take whatever else you need from the recovery chest... you've earned it! 
Only those wearing the Bands of the Chosen may enter the Forbidden Grotto. But they never return, so we don't know what fate awaits them. 
Did you talk to Kishashi? I can't trust you if she doesn't. It's nothing personal, really; it's just that everyone else is out to get me. 
Those cretin Skingrad guards caught me stealing a fish and locked me up. 
Primo's a blue blood, a noble through-and-through. He thinks he's better than most people, and in most cases he's right. 
The Society triumphs once more! Thanks to you, of course. 
I wonder if the Great Torch being lit will stop the unrest. I was getting excited about the prospect of more bloodshed. Oh, well. 
Burd! Deploy the troops for battle! 
I just can't believe he's dead. He was like a young, beautiful prince. I hope whoever did this can live with themselves. 
Thoronir will buy almost anything. And I mean anything. 
Right, okay. Listen, when you go back to Skingrad, don't tell Adrienne I was the one who saved you, okay? 
I certainly haven't heard there's a new adventurer trying to get into the Realm. 
As I've said, I just don't feel comfortable talking to you about Falcar. Forgive me. 
He was going to skip town on Arnora, but got arrested before making good on his escape. Now she has no money left at all. Poor thing. 
I told you not to come back here, and I meant it. 
Your false gods could not entirely rewrite history. Thus you remember tales of Lorkhan, vilified, a dead trickster, whose heart came to Tamriel. 
Between the hours of midnight and 3:00 AM, ask me about the Night Mother, and we will away to our Lady's home. Only then will the ritual begin. 
You are stupid if you come to chatter. If you want to train, and you pay me, then that is not so stupid. 
Actually, underground goblin lairs are no more common here in the West Weald than anywhere else in Cyrodiil. 
Valen Dreth lies dead, but why the unsanctioned bloodshed? You seem to lack... discipline. Here is your reward, but I'm afraid the bonus is forfeit.  
That looks important, whatever it is. I think you've really found something! 
Those new fellows here in town are making me nervous. Walking around with those big weapons; I hope they leave soon. 
This is an outrage! This contract should have gone to me! My stealth skills are unmatched! You will never succeed! Never! 
Were I not ordered to assist you I would forgo the Tenets and feast on your blood! 
You are dismissed. 
If you're here to rob me, I'm afraid I have nothing left. 
The Battle Raiment's already enchanted, so you can't muck with it. But aside from that, anything goes. Magic, stealth... whatever you need to win.  
There are rats and goblins down there... but from what I've seen of you, I'm guessing you are an experienced Barbarian. Am I right? 
I'm not sure about you, either. Tell you what. If you bring me back five portions of ectoplasm, I'll give my business to the guild. That's my offer. 
Nelrene is clearly withholding information. Persuasion might be in order, or perhaps Ma'zaddha will have something that will help. 
Our business is done. 
Find Tandilwe at the Temple of the One in the Imperial City. She can train you further. 
I'm hoping you can help. 
I saw Reynald Jemane's brother earlier. Can't believe they didn't even know about each other. 
Unless you relish the thought of decorating the end of my blade with your blood, I would get out of my sight. 
You're the one with the weapons shipment, right? Let's talk about that. 
I've been losing Aureals with each attack, and I'm down to nothing but men. We are pinned down here. If we lose, the Gates of Madness will fall. 
Hmph.... 
This is a private gathering of our... society. You may watch, but don't interfere. 
I hear you light that big torch in the city by setting yourself on fire. Now there's an idea. I'd like to see that, but the city is so far away. 
Stand ready! 
Until you get out of here and I see an amulet, we have nothing more to say to each other. 
You saw what happened, I had no choice. Aldos attacked first, and I had to defend myself. 
Nice. 
Here we worship Vaermina, praying for her to grant us true visions. What is your business here? 
Sister, if I may have a word. 
Chasing after shadows if you ask me. The Thieves Guild probably doesn't exist, and it's a sure bet the Gray Fox doesn't either. 
Filthy pickpocket! What did you take? 
How good to see you again, fellow knight. 
I've got nothing to say about them. 
You don't know, do you? She's kept it a secret even from you! 
I'm Watch Captain Audens Avidius. Don't forget it. I like this city quiet as a mouse. Raise a fuss, and you'll be sorry. 
Shall I show you up? 
He made things very difficult for the Thieves Guild for a while. 
Those who you assign as archers will head to the rear and keep their distance when the enemy draws close. 
It will be up to you to decide the fate of many. Life and death are strange things, easily manipulated, and both will be altered by your hands. 
Take everything, just don't hurt me! 
If you go there and bring it back to me, I'll tell you exactly where Aleron is. 
They're confused souls, too far from Lord Sheogorath's protection. 
But this one is taking all of the risk! What do you have to lose? One fourth, that's S'razirr's final offer. 
All day long, stories about severed heads and lopped off limbs. I can do without it. 
Your work, your deathcraft, pleases the Night Mother. And so, I come to you with an offering. An opportunity... to join our rather unique family. 
I never really thought about it. They just didn't seem like the sort of folks I wanted to spend time with. 
You have passed your test. Well done. I shall be more than happy to train you in the skill of Alteration from now on. 
Now is the time when we must band together and vanquish those who would pervert our forefather's tenets! 
What do you mean? Every Mazken under my command would gladly accept this honor, if it was not my own to claim. 
What for? Never mind. I don't really care. Oh, and I have to be with you. Them's the rules. 
There's an orc in Crucible who is deathly afraid of cats. 
By your command. 
I'm very excited to have an Elytra. Here's your pay. 
But the Inner Council still holds regular meetings. We have the situation well in hand, I assure you. 
I long to spill more foul daedra blood this day... for Cheydinhal! 
The Five Tenets are the laws that guide and protect us. But, sometimes, even they must be broken to protect the sanctity of our beliefs. 
I have warned my people to stay inside the walls and put my guard on full alert. There's nothing else we can do. 
Welcome to the Horse Whisperer. Are you interested in a horse? 
Stupid... just plain stupid. 
They are masters of fighting in the dark. If you intend to visit, make sure you bring lots of torches or a lantern or something. 
The Blackwood Company takes any job, no matter how tough. Fighters Guild is more fussy. 
Greetings, guildmate. 
I am Ri'Bassa, shaman of the Khajiit of Border Watch. 
For me, it ends here. You are our only hope to stem the blood tide. Give me your hand. 
Thank you. Come again. 
Well... All right. But please, be brief. I have some... research I need to tend to... 
While the information we got from the Argonian was valuable, we need more. I want you to infiltrate them. See how they work from the inside. 
Very well. Take your time. Enjoy the hospitalities of my... home. Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! 
Melisande has agreed to help revive Rona long enough for her to drink the potion, and finally be at peace. 
As I expected. Good. The target is a Wood Elf named Baenlin. You will find him at his home in Bruma. Enter secretly, and avoid his manservant, Gromm. 
I'm so tired. 
The Imperial Prison! Long did I languish there, in my youth, before the Brotherhood found me.  The guards are strong and cruel. So very cruel.... 
Only three of us left. I'm certainly no murderer, and I know it's not you. That leaves one person! We must protect ourselves... find weapons!    
The Flame is fed from the Altar of Rapture and the Altar of Despair. Only servants of Sheogorath can kindle the Altars. 
Everything else is just buying time for us to get the Amulet of Kings back from Mankar Camoran. 
The Gatekeeper's been killed. Now we're even more exposed to attack. 
I am still aghast. To think that someone would stoop so low... 
Has the deed been done? 
Ha ha! Magister, do you realize what this means? Do you have any idea how this could impact the study of magic? 
We can't keep stopping to talk like this! We've got to get out there and fight! 
With the information you have given me about Pale Pass, it could take scholars many years to amend the history books. 
I'm Elisa Pierrane. Father bought us this lovely house in the City. 
Only one city has sent aid. My guardsmen are the best in Cyrodiil, but they were never meant to be an army. 
But go ahead and take this hammer. You might have use of it, and I have others. Not much call for smith-work around here in any case. 
I hope everyone keeps working and doesn't take the time to go see the Great Torch. 
And the best way to kill something is with the bones of its own. 
We're doomed. The Greymarch can't be stopped. We'll all be Ordered like the old tales tell. 
My name is Eugal Belette. I'm pretty new here -- don't know a soul. 
The Waterfront is south of Temple District. The Arcane University is south of the Arboretum. The Imperial Prison is north of Market District. 
Shadow of a god! 
Can you help us? 
I've got more for you. Important stuff, actually. You need to go talk to Lord Rugdumph. 
You are the only remaining Duke, which is a situation quite unprecedented. Normally, you would never be permitted to pass within Pinnacle Rock. 
The Great Torch burns once more -- a beacon of comfort that only serves to mock my existence. 
Bring it on... I'm ready. 
Destroy the Aureals! 
Hello again. You're more than welcome here! I have everything for the budding alchemist under one roof. 
I know the Khajiit are all upset that the Council took away their land and gave it to us, but they just have to get over it! It's our land, now. 
I won, you lost. There's nothing else to talk about right now. 
Have you heard about Agronak gro-Malog? Turns out he's not a noble at all. He's really the son of a vampire! It's almost too horrible to believe. 
Skinned hounds are by far the nastiest dogs around. The best place for these poison-loving pups is six feet underground. 
The others are dust! You alone, Imperial, remain, First and Last! Go now! Beyond the next gate, your portal waits. 
Did you know I've counted over a 954 dead rats, 137 dead Grummites, and 12 dead men? I'm Jastira Nanus, by the way. I count corpses. I'm good at it. 
I spend many a lonely night wishing that the words I speak to it will be heard and not just fall upon the lifeless pigments and canvas. 
Concerning this, I can only speak to a friend. 
The holy Flame of Agnon! You've brought it back to light the Great Torch of New Sheoth! 
The family crypts are under the house. They give me the creeps. I have the key. Take it. Just don't hurt me! 
So, you've dealt with the problem, eh? I like the sound of that. 
Have you noticed all the city guards are roaming around the city as if looking for someone? I wonder what that's all about. 
I suppose that's good. 
I'll take refuge in my room until Nels has been dealt with. Thank you my friend! And good luck! 
No-one has ever seen his face because he always wears that gray cowl. 
Oh! Oh look! My goodness... Two people here to confront me! Whatever shall I do? 
We should get back to Oreyn and report what we have found. 
Come on! Together we can defeat him! 
Well, hello there. It's good to see such a well-equipped individual as yourself around these parts. 
So, Adamus Phillida is finally retiring from the Imperial Legion. Spent his life fighting the Dark Brotherhood. Time for a well-earned rest, I'd say. 
The Count left very specific instructions. He does not want to see you again on this matter until the Oblivion Gate outside Skingrad is closed. 
I will send word to the Countess at once of the danger to Bruma. You should speak to Martin about his progress with the Xarxes. 
You speak directly like one of my people almost. I'm glad I did not kill you immediately. 
Welcome to the Temple of the Ancestor Moths. 
Farewell, child. 
I... I don't understand. She was one of my most trusted advisors. 
Oh! You're being sent to kill Phillida? I hope the Rose of Sithis pierces his heart and sends his soul screaming into the Void! 
Well, when Hides-His-Heart gets here, I'll put on a little act. You'll cut me with your poison knife, and that vile enforcer will think I'm dead. 
Henantier isn't missing. On the contrary, I know exactly where he is. The problem is he's trapped and there's no way I can free him. 
Now that I have the book, I can try and translate what's on the walls here. You just read the inscriptions, and let me know what they say. 
Firm arms. A strong back. Yes. You'd do nicely. It's a shame. Time will ravage you, destroy you. Whither you. But there are... alternatives. 
And not a fan of My work, I can tell you. Hates it. Hates Me. A bit single minded, if you take My meaning. 
The Council was initially reluctant to believe the information was reliable, but with recent events, they have little choice but to trust it. 
Mara guides and protects Bravil, like she protects any good family. Like any good family, we have our problems. 
Fisherman's Rock is north of Leyawiin, about six hours walk, on a point of land on the eastern shore of the Niben. 
Remember, you must make the other guests feel comfortable. Make them like you. Make them TRUST you. Then bathe in their blood! Hehehehe! 
She's nothing but trouble. She went to the University long ago, but was expelled from the guild. Caused all kinds of trouble while she was there. 
Be glad to answer any other questions. Just keep your voice down, who knows what could slip out of that gate at any moment. 
Odd statues. 
The man is dead, you horse's ass! There's nothing more to tell! 
Could it be the K'Sharra? 
Here for more work? I've got one more contract for you. 
I've only got one more thing on my plate for you, but it's an important one. The Stone of St. Alessia has been stolen from the Bruma Chapel. 
Hmm. You don't look like a vampire... 
I could use a hand here! 
Yes, I orchestrated it. Syl deserves to die a painful death for turning on all of us, and consorting with our enemies. 
You saved my life. You brought me back from hell. I won't forget it. 
The Altmer have powerful wizards. It could be a dangerous situation. 
Please, no more... 
Board the ship and find its captain, Gaston Tussaud. He'll be in his cabin. Eliminate Tussaud in any manner you see fit.           
I don't suppose you could help me locate my friend Henantier could you? 
A nice lady, but strange. Talks to herself far more often than one should, in my opinion. 
His name is Jakben, and he lives somewhere in the Imperial City. There might be a clue in the Earl's house. 
You've cleared every contract we've got on the books. That's some good work. You're now promoted to Champion of the Fighters Guild. 
I guess Owyn will let anyone join the Arena these days. I guess I shouldn't let it bother me, seeing as how you'll be dead tomorrow. 
I see you've returned safely, Associate. 
It is well known in the City that I collect Ayleid antiquities. It's true, but I desire only very specific items. 
He served with honor. No Blade could ask for higher praise. 
Are you injured, Lord? Do you require my services? 
Not again! 
Adrienne Berene is the person you're looking for. I'm sure she'll be more than happy to help you. 
I never thought it possible. I mean... I had hoped... but to actually hold it in my hands. It's more beautiful than I imagined it. 
They helped us. Made us rich. But there was a terrible price. Blood -- and worse. 
Then you have come here to die. 
Hmm? Oh, yeah... Bye... 
Thank you. Thank you so much. Hopefully, I'll be able to sell these for enough to pay my debt. You're a lifesaver. 
With all due respect, Aurmazl, I ask that you reconsider. The main passage is strongly defended. Perhaps if you'd allow me to scout further... 
The Argonian said Fisherman's Rock is north of Leyawiin on a point of land on the east shore of the Niben. Take me there. Now. 
Run away! 
Welcome to Bleaker's Way, stranger. What can I do for you? 
You certainly know your Destruction spells. I wish I could be of more help, but... I just don't feel comfortable talking about it. 
You'll need to control one of the Courts of Madness. Replace a current Duke. Or Duchess. Whichever. That will command respect! 
There's a room free, all right. Best you'll find in Bravil, if I do say so. 20 gold, and it's yours for the night. 
Have you looked around Jensine's? It's amazing what people will get rid of. 
Good luck, my friend. Don't take any unnecessary risks. 
Did you hear how upset Tsrava is about all the dogs that J'bari has in his yard? 
She shall be banished from Castle Chorrol and stripped of her duties. However, I am not without pity, and therefore she shall not be jailed. 
My Beloved! I'll carry her away to safety. Should the fanatics get her, I...I...I would have to kill them all. 
Welcome to the House of Mania. 
However, Leyawiin must move towards the mainstream of Imperial culture, both in trade and in political affairs. 
The only cave to the west that comes close to the one described in Gelebourne's journal is Boreal Stone Cave. That must be where he's headed. 
Nels is a drunk. He's doesn't even try to hide that fact. But what else is he? When the liquor has dried, what remains of the man?  
Don't worry, sire, we will get you out of here. 
I have been expecting you. The full Council has already considered the matter of Martin's claim to the Imperial Throne in detail. 
I didn't think much about him when I first joined the Thieves Guild. Lately I've been hearing odd things though. 
I'm Muurine. If you have any secrets, I'm the one to tell. I won't share them with anyone but my family. Unless they're good ones, that is. 
Really? She's really dead?! Thank you, thank you, thank you! I'm free, I'm finally FREE! 
You finish the clean-up, new blood. Look in the houses. Get moving, so we can go home. 
It's not far from here. Here, I'll mark it on your map. Now, just leave me. 
Finally, some peace and quiet around here... now I can get some serious work done. 
J'Baasha's an adventurer... just like you. 
Paranoia is the order of the day in Crucible. Many keep their eyes open constantly, and some of those eyes may have seen something useful. 
Kill Mankar Camoran, and you will unmake his Paradise. 
After all, this is my destiny. No man can deny his destiny. 
At first I thought she was just a cranky old crone. Now I'm beginning to think she's a cold-blooded killer.  
Let's go hunting. 
Have you ever bought a horse from Bongond? 
How can I help you examine the Nirnroot if you don't have one? Come back when you intend to show it to me. 
But what if... what if you brought him another Ayleid Crown? 
In the event that you beat the Gray Prince, you're to remove his armor and present it to me. Then you'll get your own Raiment of Valor.         
For the right price, I can make anything good-as-new. 
So, at last we meet. I have been following your strange journey through the Dark Brotherhood, young one. 
Everything is just so... desolate. My inn is ruined and... oh, it's terrible... 
Look, I can't just give it to you. I paid good money for it, after all. 
Actually, Captain, President, Vice-President, Secretary, Treasurer, and Sergeant-at-Arms. 
You've seen the Spire in Passwall. It is believed to be a monument from times past, but its true purpose appears to be more sinister. 
Your Grace, Issmi has been waiting for you. Please speak with her. 
We filled the Desolate Mine contract, but the butcher's bill was pretty steep. 
Dear Speaker, when darkness shrouds the Empire, we can travel to the resting place of the Night Mother, and begin the ritual of awakening. 
I wonder. Do gods have bones? What wonderful things those must be! 
... stirring up trouble between Khajiits and Argonians, to help me find ingredients. 
Oh thank you! I knew there was good in you. Here's the key to Rythe's study. You may come and go as you please. If you need me, I'll be here. 
I look at you and wonder how you're still alive, considering your utter incompetence as an assassin. With any luck, this contract will be your last. 
She seemed entranced as he wrapped his arms around her and sank his teeth into her neck. I burst from my hiding place and attacked Seridur. 
They've never hurt anyone yet, but its never too late for them to start. 
Before my master passed on, she hid countless matrices in the world. There to soak up the magical essence of our world.  
No matter. You are too late to stop Lord Dagon's victory. Soon we will return to Tamriel, to rule over it as lords. 
Well, no bounty on your head, and you look able enough. Very well; are you sure you want to join the guild? 
I don't belong. Not my place. Shouldn't have gone. 
Oh, this is just horrible! Who could do such a thing? Who could kill a defenseless person in cold blood? Greed truly brings out the worst in people. 
Blessings, dark sister. 
Ah... I see you well, my friend. With all the new recruits, it is hard to be certain who is who. 
I bet you think you're pretty tough, huh? I bet you can swing a sword and everything. Well, it doesn't matter! Not in here. It does no good to fight. 
Rebuilding the Gatekeeper is one of the few things that has gone right lately. 
Did you really face down Mehrunes Dagon himself? They say he stood 200 feet high and crushed the Temple Dome with his fist! 
Black Marsh has become more dangerous than ever. Many settlers have been lost, and most non-Argonians have left in fear. 
I have been waiting. 
You'll not get the best of me! 
Behold, the Messenger of Death! 
And I feel the same. I am the happiest man in the Isles and all Cyrodiil. 
As a Speaker of the Black Hand, I directly oversee a particular group of family members. You will join that group, and fulfill any contracts given. 
Not many could resist the temptation of the Oghma Infinium. Now it is my turn to be put to the test! 
I was a Knight of the Thorn from Cyrodiil. As soon as I heard the gates to the Shivering Isles opened, I knew a threat was lurking inside. 
I don't see many wanderers out here in the wild. But you look like you can take of yourself. 
Are you ready for a bloodbath? The winner of this match will advance in rank, so the stakes are high! Pit Dogs, show us what you're made of!  
Doesn't get as much work done as he should. He's always turning things over to look under them, searching for who-knows-what. 
Speak quickly, mortal. 
Rats. Hate them. HATE them. Every one. Gonna hunt them down and chop them all to tiny bits. 
You... you're still alive... For all I know, you're the killer! You stand your ground, or so help me they'll be blood between us.   
I have much to offer, and I'm always on the lookout for more. 
And I see you've learned to summon Flesh Atronachs! Relmyna must like you, little Duchess... but probably not in THAT way. 
Can you believe how Skjorta acts? 
Hello stranger. We don't get many visitors around here. Makes things pretty lonely for me, if you know what I mean. 
You helped her pay my debt. I heard about you. She never hurt anyone! Who could have done this? What monster would do this? 
May the light shine upon your face! 
Give way, caitiff! 
I knew a priest named Martin once. I'm sure he's dead, just like the rest of them. They're all dead, don't you understand? 
We should go hunting. Soon. 
Well, you're in charge. You won't be doing the contracts, but the Master is always paid a percentage of the Guild's monthly take. 
It is a truly astounding creature, though I prefer to avoid them. 
Captain Burd wanted to attack the Oblivion Gate immediately, but I ordered him to wait for you. 
People are talking about a Resonator. Unless it makes more pests to kill, Relan does not care. 
Thadon is a drug-addled fool. 
She runs a good inn, and she's proud of it.   
Courage, soldier. We have an Emperor again. 
I am the best alchemist in Leyawiin. But if you need Advanced Training, you'll need Brotch Calus in Bruma or Ardaline in Bravil. 
I'm glad the Gatekeeper is back. Lets me focus on my work. 
I'm not listening to you. It's because I don't like you. 
Farewell! And tell your friends! The Inn of Ill Omen is open for business, as always! 
I don't even want to look at it for another moment... 
Well met. 
Very good. Follow me. I will take you to the Shrine. 
You ever hear the expression, 'fools rush in where Daedra fear to tread'? Well, accusing anyone without evidence is mighty foolish. 
She's in the hands of the Fanatics! I must save her. Stand back, stranger. I need room to swing my sword. 
Never trust what anyone tells you. 
I followed him a few times, to see where he goes. He walks around the city looking for skooma, and then goes to Lorkmir's house for several hours.    
Has Margarte ever talked to you about running a business? 
Goblins. Ugh. Evil, foul-smelling little brutes. 
The outlaw, Black Brugo, is a menace to County Leyawiin. They call his marauders 'Black Bow Bandits' because they use black bows. 
Oh, what a delightful story! Brightens my day, it does. 
I can't expect you to save the place if you don't even understand it. So, speak to my Dukes. Learn about Mania and Dementia. Try not to die. 
Witches! How dare they prey on our men. 
Very good, Arch-Mage. I shall wait here. 
You found five of the Tears? Fantastic! This turned out better than I expected. Perhaps a little bit of a bonus is in order. 
For Lord Dagon! 
Those famous for good deeds may receive Blessings of Intelligence and Magicka when they visit Wayshrines of Julianos. 
Come with me, scum. Those who can't afford to pay reparations must face Lord Sheogorath's dungeons. I'm confiscating your stolen goods as well. 
Look at all the bones around you! You have been a busy little boy, haven't you? 
When you are ready, I have a final task for you to undertake. It will, undoubtedly, be the most important service you perform for the guild. 
What's the matter, five targets too much for you? If Vicente gave me that contract I'd be home before supper. 
The lifter of curses returns! 
We killed scores... nay, hundreds of evil daedra! The ground ran thick with their dark blood. 
Perhaps this time we will have more than a few moment's rest. 
I'll pay Donton for his contract, and I've got this for you. Good work getting him back in one piece. I might make a real soldier of you yet. 
That's Amiable Fanriene. He can barely sleep because of it. 
I am ashamed of my crime, but ready to face what fate has in store for me. 
Voranil got parties near about every night, and there's plenty of cooking and cleaning and preparing to be done. If you don't mind. 
You smell of death. Been conjuring up dead things? 
Excuse me. I'm Irlav Jarol, a researcher for Arcane University. Ayleids are my specialty. 
If the gates fall, the enemy will flood into the Isles. We will be helpless to stop them. But now that you've arrived, perhaps we can slow them down. 
If you have the item my Lady seeks, I suggest you bring it to her. She hasn't slept a wink since you departed. 
I can tell you about them. Murderers, all four of them. Intelligence tells us they've been holing up in Bloodmayne Cave. Watch for traps. 
That buffoon, Hieronymus Lex, has invaded the Imperial City Waterfront. Imperial Watch guards from all over the city prowl the streets. 
We've been had. 
I was in my basement. Suddenly there was a lot of noise and heat. 
If you're skilled enough, Athragar has a rather powerful frost spell for sale. Very effective, but dangerous to the inexperienced. 
He's the killer! Don't you see? We have to protect ourselves! We'll be next!  
You want training, from me? Well, perhaps I can accommodate you. If you're worth the time and effort, that is. I think a little test is in order. 
Eleven of the evening watch, and all's well. Long day, sir.  
The Council runs the Arena to amuse the masses, and it pays for itself, with all the fools who lose their shirts gambling. 
The Gatekeeper has died. Wonder what got him. Collywobbles? Greenspore? 
You know nothing of my father's true power! 
Make it fast, dreg! What little patience I have is wearing thin.... 
The things I've done to the people of Anvil; the horrible, unspeakable acts I've committed demand repentance. 
It is closed to mortals. Your presence here is... unusual. 
You'd best go see Deetsan before you do anything else. 
Are you interested? It's only 10 gold for the night. 
Stay close, please. 
Ah well, perhaps you can return to help another time. 
He killed them! All of those people! We... we have to get him before he gets us! We have to kill that murdering swine!  
Ah well, never mind then. 
You wouldn't think it, but our rocky soil is perfect for tomatoes. The same ground that produces our glorious wines produces my splendid tomatoes. 
I have to admit, I'm better with an axe than I am with Magic. I've been working on spellcasting, but I still feel better with a weapon in hand. 
Thank you, mortal. Their spirits are free, and henceforth, above my shrine, five bright candles shall burn forever in memory of their sacrifice.  
Okay, based on your abilities, here are your choices. Do you want to fight one Boar, one Boar and one Wolf, or two Wolves and one Goblin Skirmisher?  
What's the plan? 
my current disp is 30 or lower 
Kill them, run them out of town - do what you will. I simply want them gone. 
Don't forget who your friends are, or they may just become your enemy. 
This citizen is accusing you of stealing the bust of Llathasa from Cheydinhal. I even found the bust in your cabinet. What do you have to say? 
But now I'm old, and my instincts have failed. I let that woman down. 
I can't imagine how the average person gets by without our extra services. No spell-crafting, and no enchanting? It must be awful. 
I'm short on skilled thieves of your rank just now. If you change your mind, come back and see me. 
Ciirta promised to bring us to the light. It is a way, a promise of a better future. Free from the shackles of Sheogorath. 
Hrmph. Very well, Steward. I believe you. You may return to your duties. And of course, thank you for your time. 
Nahsi at the Fighters Guild seems very at peace with himself. He says that's what allows him to be such an amazing martial artist. 
What?!? 
My housemates and I were lucky to find this house in the Temple District. It costs a little more, but it's a very good address. 
How'd you know about that? Agh... too many people don't know how to keep quiet about official matters. Very well. 
Well, my friend, let's hope it doesn't come to that, hmm? We'll get through this together... as brothers. 
People act like Sheogorath's disappearance is of some grave significance. But the Shivering Isles are the same as ever, I assure you. 
Did you hear that Falcar left the guild? I think Deetsan is in charge in Cheydinhal now. 
However, my studies of the ancient texts make clear that it is the key to dangerous magical powers which should be left dormant. 
So I offer you a choice. Would you confront me in battle? Or offer me service? 
He's Guilbert. I'm Reynald. 
Sir? 
Hello stranger. 
Hrmph. Not much of a loss, if you ask me. 
Now that Thadon is dead, I should see if he had my things in his quarters. 
I... I... It's for the good of Crucible! You must see that! 
Stop following me, you smelly cat! 
Ita Rienus knows more about the geography of Tamriel than anyone I've ever met. Apparently, she knows quite a bit about Mysticism as well. 
Thank you for getting me out of that cursed place. 'Tis ashame Farwil didn't make it. At least he died doing what he loved. 
I don't see a problem with it. Perhaps they're in love. 
The Dark Brotherhood must seek out a Dark Elf named Hlanas. He has need of our services, and we are only too happy to oblige. 
I salute you! Most impressive! 
I've had many meals at the Oak and Crosier. Sure, it may not be the best in all Cyrodiil, but it suits me fine. 
I'd better get back to practicing. 
Cindanwe would breathe her last breath with my hands around her throat and my sweet Kishashi would take her place. If only... 
If you can get used to Thoronir, you can find some good deals there. 
Only a true Demented can appreciate what it means to render his name. 
Be wary of the Shambles, its bones in disarray. Don't stand too close when they die... explode into frost they may. 
You seem the trusting type. Perhaps you can assist me? 
I bet someone sold the Bravil jailbreakers down the river. How else could the Fighters Guild have found their hideout? 
Be careful. 
No. He departed long ago. But his evil will remains, preventing any from paying homage at the Shrine of Tiber Septim. 
Have you reconsidered? 
Hey, something wrong? They're waiting for you up in the Arena! 
Do you enjoy it? Cutting my heart? Why visit that other smith? 
And the last defender of the last ragged Septim stands before me, in the heart of my power. 
Looking for Raminus, are you? Well, you'll find him in the lobby of the Arch-Mage's Tower, in the center of the University. 
Hello, I don't think we've met.  Are you new in town? 
Oh. Suit yourself. 
This is not one of Mankar Camoran's chattels from the Garden. Who is she? 
We were the Chosen. We saw more clearly than ordinary mortals. We would destroy the world and remake it. 
Your words warm my heart, my love. Being here is the best choice I've made in my life. 
May I interest you in some of my fine wares? 
At last! We are free from Ciirta and her madness. Hail to Ra'kheran, the lightbringer! 
You get used to the cold. Got a good set of fur boots to keep my feet warm. Give a Nord a good thumping to keep the blood flowing, khah-khah-khah. 
I am honored by your presence. How can Ocheeva be of assistance? 
So Alessia Caro has recovered her ring. And now you want to know where she keeps it so you can steal it back. 
Greetings, honored friend. 
Jerall View is a nice place for visitors to stay. Hafid makes everyone feel welcome. 
I could have told Syl who the traitor was, if only I could remember! Damn my failing mind! 
A perfect tomato... one taste, and it is gone forever. And then... a lifetime of searching for the next one. 
Well, my pride is a little wounded... 
Wait here. I will tell the Count you are waiting to see him. 
I do know the portal I create through the Mysterium Xarxes ritual will close behind you. You'll have to find another way back. 
You're starting to crowd me, friend. Why don't you just back off, eh?   
Breath, child of air, bestowing movement, the stirring of spirit.... 
Please search to the east of my sprawling abode. They have been known to vacate these premises. I am most gracious and truly woeful. 
Exactly.  Sometimes I think he's following me.  I've tried to talk to him but he always hurries off when he sees me coming. 
Of course, sire. 
The Gray Fox made a fool of Hieronymus Lex. While half the Watch was in the Waterfront, thieves made off with half the rest of the city. 
We cannot do it ourselves, as he recognizes all of us. The job pays a fair bounty in gold when he is brought to justice. 
I swear to you, my friend, if anyone tries to harm that sweet girl I will tear them limb from limb! Whoever killed the others will strike again. 
The Count? He could care less about our plight. As long as the roast suckling pig is delivered to his feast table, he's as happy as can be. 
Everybody needs a copy of the Black Horse Courier! 
Excellent work my friend! All we need is the Brush, and we can leave this place. 
Unwelcome it is. 
Goodbye for now. 
I ask you one last time: give me your possessions. The Master requires it of all initiates. 
How did you get in here? What are you doing here? 
While I welcome the break from correspondence with her, I worry that something may be amiss, given recent developments. 
Yes, you'll find them throughout the Isles. Jyggalag's forces use them as conduits into the Isles. 
You speak, yet I cannot hear. You listen, yet I cannot speak. When the voices grow quiet, then shall our time be at hand. 
I long for a Colovian Fur Helm. 
Hello, Evoker. 
He's quite the pugilist. 
My Lord! I've been waiting so long for you to return! 
If you want to sneak up on one of those Zealots, don't wear one of their robes. That never fools them. 
I paid several scouts to try and find the ruins at Pale Pass before I hired you. They were only able to locate the first of a series of landmarks. 
Then you are free to enter the Shrine of the Flame of Agnon. This key will allow you passage through any door in Cylarne. 
That's not fair! 
Then Aleron's death has been avenged. I told him that the gambling would lead to this, that foolish man. But he never listened. 
Bjalfi snatched Rockshatter from our mantle and took off to "find his fortune" with the local Marauder gang at Fort Strand. I want that mace back. 
You don't want to fail me again. 
Always a good idea to protect yourself. I can help with that. 
You think? 
My three companions and I were sent here by the Emperor Tiber Septim to discover what evil had defiled the holy catacombs of Sancre Tor. 
I'm afraid I'm not very social. So I really don't know very much about the people here. 
You have the blood price? 
Welcome back. Have you completed your task for the Count? 
Fine. Your loss though, isn't it? Can't get that recommendation you need. 
Yes, you are quite an asset to this Sanctuary. In fact, I believe you are ready for advancement. I hereby appoint you Slayer. Well done!  
My Lord, you do me too much honor! It will be glorious to fall in battle at Your hand! 
Why are you bothering me with that wagging tongue? Do you know how long it would waggle after I rip it from your mouth? I do. Don't tempt me. 
Volanaro, at your service. Need a spell? Need an item recharged? Need a witty practical joke played on someone? I can handle it all. 
What are you talking about? I don't know anything! There's nothing going on! 
That's amazing! The pelvis of Pelagius III! An honored madman if there ever was one! 
Wait... what's wrong with Lewin? 
No? I thought you might be interested yourself, given your condition. Should you change your mind, simply speak with my steward. 
Armies with steel are good, but armies can be destroyed. Magic is better. Magic can bring armies back to life. 
Also try my friend, Ogier Georick, The Main Ingredient, here in the District. 
I do it first thing in the morning. 
Idiotic. She'll pay people to help her, though. 
The orrery here is the only one in Cyrodiil. There's one more in Hammerfell... the old one at Stros M'Kai. 
Hey, that's mine! Guards! Guards! 
You're not afraid of trouble, are you? You'd like the Fighters Guild. 
Then you should start saving for it right now. 
Do you hope to be counted among my Chosen? Then prove yourself to me, mortal. 
I don't know where it came from, and I don't want to. Those who've gone in have come back out... wrong. I'm just here to warn folks to stay away. 
Sorry, I have little time to speak. 
Your bravery is the talk of Skingrad. Well done! 
If you've got the amulet, then Dagail should be able to regain control of her visions. Then I'm sure she can send that recommendation for you. 
When people start turning up dead, it's usually a good idea to keep your eyes on any nearby Nords, if you understand what I'm saying. 
Be that as it may. I now have a task that should be better to suited someone of your particular talents. 
Was Vigdis our most recent recruit? Or Lensi Llharam? It's been so long, I forget. 
To-MAY-to. To-MAH-to. DAY-dra. DEE-dra. It's all the same to me. 
Ask me what I think about chapels, praying, the Nine Divines. Go ahead. Ask me. 
I'm not in the habit of answering questions for strangers. No offense intended. 
Hello, Brother. It's good to see you again. The Night Mother has been smiling upon you, I hope. 
Ohhh, the big strong adventurer killed the Gatekeeper. How interesting. 
Stand aside! 
Are you a student of the Arcane Arts? My husband, Alberic, is an Advanced Trainer in Conjuration at the Mages Guild. 
I hope someone saved a piece of Jyggalag's armor. Just the thing for my museum! 
I assume Sheogorath gave you the Manual of Xedilian. You can consult it for more information, or I can provide instructions. 
That skooma trade is bad business, and the Renrijra Krin are just a bunch of thugs. 
I've made you a little pumpkin bread... something to keep up your strength on those long night watches. 
Don't push your luck, stranger.  Plenty of folks have turned up dead after asking questions like that. 
These are the signs as they were foretold. First, there is the Plague of Vermin. It is said our town will be overrun by disease carrying creatures. 
Why? What drove you to this madness? 
So is it true about your latest contract? The girl's nanny was actually a Fighters Guild bodyguard? 
I have ordered my troops to deploy into the Underdeep. Your job is to lead the Aureals into our trap. Don't worry, we'll be ready for them. 
Three people now dead, and yet the two of us still live. Do you think I'm the killer? Because I most certainly wonder the same thing about you.   
We'll have to fend for ourselves. Do you think you can pry the door open? 
Oh, do you now? Well then, far be it for me to deny you such a reasonable request. Guards, I need assistance! This person is resisting arrest! 
You know where they're burying Rienna? 
Don't think he ever forgave himself for not being there when she passed. He swore then never to raise a weapon again. 
Don't eat me! For the love of Sheogorath! Please, don't eat me! 
Join us, and you'll find the Dark Brotherhood to be all that, and so much more. We are, more than anything, a union of like-minded individuals. 
Sheogorath gone. The Duke gone. This whole thing is making me really, really nervous. I need to calm down. 
Sorry, but I'm too busy to talk right now. Try one of the other Blades. Perhaps Roliand or Cyrus? 
I heard Ah-Mahlz was out hunting goblins again. Good. They're vermin. 
He hasn't reported to the client at all. Get yourself down to Bravil and find Maglir. Make sure that contract of his gets done. And send him to me. 
But when he didn't come out for a full day, I unlocked the studio with the key he said to use only in emergencies. It turned out he wasn't inside! 
Behold, the Black Arrow! 
Martin? He was with the rest of the survivors. They were taken back to the encampment, where it's safer for them. 
I am Arquen, Speaker for the Black Hand. As you can see, we have dealt with the betrayer, Lucien Lachance! No longer will you serve as his puppet!   
Many thanks. I'm preparing the ship for her return. 
Hero of Kvatch? How about the Hero of Bravil! No need to be modest, my friend! 
Have you ever spoken to Margarte? She knows a lot about running a business, and about alchemy. 
I'll confess that I have no idea why Primo is here. The kid's got more wealth than the rest of us combined. He sure doesn't need a chest of gold. 
I am Lorgren Benirus, and I desire the chance to atone for my sins. 
I don't know what would possess him to do that. Marrying a Bosmer is just wrong. 
So you're telling me I should believe you? That Matilde is the killer? Why should I trust you? Get away from me!   
We should go back, I'm not sure we should be here. 
Everyone knows he's the court wizard. But I reckon you want to know more. Is it worth a few coins? 
Really? And whom might this figure be? 
I like the ladies. It's been my weakness. But now I've got Romana, I stay away from the fleshpots. 
It's a little too rugged up here for me. Add a couple hairs to a Nord and you've got a bear. 
Whatever you do... don't leave me alone with these things! 
That's more than I'd usually pay. 
It's of no great consequence to me. 
Then pay with your blood! 
I was collecting their scales, see. I had a contract with this young alchemist. You wouldn't believe what he was paying for those scales! 
You cannot deceive me. Anaxes has fallen. Now I must restore order to the Garden myself, and this angers me. 
I'll hack you to pieces! 
We figured it was time to move on to a new prank. This one was getting boring, anyway. So you can tell her you've found me! 
How can I help you today, friend? 
Other arcane trainers in the City? Just one. Dovyn Aren. In the Market District. Basic instructor in Alteration. 
Ah, the Gray Mare! Chorrol's finest repository of wine, women and song! 
I don't see how the Empire can survive without an emperor. 
The Rose will only work if Phillida is unarmored. So, when would a soldier not wear his armor? I only take my armor off to sleep or swim... 
You've got it. I'll have the two Goblin Berserkers and the Troll brought out to the Arena. Now get up there and give the people what they paid for!  
Let me know if you need my help. 
I'm pleased to see you again. 
That fetcher. He knows this is the only heirloom I have left from my family. Only he would stoop so low. 
The Gray Fox is waiting for you. 
Bruma's a funny place... half Cyrodiil and half Skyrim. I'm old Nord all the way. I keep the old songs and stories alive. 
The only way to save him is to put on the Dreamworld Amulet and go to sleep. Only then can you hopefully find out what's happened in there. 
Do you have the gift for Malene? 
Sounds like everything is taken care of there. Good work. 
1, 3, 5, 7... my Lord! I... I don't know what to say. 8, 16, 4... 
Hey! You aren't Celia Camoran! There's an intruder in the library! Protect the scrolls! 
Very good. You are well-prepared. But if you should ever find yourself in need of a horse, my offer still stands. 
Matilde claims to be from one of High Rock's most distinguished noble families, but I have a feeling their fortune has long been squandered. 
Heretics are misguided worshippers of Arden-Sul. 
So nice of you to drop by again and see me. 
I know Brugo. Long ago, back before I became 'Sir Mazoga', I split a share or two with Brugo. 
He sleeps with us here in the Priory House. 
Please, I no longer have a desire to speak with you. I appreciate what you've done in the past, but that's just what it is... the past. 
Somehow the forces of Order have poisoned the Pools of Mania and Dementia that feed the Font. 
I am Weebam-Na. What do you want? 
 I suppose Farwil will wish to talk to you now. Musn't keep the Count's son waiting. 
Sorry, I'm too busy counting the number of rat droppings in my cell. 
Well? What are you waiting for? You have the blood, and the altar awaits. 
You mean there are still ogres there? 
You're the one the Madgod sent, aren't you? 
You're not dreaming, Reynald. It's me, your brother. Guilbert. 
You'll just have to get the book back, that's all. Whatever it takes, yes? If you need to break in and steal it, that's what you'll do. 
So, do you feel any different? Now that you've been through this experience, I mean. 
Good to see you again. Have you reconsidered your decision to undertake the investigation? 
That is why I stand here before you. I bear an offering. An opportunity... to join our rather unique family...   
It's all the same to me, either way. All of it. Nothing is right without the Chalice. Have you ever used it? No, of course not. You simply must! 
Not until you've proven to me you can handle yourself with a shield. 
How did someone manage to kill him? 
Victory is sweet! 
For you? All right, I'll take it. 
I'm sure you hear it all the time, but I'd like to thank you personally for closing that Oblivion Gate outside Cheydinhal. 
A bloody black horse courier. Hahahaha! ... Ahahaha! 
To be honest, I'm not sure if I trust him. He's a hard drinker, but there's something more. Something in his eyes, hard and calculating.   
Then leave this place, until you have better reason to be here. 
Never seen you here before. 
Whatever you've got, I don't want it. Head to the Church before you get me sick. 
If you had come to me before... I would have laughed and dismissed you out of hand. 
What is it, pondscum? 
A God. My God. Wow. I thought little furry puppy dogs were the cutest thing in the world. But, look at you! I could just eat you up! 
The Resonator is fixed again. What a shame. I looked forward to meeting new people. They always have such nice things. 
The monastery is extensive and well guarded, so you should make sure to be well prepared. Should you succeed, I will pay you well for your services. 
You are finding your contracts agreeable, I hope? 
No news yet, eh? 
Hmmm. I don't think I know you well enough to tell you that. 
Your predecessor did have one task He wanted performed, though He never found a mortal suited for the task. 
Rest here for the night, and then continue along the Gold Road, heading east towards Kvatch. 
Where ... go? Grrr. 
You shouldn't be here. 
Patience. We'll have... all night. 
It appears to me that Jyggalag is strengthened by these obelisks that are disfiguring the Palace lawn. Perhaps shutting them down would help? 
A friendly word of warning before you choose. 
Have you taken this to Sinderion in Skingrad yet? As far as alchemists go, you couldn't ask for a more knowledgeable source. 
M'aiq is glad he has a compass. Makes it easy to find things. Much better than wandering around like a fool. 
I don't know his name, but I'd recognize him if I saw him again. 
My father carried me to safety. He later returned and believed Reynald and my mother had perished. 
It's only a matter of time before adventurers swarm the Isles now that the Gatekeeper is killed. You'll need a sharp blade to bleed them. 
We must find Galtus Previa. He must be here somewhere. 
I walk right past them. They're slow creatures. 
Do you know where the vampires are? 
5, 6... Thadon's back on the Felldew... 7, 8... without the downer... 10, 11. 
The Fighters Guild is always looking for new members. If you've got a clean record, and don't have a bounty on your head, we may be able to use you. 
So? What do you have to report? 
I'm willing to teach, if you're willing to learn. 
Armies of Our Lord are singing again! Bells ringing! Singing! Singing! 
I know someone's been murdered and we're all on edge. Just try to remain calm. I'll get to the bottom of this. 
Once she helped me advance out of that place, and stepped down, then she could have it back! Why did you have to get in the way? 
If you win, you get back double what you bet. Simple as that. Win or lose -- it's mostly a matter of luck. 
I am Janonia Aurunceia, chief maid-servant of Castle Leyawiin. 
We've got to clear out all these goblins. I'll let you know when we've gotten the last of them. 
If you need to learn how to use a shield, you should talk to Fadus Calidius at the Fighters Guild. 
Kvatch was rebuilt from ruins once before and she'll do it again. You have my thanks. 
Okay, but remember. I'm not so good at close combat - you'll have to watch out for me. 
Business isn't going to be the same, now that anyone can just wander into the Isles. 
Well... this is a bit embarrassing, so forgive me... 
Hello friend. Stay a while and watch the sheep with me! 
I will, I will! I want to see Syl dead just as much as you do. She cannot be allowed to survive, after what she's done. It's despicable. 
You have all the recommendations you need, I believe. Raminus Polus will want to speak with you. You can find him at the Arcane University. 
Who does he think he is, acting all high and mighty? 
Martin couldn't have done it without you. I count you among the greatest heroes of the Blades. 
I hope Julienne was helpful. 
This won't be the end of my story! Stay away! 
Right. A big, fancy dinner party. You seem likeable, but not so much that I'd just let you in there. And not dressed like that. 
Good luck with Itius. 
You've finished? Excellent! Good work, guildmate. Here's your payment for the contract. 
You should speak to the rulers of the other cities of Cyrodiil, as well as the Elder Council. Ask them to send aid to Bruma before it is too late. 
Don't try to turn me against Primo! For all I know, you could be the killer!   
I wish those Knights of Order would come here and wipe everyone out. I'd finally get some piece and quiet! 
Have you heard that Arentus Falvius can summon creatures? 
Is there something you need, Champion? 
I shall tell the master that you were here looking for him. Perhaps I'll bring him your head as an offering. 
I'd like you to speak with Tar-Meena at the Mystic Archives. She is our specialist on magicka arcana, and has been helping gather information. 
You're a sneaky looking sort. 
I don't expect any objections from the Elder Council, but we should defer to their authority. 
I have no time for your pathetic attempts at small talk. Now walk away, before I get... nasty. 
One day, you'll find out who the Brethren are, and you'll be sorry.  Oh yes. 
Long burn the Dragonfires! 
That's my business. 
Just in case, it might be best if you wore this ring while you were casting the spell. I make them myself. Very useful for this kind of research. 
While you're in Anvil, we'll treat your horse like an honored guest.  
The Dark Brotherhood must seek out an Imperial named Avresa. She has need of our services, and we are only too happy to oblige. 
He's our new Captain. I've never met a finer man. 
Please, do not let my appearance... unnerve you. The needs and Tenets of the Dark Brotherhood come before my own needs as a vampire. 
So many things do do. So little time. 
The Renrijra Krin are Khajiit bandits and smugglers posing as guerillas and freedom fighters. 
The Dark Brotherhood must seek out an Argonian named Pasha. She has need of our services, and we are only too happy to oblige. 
Back, nithing! 
A wise choice, citizen. 
Guess I won't be visiting Kvatch. 
An honor to serve you. I'm Emfrid, owner and publican of the Grey Mare, at your service. A room? Or food? Whatever you wish. 
Are you interested in joining? You'll need to talk to Teekeeus, then. Otherwise, just talk to the head of any of the local guild halls. 
Don't get too many folks passing through here these days. 
They have caused trouble here as well. But they have gold to pay for the trouble. Things are always better when served with gold. 
Yes, let's see what he thinks of your plan. 
Are you not the exalted Duchess? Slayer of the great Gatekeeper? Champion of our mighty Lord Sheogorath? 
There was a 21 percent chance that Dementia would get a new ruler. 
I think it says something about Ocheeva's faith in your abilities when she gives you a contract to kill someone who isn't even conscious... 
From this point forward, you are no longer bound by the Five Tenets! Sithis will forgive any murder, any theft, so long as you serve the Black Hand! 
He's the person to talk to about an audience with the Count.  
You now owe your loyalty to our guildmaster, the Gray Fox. He has three rules you must follow. 
There is a group of battlemages tracking the Necromancers carrying the gem. I want you to meet them near the ruins of Silorn. 
Evening, sir. 
So you say.... 
You see, Francois Motierre is a marked man. He owes a considerable sum to the wrong kind of people. So, they have sent an enforcer to kill him.  
It appears you're well prepared. Good luck. 
Thinking about sticking your paw in my pocket? Go ahead. I'll blow you to cream corn, and the Law will love me for it. 
You honor me, Lord. 
Hello. I am Laythe Wavrick, the Chief Herald and Countess Valga's attendant. Welcome to Chorrol. 
I don't trust you enough to reveal details about the castle to you. 
Thank you. I will now speak the word. 
All this talk of torture has me thinking -- would it be possible to hold someone in time during their most painful moment? 
You have been found guilty of killing a guild member. As such, your guild privileges have been suspended. 
You've done it! Victory is within our grasp! Give the Amulet to Martin at once! 
Blast! The cage is locked. 
Come to gloat, eh? Well, you'll get no apologies from me. 
I guess you haven't heard. We don't like the 'beautiful people'. But maybe you can persuade me you're ugly inside... 
Sad story. But at least we stopped him in time, thanks to you. 
Please, rescue my daughter from those brutes! I fear for her safe return! 
Well, aren't you the clever one. Mind you don't get too full of yourself. You might explode. 
Oh, my dear. I didn't mean to imply that you have a choice. 
What happens to Maglir now isn't your concern. I'll deal with him. 
Keep to it, I have faith in you. 
Maybe later. 
Behold, the Butcher! 
The first and second floors are public. All other parts of the palace are strictly off limits. 
I need some time to study the Mysterium Xarxes. I'll let you know when I learn something. 
I will see you next week, most honorable Listener. 
It's such a shame. He didn't deserve to die like that. 
Remember, 11 in the evening. Don't disappoint me. 
Ahhh! Eeeyah! No, no, nooo! 
Too risky. It's likely to be a trap. They could cut us to pieces down there if they knew we were coming. 
You aren't a member of the castle staff. What are you doing here? 
I hear one of the guild mages has gone missing again. 
I wish I had more teeth -- great big fangs on my arms and legs to eat them before they eat us. 
Suit yourself. Maric may be cheating S'razirr, but at least this one knows what to expect. 
He is? Then the Greymarch has begun again? If that is so, then why are you here? 
Guilbert was always the brains, but I've got the brawn! If you need anything, he can help you! 
In three days or so, Erthor should be back here, safe and sound. I'll fill him in - you just tell Adrienne that you did the work, and you'll be set. 
He's always wanted to be in the guild. Good that he was finally made a member. 
Oh, and I guess there's keys sewn up inside the Gatekeeper's body. Not sure why someone would do that. It's not like anyone can get them now. 
Lead on! 
I passed her the other day. You wouldn't believe the look she gave me! Whatever happened, she's taking it out on the whole guild. 
Head to Skingrad, and visit the West Weald Inn. I believe he's currently employed there. In the wine cellar, in fact. 
If it wasn't for my friend here, you'd be right. 
The burning flame of the Great Torch casts a peaceful glow, but will the flame stay ablaze or will it one day go? 
I don't like a lot of what I hear about the Blackwood Company. But they complete their contracts on time. 
If you want to challenge Agronak, go right ahead. He lives down here in the Bloodworks. Do that, come talk to me again, and I'll arrange your match. 
If it's about Cropsford, please talk to my father. He'll know what to do. 
Well. Good. I really don't care, either. I just get sick of all the god-talk. Might as well pray to rocks and lamp posts. 
It has been an honor speaking with you. 
Must be nice being in the Mages Guild. If they need something recharged, they just talk to Vigge the Cautious, and poof! All done. 
I haven't seen him in days. Volanaro said something about a spell backfiring, making him permanently invisible. 
Thanks to you, the Mazken have been utterly defeated! 
He's drinking even more than he was before. Is it because he's afraid, or feeling guilty?  
Please, sire, we must keep moving. 
I'm sure I have something that will interest you. 
My name is Elragail. I look after Thamriel. He's a little strange. 'Touched by the Gods', they say. 
They say from the obelisks Knights do spawn; stay clear of them unless you wish to be gone. 
I knew the secret of my success would be revealed one day. I can tell you all about the brush if you like. 
We might be able to grow turnips next spring. 
I wish I had witnessed the avatar of divine Akatosh myself. Imagine! Upon the very altar of the Temple of the One! 
Well... yes. Absolutely. Bit of a shame for them. 
Do you ever go to the Copious Coinpurse? 
This is not the first time such a thing has happened, however. 
Yeah. I've heard of him. Isn't he a soldier or guardsman in the Imperial City? 
I don't know how he does it. It's no wonder he spends so much time at the Tap and Tack, though. 
I have everything I need. Now all that remains is to brew the potion. This, however, is a task with which you cannot assist. 
Enjoy it. 
It is so kind of you to favor me with your attention. Please excuse me if I seem unappreciative of the honor. 
You have not done that which I ask. Kill the bears and bring me their hides. Then I shall do as you ask. 
You can pay your respects in the northern croft. Just don't touch anything. 
Please, I have much to tell you. Don't go. 
Get lost. Or I'll pull your arm off. 
I hope we'll get to Skingrad soon. I've had enough of the wilderness for now. 
The Elder Council rules in the Emperor's absence, by ancient tradition. 
Sir, this property has been seized by his lordship, the Count of Cheydinhal. Leave immediately. 
Why are you here again? You'll only draw attention to us, give them one more reason to attack! 
Are you ready to give me the artifact? Remember, the ritual will consume its physical form. It won't be seen again on Tamriel for many years. 
Please, accept this as a gesture of thanks. It's the least I can do for you... after all, you saved my life! 
Let's just keep this incident between us, okay? It might make... a bad impression. 
Did you pry any information out of him? 
Be ever vigilant, vampires are creatures of deceit. 
I suppose I assumed you'd be able to lift the curse and be done with it. 
Have you decided? 
Does Dovyn Aren still teach Alteration? 
Yes, most revered Listener! My blade will rend flesh at your command! 
Not at all. It was an honor to carry out such an agreeable duty at the personal command of Lord Sheogorath's personal emissary. 
What can I help with? 
You've got him. Let's talk about Ajum-Kajin. 
I'll be at the Grey Mare until I've finished my work. But please don't disturb me until I'm done; this is quite a delicate business, you see. 
You're welcome here. 
Kneel before the might of Jyggalag! 
Very well. The area outside the Chapel has been cleared, and these people need to be taken to safety. Escort them to the camp south of here at once. 
You're still annoying me, but not as much as the other J'zidzo. 
Talking wears me out. 
Did you see Ganredhel training her dogs yesterday? She's got a knack for it. 
All found dead along the same stretch of road. The only trait shared amongst them is that each had previously stayed at the Brina Cross Inn nearby. 
Perhaps it is a mistake to make that assumption; only time will tell, I suppose. 
They're bizarre people. I'm glad they stay out of the city. 
Lead the way. 
Well, well, if it isn't the Black Arrow! How's our new Grand Champion, huh? You ready to make me some money? Ha ha ha ha ha!  Ahem... 
Cyrodiil's runestones are thought to belong to one of three time periods: the Dawn Era, the Merethic Era, or the late First Era. 
Hello there. You don't have any experience building boats, do you? I'm rather stuck, what without any instructions and all. Confusing stuff. 
I shall follow you through Crucible. Speak with the citizens, and ask what they know about this supposed conspiracy. 
Have you seen it? Have you seen the light? The bright, shining light? I know it. It waits for you. Speak with Ravel. He knows the way. 
The others are dust! You alone, Argonian, remain, First and Last! Beyond the next gate, your portal waits. 
These Dunmer are useless. 
What's this about? 
I beg to differ, history can be quite enriching. Hmph. I figured you to have more brains than brawn, but so be it. 
Oblivion take you! What is it you want from me? 
Now you have an opportunity to engage in more meaningful tasks, and continue with your advancement through the guild. 
So Earana has ascertained the location of the book, has she? This is an unfortunate turn of events. She can't be trusted with it. 
Are you so eager to begin? Very well. We can start, if you feel you are ready. 
Ulrich is definitely up to something. Every day, we take in exorbitant fines from the people. Where most of that money goes, I have a good idea. 
This is his stronghold. Where the Blackwood Company supposedly defeated him. Something's not right here. Come on. 
Counting the wrong corpses. You were a big help. 
It's not safe for me to handle the bust. I shouldn't even be talking to you. Go find Methredel. She has your instructions. 
I'm not sure I trust you enough to reveal any more to you. 
You will receive no training from me. Not now, or ever! 
You bloody half-wit! Do I have to spell it out for you? She's a killer! A murderer!  
A nice effort, though. A shame he's dead. These things happen. 
May the sunlight always safeguard your path. 
You aren't going to kill me. I know it. 
All right men. We've been ordered back to our posts. I smell the dirty hand of the Gray Fox behind this. 
And Xedilian? Since you're standing here, I assume you've succeeded. Or you're terribly confused. Or really lacking in good judgement. 
You are a wonder! Not only the Hero of Kvatch, but the Master of Miscarcand as well! 
It's time for you to leave, my friend. 
I'm glad to see you. I'm finally starting to unlock the secrets of the second half of the gate-opening ritual. 
I don't know what her problem with Argonians is. She's going to cause some real problems, if she's not careful. 
I shall be an unbreakable wall. 
Very well. You are now an Associate of the Mages Guild. The full guild hall is now available for your use. 
Hurry up, before I change my mind. 
There you will find a man named Rufio. Kill him, and your initiation into the Dark Brotherhood will be complete. 
You may attempt to approach her then. The Lady has been concerned about her safety lately, so be prepared for a hostile reaction. 
You have your "criminal." Congratulations. 
I hope you're enjoying the museum! 
I don't know if I like this. 
It's in the Elven Gardens District. I think the house is deserted. That's why he goes there. So he can escape from life and do his skooma!          
Hello. What is it I can do for you? 
We must protect Martin during the battle. He is the Empire's last hope. 
You know of the K'Sharra Prophecy? How odd! Are you some sort of scholar? 
His name is Martin. He is a priest in the Chapel of Akatosh in Kvatch. Yes, Kvatch. 
The Emperor may trust you, but I don't. Stay out of our way. 
Welcome to the Alchemy Headquarters. 
You won't be leaving, though. I'll see to that now. 
You will let him kill you with this: the Cursed Mace. As you are doing this for me, I'll save your miserable life. Probably. Get out of my sight. 
Heinrich Oaken-Hull is married to a Bosmer? I suppose the women are less annoying than the men. 
My Lord of course noticed the Font when you arrived in the Palace. The Font of Madness, in the middle of the throne room. 
If you'll come with me. 
I have provided you with a vial of antidote, which will be used to revive Francois Motierre after you successfully stage his death. 
Something on your mind, goldenrod? 
Uh-huh.... 
What is it? Should we stop? 
He's dead? Thank goodness! I feared I'd never be able to leave here, or worse, that he would come for me. I can finally return home. 
Then we have no further business at this time. Return when you have gathered the supplies. 
There's a charge in the air. Been casting some destruction spells? 
My Lord comes to rid us of the Scalon menace? 
I rushed into the back garden to find Roland struggling with a woman he'd been courting. I tried to intervene, but he was too strong. 
We need the Brush to get out of here. Bring it to me so we can get out of this painting. Hurry, I'm starving. 
Thoronir isn't too picky, which is nice. 
Congratulations, you manky scroat. Now get away from me. And don't ever talk to me again. 
Thank you for your patronage. 
As a member of the Order of the Mythic Dawn, everything you need will be provided for you from the Master's bounty. 
Do you have any new items from the list? 
Have you reconsidered my offer? Will you bring to me the daggers? 
And leave me alone! I've got enough wrong with me already. Don't need new wounds to add to my troubles. 
Well, that would be a trade secret. I can't divulge how I pass the great savings on to you, now can I? 
Neville used to be a soldier. I'm sticking close to him. He makes me feel safe.  
We are safe in your presence, Lord. Thank you. 
Ciirta is dead. Ra'kheran will guide us now. 
You can't be too careful out in the wilderness. Almost any creature you find is liable to give you a disease. 
You've got it. I'll have the Mountain Lion brought out to the Arena. Now get up there and give the people what they paid for!  
The Mages Guild seems more disorganized than usual lately. 
Please, I mean you no violence. Perhaps you can help me. 
Don't forget: the living quarters at 10 PM. I'll see you there. 
My aim shall be true. 
Thanks for the help, not that I couldn't have taken care of it myself. If I were still allowed to carry an axe.... 
What else would you ask of me? 
Have you ever used a decent piece of armor in your life? I doubt it. 
Yes, the West Weald is a nice place. Just stay away from Erina when she's in a mood. 
I am Iniel Sintav, head of the Sintav clan. 
My Khajiit is quick and cunning! Go! Seek him out! See whose blood is quicker. 
Why, hello there! I'm Brithaur! It's a pleasure to meet someone who doesn't judge me so harshly. The people here, they have some ideas about me. 
Just know, that whatever you need, we will give gladly. Our hearts, our blades, our lives if need be. Long live the Septim bloodline! 
My progress through the ranks here will be slow. My prejudices against certain types of magic limit my chances for advancement. 
You know what they say about the size of a man's boots.... 
There's no need to be that way. Goodbye. 
1, 2, 3, 4.... 
I wish I knew. They're all dead. All of them. Even my poor, sweet Biene. You... you're the one who helped her, aren't you? 
Primo may be young, but he looks strong, and I'm sure he could handle himself in a fight. I think I'm going to enlist his help. 
So then Sorceress says to the new Gatekeeper, "But in the morning, you'll still be ugly!" 
I heard that you helped the Guard close that Oblivion Gate. Thanks. We were getting worried about that damn thing. 
It was returned to me by a stranger from my homeland, Morrowind. Wear it proudly. Perhaps you can help restore the glory of my family's name. 
Yes, Brother? What can old Gogron do for you? 
Very good.... Very good indeed. The Creators shall take notice soon enough, and then they shall have me to deal with! 
Have a seat. Please. 
Does the Lonely Suitor Lodge sound familiar? Try there. 
Hahaha! No! Really! It wasn't me! Never! 
I don't think you can quite grasp the nuances of Alchemy. I'm sorry, but my training would be beyond you. 
I don't blame you. 
We're going to show them daedra a thing or two, aren't we ma'am? 
You should hasten to Castle Cheydinhal. 
The cemetary is well tended, brother Holger. 
Somehow I knew you weren't serious about it. 
Have you spoken with Kishashi? Until she sends word you are a friend, I will not speak to you. Not another word. 
You did it! You actually made it back with the crystal ball! Oh thank you! Here, please take this as a reward! 
Ah, yes. I'm afraid I'm unable to issue a recommendation. Only Dagail can do that. 
That's not bad. 
Strange... with all the lava, you'd think I'd be warm, but all I feel is a bone-chilling cold. Perhaps it's fear... 
I did not join the Imperial Legion to engage in small talk with rabble like you. If you have something to say, say it. 
Ulrich has been watching me, so I haven't been able to enact the plan I devised to bring him down. That ends today now that you're here. 
We shall speak when we've reached the chamber. 
Well, I hope this will eventually drive them away. There may be a few stragglers, but I think this should do it. 
These arrows will sink deep into your enemy's flesh. 
Agata is the first person I go to when I need something. Maybe I should talk to Dagail instead, but I just don't feel comfortable doing that. 
Have you heard the Derics arguing? 
I wonder what makes him so "Naughty"? He seems nice enough to me. 
Crime doesn't pay. We have long memories. We won't forget. 
Sheogorath, guide my hand! 
You won! Congratulations! Here are your winnings, my friend -- 100 gold pieces. Come back and bet on the matches as often as you like! 
There is an orc in Crucible who is deathly afraid of dogs. He loves cats. He's a cat person. Cats are his favorite thing. 
Look, I... I got nothing else to say to you. Just leave me be! 
Don't you have a book to read? Or something else very important I've told you to do? 
Well, that's never happened before. I suppose we'd have to kill you. I mean, we can't have you going back to Anvil and ruining the whole plan. 
You can put away your sword in these halls. Unlike the defending spirits, within these walls, none will war with you. Not even the Fanatics. 
You won't say 'Sir' to me? You are afraid to speak. It would shame me to fight a gutless thing like you. So go away. 
I'm so hungry I could eat a Bosmer. 
Forget it! This is obviously a trick! Let's get out of here. 
I don't know where they came from. I just know they're everywhere. 
I'm don't mean to impose, but I'm hoping you can help me.  My daughter, Dar-Ma is missing and I don't know what to do.   
Your next contract can be found at the dead drop on Hero Hill, southeast of here. A hollow in the moss-covered rock contains all you need to know. 
All I did was fall down, sure. Maybe even vomited on the floor of the tavern. Charge me six times, Ulrich... charge me you fetcher??! 
This is terrible news. Under normal circumstances, I would dispatch a legion or two to Bruma immediately. 
Death to the Master! 
Please, follow me, and we'll have this matter cleared up in no time. 
Well, you got the weapons there, but there were casualties after. Do better in the future, or don't come to me for work. Here's your reward. 
Fool! I am no effete noble! 
I still don't know if there is a divine plan. But I've come to realize that it doesn't matter. 
Graman gro-Marad. I'm a bouncer for the Bloated Float. My wife, Umog, is a night guard for Master Umbacano. 
You know what Brawler rank is worth around here? Nothing! Face it kid, you're still a maggot! You need to keep fighting if you want to be somebody! 
Crawl, craven! 
Hmm. Don't get me wrong, that magic arrow sounds nice and all, but it seems to me like you don't even need to use it to get the bonus. 
Of course. The Amulet of Kings. So we... I... can take it to the Temple of the One and light the Dragonfires. And stop the Oblivion invasion. 
So how do like THEM apples? 
You're needed in Chorrol. Report to Vilena Donton. She's got some duties for you to take care of. 
Did you fare well? 
Praying to yourself, my Lord? That's not a good sign. Or perhaps it is. Prince of Madness, and all that. 
Sorry, no time to talk! I have to deliver these copies of the Black Horse Courier! Here, have a copy! The Night Mother rituals are on the rise! 
If Pinnacle Rock is indeed under attack, you should prepare yourself for a difficult fight. The forces of Order must be quite powerful. 
I don't know, besides Nelrene. She's taking orders from someone, but won't tell me who. If I find out, will you promise to spare me? 
You should also know that there's only enough Languorwine on the blade for this one contract. After Motierre is sliced, the knife will be useless. 
I'm happy to be of service in any way I can, in any place I can. There are so many who need help, and so few to offer it. 
Y-yes. I understand. I'll head there right now, okay? 
A bargain at twice the price. 
The lad's dead, you uncaring fool! Now get away from me before you join him! 
Bring my salutations to Julienne. Safe journey to you. 
Good luck to you! 
He'll be sleeping, like anyone with a lick of sense... in the Priory House. 
Dammit! The gate is barred from the other side. A trap! 
You've overstayed your welcome, I'm afraid. 
They say they treat all their patrons like royalty. From what I've seen, it's the truth. 
Hope it suits you. 
It was even easier than Maric promised. Push off. 
I'm Errandil, Living Saint of Arkay, and the Chapel's chief crusader against the wicked practice of necromancy. 
She a liar. Say she kill Minotaur with spoon. Ha. Ranarr-Jo, he trust nobody. Except he trust this liar. Why? They strange. Not good neighbors. 
She doesn't tell me where she goes. It's not my place to know. Please, there's nothing else. There's nothing else to tell you. 
Please, keep looking. I know it's out there somewhere. You'll find it eventually. 
I can't wait to get my hands on Raynil. He'll become very familiar with Bruma's dungeons; or the end of my blade if he doesn't come peacefully. 
Ho there! Where do you think you're going! Selene's not going to like this one bit... I wasn't to be disturbed! 
By the gods, you're the only one left. It was you! How could you? How could you have killed all those people? You won't take me so easily! 
What news do you have to report, Inquisitor? Have you found who is responsible? 
Didn't I send you to see Lord Rugdumph? 
You're back. What have you found out about Galtus Previa's disappearance? 
The only odd occurrence lately was with Chanel. I have seen her spending a lot of time in the West Tower. 
Please, there's no need to apologize. If anyone should be sorry, it's me. You're busy, and I'm distracting you from your work. 
Don't talk to me. 
You of course recall Rufio, the feeble old man I sent you to kill when we first met? He was weak in life, but his spirit is quite angry in death.     
Stay. Go. What do I care? 
Even a small bit of good news is refreshing in these grim times. I salute your courage, Savior of Cheydinhal! 
I'm the only alchemist in Skingrad. Not much business here, but I can't go back to Morrowind. It's just like anywhere else in the Empire. 
Perhaps they will cause no more. Perhaps they will have the gold to pay for their drinks. 
Sheogorath's gone. I wish I could just disappear that way. Sometimes I feel invisible. But, that's not the same. I need a nap. 
That Ra'qanar seems a bit shady to me. He does a good job on the horses at the castle, though. 
I was right about him! He's been doing it, he's the killer! My friend... you and I have to end this. We must kill Nels before he kills us! 
I'm constantly on the verge of retching up, or falling asleep, or screaming at someone who doesn't deserve it. I'm just so fed up with it all. 
Sheogorath has abandoned you, fool! 
I should've killed you outright when I had the chance. Well, life is all about second chances, isn't it? I won't waste this one. 
One Strong Elixir of Exploration for you... and many more for sale if you wish to buy. 
That's all I know about Kvatch. 
The coward's way out. So be it. 
Nords are raised to be cold-blooded killers. Don't take your eyes off Nels if you value your life. I'll bet anything he's our murderer. 
May I help you? 
Greetings, most honorable Listener. The time has come for you to hear the whispers of death. Go to Bravil, and listen to the Night Mother.            
Then why do you waste my time? Begone, I have no more patience for you today. 
A smith, book shop, and general trader are west of the river, near the west gate. 
Thadon has his Chalice. That'll anger Syl, I'm sure, which means more work for me. 
How are you doing, dear? 
He sees all, knows all. 
Let's make these bastards sorry they messed with Bruma. 
My Orb is returned, and Arkved will live out the rest of his days in nightmare. It is fitting. 
Didn't I give you something to do? 
You've got a lot to learn. 
I bet there's plenty of corpses to count in Xedilian. 
This is the Bay Roan stables. 
Look at this. I got it from a dead bug. A really big one! This oozed out of his body -- here take it! 
Really? What a shame. 
I am pleased that you would ask. There is a way, though it is not known to me. 
Hurry, before everything falls on top of us! 
You'll need to put an end to that. Stop them. My armies should already be there, but I want you to see what you can do to help. 
I am tasked with keeping order here in the Savage Garden where Mankar Camoran's chattel challenge themselves in unceasing combat. 
Come closer. I'd prefer not to have to shout. 
The Torch relit! It sings of things returned! 
Even if Farwil doesn't say it, we appreciate that you're here. 
You're stuck here like I am. 
I always suspected she was watching me. Thank you for finally confirming it. 
The Count and I thank you for helping bring Ulrich's hold on Cheydinhal to an end, and for doing so without unnecessary bloodshed. 
Does the hunter have this one's ring? 
Take some advice? Go down to the sea, stand a while. Watch the sun rise and set. Think on the distant lands across the water. 
Don't forget, only I can fence the most difficult items. 
Until you pay the blood price, your membership in the guild is forfeit. You can pay me now, or Armand later if you wish to rejoin. 
Your Grace, you honor us with your presence. 
Rumor has it that he'll teach others to pick locks. 
Behold, the Divine Avenger! 
Not an easy thing to come by, obviously, but we will need a daedric artifact. Bring it to me when you have acquired one. 
Damn! He's finally gone completely bonkers! Thanks for the tip. Now stand aside and let the Guard do their work. 
Once these ancient monuments might have been powerful bulwarks of the Cyrodilic emperors, battlemages, and priests. 
What did you do to my little rats? 
At long last, it's good to stand at Weatherleah again. 
They'd never believe he was a vampire. I retreated here to the cabin to collect my thoughts. 
The only modern sites that still bear their ancient names are Moranda, Mackamentain, Wenyandawik, Ninendava, and Fanacas. 
For what purpose, we've never exactly been sure.  
If for any reason they are unsuccessful, Mucianus' life will be in forfeit. You must make sure he is safe. 
Your Highness. The Blades are at your command. You will be safe here until you can take up your throne. 
Phintias, the proprietor, caters to specialist collectors. He may have an idea of where to locate those books. 
I... I can't believe it's true. One of us is dead... and everyone else is convinced it was no accident.  
If you'd give me that amulet, I would like to show you what you've recovered. 
I'd like to report a crime. Watch Captain Avidius stole all my money while I was shopping in Jensine's Merchandise. 
Yes, Cyrus. This is the Emperor's son, Martin Septim. 
The bond we share is unbreakable, is it not? The Blades are as one, on this and every other matter. 
Let me guess, traveling on business? You don't look like you're out for a stroll. 
But... but I thought you were my friend? How could you say such a horrible thing? Just leave me alone, you monster! 
Good luck finding Erthor. 
Now, it seems that this illegitimate son is the heir to the Septim Throne. If he yet lives. 
I can't argue with that. 
Vigdis, Fighters Guild. 
I like how magic makes things glow all pretty-like. Light up your foe by sticking a couple of these in him. 
I offer you a chance for redemption. Do not return until you have 20 bear pelts. Take this time to come to terms with what you've done. 
You have not yet followed the path required to speak with the Lord Hermaeus Mora. 
I don't know who the Night Mother is, but she pays me to kill people. My own mother should have loved me so much. 
You... die! 
This next one's a Breton. He looks like a bit of a dandy, but he's deadly with a blade. He has more experience than you, so be prepared. 
Looks to me like you're in trouble with the law. Clear that matter up, and then perhaps we'll discuss the guild. 
Now I know why he didn't finish me that night. He wanted to cast suspicions on me instead. 
It got its name from the pointed rocks that jut out of the water there... sort of look like teeth. Mouth, panther, teeth... get it? 
It doesn't become you to tell lies. If you've recovered the Madstone, please bring it back to me and you'll be rewarded. 
Fine by me. No great loss. Let me know if you change your mind, though. We can always use fresh meat. 
Your job is still to stop it. And to stop Jyggalag. You've already forced Order's hand. 
Well, well, look who's here. It's the number one suspect in the cold-blooded murder of two innocent people. I'm watching you, scum. 
You should check in with your Doyen every once in a while to see if there are any commission jobs available. 
Syl being killed is no surprise, but Thadon leaving, as well? 
I suggest we use the Reman Sweep Formation. You'll assault and we'll guard the rear flank. Onward and upward! Huzzah! 
Look me in the eye when you answer this. You dare accuse me? 
I've learned of another crown, entombed with the last ruler of the rival city of Lindai. 
You have been told all that is necessary. Approach the shrine or do not. 
You should rendezvous with Captain Burd immediately. The sooner that gate is closed the better. 
Bat loves his arrows. They aren't Althel's, they're his. Bat would be betrothed to his arrows if he could. By the way, have you seen my betrothed? 
The Fighters Guild recovered the Stone of Alessia? I didn't know it was lost. Is it magical or something? 
Mama used to say, "If sweet-talking doesn't work, try hitting him with a big stick!" 
Good day, Your Grace. 
Order is defeated, but the cats still prey on us all. 
We need to get that fourth book, then. If Tar-Meena is right, we can use these books to locate the Mythic Dawn's hidden shrine. 
At sunrise, the view across the water is quite picturesque. 
Haha! Cindanwe lose her head looking for that. Show to Ranarr-Jo. He hate Cindanwe.  
You...you can! Bless you, My Lord! I should have known that you of all people would be able to understand me! 
I just have to tear apart the boat to get to the hinges. 
You'll come with me, and you'll be searched for stolen property and pay reparations. Then, you're free to go. 
The Amulet has power. Only a true heir of the Blood can wear it, they say. 
Oh... well... it would seem you don't have the 25 gold required to place a bet. Best come back when you've got enough coin. 
You'll have to excuse me. 
We all owe you a debt of gratitude for closing that Oblivion Gate. Thank you. 
Get out of my way! 
Well, maybe. 
I've said all there is to be said. Trouble me no more. 
I must return to my task, for Gortwog waits. May you find all that you seek, traveler. 
Afraid He might mess up that pretty face? Good thinking. 
I'm glad you've returned. The contract is waiting, if you're ready. 
Open the gates! Let in the horde! 
Someone new is trying to get into the Shivering Isles. I'd better hide what little I have left. 
And a good day to you, sir! 
Take him on the flank! 
Hail, my Sister! 
If not for the Tenets, I would slay you where you stand! 
Yeah, I know, you already told me. That's why there's an Arena full of Spectators and some hungry creature that wants to make you its lunch!  
The time of Cleansing is at hand, praise be. 
There's nothing to see here. Why don't you just go home? 
We need you to stage an... accident. Kill the target in the manner specified, and you'll receive a considerable bonus. Do you accept this contract? 
That's an excellent idea. They cannot refuse entry to an emissary of Lord Sheogorath. 
He.... he's alive? 
Guards, I think Thadon forgot how to use the door. Kindly show him out. Before I forget myself. 
My whole family is happy about the Torch being lit. Unless it's all part of some bit plot. 
I must speak to my husband first! 
At Common Treasures you can find enough bits and bobs to last all of time. 
I was positive he was the killer until you opened your mouth. Now I'm not so sure. 
You test my patience, mortal. You are in my service. I expect my orders to be carried out. 
Tell her right away. 
It's safe to pull those people out of the chapel. Let's get in there and make sure they're all right. 
I can't count my own corpse! Stay back! 
Have you heard Renoit got some new books in stock? 
I'm just as good as he is. Show me your stuff. I can move anything. 
I'm calling my new act "The Restoration of the Resonator." But, I don't think my public is ready for it yet. It's very cutting edge. 
Come back as quickly as you can. 
Hail. We got plenty of rooms if you want one. 
It is a nice place, and you're right about Talasma. 
I managed to escape, but the others are strewn across that bridge. They took Menien off to the big tower. You've got to save him! 
The Count appreciates your efforts, but as the vampires have not yet been dealt with, he has no interest in seeing you at this time. 
When you hack off an arm, the blood spurts out in surges. 
You'll find your equipment in that chest over there. And here's a little something for your efforts. Maybe we'll celebrate again sometime.... 
One of the castle staff was murdered trying to stop a thief. 
You look like just what we need. 
When the Lady learned of my birth she was furious, and threatened to kill both my mother and me. So we fled, leaving my claim to nobility behind. 
I was hoping if someone came across my notes in that cave, they'd take the time to read them and trace me back to the Imperial Bridge Inn. 
Welcome to Leyawiin. I am Alessia Caro, and I have the honor to be the wife of the Count, Marius Caro. 
Hrmph. Very well. Good day. 
Sanguine is pleased. It is reason to celebrate. 
To think that I trusted you. You! 
I think you're onto something with those books. You should finish tracking them all down, and then we'll see what we've got. 
If Thadon has his Chalice back, maybe that will smooth things over between the two Houses. 
Terrible creatures. They travel in packs, and they're always up to no good. 
That's too bad. I was so looking forward to you living in the city. 
Don't hold back! 
If it is not returned soon, they will let Lex return to the Waterfront. You must finish the job. Go now! 
I told you to come alone! Brothers, kill them!! 
Take the Amulet. Give it to Jauffre. He alone knows where to find my last son. 
Good work. You are truly an asset to the guild. I will make sure the Gray Fox himself hears about this. 
[CLEARS THROAT] 
My lord, please excuse my presumption, but I would speak with you. 
Like Bradon, I think he deserves to have his name clear of wrongdoing. 
Please wait in the Hall. The Count will be with you shortly. 
The only way to obtain a daedric artifact is through the cults devoted to each of the Daedric Lords. 
The Arcane University has been here for nearly as long as the Mages Guild has been in Cyrodiil. It has been our home for ages. 
My Lord comes to Deepwallow to make it safe? 
No one has yet found a way to leave the Garden, except those few given the Bands of the Chosen and allowed to enter the Forbidden Grotto. 
Small fork on outside, or is it inside.... 
Are the Mazken prepared? 
I'm sorry, but my feelings for Primo are really none of your concern.   
Vampires rarely live alone. They tend to have others of their ilk around them for protection. 
Back to your positions! Don't break ranks! Hold! Hold! 
Have you changed your mind? I don't think they've barricaded the gates yet, so we still have a chance to attack the city. 
I'm the Master of the Fighters Guild -- Vilena Donton. Can I help you? 
Yes? Have you found another statue for me? 
If you're finding Jyggalag a bit overwhelming in person, you might consider using your Staff. It may prove effective in this battle. 
As I'm sure you guessed, to make the grand version of the Elixir of Exploration will take still more samples of Nirnroot; 40 to be exact. Good luck! 
Looking for adventure? The Fighters Guild is a good place to start. 
We could just listen to people talking. It's uncanny how informed people are. 
Do I have to think of everything? 
Ah, very good, Sire. your predecessor left everything in place for the final sign. You'll want to head to the center of town. Good day. 
You cannot escape the Master's vigilance! 
The Gray Fox seems very anxious to see you. Go inside. 
You really are a dear! A true friend to the Museum. Perhaps Lord Sheogorath himself will come see the exhibit one day. 
Sometimes a woman's got to swing a big stick to be taken seriously, right?  
Find someone else to bother, won't you? 
I'll never let an Orc drink here again! 
We must find out who is behind this betrayal! We haven't much time... I am hunted day and night by the Black Hand! They want me dead!        
If I was ever rude to you before, I'm sorry. You deserve my gratitude. 
Your Speaker should look for this person in the city of Daggerfall, in the Breton homeland of High Rock. 
[The Peryite worshipper says nothing.] 
Why, all the important people in the guild are there! 
As a reward, please accept this bounty of gold and gems. You've earned it. 
They probably call us 'the Dog People' here in town. Rimalus and I love dogs. We have quite a few. So sweet and well-behaved, you wouldn't believe. 
You are cautious and perceptive. Good traits to have in this business. Yes, you guess correctly. This one is working for Maric. 
What is it now? 
Head to Xeddefen, Your Grace. By your will, we shall hold this position. 
I heard the Fighters Guild thing at Desolate Mine went wrong. They cleared out the goblins, but they lost some people. 
The captain and her men... it's their duty to protect me. I will do as they say. 
Henantier isn't a prisoner in any physical sense. He's a prisoner of his own mind. He's trapped in his Dreamworld. 
The power of Sheogorath doesn't lie in armies. Power comes from the willingness to do things others won't. 
Ah! How brave of you, to walk the roads with all of the recent trouble! 
Traven might get us through this yet. I hear that the Necromancers were handed a significant defeat at Silorn. 
Listener! I am a new initiate to the Dark Brotherhood, just a lowly Murderer, but if there's any way I can serve you, any way at all, I am yours! 
Athel was a brave scout. She brought us the first word of the Fanatics. My curse will not allow me to help you with her need. 
I had a feeling you'd catch on sooner or later. That's why I had this trap prepared for you. If you'll notice, the grave is already dug. 
Despite this misfortune, you are ready for advancement. I appoint you Slayer for the Dark Brotherhood. Now go, and continue to serve Sithis well.    
Raminus has told me good things about you. You have advanced quickly, and show great promise. 
Our Lord took interest and brought her here, so Relmyna might continue her work, free of those provincial notions of decency and morality. 
Don't you even care what's happening? Bruma has been saved! The Great Gate has been closed! There is hope for us all, whether you like it or not. 
Get away from me. I don't want whatever you've got! 
You may need to ask around, but training in all the schools of magic can be found at our various guild halls. 
Before I send you away, however, I would like to present you with a rather special reward. 
Hmm? I suppose it is about time for me to add another creature. I have hopes for an Elytra. If you see one, could you bring it around for me? 
Maybe there's something strange going on, but Skingrad is a well-run city. 
I think perhaps you should speak to Deetsan. 
We're the Emperor's bodyguards. Our job is to get him out of situations like this. 
You and I are the only ones left. But we did it. We survived. We... we won! 
Well done! Here is your payment as promised. 
This cannot be! 
All honor to the Masque. 
Please accept my surrender. Here's my blade. Please. No treasure is worth my life. The Bloated Float is yours. 
I shall await your return. 
Get out! Get out! 
Huurwen of the Fighters Guild. Health and fortune. 
Feel free to take what you need. The fruits of the conservatory are for all to enjoy. 
Leave my husband and I alone, Gray Fox. Your presence only stirs up evil memories. 
Not even 10 gold to your name? And here I thought I had it bad. Sorry, but I need you to pay before I can let you stay here. 
Tenet 5: Never kill a Dark Brother or Dark Sister. To do so is to invoke the Wrath of Sithis. 
What brings you to this neck of the woods, sir? 
What a way to go. Awful news, just awful. 
Are you familiar with Green Emperor Way? The gardens around the Imperial Palace. Something must be revealed there at noon! How exciting! 
Oh, no. Not another one. 
Strange. 
I'm impressed that you killed all my clients. Doesn't matter. More will come along with their purses fat with gold and hearts lustin' for blood. 
Good. Remember, we must not leave here without the book. It's our best chance of finding the Amulet. 
I mean, look at you! The things you've accomplished! You've obviously proven yourself a valuable member of this Sanctuary. 
Welcome to our town, friend. The gods are always watching over Border Watch. 
Somehow the forces of Order have poisoned the Pools of Mania and Dementia that feed the Tree. 
Farewell! 
Sir, we're all that's left. Berich Inian, myself, and these civilians. 
You have your orders, Silencer. Ask of me what you will, and then make haste to Hero Hill. Your first dead drop contract awaits. 
We wait and see how this plays out. If and when there's an opportunity, S'razirr will help you against Maric. 
Ah... another mortal come to beg Sanguine to add a bit of spice to an otherwise drab existence. I would have you perform a service for me. 
Oreyn is trying to get Viranus out in the field, but Vilena keeps interfering. 
...my heart...can't breathe...help me... 
Do you think you can spare a little something for an old friend? You know I'm good for it. 
Gasp! Oh... oh, it's you. What do you want? Why are you looking at me that way?   
If you wish to seek audience with her, please return at that time. You're also welcome to wait anywhere in the Great Hall. Good day. 
I was doing some research in Bramblepoint Cave, and suddenly I was attacked. I grabbed everything I could and ran, but I fear I dropped my notes. 
Thanks for your help. I didn't think any of us were going to survive the attack. 
Horrible things. I hear that the High Elves train them. I can't imagine it. 
Something to report? 
We're just not ready! It takes time to find those beasties and get them back here alive. Remember, just one show a week. Come back some other day. 
Maybe I wasn't clear before. You only talk business with me in the Garden of Dareloth around midnight. 
Just keep going. Nothing to eat here. 
Do not bother the Aureal with your petty conversation. 
Sheogorath's armies have returned. They'll protect me while I protect my belongings. 
Welcome back, friend. Here is the painting. When you place it in your home and gaze upon it, may you always remember the deed you have done for me. 
Why? 
No, no shoes. But how about a bath? You really should take a bath. You shouldn't run any errands for Mirili until you take a bath. 
Talk or not as you choose. But you will listen. 
They're the pride of my collection. 
Did you know we have the finest horses in Cyrodiil, right here in town? Black Waterside Stables... the best thoroughbred blacks. 
Good job! No one owns ogres but ME! 
You don't want to do that again. 
No one goes through this door unless under the Captain's orders. 
It's so hard to concentrate with all that noise! 
By defeating that Breton, you've secured your advancement. It's been a long time since I've said this, but congratulations, Hero. 
Strange. He saw something in you. Trusted you. 
You don't need to understand. Just tell Adrienne that the new Associate is the one who saved you. Or else. Are we clear? 
So you found a book.  Someone must have left it.  What do I care?  No, I don't know what happened to her.  Why would I? 
It's all over, lawbreaker! Your spree is at an end. I'll take any stolen goods you have. The next move is yours -- Pay your fine, or I haul you away! 
Two people are dead, and the only thing the Nord can do is dive into a bottle of beer. If you ask me it's all an act.   
If you were to obtain this item, somehow, and bring it to me, I would pay you very well for it. 
Well, well, still alive, are we? Amazing. I never thought you'd make it past the first combatant. Just make sure you remember your place, Brawler. 
Gaston and his brother produce quality wines. I'll have to pick up some more. 
Lord Dagon will walk the earth again! 
There you can view all the finest Oddities of the Realm. I'm always looking for new exhibits, so be sure to think of me when you see anything Odd! 
Out of my way! 
Finding ways to confuse her just never gets old for me. It's good practice of our skills too. But it's mostly just funny. 
They still aren't letting me live this down. 
Not much of a talker are you? All right then, I'll give you your space. It's a shame, I thought we could be friends. But you're just so... strange. 
Have you seen my sanity? It went by here just a moment ago. 
Pathetic Blue Team Coward! 
I need to know why he defaulted on his contract. What have you learned? 
Ask yourself! How is it that mighty gods die, yet the Daedra stand incorruptible? 
Follow me! 
Send Rosentia my regards. If there's anything else I can do, please let me know! 
We're looking for fighters and adventurers. You should join up. 
She's a very demanding teacher. You can learn a lot from her, if you're willing to try. 
It doesn't seem you have a sword, or any of the weapons for us. Please, get those weapons as soon as possible. 
Uuras is a good shepherd, but his real love is cheese. Of course, there's no money in herding cheese. 
There may be one left. I have unconfirmed reports of a woman seen near the Corbolo river who fits the description of these witches. 
You are the Duke, yes? And Sheogorath has sent you to find Ciirta, has he not? He finally seeks to kill her? 
I... I know nothing of the place. Just an old cave, from what I hear. 
Now that Syl is gone, perhaps Skooma will once again be legal! 
May luck be with you, and may your wisdom guide you well. The Arcane University will need your help someday. I have seen it. 
These landmarks are mentioned within the diary. The one referred to as Dragonclaw Rock has been located. I'll mark it on your map. 
Over my dead body! 
Agh! Go away! Go away! 
My housemate, Malintus Ancus, and I are well-known in certain circles here. But, you don't travel in those circles, do you? 
Stop! Take me unaware, not like this! 
You are? There is a positively gorgeous home for sale right on the main plaza. 
I've heard others say the same. 
I suspect the traitor Syl. Jyggalag has never had an original thought in his existence. 
They can build a new Gatekeeper, but they can't send someone to aid me in fighting these Scalons? 
A great deal, over 1,000 septims. My father was quite a gambler. Quite a bad gambler. 
In light of the circumstances, I believe they'll find it more than adequate. 
Now that sounds like an odd way to prove your worth. I just don't understand Falcar sometimes. 
I'll talk to you some more yesterday. 
Hmph. Suit yourself. 
To speak with Vaermina, you must offer a black soul gem to the Daedra Lord. 
Stay away! 
I thought you might need a break, after the things you've been exposed to lately. You can find Irlav here in the Arch Mage's Tower. 
Not on this day! 
Very well. Perhaps I misjudged you after all. 
Relax. I didn't see a damn thing. 
Here's the gold, as promised. I always pay my debts, and then some. Do the last .. task ... in that note, and I will pay you much, much more. 
That's not possible! 
Reman Cyrodiil not only was the conqueror of the Akaviri forces, but he actually convinced them to help build the Empire as it is today.  
What about you? Turned up anything suspicious? 
Seek out Tooth-in-the-Sea. He can train you further.  
Some kind of portal to Oblivion. The enemy used them to attack the city -- they appeared outside the walls and daedra poured out! 
You treacherous little filcher! How dare you steal from me! 
Why do you disturb me? I must free the Shrine so that I can sleep. It has been so long since I have slept. 
Really?! So you're saying that neither Bernadette Peneles or Toutius Sextius is part of the conspiracy against me? Hard to believe. 
No! Come on! 
I've never bought one there, but I've heard many mages swear by the place. 
Did you see City-Swimmer swimming in the canals again? 
I've been dying to tell someone. You seem trustworthy enough... but don't tell Relmyna I said anything! 
Run him through -- or, run him out, I mean. Yeah, get rid of him. Then, your friend can sleep outside in Uungor's bed. 
Welcome to the Great Hall of Castle Chorrol, milord. 
Oh. That's strange, I thought there was something else here... well, no matter. Just losing my mind or something! Right this way. 
Why do you torture me? I don't want any trouble with your kind! I've got dogs, you know. Vicious ones! 
No. No, no, no. Absolutely not. 
Not far, in my family's ancestral tomb. Here, I can mark it on your map. Please, return them to me, so I can pay off my father's debts. 
I've seen them. Everyone likes a good dog, but they're an odd couple. 
Begone, mortal, or you will soon find yourself between the Mazken and their prey. A most dangerous place to be. 
I can live with that. 
By the power of the Elder Scrolls I name Emer Dareloth as the true thief of Nocturnal's Cowl. 
I'll take point. Let's move. 
You shouldn't be here now. I insist you leave. 
What I know is that he sacrificed himself to save us all. As a Blade, I'm proud to have served such a master, if only for a short while. 
But, there are those of us here who want her gone as well, yes. Those of us who think that maybe we could lead better then she does. 
Sometimes I think Lachance will let anyone into this Sanctuary... 
An honor to serve you, my lady. 
Tread the humble path and find enlightenment. 
Maglir? He's the OTHER bottom boot, right? Not the rat guy? 
What can I help you with? 
I have no more to say to you! 
Two people are now dead. And for what? A trunk full of coins? How pathetic.   
Did I give you the key after lockup last night? I really can't remember. 
She knows a lot about doing business. I don't like to bother her, though. She's a bit touchy when you do. 
You're taking the meeting. You'd better get in there before they realize you didn't come alone. 
We have a... situation. The Count has sent most of the servants home. You have to leave. Sorry, but you ain't working here anymore either. 
I'd suggest you make haste and get to Xedilian. My Lord Sheogorath does not like those who lollygag. Or maybe He does? Bah! Just get going. 
I don't like the looks of this. 
Now, in my father's name as Count Indarys of Cheydinhal, I order you to lead me to that sigil stone! 
Protect my little ones, Lord. 
1, 2... Adventurers are being sucked up into that dungeon again... 5, 6. 
You possess strength, and cunning, and a heart as black as midnight. You were marked by Sithis the moment you emerged from your mother's womb. 
You've killed one of your Fighters Guild brothers! I'll have no more to do with you. If you have any hope of redemption, speak with Vilena Donton. 
Once we capture the Altar of Despair from the Mazken, it will be my great honor to light the Flame for Lord Sheogorath. 
The servants whisper that the Argonians are dragged into the basement and never seen again. 
I will do as you ask. Let no one say Leyawiin did not do its part to uphold the Empire. 
Please, travel there as soon as possible. The Count is waiting for you. 
What can I assist you with? 
I wouldn't keep him waiting if I were you. 
You have completed your tasks for the Count, have you not? Then please, wait here while I inform him. 
Do I have to spell it out for you? Apparently I do. 
I don't know her. I'd be smart to ignore her. 
You aren't the first person to go looking for those. Quite a remarkable story, really. I know a bit about it. 
Odd folks, the way they dote on those dogs. They're not hurting anyone, though, so it's no concern of mine. 
I'm sorry you got mixed up in all of this. I hope you can fight. It's our only chance of escaping alive. 
I don't have much. I lost everything. 
Always glad to help. Lex has an office at the top of the South Watchtower. 
It's a simple job. Go get a journal from Fallen Rock Cave. Shouldn't that be a cinch for a Fighter Guild contract? 
We must hold the line until the Great Gate opens! 
We were supposed to storm the place and take this gem they're holding. Only we can't. There's some sort of enchantment on the door. 
There used to be a pygmy skull here, I was sure of it. My very first Oddity. I couldn't have imagined that, could I? ... Well, let's move on! 
That's right. Everything depends on this. So don't screw it up. 
Remember that Argonian? The one from yesterday? Little bugger pulled a knife on me earlier. I had to put him down.  
Where there's one, there will be more. Find Pinarus Inventius. He's a hunter, and knows this area inside and out. He'll know what to do. 
You'll have to get one from Falcar, if you can. 
We are preparing to wipe out the arrogant Aureals once and for all. 
Then just tell me when you've decided. 
With a body count like that on your head, you're my kind of person. You want training? Fine by me. Be sure and put it to good use. 
Order. An obelisk has activated just outside the Palace. I've ordered my Mazken to engage the enemy. 
I'm pleased to finally meet the savior of Cheydinhal. I'm also overjoyed that you saved my son's life. 
From there we'll try to lift the curse together. 
I heard he moved to Bruma. I'd look for him there. 
Gruiand Garrana can talk her way out of anything. Of course, all she usually talks about is herself. 
Come back and see me again. 
Nelrene is lying to you, Inquisitor. She knows more than she tells. You should address that as soon as possible. 
Well, you watch out for yourself, and be careful! 
Get the crystal ball and return it to me here, and I'll make it worth your trouble. Here, you'll need this key. Thank you so much!  
Syl's finally dead. I'm not surprised. 
Only the true heir can light the dragonfires, and if he has the Amulet of Kings. 
Normally I would give you a chance to celebrate your success, but I do have another task for you, if you are interested. A rather urgent one. 
But they'll never take me down. Never! I'll see them all rotting in shallow graves before I let my guard down! 
He's good. We're lucky to have him. 
A new ruler for Dementia! Perhaps blood was spilled. Great deals of blood. Syl's blood. Lovely blood. 
Yes, that's me. And apparently some other fellow, as well. Strange thing, that. Knowing that someone else is also you... makes my head hurt. 
Greetings, fellow Speaker. 
Now, we just need to find them... 
Any friend of the Society is a friend of mine. 
Welcome, Redguard, to the Tournament of Ten Bloods. To your right, through each of nine gates, another Chosen awaits you. 
The Baliwog are known to carry Swamp Fever. 
Picked up a good book at Renoit's this week. Sure wish I could read it. 
No way. 
With two of us now dead, it seems like the others are looking to Neville for protection. The fools! He'll kill them like he did the others! 
What is it you want to know? 
I have no patience for impertinence. Maybe I should reconsider what I was about to offer you. 
I've heard that there's a powerful conjurer off in the woods someplace, worshipping Molag Bal. Olyn Seran, I think his name was. 
Aldos was a drunkard and a fool. He decided to draw a blade and attack a guard, so he paid the price. 
You'll need to make a better offer. 
Please save my little rats! 
Trying to take advantage of a sick woman? You're horrible. Come back when you actually have the money for it. 
I'm keeping the city guard in Bruma, as Raynil doesn't know we're after him. If he sees a guard, he may panic and run. 
Ahem. The lady fair, our love is told. With hair as fine as soft-spun gold. 
Lord Sheogorath! I would love to put on a show for you some time. 
The things she did.... Well, I heard she atoned for her crimes. She might be willing to train you, I suppose. 
No ... no, we can do this. We have to do this. We have no choice. 
I've been waiting for you, Associate. 
Greetings, my Dunmer brother. 
You should come see my museum, Lord Sheogorath. I've built it just to honor you. 
In the late First Era, Empress Hestra improved the roads, and the Reman Emperors continued her policies. 
I've come into the possession of a diary written by an Akaviri messenger. I suspect that the text within can lead you to the ruins. 
Look, there's no need to be rude. I just thought it might have been interesting to you. 
Oh no. Oh no no no. No no no no no no no!! 
Hey there, handsome. 
Martin Septim will soon claim his rightful place at the head of the Empire, and the Blades will stand beside him. 
Once you have it safely in your possession, return here immediately. 
You have it? Let me see it! 
Read "The Cleansing of the Fane." You may be less eager to seek the High Fane then. 
My friend, you must travel to Crowhaven and use the key to unlock whatever it is that holds the proof of my birthright! 
Blessings of the Madgod, citizen. Walk without fear. 
Can I be honest with you, my friend? I find Dovesi... captivating. She possesses a beauty beyond compare. 
Yes, yes! Whatever you say! 
Yes? What would you have me say about it? 
I've told you all you need to know. Follow the road west out of town and through the High Pasture; the Count will meet you there at 2 AM. 
Since ogres are cannibals, he didn't expect to find their bodies. Thankfully, however, it seems that my mother managed to carry Reynald to safety. 
I wish something would happen already. There is so much else I could be doing. 
I'll have to remember to remove the trolls from my painting before I complete this piece. 
Oh, I knew it. I just knew something like this had happened! 
If you insist on sleeping, there's a bed for 20 gold a night. 
Now is a time for indulgence. Partake of the wine and the Greenmote! Cast off your clothing and your inhibitions! Sing and dance until the sun rises! 
No, no! Stay away from me! 
Time is pressing. Martin must relight the Dragonfires before the enemy can stop us. 
I saw that, criminal scum! 
You must help us break the cycle of torment. Help my people overcome their weakness and defend Vitharn from the Fanatics. 
Seeing you warms my cold heart. Why has He forsaken us? 
Looking to buy a horse? I have some fine animals for sale. 
Thank Akatosh the Oblivion Crisis is over! Although with no Emperor and no heir, I wonder what will happen to the Empire? 
I'm disappointed in your choice. Why you would choose to honor the fetid madness of Dementia is beyond my understanding. 
Take care, friend. Don't get yourself killed on our account. 
Be that as it may. You will have to enter the Fountainhead beneath the Tree and find the source of the poison. 
There must be some mistake. You must not be in here now. 
We did a follow up investigation, and it's true that no one recollects seeing Bradon out in the daylight. He's only been spotted at night. 
If you stay here, and Lord Farwil finds out when he gets back from his latest quest, he will have me thrown out of here. Please, leave at once. 
Report to the Arcane University, and speak with Raminus Polus. He will provide further instructions for you. 
I'm in here for the long haul. They got me for murder, even though I didn't do it, and once the Count makes a ruling, there's no way it's changing. 
I can't stand the sight of those creatures. 
I amaze me. 
I wonder if she heard me say that? 
Oh, and speaking of the Gray Cowl, did you know he stole it from Nocturnal herself? 
I'm not really at liberty to discuss my customers with stangers. 
Is this true? 
Honestly, who cares if that noble brat Thadon has his toy Chalice?  
If there's anything else you're interested in, anything at all, just let me know. 
What is important is getting to Xedilian. Quickly. Before I get bored. You wouldn't like me when I'm bored. 
It's Jyggalag's time, and not a good time at all. You're going to help me stop it. First, though, you need to get your feet wet. 
It was passion, it was... forbidden. Oh, the things that would be said if word got out. That made it all the more delicious. 
Every moment that Baenlin draws breath is an affront to Sithis and the Night Mother. Fulfill the contract and honor the Brotherhood as you should. 
A sweetroll? But, of course, Salmo is famous for his sweetrolls! One taste, and you are in heaven... on top of the world, yes! 
That's not smart. 
12, 13... A new ruler for Crucible... 14, 15. 
Bhisha is always following him around. Ushnar would do anything to stop it. 
This is a grand day. Greetings. 
There's a lot of adventuring action from here south to Blackwood, and everyone comes to me with their gear. 
[YAWN] 
The King and Queen Tavern isn't a bad place to stay if you're visiting the city. 
Arnora and Jorundr were once a happy couple, but that's over now. I hear that he took all of their money and stashed it after he committed a robbery. 
Ciirta resides in the Howling Halls of Mania. Find her and bring me the eye that has seen that which no other has. 
I offer you a choice, more than I have offered most. Stay here and die, or leave now, and live your life. Speak to me again when your mind is set. 
Her skills with Destruction spells are supposedly impressive. I understand Kud-Ei has her teaching them at the Mages Guild. 
Maybe Weebam-Na told you how we got all the rats here in Leyawiin? It's not so bad. He's been killing them for months. 
I do. I did. And I won't say it again. But, that's enough about that. You're the ruler of Dementia! Just look at you. You're positively beaming! 
Somehow I knew you'd do the right thing. 
Brandy and comberry wine. Not a good combination. 
Okay, do... Do you want a Heavy Raiment of Valor or a Light Raiment of Valor? Your choice! 
I take it you've spoken to Dagail? Then you know she is not well. 
You're looking for Rellian, Vantus Prelius, and Dubok gro-Shagk. I haven't had any trouble with them before, so find out what's going on. 
Welcome to the West Weald Inn. I'm Erina Jeranus, the proprietor. If you'd like food or a bed, speak to me. 
Ranarr-Jo. He protects me, like a valiant knight. Always rooting out spies and ne'er-do-wells. He's so good at it, I've never seen one yet! 
Need something sharp? Stabbing, cutting, that sort of thing? I can accommodate you, I assure you. 
Sheogorath certainly has a sick sense of humor. 
But mostly because I asked nicely. 
If you need to learn how to use light armor, gro-Shug is the one to talk to. 
Ahh... much better. You repulse me now, at least to a degree. Others should find you foul, disgusting. Namira may be pleased. Approach the shrine. 
It's just that I like to collect things. All sorts of things. Shiny things, valuable things. I can't help myself. 
You'll find the Rumare slaughterfish all over the lake around here. Just dive in, wrestle one down, cut its throat and bring me the scales. 
Filthy animals. Some of my kinsmen are partial to them, but I find them reprehensible. 
She's staying in one of the rooms upstairs, though she seems to spend most of her time down by the Mages Guild. 
I can still smell the things. Look in the houses. 
You're about to face off against the best the Yellow Team has to offer. Azura knows you're the best the Blue Team's got. 
I was looking forward to reaching Cloud Ruler Temple. Don't be long. 
You got the book, eh? Good for you. I've given up trying to deal with her for now. 
We've been hit hard. But we'll come back. 
You and Captain Burd sure gave them daedra a good kick in the teeth. I wish I had been there to see it! 
What brings you here, Magister? 
Then your blood stands forfeit for your crimes. 
There's really no more I can promote you. After all, you do outrank me. 
Books. I sell books. Go ahead. Look. Buy some. 
A coward as well as a criminal. Very well, perhaps I'll have a chance to test your mettle another day. 
A sword would be wonderful. Unfortunately, it appears you don't have one. It looks like you have a hammer, though. 
I need to talk to you, soldier to soldier.  
Jauffre believes that the death of the Emperor and the darkening of the Dragonfires is the key. 
He'll make a fine replacement for Seridur. It's the least we can do. 
Do you have the blood price? 
It is now clear to me that the only way to stop the Oblivion invasion is to relight the Dragonfires. 
Well, I'll be at The Count's Arms every day from noon until midnight. Let me know if you change your mind. 
I was thinking, maybe Nels found the chest of gold, and one of the others killed him for it! We've got to be careful, my friend, or we could be next! 
Nothing to see here, citizen. 
Hmm. Now that is a bit more specific. Finally, something I can respond to! 
I'm sure it's just a rumor. I can't think of a reason why anyone would want to hurt Toutius. 
Where is our Lord? 
I thank you on behalf of all the citizens of Cheydinhal. May Arkay guide you. 
We're next. I'm sure of it. First Kvatch, now Skingrad! The daedra won't stop until we're all dead! 
If it's a fight you want, it's a fight you'll get! 
She didn't, huh? Hmph. But, you've taken care of the problem, and I suppose that's what counts. Thanks for that. Here's your payment. 
You've made your selection. Now, we travel to the statue of our Lord, in the Fringe. There we will perform the ceremony. Make haste! 
Just look for me if you need anything else. 
Stand clear! 
It is a privilege to see you again. 
You cute little bunny. You've done a horrible thing here. Bad bunny. Bad! 
Well done. I suppose you deserve your new post. Now, if only you stay alive long enough to enjoy it.... 
Someone should teach you some manners. 
Horrid creatures. I hope we never see one in the Imperial City again. 
I have to admit that when he's not dead, the Gatekeeper seems to do an excellent job. Perhaps Relan could learn from it. 
I don't have time to talk. I'm in the middle of some very sensitive measurements. 
He'll be in the Great Hall, reading. He's hardly taken time to sleep since you left. 
You have them? Do you? Give them to me! I thirst for Ciirta's blood! 
Here I train our skirmishing specialists. You know, perhaps, that Argonians may be gifted spellcasters. 
Parwen is another one of those goblin hunters at the Fighters Guild. She's always talking about her "goblin killing tactics." 
This scent is foul. 
We'll clean up the mess. Don't concern yourself about it. I'm sure you had no choice. 
He became startled for a moment and tossed Relfina aside. She fell to the ground and I heard a sickening crack as her head struck a stone. 
Go, go! Socialize! Talk to those fine people, and then plunge your knife into their throats when they ain't lookin'! Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! 
You arrived just in time. 
That's funny! I just thought I saw Sheogorath! 
Just like a baker not revealing his best recipes, I must keep my sources anonymous or every merchant in town would use them. 
Huh. I'd have thought a god would be taller than that. 
The Archer's Paradox. Because a perfect arrow flies forever, and that's impossible. I'm Daenlin, and I have no perfect arrows. 
I don't know what's going on, but Oreyn said Maglir has the contract. Has he lost his nerve? 
What are we waiting for? 
Why, I never knew! 
You have earned the reward. Here is your payment. 
Her death pays a handsome bounty. I hope you'll take advantage of the opportunity. 
To think, it was here at Bruma where the tide finally turned against the Oblivion Invasion! 
I'd like that a lot. But who sent you? Yeah, and whose bed are we talking about? 
Your stick is a lot nicer than mine, Sheogorath. 
We of the Imperial Bodyguard are the public face of the Blades, but most of my brothers serve the Emperor quietly, behind the scenes. 
The lack of reports from Mucianus has disturbed the Council, and they are now concerned about the legitimacy of his information. 
I have something for you.... 
Do you ever bathe? 
But then, things got confused. Even the Legion troops stationed here couldn't hold the defenses. 
Are you here to help Rosentia? 
When she started taking walks in the garden at night, I became suspicious. I didn't want to lose her. I should have trusted her... oh, Relfina.... 
That helps the odds, but not much. We're still going to be outnumbered. Follow me; I'll show you what we're up against. 
So it would seem. You are unharmed, I presume? 
[Ancotar hands you a scroll.] Here. Stand in the center of town, to make sure you get everyone. Oh, and make sure... never mind. Should be fine. 
Thieves break in, but they don't break out... they break all over, when I'm finished with them. 
Ah, dear friend, may I steal a moment of your time? I have a rather delicate situation I was hoping you could help me with. 
Are you prepared to accept it now? 
Certainly, Arch-Mage. I shall stay close. 
Yes, Baurus told you right. I am the Grandmaster of the Blades. We serve the Emperor and the Septim bloodline. Talos is our patron. 
Long live the Empire! 
More beer, sweetcakes! 
Sad about the Gatekeeper. I wonder if he had anything worth keeping? 
Goodness. What can I say? 
Farewell. So much to bake, so little time! 
Impersonate ME will you? Ha! There's only one... ummm... ahhh... what was my name again? Oh, yes... only one Reynald. 
You know what's NOT amusing? I don't have my Chalice of Reversal. It makes me sad. When I get sad, I don't care to do much of anything. 
The Ayelid ruin of Anutwyll is nearby. I can spend a few days on site, then return here for the comforts of home and my library. 
I need it. You got it? 
I've never spent time at the Mages Guild. I've thought about it, though. 
The Castle Leyawiin is a dull, dreary place. The mistress is an especially somber soul, and tomorrow she will hold another excruciating dinner party. 
You want to know something, my friend? I just don't care anymore. We're the only two left. I know I didn't kill those people, so that leaves you. 
Perhaps you'd forgotten about the attacks on Deepwallow, My Lord? I'm sure the citizens might last a bit longer. 
Soon after that, the sky darkened and the knights came. 
Weapons and armor here. Especially weapons. Sharp ones. 
In truth, I miss the towering elms of my native Valenwood. But I was banished from there, for deeds I don't care to discuss. This is my home now. 
Ah, is Your Grace having difficulty with his choices? 
I'm glad you talked me into coming with you. Now that the curse has been lifted, I feel like I've taken care of my family's unfinished business. 
1, 2... Hate her. 3, 4... Sick, sick woman. 5, 6.... 
Stop gettin' in my way! 
I'm sure the Aurmazl Kaneh will be glad to help you once the Mazken are driven from the Altar of Despair. 
Run along and play! 
Drop it, you sticky-palmed little worm! 
Make this brief, I have a pot of Grummite Gumbo simmering on my fire at home. 
I leave the decision up to you. If you want to join up, meet us at the Gweden farmhouse around 11 in the evening. I'll mark it on your map. 
And now you're here to kill their father. Of course. You came for the Amulet of Kings. 
But then who will run around the town? I need to keep retracing the circle or it will break. 
Just what are you trying to pull? 
Lord, you know that Pinnacle Rock is ours and ours alone. You may not enter. 
Sheogorath refuses to protect us. Madgod? Bah! The Greymarch brings darkness. We seek light for all. 
By the light, how did you make it out of there? 
But no one has ever done more than glimpse it from a distance. It is said to be guarded by the ghost of the last king of Miscarcand. 
Are you here to challenge me? I don't think so. 
My feelings about the Nord are my own business! Leave me be! 
Tell your men I'll pay them for minotaur horns and ogre teeth. The Fighters Guild will be my sole supplier. I look forward to doing more business. 
Count Umbranox has returned! After eleven years, he just walked back into Anvil. 
People keep telling me that the armies of Sheogorath are reassembled... as if this is something that we should be happy about. 
That's right. The little vermin has defaulted on another contract. I need you to go babysit him again. 
Sheogorath has asked that you create a new Gatekeeper to stand watch over the Fringe. 
I've been storing things for when the end comes. You might find some of it useful. 
Don't bother to come back until you have it. 
Perhaps the Gods have placed you here so that we may meet. 
What Iniel says, goes. He says, lay off the Atius, I lay off the Atius. Simple. 
Fine, fine. I'll come with you. My guards are dead. You win, for now. 
HAHN! 
No offense, but I don't see how you can do that. Unless you'd like to take some of this work off my shoulders, I'm beyond helping. 
Yes, yes, of course I value our secrets, and I have never betrayed them! But using stealth to kill.... It's just so... weak. 
I don't necessarily want to see it coming. And I want to die here in the city so all these people finally believe me. They'll wish they were nicer. 
I've got that one! 
Unless you can persuade me of your good intentions, I cannot speak further on this matter. 
Have you ever heard one of Tandilwe's sermons at the Temple of the One? Goodness, that woman knows how to orate. 
Why do you bother me? Go away! 
Greetings! Salutations! Welcome! Now go away. Leave. Run. Or die. 
You killed someone in the Chapel, and now you have to pay the blood price. Until you do, you are no longer a member of this guild. 
Now, please keep in mind that you'll need recommendations from every local guild hall in Cyrodiil before you may enter the Arcane University. 
To me! 
Outsiders are always up to no good. 
Either kill the attacking tribe's shaman, or recover the "tribal head" from the rival tribe, which is likely the cause of the war. 
There's no time to talk now, prisoner. We've got to keep moving. 
I've got nothing more for you, my friend. I believe Burz has one further assignment, but that is all. I wish you luck. 
Uungor communces he "bye-bye." Communce with Uungor. Are you identing me? Communce with Uungor! Give friend dorpidity in Uungor's dormitiloo. 
I think we should just pack up and go home. 
Well then, you have work to do. I will continue to search the archives for any clues to the statues' locations. 
Heard about that, did you? Ha ha ha! All right, so things got a bit out of control. Nothing I couldn't handle though, as you can plainly see. 
You who have returned from Boethia's realm, approach the shrine and learn your fate. 
You impossible fool. What possessed you to think I would suggest a meeting here, of all places? 
The Knights are relentless. They do not tire. They do not fear. And they do not stop coming. 
Then the stars were right, and this is the day. 
Ah yes, there is one more thing. The Imperial City is also home to an Imperial Legion captain named Adamus Phillida. Do you know who that is? 
You'll go to Cylarne and bring back the Flame of Agnon to relight the torch. Oh... and take care with my minions at Cylarne. 
Bravil is an important trade center, and a rich melting pot of Imperial, Khajiit, and Argonian cultures. And, yes, a bit shabby and shopworn. 
I will send what aid I can. Bruma must not share the fate of our city! 
I'm Clesa. My husband and I run the Horse Whisperer, the finest stables in Anvil County. 
You talk to Horkvir. He can tell you what to do. 
Well, Neville is a trained soldier. He was in the Imperial Legion for twenty years, or so I've heard. He certainly knows how to kill.  
Finding that book should be your top priority, Associate. 
I haven't done too much betting. Can't say I know enough about the folks fighting to make a smart wager. 
Many years ago he decided to hold a night of absolute indulgence, resplendent with dance, wine, and sex to celebrate his fondness for his brethren. 
Leave here now, Redguard! 
An ancient relic of the first Emperor, who became the divine Talos, the patron of our Order. 
He wishes you to gain the respect of the people, to be a leader once He is gone. It is an interesting concept. 
You have been given a task by Namira? Truly, you are terrible in my eyes. Disgusting and foul. Blessed are you. 
The Order of the Black Worm will feast on your soul, mortal. 
Well, Aldos couldn't pay the last two fines, so they seized his home and threw him into the street until he could pay it! Bastards! 
Well, my friend, the search is on, eh? I wonder how much gold is actually in the chest? A thousand pieces of gold? Ten thousand?  
Fribble, just frib... Wait. You can understand me? Lovely! It's been too long since I was able to have a nice chat with someone. 
Perhaps you still do not trust me. Very well. I will not interfere. If Akatosh still hears my prayers, go with his blessing. 
Outsider! Kill! 
You seem far too nice to be one of Ulrich's men. What can I do for you? 
Becoming the Duke of Dementia requires passage through the Ritual of Accession, specific guidelines set forth by Arden-Sul himself. 
My memory is playing tricks on me. I can't seem to remember where she lives. 
I was elsewhere at the time of the robbery, and the chamber was locked. 
What is your business at the Shrine of Molag Bal, the Tormentor of Men? 
Everyone feels sorry for the Fighters Guild, but they can't function without leadership. 
If you change your mind, please let me know. 
Are you sure...? 
You must avenge his unjust death. 
With the mystery solved, we can explore the rest of the ruins and see if there's further information we can divulge from them. 
Gone? I can't imagine Him leaving us now. 
We need to check out Arpenia. Come on. I'll follow you. 
She's in all the usual places. I'll need a donation to refresh my memory. 
We have a new master. And with Oreyn to run daily affairs, we should be in good shape. 
Bring me back the remedy, and I will reward you well. Here, take this special flask to collect the aquanostrum. 
Tamriel is just one more Daedric realm of Oblivion, long since lost to its Prince when he was betrayed by those that served him. 
May you always walk in the shadow of death. 
You have to believe me! I truly had no idea. I mean, I knew they were a daedric cult. 
I'm sorry, what? Training... right. I'll make you a deal: you fetch me a bottle of each of the best wines from Skingrad, and I'll think about it. 
I know Kud-Ei will keep her in check. She even has her teaching her spells to other Mages Guild members. 
Well of course he'd say that! He'd do anything to save his skin! 
The Bosmer must have leapt into the painting, then painted guardians inside to protect himself using the Brush of Truepaint. 
Vinicia may have the worst job in Cyrodiil. She takes complaints all day, and nothing ever comes of them. 
I hate it here. Came here with Edla. All these snooty Southerners. And damn guards won't let anyone have any fun. 
I knew it. Like I said before, a vampire wouldn't hide in a cabin. It'd be more like a cave or some other dank place. 
Leave me alone! 
I bet the Blackwood Company had something to do with Viranus Donton's death. 
What is your business here? 
We aren't here for that! My patience is at an end, as will soon be your life! 
The Feed Bag isn't fancy, but it fills you up. 
The Mages Guild is south of the chapel, by the west wall. The Fighters Guild is across the street from the Mages Guild. 
Seridur is asleep right now. He's had a long night of study, and is exhausted. Do not disturb him. He'll be up at five this evening. 
That's right. I heard some of the guards talking. You're going to die in here, "High" Elf! You hear me? You're going to die in here! 
What makes you think you can persuade me when my own lieutenant cannot? 
Thadon is dead? I had a nightmare about that once. 
... Because you don't want to be on the dead guy side of the line, do you? 
Things seem back to normal now. Glad the painting was recovered. 
Oh, dear. A budding spellcaster. How charming. I'm Falcar. I'm what a real wizard looks like. 
I give up! 
Slink away, then, bug. Stay far, far from Mephala's web. 
Looks like we got them all. Good work, soldier. The miners will be able to get back to work. You should head back to Burz and find another contract. 
But they fought on anyway. Desperately. They seemed to think this decadent, mundane world of theirs was worth defending. 
A bad lot. Traitors. You'll find them near the obelisks that dot the land. They perform rituals at the obelisks to summon Knights to the Realm. 
The will-o-the-wisp is a luminous being. It has naturalized residences to many types of spells. 
We have the finest white horses in Cyrodiil. None are hardier, and only the black horses of Cheydinhal are faster. 
You have something you want to tell me about that nutcase? 
My child will smash to a bloody pulp any adventurer who tries to get into the realm. 
Welcome to the Wawnet Inn. Could I interest you in a room or perhaps a bit of wine? 
I was honored to fight by your side again. 
He wishes to meet with you north of the Cursed Mine outside of town, after 2 AM. 
Nonwyll Cavern is a good start. But the kid has to go out on his own, or he'll never learn the hard lessons. 
Perhaps you could overpower me and take the Crown. Perhaps. But I urge you to reconsider. 
You may as well take Prior Maborel's horse from the stable. He won't have use for it any longer. 
Behold, Sir Slaughter! 
There are rats and goblins down there... but from what I've seen of you, I'm guessing you are an experienced Pilgrim. Am I right? 
I'm Phintias, owner and proprietor of the First Edition. Look around. If I don't have it, maybe I can get it. 
That should keep Passwall safer. But what about the rest of us? 
Oh no! What am I to do! An underworld enforcer and a Dark Brotherhood assassin, both here to kill poor Francois! 
They've found us! Attack! 
Soon, the Elder Council must choose a new emperor, and then I suppose they'll sort out my commission. Until then, I just have to keep on working. 
Hmm. You haven't seen a huge severed arm with an axe for a hand anywhere, have you? I seem to have misplaced mine. Ah, well. 
I don't miss Morrowind. All that sour Tribunal grumbling and old-fashioned ancestor worship. Good riddance. 
I'm so grateful. 
Perhaps we shall chat for a while, since you really have no other options? 
No sign of Armand Christophe, Sir. 
The Wellspring of the Mazken. It's what links us to this Realm, where we return to the world from the Waters of Oblivion. 
Did you hear? Someone has been murdered! One of us! One of the guests!    
At the time, the idea was quite clever, I thought. I figured the lore would draw more curiosity seekers and adventurers looking for the treasure. 
But now he's become a genuine troublemaker, eh? That's my speciality. Don't worry, it will be handled. 
Have mercy. Just one coin. 
It's a great loss. 
Now that Bjalfi's gone, looks like I'm available again. Back to the old dating game. 
How many people have you killed in your lifetime, eh? Not as many as I, my little friend. When we're equals, you might interest me. 
I'm not buying that one. 
I come to the Arena any chance I get! Once, I got hit in the eye with some spraying blood, and went blind for three days! Now THAT was a good match! 
Old friend! 
Get away from me. 
Old Glarthir is a bit out of his mind, I think. He's convinced everyone is out to get him. 
The common folk of Leyawiin recognize your valor, even if Count Terentius does not. What do you need, friend? 
No more delays, please. 
Have you shopped at the Guilded Carafe? 
But we must hurry! The barriers between our world and Oblivion weaken with every Gate that is opened. 
They gave me no choice. I'm not a violent person, but I can only be pushed so far. 
Really? That's not what I heard. I heard you got made into a knight. 
Wha'? You say somethin'? 
I'll deal with him soon enough. 
Yikes! To bad that Resonator of Judgment doesn't get rid of troublesome beasts. I bet you could swallow me whole, couldn't you? 
You better have the right offering, or you're wasting your time here. 
It's not my favorite place, but if I'm really hungry, it'll do. 
You must infiltrate the Imperial Prison and kill Valen Dreth, a Dark Elf. He should be easy enough to eliminate, once you actually get inside.   
Good to see the armies back. Did you know that the average Saint is exactly six feet tall? 
Okay. Guess who I am. Caenlorn? Or Maenlorn? 
You go into danger. Jauffre didn't tell us any more than that, but know that our prayers go with you. 
Very clever, Your Grace. Bring to me three Apostle daggers. Ciirta must be slain with the weapons of the light if I am to take her place. No other weapons. 
The enemy will be upon us soon. May the blessings of our lord protect us all. 
How about that. 
The author of the "Commentaries" claims the Xarxes was written by Mehrunes Dagon himself, but no one else has ever seen it. 
Well, perhaps Thadon would want you to have a bit more guidance. He did say that you should talk to me, did he not? 
From that day on, the Ritual of Accession for the throne of Dementia was set. 
Aren't we lucky to have a skilled healer in town? 
Poor Olfand. I don't know how he manages to live with Skjorta. 
I'm happy with our progress so far. I feel better knowing that Callia and Aloys have a home again. 
I've heard nothing good. In Morrowind, they say the man-god Vivec has gone missing. Some believe he has been taken by the daedra. 
They charged me 5 gold for littering! Littering!! I barely make that in a year! These fines are ridiculous! 
I hear the army is restored. You should go see if they need a target dummy to practice on. 
I'm glad that the Oblivion Crisis is over, of course, but I can't help wondering... what happens to the Empire now? 
I was never good at saying goodbye. 
May riches fill your pockets, friend. 
Ugh! These welkynd stones taste terrible. 
Hmm. I thought you'd jump at the opportunity to infiltrate the most heavily fortified prison in all of Cyrodiil. Maybe I overestimated you after all. 
No sir. Please don't hurt me. 
There is no guarantee that my sources are correct, of course, but these should at least provide a starting point for your search. 
They show initiative, and Anaxes doubtless deserves humiliation, but I cannot permit this to continue. 
The Emperor is dead. The Amulet of Kings is mine. 
Everyone comes to the Big City to buy and sell. Why not? More stores, better selection, better prices. 
As I've said, I am rather busy. I'll get to it eventually though, I assure you. 
Busy day today, isn't it? 
Hello, stranger. What can I do for you? 
You're not welcome around here. 
Typically, when one has finished an errand, it is time to return. Why is this confusing? Are you feeling quite well, Your Grace? 
I suspect that the Resonator is affecting the migration patterns of baliwogs, but it's going to take years of study to be sure. 
I'm working as quickly I can. The Xarxes doesn't give up its secrets easily. 
Finally. I shall see to it that the book is kept safe until the Council decides what should be done with it.  
As far as I know, he was a good man. I never saw this coming. But vampires are masters of deception, so I guess it makes sense. 
Sorry, no time to talk! I have to deliver these copies of the Black Horse Courier! Have the latest edition, free as always! It's about the Gray Fox! 
You think I care for Thadon's toys? It matters not to me whether he suffers in agony, or erases his mind with drugs. 
Two of us killed, and where was the stalwart Legionnaire? That's what I'd like to know. He spent his life protecting the citizens of Tamriel? Ha! 
I see you. Hello. 
There, on the lowest level of the place, is a pool containing the cure: aquanostrum. Legend has it that it bubbles up from around an old statue. 
I heard someone broke into the Mages Guild. 
She's a wilderness guide we hired to lead our expedition to Cropsford. Saved our lives when the goblins attacked. 
Somebody stop that awful racket! 
Skingrad! 
The Blackwood Company is gone. They were working high on Hist sap. That's why there were so many terrible 'accidents'. 
I'm watching you. 
Is Thadon not waiting for you to return the Chalice? Go to him, then! Do not anger him, for then you risk angering me as well. 
It's good to get up and move about a bit. 
Stick close and you'll be alright. 
Welcome to Colovian Traders, Skingrad's finest selection of general merchandise. I'm Gunder. Just let me know what you want. 
A street scavenger made off with a ring that the widow Ahdarji values highly. She is offering a reward. 
So while she is party to the secret, she does not know its significance. She believed Sheogorath to be a traitor to His people. 
To commemerate his kind heart, she imbued the Tears with some sort of magical power. That's only rumor though. 
That's all I know. Nothing more. 
Oh, really? You think the Mythic Dawn is the first daedric cult I've encountered? 
Is that who they were? All I know is that they intended to sacrifice me to their dark god. If only I could erase the memory of that hellish place. 
They're very serious about it, but I'm sure it's just some boys night out kind of a thing. 
I told you all I'm going to tell you. You want Brugo, you're on your own. 
Thinks his house will collapse in a heap, this foolish man can't even sleep. 
With every word you speak you're just proving me right, Nord. Your kind has contributed nothing to our Empire, and never will! 
Well, would you look at that! 
Would you like a blade to cut open your foes? 
She's something else. I've heard she'll train others, as well. 
Prisoner! The Emperor needs help! 
Yes... how we would all aspire to be as great a leader as the First... our savior Arden-Sul, the greatest Duke of the ages. 
Liar! You have nothing new here! Begone until you get me something interesting. 
The Azura coven in the Jeralls north of Cheydinhal... nice folks. Nothing like the blood-drinking Daedra worshippers everyone raves about. 
He tracked the vampire to this house. When he entered the place around noon, Bradon was sleeping. He was able to slay him at that point. 
Now you embrace your fate. For the slaying of Rufio was the signing of a covenant. The manner of execution, your signature. Rufio's blood, the ink.   
You have returned my followers, mortal. The natural order is restored, and for this, I thank you. 
Anything for a friend. The Moth Priests live in the Imperial Palace. I don't know exactly what they do. Something to do with the Elder Scrolls. 
You'd better go talk to Jeanne before she really loses it. 
By all means. I would have paid any amount to be rid of those watching eyes, always watching me ... but never again! Ha ha ha! I'm FREE!! 
Haven't you got what you need? Shouldn't you be running off to tattle like a good little servant? 
The rest are farmers or herders. Wines are a Skingrad specialty, and the Surilie and Tamika Vineyards are famous all over Cyrodiil. 
More questions? Astounding. Speak. 
There are rats and goblins down there... but from what I've seen of you, I'm guessing you are an experienced Bard. Am I right? 
Relan is jealous of the Gatekeeper. Relan wishes that he had swords for arms. 
She is very well-spoken. I understand she teaches those skills as well. 
Well, if it isn't my little helper. Have you retrieved that book for me yet? 
Ten years of research down the drain... 
Well, they're all taken care of now. It's a damn shame about Elidor. He was a fine swordsman. You should head back to gro-Khash now. Thanks. 
Shamar's up by the statue, Vontus is out in the High Pasture, and Carsten has the town exit near the Castle covered. 
All right, but you're missing out. It's a fine room, and to be honest, you look like you could use some rest. 
It sure sounds like Falcar has it in for you. What a bizarre thing to ask you to do! 
I hope you don't blame me for the unpleasantness with Maric. I have no control over the man. In any case, it all turned out well, didn't it? 
I have many questions about all this. I hope Jauffre will be able to answer them. 
I'm busy now. You need to talk to Methredhel. 
Are you here to visit me and perhaps purchase more of my Famous Potato Bread? 
I've heard rumors about him, but I don't believe they're true. 
You're wasting your breath. 
Sheogorath gone, and me not far behind. I think this cold will finally be the death of me. 
You seek more from me, child? It is as I have seen. 
Yes, hunter, make your offering. Did you taste its flesh and drink its blood? Never waste the spoils of a kill. 
I stepped outside, and the whole town was on fire, smoke everywhere. I ran for the gate. 
Your tasks now come directly from Arch-Mage Traven. Please speak with him if you're unsure what you should be doing. 
Is it safe now? 
Let us see who at last has proved the stronger! 
He fled from Chorrol with his family, and was never heard from again. Only his small son Reynald was found, wandering alone in the wilderness. 
Welcome, brother. The hour is late, but the Master still has need for willing hands.  
Escort me out of here, protect me, get me home, and those people will praise you more than you can imagine. 
Again, I thank you. 
Enjoy. 
You have kept your word. Now I will keep mine. What is it you wish to know? 
This pact must be sealed with red-drink, the blood of Lord Dagon's enemies. 
Behold, Man o' War! 
If you seek additional training, I cannot help. Dagail, however, knows more than anyone in Cyrodiil. You can find her in the Leyawiin Guild hall. 
For Chorrol! 
I am Haskill, Chamberlain to the Lord Sheogorath. 
Thank you for saving my business, I won't forget it. 
Thadon is dead, and a new ruler is in his place. Sheer-Meedish must be excited. 
The rabble of the Savage Garden have imprisoned the Xivilai Anaxes. I consider his humiliation a fitting punishment. 
Take this note. Leave it in his nightstand. Bring me the staff when you get it. 
My name is Hastrel Ottus, and I'd like to talk about Akatosh. 
Help, help! You've got to do something! 
I guess I could have been an adventurer. But I like sleeping in a bed. 
What do I care of the intrigues of the city? Old Duke, new Duke. I'm too busy to keep track of all that nonsense. 
Do you seek to deepen my despair by reminding me of my greatest failure? 
I follow Issmi, your Grace. If she follows you, then so do I. 
It should be easy enough to locate Dreth in his small cell. Besides, I think you know the way, hmmm. He he he he he. 
Wha...? What do you want... friend? Wait... You're not my friend. If you were my friend., you'd give me something. Like, you know... skooma! 
I understand that Dagail is in much better control of her faculties now that Kalthar's plot has been exposed. 
By the Divines! You found some? Fantastic! 
Smart move. I hold the power in this castle. Don't forget it. Here is a small token of my esteem. 
You may have as much of my time as you need, so long as you stop calling me "lord." My name is Martin. 
Yes. A filthy Argonian stole my precious ring. It was a gift from my mate. It has... sentimental value. I will pay well. 
Order is at our doorstep, yet you felt it necessary to offer some yarn to... yourself. An interesting choice, to be sure. 
The Baliwog will stay away from the water. Water certainly doesn't heal them. Nope, not at all. 
Six of the day's dusk, and all's well. Good evening, sir.  
Very well, Your Grace. 
I spent 40 years at the Arcane University. Good years, but I don't miss it. Now I'm completely useless, and proud of it. 
You burned her?! She's gone? 
You'll have to speak with Shum gro-Yarug about that. He's the only one that can handle the deed. 
There would have been little anyone could do to stop him. Now, however, I believe you have a chance to defeat him. 
Do you think there are any more of those assassins about? 
They can build a new Gatekeeper, but I can't manage to get anything done. I'm over-tasked, I tell you. 
Lord Dagon cannot invade Tamriel, his birthright! He comes to liberate the Occupied Lands! 
I hear a new Associate came to Teekeeus's aid recently. Something about an old enemy of his storming into town. 
Elements... Dreamworld... HA! That's the best yarn I've heard in years! 
There are things to be done. So many things... 
What? Ancotar gave you TWO scrolls and you wasted them both?! 
That should deter unwanted guests. 
I never thought to see this again. I once possessed it, briefly ... a lifetime ago, it seems now ... 
Oh, you just go talk to Raminus Polus at the Arcane University, and he'll have things straightened out in no time. 
I realize he's trying at times, and he speaks before he thinks, but he's still my son, and I adore him greatly. 
You can be sure I won't be back! I've never been treated so shabbily in all my life! Good day, sir! 
Greetings, Sister. I do hope you are well. 
A wonder of engineering, is it not? 
So, why am I here? Greed, my friend. I need the gold. I served the Legion proudly for twenty-three years, but pride doesn't put food on my table. 
Strangest thing. One minute we're inside Oblivion, and the next thing I know we're back here and the gate falls apart. How odd. 
I can also teach a bit of Athletics. Why, you ask? Because I am the mountain sheep's brother, and I must dash with him from crag to crag. 
If you've got 10 gold, I've got a room for the night. Deal? 
The Mazken guard Crucible in New Sheoth. We ensure the Demented remain orderly and respectful of our Lord Sheogorath. 
You did. I can count on you. 
The Black Hand has sanctioned the Rose of Sithis. It is a magic arrow specifically enchanted to kill its target. In this case, Phillida.       
Although they are not composed of flesh as you know it, like any other enemy, they can be destroyed with sword and spell.  
Nice pick. the 2nd one is a long choice,  You should have the topics back again. 
You best be careful around here. 
That will get you something. 
We're going to show them daedra a thing or two, aren't we sir? 
Wrong move. 
The Master has promised us that the Time of Preparation is almost over! The Time of Cleansing is almost here! 
You're back! 
That's good to know. 
You haven't? That's strange. Rythe is known far and wide as one of the best painters in all Cyrodiil. 
Shh! We are not alone! It's not safe to speak. Go, before someone sees us. 
Hail! 
I hate to ask more of you, my friend, but you know that we're not warriors. 
You are no longer welcome here. 
Welcome to my hideout. 
I hear that Emfrid and Captain Bittneld are spending a lot of time together. You wouldn't have anything to do with that, would you? 
You shall follow me yet for a while, then we must part. 
What?! The Mythic Dawn were the ones...? 
Luther Broad's Boarding House. I'm Luther. You want beds or food, see me. 
I thank you for completing the task I set about to do long ago. His unholy craft will no longer threaten the citizens of Anvil. Well done! 
Feast until your belly is full, then fill the wine goblets once more and toast our fortune. 
Ah, you have arrived. Come now, we must speak. The Black Hand has need of your... talents. 
Here's the staff. As soon as you leave, the scamps will thankfully follow. Do be careful, I don't wish your death on my hands as well. 
Agronak gro-Malog is the best fighter ever to step into an Arena. He can't be beaten! Not by you! But if you want to fight him, that's your right... 
Got a lot to do here. We can talk later in Anvil. 
Jobs are good. I need more money. So I need more jobs. For money. 
Sulinus should be around here somewhere. Talk to him if you'd like to know more about Erthor. 
Lachance gave me a special assignment once. Had to go all the way to Sumerset Isle for that one, killed me about thirty Elves. Ah, good times.... 
I'm sure the Duke is very happy. 
And before you ask, yes this only works with ingredients. Be very careful in what you place in that chest. I can't be held responsible. 
I'll show them. I'll make them pay. 
Are you mad? A Knight of the Thorn never returns home until the mission is done. It's our way. 
What's this, some sort of Ayleid artifact? 
You get rid of those Manics. All of them. If you can take care of that for me, I'd make it worth your while. 
Have you reconsidered? Are you ready to join our order in service to the Dragon Blood? 
What we do know is that there is some link between the traitor and the Cheydinhal Sanctuary. The traitor has tainted that place beyond repair. 
Return with 20 minotaur horns if you wish to rejoin the Fighters Guild. Perhaps you'll find redemption; perhaps you'll die trying. Go now. 
We'll be swimming in blood soon. Yuck. 
Need a new mount? I have fine horses for sale here. 
Yes, there's a room available. It'll cost 15 gold for the night. Are you interested? 
With the voices quieted for now, the words you seek have come to me. You shall have my... recommendation. 
Heed my words. Phillida has dedicated his life to eradicating the Dark Brotherhood. He will not tolerate our operations within the Imperial City. 
First the vision. Then the conjuration. This is unsettling. 
Rohssan is a talented smith. One of the best around, if you ask me. 
Hmm? Yes, yes, I'm sure you've got something exceedingly important to say. But the Apprentices do not teach themselves, now do they? Good day. 
The Staff of Sheogorath contains a portion of the divine power of the Daedric Prince. It is the embodiment of Sheogorath and of this land. 
Then I have no choice but to use force. Our orders come from Lord Sheogorath himself. 
You've done it! The Gray Prince was a great Orc, rest his soul and all that... but you beat him! Ha ha!   
Get out of my way. 
With Modryn Oreyn gone, and Vilena Donton mourning her lost sons, who's left to lead the Fighters Guild? 
Handsomely done. A pleasure doing business with you. 
It fills me with joy to welcome you, Your Grace! 
No one knows how widespread the cult is, or where their shrine to Mehrunes Dagon is located. 
Have you seen those miserable souls on the Hill of Suicides? Do you think that kind of existence is any better than this? 
Any more luck finding Nirnroot? 
I expected better from you. Are you the one witless Khajiit in all the world? 
As Farwil is fond of saying, "We strike fast and true as lightning." He tends to overstate things a bit, but he means well. 
I'll do what I can to help. I... I like to hurt things. Maybe I can hurt these damned knights. 
Not now. I need to concentrate. Can't you see I'm in the middle of something? 
You what! But I didn't... I mean, of course. I'll take that letter now. I'll personally make sure that Lady Umbranox gets it. 
No! Please! I didn't mean to do it, you understand me? She struggled! I... I told her to just stay still, but she wouldn't listen! I had no choice! 
Thadon let them in. More than I could count. It was all we could do to fall back and regroup out here. 
You have done the right thing. Thank you. 
A chapterhouse of the Order of Talos, a monastic order connected to the Blades. It's located on the Black Road just outside of Chorrol. 
Poor fellow. You may be able to find him roaming the streets of Cheydinhal, probably drunk. Only a month ago, he lost his wife. 
You don't seem to have the money for the room. Perhaps you should look elsewhere for accomodations. 
No! Let her go! 
You there. I have an update for you. 
Hail Blade. Do you have a moment to talk? 
It's a secret way out of the Imperial City. Or it was supposed to be secret. 
Here is more than enough gold to buy it at any reasonable price. You may keep whatever you do not use as your fee. 
Now, I've kept you long enough. Vicente is waiting. You'll find him in his quarters. Go now, my child, and may Sithis go with you.  
Is there a problem, ma'am? 
Very well. I'll be here when you're ready. 
Those strange Knights probably have diseases from wherever they came from. Best stay away from them. 
Are you confused? 
Between the sailors and shipmen of the port, and my little local circle of friends, I have plenty of yarns for knitting up my tales. 
You complete and utter disgrace! Disqualified? For not wearing your Battle Raiment? Don't you dare humiliate the Blue Team like this again! 
Wait! I must speak! The Ritual must not be completed! 
I've heard him talk, and talk, and talk. Haven't heard anything useful yet, though. 
Glad to see you are well. 
Thanks for doing my work for me. Nothing like having someone else do your dirty laundry. Thanks, you idiot! 
Colovia is a land of rugged wastes and highland forests. 
Are you ready to part with your statue now? 
Many years ago, five followers slew the vampire Dratik and its kin, but all were infected by the foul creature. 
She's dead. I'm sorry, sire, but we have to keep moving. 
And... Ah, I see. So, you're an Arena combatant. Well isn't that nice. Now get out of my face. 
No. If we let ourselves get besieged in the Palace we're doomed. We must get to the Temple of the One immediately. 
My horde will swallow this keep! 
Indeed. What is the point of my tale? Albert Jemane builds Weatherleah way out in the middle of nowhere. 
Samuel Bantien used to be a wild one. They say he used to be quite the "locksmith." 
What are you doing here? What do you want? 
I see you work with the Gray Fox. 
Take care of Maglir's contract. Then report back to me. 
Have you ever considered a job in law enforcement? Hehehe. 
Aye, it's a thankless job sometimes, but we wouldn't trade it for the world, now would we. He he he he. 
It sure sounds like the Blackwood Company double-crossed Argoth and helped Azani Blackheart murder him. Hard to prove it, though. 
I've made some bets. Won some, lost some. 
Something about Arvena Thelas is a bit odd. I've heard she keeps strange things in her basement. 
At the worst possible time, the Council is in ruins. 
It is awful. Her poor mother. What is Glistel thinking? 
Power! I need power! Unless you can give me the magicka to help these soldiers, get out of my way. 
My prayers go with you. 
Pretty, pretty forks. Singing sad, sad songs. Do you hear them? 
All I care about is where the vampires are hiding. I know they're here somewhere... You know where they're holed up? 
The magic glow flatters your complexion, dear. 
Sir, yes sir! 
All practitioners of daedric magic are familiar with the almost impenetrable barrier between our world and Oblivion. 
Tell everyone not to worry, I won't be bothering them any longer. 
Do you have any yet? 
Any news about that certain task we discussed? 
Please, go ahead. 
I hear the Heretics in the lands of Mania summon Hungers to fight by their sides. 
Oooh, aren't you a fair lass. Your skin is so pale, so pure. And your body is so... strong. Let me guess. A Nord, right? 
It's like he dropped out of existence! No one knows what happened, and Falcar won't say a word about it. 
Two people lie dead, and all you can do is question me about that sweet boy? I'm beginning to think something is seriously wrong with you.  
Very well. I imagine if you're so interested in the cure, it's urgent... and perhaps personal? I shall be here if you change your mind. 
Alas, I am still distraught over the destruction of my sweet child. I cannot return to his womb. You must do this. 
Yes, I think you may... 
Well, apparently the wine is so rare because it was only made in one tiny batch. It's the product of an alchemist who was also a vintner. 
Hmmm... perhaps the new ruler of Mania will take care of the Scalons. 
So don't get any ideas about murdering me and looting my gold... 
It is good that we've taken care of them, though they smell worse dead than alive. 
But why, Sister? Why must I use stealth? Sneaking around in the shadows is so very... slow.   
Head to Leyawiin, and find J'bari. He's the one you want to talk to about Light Armor training. 
What is the color of night? 
You possess the eye and the branch. Together, they shall form the physical shape of the Staff of Sheogorath. 
You have been cast out for mistreating your fellow Thieves Guild members. In order to be returned to the rolls you must make reparations.  
He's probably still out at the cave. Adrienne hasn't let him work here in a long time. 
It's still pretty wild east of the Niben. Few people, except for bandits, but at least it hasn't been picked clean by treasure-hunters. 
Happy hunting, my Sister! 
Hannibal Traven, Arch-Mage of the Mages Guild. Welcome to the Arcane University. 
It's unbelievable. Glarthir went after Toutius Sextius with an axe. Killed him before the guards could do anything. No one even knows why. 
She is leading what is left of our forces. She waits for you outside Pinnacle Rock. Please hurry to her before it is too late. 
You've been told what you must do in order to regain your standing, and you've not yet done it. Don't return until you have twenty bear pelts. 
I'll make the necessary arrangements for his burial. He'll be buried next to his poor wife. 
I helped build Raven Rock. Had a bad run-in with the law, so here I am. Pretty soon I'll head out for the Imperial Reserve, try my luck there. 
Unless you can pay for it, you're not staying in one of my rooms. 
Hmm? Oh, Caenlin's my name. Maybe you knew my uncle, Baenlin? He died recently. Stuffed head fell on him. Very tragic. Well, goodbye.                 
Thank you for your help. You are always welcome here. 
I'm not sure the Dark Brotherhood is any more serious a problem than beggary and petty thievery. And it's certainly a discreet and secret problem. 
Are you interested in joining? 
Yes? We should keep moving. 
Find out where Springheel Jak is buried and bring me back those boots. Will you do this for me? It pays well. 
It's the finest light armor selection in the city. 
Stay here? What's wrong with you? I'll be killed! Take me with you! Please? 
Faelian? Oh, I know him all right! A waste of life, that one. He lives here you know, with his sweetheart, Atraena. 
Ah, the Madgod's pet! 
I did no such thing. I think perhaps you've been spying on me. Yes... spying! You cannot have my treasure! 
Always he look over his shoulder. 
Nothing can stop Lord Dagon now! 
Nothing has changed, child. The voices still cry out, and I am unable to hear. If they can be sealed away, our work may begin. 
That manor is still for sale if you're interested. 
Excuse me. 
Did you hear about the discovery at Pale Pass? It's in the new Black Horse Courier. Here. Take my copy. 
You fool! 
One thing I do know is that the killer won't just stop with two. They never do. You and I, we need to watch each other's backs. 
Thank you. I'm sure he'll be pleased. I must go now. Good day to you. 
Well, I've kept you long enough, my lord. Remember that I'm here if you need anything. 
What kind of sick, demented person could cut down an old woman in cold blood? It proves that evil truly does exist in this world. 
Travel to his tower and retrieve my Orb. Take care, though, mortal. In my Orb, Arkved has found more than he bargained for. 
Watch the flank! 
Well, well, if it isn't the Iron Maiden! How's our new Grand Champion, huh? You ready to make me some money? Ha ha ha ha ha!  Ahem... 
Necromancy, of all things! 
Kud-Ei would be the one to talk to, if you wish to join. Otherwise, just find one of the other local guild heads. 
Plenty of deer, wolf, boar, mountain lion, bear in the county. Just need to know where to look for 'em. 
Uravasa and Marz leave me little to do here in Bravil. That leaves me free to devote my time to Mara's ministry throughout the Empire. 
Elante of Alinor? She's the Daedric scholar, right? She'll live to write again, thanks to the Fighters Guild. 
Then you're safe for now. Speak to no one unless I instruct you to. None of them can be trusted. Do you hear me? None! 
The Gatekeeper is dead. Did you kill him? You've got awfully sharp looking teeth. Don't eat me. Please! 
You are a skillful thief. The guild is lucky to have you. 
He he. Remember, Dear Brother, I can't always be there to get you out of trouble!   
Yes. I'm Boderi Farano, Mages Guild. You want Advanced Training in Mysticism? I think I can fit you in... 
Those who live by the Commands of the Nine receive Blessings of Strength when they visit Wayshrines of Tiber Septim. 
Stay vigilant. Order's enemies are everywhere. 
You might want to ask around, and see if anyone can be of some help. Let me know when he's back, and you'll have your recommendation. 
Vilena Donton needs to set a fire under the Fighters Guild if they expect to compete with the Blackwood Company. 
I've had about enough of Sir Lazare. He thinks he's so much better than everyone else. 
You will need this as well. It is the key to the inner chamber of the High Fane. 
My people long to be laid to rest. Please help them. 
The Battle of Bruma will surely go down in history as the turning point in the Oblivion Crisis. Mark my words. 
There are rats and goblins down there... but from what I've seen of you, I'm guessing you're experienced enough to handle them. Am I right? 
Those Hearts of Order you find on the Knights can't be used to unlock special chests. 
Hurry up, will you? 
Can you help me find my lost Jumbo Potatoes? 
I'm having trouble hiring these days, so if you want the job it's yours. 
You've done it! I never thought it possible! 
He is kept locked away to prevent curious beings from using his knowledge to subvert the personal choices of other creatures. 
I closely supervise the priests and healers of Cheydinhal Chapel, so they might more closely approach the sacred ideals of our faith. 
I would have sworn with my life that Nels was the killer, but now he's dead as well! Dovesi is now my top suspect. 
Now that you mention it, yes.  You look up and find him across the street staring at you.  Creepy. 
Here's a copy of the Black Horse Courier. Identity of the Gray Fox revealed. 
I'm sure you've heard that Glistel and Malintus Ancrus are living together. Simply shameful. 
I don't know anything about a conspiracy, but Anya has been looking extra nervous lately. 
The smith is next to the north gate. The general trader is in Harborside, outside the wall. 
Leave me alone!  Why won't you all just leave me ALONE!! 
You'll need to see Falcar about that. 
So, the Great Torch burns. I know something about burning. The human body makes a pretty good torch, especially the fattier parts. 
I'm not going anywhere with you. I can't trust you not to kill me. 
Only those wearing the Bands can enter the Forbidden Grotto. No one who enters the Grotto ever returns. 
You know, I always walk over here thinking there's another exhibit, but there never is. Silly me! 
By the Divines, I salute you in the name of the Legion. Here is your well-earned reward. 
It is the role of lesser men to fight for those of noble blood. 
It's more symbolic than practical, but each carries great significance to its owner. You're going to get Ardaline's staff back. 
Your job is to protect them, either by dealing with the matter yourself, or sending your armies to take care of it for you. 
By Ysmer's beard, not you again! 
The triumphant champion returns! 
Go. Sink your blade deep into the flesh of your enemies. 
Please. I wish to be alone with my thoughts. 
We obviously didn't get enough information from the Argonian. I want you to infiltrate them. See how they work from the inside. 
I am undone. 
I give you... the Blue Team's Hero! Can this brave combatant defeat three opponents and become the next Champion? Let's find out!                  
The Council of Mages meets there in the Imperial City. That's where the real power of the guild lies. 
Quickly, we must speak. 
Took care of all of them, did you? And you're still alive. Fantastic. You're full of surprises. Here's your payment. Good work. 
There's much I can show you. 
Yes? How may I assist you? I'd be happy to help, if helping you means helping Thadon. 
I'll drain you until you live no more! 
Why are you here? You are still too pleasing to speak with Namira. Begone. 
But the Emperor trusted you for a reason, and I trust the Emperor. 
Then let's get this over with. I don't relish the thought of spending too long inside of the manor. Follow me. 
Her Ladyship is rather suspicious of all around her. Best for you to not question it, and merely do what she requires of you. 
You have the scroll? I can hardly believe it! The odds were clearly against you. Capital job! Capital! 
As is the tradition, you are to be awarded a focus crystal as a token of your fine work. 
Ooh! You have a nice stick! 
I'm not used to hearing no, but I admire your boldness. I won't force you to go, only to request that you reconsider in the future. 
Don't mind him. He's not right in the head. Poor fellow. 
There isn't a man in Bliss who believes his own house will collapse on him. That would be silly. People in Bliss are completely normal. 
It's a fine day is it not? 
Any citizen who takes the time to talk to a member of the Legion is okay in my book. With all that's happened, it's good to know we're appreciated.  
Be wary the shadows. 
This location is supposed to be secret. Not secret enough, obviously.... 
There are many deals to be made, even with a god. You could find great wealth, or painful death. 
Have pity on an old war veteran. 
I'll wait here. 
Can't say I blame him, living in Crucible. 
Did you hear? The Resonator of Judgment is active once again. I don't trust anything that can influence the thoughts of others. 
I am Orok gro-Ghoth, steward to Countess Arriana Valga, Countess of Chorrol. I manage her affairs, and the castle is in my keeping. 
Now, so I may make my final peace with the Nine, please rejoin my hand to my body. Only then, when I am complete, will this eternal nightmare end. 
The Hearts of Order found on Jyggalag's Knights can be placed in the obelisks. Adding enough can cause the obelisk to become overloaded with power. 
The gods don't do a damn thing. Do they even exist? How could anyone tell? 
Cindanwe runs a tight ship in Fellmoor. 
S'shani. The old sea captain and rover... now a shipowner and fatcat. Pleased to meet you. 
Humilis Nonius. Wildeye Stables can board your horse, or sell you one, if you like. 
I believe Kud-Ei is in charge of the Mages Guild here in Bravil. She seems very well liked by other members. 
It was in this temple that Emperor Pelagius was taken during his madness. After his death in these very halls, the temple was destroyed. 
I can't accept what you're implying without some proof of the crime. 
Go root in the mud, pig man! 
Hmm. This place will be more peaceful once Lord Jyggalag resumes his throne. 
Excellent. Yours is the last item on the list. Now we just wait for the powers that be to pull the plug on Hieronymus Lex's seige. 
You want to know about my child? Go see for yourself. He guards the Gates at the top of the hill. Be warned, he doesn't play nice. 
Such vengeance is a noble deed. Leyawiin thanks you for your service. And I have a fitting reward for such noble deeds. 
Our time must now be spent in prayer. Perfect order must be achieved. 
Then leave this place, before the Lord Molag Bal decides that your eternal torment might prove amusing. 
Sometimes, right before a kill, Sithis speaks to me. He whispers in my ear and fills my heart with the joy of suffering and death! 
One of my duties is to find exceptional individuals, such as yourself, and offer a place within our family. 
And Malacath is NOT popular at parties. 
Nothing I would tell to you. Get lost. 
Don't bother using a frost spell on a Shambles. 
Nels is dead. You know what that means? You've just shot to the top of my suspect list. You make one wrong move and I'll break you! 
The Arrow of Extrication is the only way to unlock the final door. Take them both. 
I'll need to go see him at once! You'll have to excuse me; I'd better leave right away. 
Outsiders came and burned our town, years ago.  Ruined us.  But we'll get ours back, one day soon. 
I'm glad that this war business is over and done with. There are those of us who have work to do. 
I am impressed. Only three more statues to complete the set. Keep up the good work, my friend. 
I think he's sleeping. But it must be important... go ahead upstairs and wake him. 
I'm Trayvond the Redguard, Mages Guild Evoker. Surprised? Yes, you don't see many Redguards in the Mages Guild. 
A short stay in our lovely Imperial Prison should cool your enthusiasm for a life of crime. The drunk tank in particular has a unique aroma. 
I sure wish Vitellus hadn't died. That was sure a mess. 
I don't know how you got in here, but you're not saving anyone! 
Going into that Oblivion Gate was an impressive feat of derring-do. I salute you! 
Yes, yes.  I can see that you have no idea what is going on.  Excuse me. 
I hope you've prepared yourself. The journey you're to undertake could be dangerous. 
Excellent. Let's see ... yes! The first letter of each paragraph spells out a message! 
He can teach you how to steal the boot right off a lich. 
I'm starting to think we might actually beat these bastards! 
I take it you want something. Well, what is it? 
But if you can get that gate near the bridge open, we can bypass their traps and meet them blade-to-blade! 
Someone different come to the Isles? Don't like to think what kind of diseases came along. 
Not much for wagering, myself. Of course, I always seem to lose.... 
I've always known we're not truly safe in the Isles. Perhaps now more people will listen. 
Make haste. I wish to be rid of Earana as soon as possible. 
Ciirta is the lightbringer. She has seen things that we can only imagine. If you are to join us, you must speak with her. 
Good that Thadon got his Chalice back. I'd hate if someone took mine. Or anything else, for that matter. 
There are rats and goblins down there... but from what I've seen of you, I'm guessing you are an experienced Nightblade. Am I right? 
Sheogorath will return. He must return! 
He was the sovereign of thought and a regnant artist. To call him a simple craftsman would not suffice; know him as the Artificer Superior. 
Torture and pain abound in Crucible, glory be! 
Don't turn your back on Lonavo for a second. He wouldn't think twice about burying his blade there. 
If you ever have need of my abilities, dear Listener, just say the word. 
Do you know where Weebam-Na is? I hear he's a hunter, knows all about the woods around here.  
Would you look at this! My brother - my spitting image - is here! I can't thank you enough, friend. 
Kill the leaders of the two families. Plant evidence to implicate the other family as the killer. 
Pinarus is an impressive tracker. I'd like to see if he can teach me a bit about using a bow. 
Talking with you leaves such a nasty taste in my mouth. And not the good kind. 
Hail, friend. Good to see you again. What can old Manheim help you with? 
You can try to sneak by them or you may elect to eliminate them, but the latter is hardly the way of Mania, now is it? 
What's the matter with you, huh? You some kind of mute or something? I saw you escape, now you're crazy enough to come back? 
Once you've got the book, return it to me immediately. I assure you, it will be worth your time. 
I'm afraid I couldn't sell it to you for any price. I've already promised it to someone else, and my word is my bond. 
I might eat there, if it were the last food in the Isles. 
You seem like a very nice person. I very much want to find the gold, but I wish you luck. May the best guest win. He he.  
I've got a few hot prospects. I'm sure something will come through for me. Soon. Really soon. 
Do you have a moment? There's something we need to discuss. 
Did you know you can officially complain about the merchants in town? 
I've got my old Legion armor and sword in a chest upstairs. It's time I geared up and showed this coward just who he's dealing with! 
I came to Leyawiin after a tour in the Legions. Poor Mother. She hoped I'd choose the chapel or civil service, or perhaps even marry well. 
No! really? 
Stand true, my friend. May your heart be your guide and the gods grant you strength. 
But so few ... surely the other cities will send help? 
So, which is it? What will it be? Mania? Dementia? The suspense is killing me. Or you, if I have to keep waiting. 
I think its time to promote you to Footpad. Congratulations on your new guild rank. 
I shouldn't have pushed so hard. 
You have them! You have them! I can sense they're with you! 
Hello, sweet Sister. It warms my heart to see you again. The Night Mother has been smiling upon you, I hope. 
 I'm afraid I know nothing more about the location, or what you may expect to find once you arrive. 
Sheogorath's army is restored? That's good. You learn discipline in the army, something folks around here are lacking. 
The Resonator of Judgment is working again. I guess, since the Gatekeeper's dead now, that's a good thing. 
Tell your Council that the next time they want something from me, they come themselves. They don't send someone under false pretenses. 
I've also been a Redguard. For a while I was a scamp, making deals with Orcs. But, for now, I am His Hound, and I serve the Lord Clavicus. 
Looks like you are in some trouble. Since we are friends, don't worry. I'll look the other way and take care of that fine for you.  
Is there anything more pathetic than a clumsy juggler? Don't even look at me! 
I am the curator of the Museum of Oddities, Una Armina. Have we met? You look familiar... 
The Altar of Despair is ours! But the battle is not over yet! Defensive positions! 
Very well, I suggest you begin to gather clues. And I warn you: do not accuse the wrong person, or I shall be quite cross with you. 
So, you didn't sell me out. I appreciate that. Well, I said I'd make it worth your while, so let me teach you a little something. 
So... what have you brought me? 
You're a dangerous little rascal! Stay away from me! 
Will we let the daedra do to Bruma what they did to Kvatch? Will we let them burn our homes? We will let them kill our families? 
I tell you, we can't expect much from people who have to murder each other to get into power. Not very civilized, is it? 
Do you ha... have any skooma now? Cause... I can be your friend ri... right now... 
If you could find him and get him to remove this cursed invisibility, we will all be in your debt. 
That thing may be small but it looks mean. Let's get out of here. 
To unseal the entrance you must sneak into the basement of the palace and activate the Glass of Time, whatever that is. 
And I'll double your payment if you manage to recover the complete set of ten. I look forward to a long and mutually profitable relationship. 
I'm Dar Jee. I'm a Khajiit in disguise. Want to see me lick my butt? 
The very foundation of the Empire is the bond between god and emperor. 
Undena Orethi. I am a pilgrim in search of the perfect tomato. It is my grail, and I shall follow it all my life. 
You should know that there are other secrets in that castle. 
I'd like to see this new adventurer try to make it past the Gatekeeper. 
If you wish to take the place of Sheogorath, then ask me what you will. 
There is grave news from Skyrim. From Falkreath to Windhelm, the foul daedra attack the land. 
I have spent seven years learning how to translate this scroll. Even so, I will need a while to decipher what I have sought so desperately. 
Ah, well, I'd love to continue chatting, but I have to prepare for my next contract. You know... that Mages Guild matter. You understand. 
Ah, the comely Argonian lass.  You may have met her if you've ever been in her mother's shop, Northern Goods and Trade. 
He'll... not be needing it any longer, and I want you to have it. I'll not take no for an answer. 
Come now. We all know you've spread rumors about Thadon leaving his section of the palace late at night. You've been meeting him, haven't you? 
Have you found anything in Falcar's quarters? 
If you want to get close to the Heretics, don't try putting on their robes. They aren't stupid. They'll see right through that trick. 
The Guild has passed me by. You are its future. Take your responsibilty seriously. I wish you luck. You still have many duties to perform. 
Sorry, I can no longer help you with that. 
You've failed, mortal. I didn't figure you had it in you. Weakling. Pathetic piece of filth. Leave, before I make you sorry you ever came here. 
In addition to your standard reward, I present to you this bonus. Behold, the Scales of Pitiless Justice!  
Next time you want to "help out," just don't. 
The Fringe was destroyed! Did you hear? Gone. Everything turned to dust! You don't think that could happen here, do you? 
If you're looking to learn about conjuring creatures, you should try to speak with Fathis Aren. 
I'm searching for some specific crystals known as Garridan's Tears. If you can locate these objects for me, I'd pay handsomely for each one. 
Why didn't you help him? You could've saved him! 
That was close, but Sheogorath has won. I'd better get back to work. 
Shhh! This is our time for silent prayer. You may wait outside, or quietly in here. We usually finish around the eleventh bell. 
You'll need a recommendation from each ranking member at the local guild halls around Cyrodiil before we may continue, Associate. 
The gate has been closed. Finally, thanks to you, the Knights have a real victory on their hands. 
Syl likes torturing people, doesn't she? But, there's really no point in lying. I mean, it takes too much energy to keep it all straight. 
Well, stranger, anyone ever tell you the story of Torval the Pilot, the High Elf who discovered the Niben? The patron saint of Leyawiin? 
See you in 24 hours. 
What a pity. 
Hmm. This Scalon looks a bit mangy, but I suppose it will do. Your reward is in the house. 
It's the only place to go for books. 
The Great Torch spreads the light of Dementia across the land! 
I am unable to look into something that has been brought to my attention. Are you capable of going on my behalf? 
The Watch is so completely on my ass. So I got to lay low for a while. I got some dosh stashed, so I'm fine for now. 
You should return to the Palace and speak with Sheogorath. Ask him how he plans to defend this realm. 
I heard the others talking. Neville was a soldier for twenty years. He's used to killing, if you know what I'm saying.     
So we have armies again? I wouldn't want to be in an army. All that physical exertion. Better to just sit and regain your strength. 
You want more training? Then you'll have to find Andragil. I learned most of what I know from her. 
Thadon has one less excuse for his sloppy rule over Bliss, now that he has his Chalice again. 
You want to stay here for a night, eh? Just for sleeping... you keep to yourself, mind your business, and stay away from my wife. 
I don't know anything about a conspiracy! 
I wonder if Mephala herself knows how many lives this foul blade has taken over the years? I will be glad to give the world a respite from it. 
Every day, it seems the number of undead increase. If someone can get into the cave and kill Raelynn, maybe we can stem the tide. 
I don't suppose I could convince you to help me recover my research notes? 
What have you learned about the spies? 
I do believe that establishment is right here in the Talos Plaza District. I'd ask around there, if I were you. 
He won't be getting up! 
I'm supposed to defend the courtyard against the Fanatics. I'm supposed to stop them from getting inside the keep. 
I looked it up once in an old atlas I had in stock. Here, let me mark it on your map. 
Oviparous. Ovovivparous. What's the difference? We are born and we die. 
It just so happens I am familiar with the Chorrol Chapel Undercroft. You're as good as dead. 
She jumps like a toad. She'll also teach others how to do it. 
Why not spice things up a bit, give the people of Cyrodiil what they really want? We revise the rules of competiton, offer a new kind of match... 
It's just northwest of Skingrad. Here, see it on the map? 
I see. Perhaps it's just as well. The book is best left in secret. 
He's the one in charge of this expansion. I know he's a high-ranking member of the group. An Argonian mage, from what I hear. 
I was certain that no one could survive the spire's collapse, but here you are! By the Staff, you are more than worthy to lead us. 
It's just outside the city walls. I think the robed man has lived there for quite some time. In... in the cellar. 
They're only trying to do their duty. Come, let us play our parts... 
You almost have to feel bad for the Yellow Team's Khajiit, for the Blue Team's Gladiator is a combatant you know and love! Let's see how they fare! 
Piss off. 
No way! I'm never talking to you, ever again! After she found out what I told you... she... she... you have no idea what Pain is until she... she... 
Ah, yes, that was quite a situation I got myself into. But I have to admit, I had quite a bit of fun cleaning up my own mess! He he he he. 
Then what do you want with me? I'm a busy man. I don't have time to stand around and chat. 
You're giving me free food? You're a good friend. Thank you. 
But first, of course: you must hand over the carving. 
But I've kept you long enough. Vicente is waiting. You'll find him in his quarters. Go now, my child, and may Sithis go with you.  
Ra'jhan used to share a house, but not now. Ra'jhan is very proud, work so hard, now has house all his own. 
My pleasure, really. 
Greetings, High Elf. 
Don't work too hard. 
I've worked on the docks as long as Vlanarus, but he thinks he's the expert. He's always looking over my shoulder, do it this way, do it that way. 
The heart of Syl has been consumed by Arden-Sul's will, and the Demented welcome you with open arms. 
Do this, and the next time you sleep in a location I deem secure, I will reveal myself once more, bearing the love of your new family. 
I see. Strange visitors appearing late at night... happens all the time here. 
Okay, we'll keep following you. 
Can't quit now. 
Eridor's the chap in charge. I've talked to him and Shamar; didn't catch the names of the other two. They'll be back around midnight, I think. 
I've heard that those that free the souls become blessed. Can't say for sure. They scatter the remains all over the Isles. Bastards. 
Your Grace, why disturb this ceremony? Oh,  I must have come accidentally. I should come when it is more appropriate. My apologies. 
Why do Khajiit lick their butts? 
Those aren't Sheogorath's real armies that have returned. The real ones are being held in a secret underground compound. 
Oh no. They're bleeding all over the place! 
Hail! This area is extremely dangerous. I'd recommend leaving quickly. 
You think you can stop us? Soon Mehrunes Dagon will walk upon Tamriel for the first time since the Mythic Age, and our victory will be complete. 
Did you hear about Reynald Jemane's long lost twin brother returning to Chorrol? 
I have searched for these witches throughout Cyrodiil, but no covens still exist within its borders. 
Damn bears... going to run me out of Shardrock at this rate. 
He got reassigned, to Anvil I think. Without him around, all this hustle and bustle about the Gray Fox will go away. 
If you are successful in finding a cure, report to my steward. You have my thanks. 
Your accomplishments are impressive. Because of this, I bestow upon you the rank of Warder of the Fighters Guild. 
Help! 
The ringing of the chimes is said to help call the souls back to Pinnacle Rock, guiding them to us, so they may return to our Lord's service. 
I'm really tired. Can we get on with this? 
Get back, you filthy beast! I'll have nothing to do with the likes of you! 
Good. You're finally awake. I was beginning to get a bit concerned about you. 
ABOVE HERE ARE RESPONSES TO LOW DISPOSITION GOODBYES 
Yes, he will soon march across the land, destroying all that stands in his path. It's a frightening prospect. 
I will continue to tend to Dagail. Can you speak with the other mages, and find out if any of them have seen the stone? 
Why are you trying to turn me against the Nord? Maybe you did, and you're just trying to cover your tracks! 
You'll want to seek out Lord Sheogorath. I believe He has plans for you. Try not to disappoint Him. 
Fort Naso and Fort Facian, though... bad news. Undead, and then some. But far out and foul enough, you'll get plenty of action. 
Evening, ma'am. 
Our Lady has given you a task. The blessings of the Webspinner be upon you. 
There is someone watching me. I can tell. 
I hope you have some good news this time. 
You may want to spruce it up a bit with some furnishings. I'd suggest talking to Sergius Verus at Three Brothers Trade Goods in the Market District. 
Good luck, stranger. You get that girl out of this terrible place. 
You've spoken to him by now, haven't you? 
A most fascinating contraption. Bothiel is one of the few who understands how it worked, and kept it running. 
So, thanks to some hired help, the Jemanes recovered Weatherleah. Good thing... I never liked having ogres so close to Chorrol. 
Lots of dogs in this town. Lots of sheep, too. Of course, I prefer the taste of sheep. 
I'm Valandrus Abor, Primate of Julianos. You may address me as 'Your Eminence'. 
Please, don't tell her what I've done. I can make it worth your while.... 
I've heard The Fringe has been attacked. I hope the residents were able to escape in time. 
I spit on them. Mercenaries sent by the Emperor to reclaim territory in Black Marsh. When they failed, they came back and set up shop. 
I can't imagine this new Gatekeeper can protect us, either. 
It's been so long since I've seen a corpse to count. Perhaps I'll have to make my own. Yep, that's what I'll have to do. Yes, can I help you? 
Well, almost the best... You're done competing in normal Arena matches. But there's still the Grand Champion...  
You've already got the room. It's down below deck. 
Behold the new hero of the people of Cyrodiil! Behold, your Arena Grand Champion, Man o' War! 
Ah, yes, I have been expecting you. The Listener now kneels by Sithis, as does his successor. There is a traitor amongst you. 
I can hear them coming as we speak! You must protect me... escort me to the Gray Mare where I can buy passage out of Chorrol! 
But you've already rented a room for the night. 
There are rumors that the Nords are attempting to capture the whole of Solstheim, and remove the Imperial fort on the island. 
Are you prepared to pay the blood price you owe? 
I'm glad you're here. We have work to do. 
If you're looking for further training in Alchemy, I suggest you speak with Sinderion. He's quite gifted, although slightly eccentric. 
I want you to get to Leyawiin and join the Blackwood Company. Find the secret of their success. 
You have something to tell me about my father? 
Let me see that. Interesting. The symbols on it are familiar to me. I'll be looking into this. 
The Gatekeeper's been killed, you know. Uncle Leo is most distressed, but I'm thrilled. Can't wait to find out who's behind it. 
The Font flows with the sap of the Tree of Madness, which it draws up from deep beneath the palace. 
I hate to speak ill of them, as something horrible may have happened, but their own bravado got them into this mess. 
You see a sailor in the streets of Anvil, best step out of his way. If it's in his mind to raise hell, a little jail time is just fair payment. 
Biene Amelion sold her family sword and armor to pay her debts. And you think you have it bad? 
Our child stands guard once again. 
I suppose it can wait for a while. Let me know if you change your mind. 
I don't know that anyone in Cyrodiil drives a harder bargain than Palonirya at Divine Elegance. 
Where's Erthor? I haven't seen him lately. 
The latest batch of silk is ready, brother Hridi. 
Between the Gatekeeper and the Resonator of Judgment, I feel much safer in New Sheoth right now. 
All mortals will come to him. He is the Harvester of Souls. 
In normal times, Sheogorath would simply command it and his servants would leap to sacrifice themselves upon the Altars of Rapture and Despair. 
Vitharn shall fall! 
Ha ha ha! You move like a pregnant cow! 
The Blades have gotten the Emperor out of worse situations than this. 
Even if I had, why would I know anything about her goin' missing?  Not that I'm saying I ever seen her.  Cause I haven't. 
I fear for his life. Kurdan isn't known for his patience. Please, I'm not wealthy, but I'd give anything to see Aleron again. 
At this time, you have enough to go on. Now, get back to it! 
What? I'm in kind of a hurry. 
Skjorta is a nuisance. She was running around town, drunk and naked again. 
To think that I hold hold the very crown that once graced the brow of the last Ayleid king... 
Get rid of that Demented bunch. Useless, anyway. Don't get a lick of work done around this town. 
Glad to meet you. 
Thank you for freeing me. I'm Graman gro-Marad, the Bloated Float's bouncer and helmsman. I've been locked in that storage room for hours. 
I have things to do. 
Our transaction is complete. I trust you'll keep this between us, yes? 
Oh? Does he now? 
Step aside. 
Since you've dealt with these Gates before, I'd like you to help the Countess's guard close this gate. 
What, you think I didn't know what you're up to? I knew you were looking for it. I knew you'd find it, and I had to stop you. Now hand it over. 
Duty. That's what all this is about, isn't it? The Blackwood Company is destroying us. They steal our contracts; they steal our members. 
Order is defeated! Triumph for us all! Songs of gladness! 
Bust? What bust? I didn't overhear any conversation about a bust. 
Your Highness? I am Narina Carvain, Countess of Bruma, at your service. 
You and I, we've got to stick together, eh? The others, they don't understand. Orcs may not be quiet, but can anyone kill as well as us? Never! 
If I were you, and thank Sheogorath that I'm not, I would begin with the people who spend their day closest to Syl. 
Talos bless me. 
Nothing much doing with the Fighters Guild. Though they got some contracts out Anvil way, didn't they? 
Didn't you hear? Oh, no. I suppose you wouldn't have. 
What is it? You've got duties to attend to. 
Surely... you must know who I am! The Count's son. Do you mind? I have no desire to be further acquainted with every visitor to Bravil. 
Thadon's problem. Not mine. 
I was off gathering food, but Jorundr was captured. Served him right. When I went back to the site later, the gold was gone! He'd moved it! 
The Aurmazl Kaneh wants to assault the altar down the main passage, but the Mazken are expecting us to come that way. 
Too bad she's dead. She wasn't a bad looking woman... for an Imperial that is. 
May I answer any questions for you? 
By the love of Shinji, you did it! You beat the Gray Prince! This... This is unbelievable! That makes you the best fighter the Arena has ever seen! 
You'll have to forgive me if I don't answer. I don't trust you, frankly. 
I'll teach you to steal from the Arcane University! 
Yeah, right... 
My research is moving forward again. It's only a matter of time before I decipher the third and fourth ingredients for the ritual. 
Perhaps you'd like to know more about Border Watch itself? 
I knew someone would be able to kill her eventually! Shh. They may be listening. 
What are you doing in here. This is the headquarters for the Knights of the Thorn. No one else is allowed inside. 
Why should I leave just because you tell me to? 
Knowledge is Power. 
Isn't it obvious? We need to search through Crucible, looking for these traitors. Talk to whomever might have information. 
I am very disappointed. I had hoped we would not meet again under these circumstances. 
The Countess deserves all the credit. I do things my way, indeed, but she gives me the authority and support. 
Reform! Back to your ranks! More are coming! 
Hard to believe that anyone could find that too complicated. Lucky for you, I made a backup scroll. Here. But I don't want to see you again. 
I feel sorry for Vilena Donton, but she had to go. A new master is just what we need to restore the Fighters Guild's reputation. 
You know, sometimes, when they let us in the yard, you can hear the sounds from the lake. The boats, the gulls. So close... 
You approach the Shivering Isles. Through the door behind me lies the realm of Sheogorath, Prince of Madness, Lord of the Never-There. 
The Font which is unaccountably covered with crystals. 
Then why do you interrupt me? You will not find the Crown here. Begone. 
Oh. Well... all right, then. I guess I'll be going about my business. Goodbye. 
Yes? I have idea for you. But first sweetroll for Fimmion. Sweetroll for Fimmion, idea for you! Saa-WEET-ROOOOLL! 
What now? 
How nice. 
Had you not been instrumental in getting this far, I'd put you down where you stand. 
Oh. Thank you. I thought you might be one of Cindanwe's hired thugs. 
Ignore the controversy of whether the runestones are enchanted. Let me suggest one possible account for the placements of the runestones. 
We must discuss our next move. The spire is obviously their source of power. This battle will not end until we find a way to shut it down. 
I think I overheard him once mention Memorial Cave to another patron of mine, but he never talked to me about it directly. 
The Moth Priests seem agitated today. 
I'm a fair hand at grapes and bows. Shameer, grower and trainer. But I suspect you want to shoot, not grow grapes. Am I right? 
Things have been very quiet with the Atius. That suits me just fine. All this fighting is stupid. What are they fighting about? Just stupid pride. 
He is dirty. Plain and simple. I don't trust him at all. Won't even come to merchant meetings and sets his prices so low, he undercuts everyone. 
Don't push me, prisoner. 
However, Theranis has not been seen since. The Gray Fox himself hunts for this book. I need you to find Theranis. 
You've heard Ma'zaddha. Isn't it time to confront him with that fact? 
You should have heard the cheer when you came out of that monster Gate with that Siege Machine right on your heels. 
Ah, but more to the point, it appears to me that the first words of each paragraph may be significant. A message may be hidden there. 
I am Gruiand Garrana, Primate of Arkay, and spiritual leader of the Cheydinhal Chapel. 
Alga sure can tell a good story. I'm not normally a big fan of bard's tales, but she's got some good ones. 
You did it. You defeated him. Then you have it... you have the Amulet of Kings? 
You've been doing a good job, and under a lot of scrutiny. I've been authorized to promote you to the rank of Guardian. Good work. 
Conspiracy in the House of Dementia. Sad, sad songs. Songs of missing things. 
At the touch of a button, you can cause a large group of tiny Gnarls to appear and attack the adventurers. 
No problem. He has an office on the first floor of the Imperial Palace. Try there. 
Nowhere to run.... mad t-tree... must escape... 
Help? 
Yes, I admit that being a Knight of the Thorn no longer holds any interest for me. 
Once again, we meet. 
Goodbye. So long. See you soon. Or not. Whichever it might be. 
How then to obtain the blood of a god? But Jauffre solved it. The blood of Tiber Septim himself, who became one of the Divines. 
Everyone's talking about the victory over Mehrunes Dagon! I can hardly believe that the great Oblivion Crisis is over. 
What!?!?! 
Okay, I'll go over there now. 
If Mehrunes Dagon is able to cross over into our world, even relighting the Dragonfires will not be able to send him back. 
You scare off my customers. Go away! 
He has a nice dog. I like dogs. 
I do my part on the docks, just like Bronsila and Vlanarus. Why should I kill myself? They don't pay me any more. For what I get paid, I work plenty. 
No. You mustn't come near me when I'm crying... you remember what happened last time you touched my tears! 
He must be in Nonwyll somewhere. Let's get there quickly. 
Words dripped like honey from his tongue and his songs were intoned with extraordinary verisimilitude. 
Sleepy, are you? Be careful, you might be ill. Or dying. You never know... 
If you don't want to be doing this, then why are you even here? Father and I can handle this. 
You've found the shrine of the Lord Malacath, friend Orc. You are welcome here. 
Victory is ours... for the moment. 
From these strange ores they can make gear: armor and weapons, or so I hear. 
Your High Elf opponent is cool and confident. Go! Let the contest begin. 
I am interested in obtaining the complete set of these statues. If you bring them to me when you find them, I will pay you double for each one. 
It's nice to go back to tending sheep without having to look over my shoulder. 
She is safe, hidden within the castle. That is all you need know for now. 
When will the Master order the Cleansing to begin? Everything is ready. The door is unlocked. We just need to throw it open for Lord Dagon to enter. 
So, Umbacano has resorted to hired thugs now? 
My father hired her as a guide at an inn south of here. Good thing, too. She saved our lives, and led us safely back here after the goblin attack. 
Between the two of them, Borissean and Gaspar have mastered nearly every type of spell there is. You'd be wise to go see them if you can. 
No! No, please don't hurt me! He paid me to do it! 
Big-Head was hatched, but his brother was not! Presents for egg-friend! Almost forgot! Selfish Big-Head. Shellfish Big-Head! 
I'm with you. 
Blackwood Company is sloppy. They make mistakes. Sooner or later it is going to cost them. 
What did I do to deserve this honor? 
Please... help me, I can't remember anything. 
Are you deaf? Leave me alone! 
You have proved yourself, mortal. It is fitting, as well, that you should bear my token. 
Since the Throne Room has been sealed since the time of the Ayleids, it should provide rich pickings. 
She's pretty shy, unless you get her talking about armor. 
But there never was a single King of the Ayleids. Each city-state had its king, and their power waxed and waned over the years. 
I get paid to kill things. That's why I like the Fighters Guild.  
Welcome, Madgod. 
Congratulations on your victory! I admit, I thought your plan would lead to disaster, but you came through for Bruma. I won't forget it. 
My poor Henantier. I shudder to think what's happened to him in there. 
Adamus Phillida has spent his entire career investigating the Dark Brotherhood, interrupting our contracts, killing our family members! 
I have need of your special gifts. There is an item, hidden away in a remote monastery. I need you to go get it for me. 
So the moral of the story is: don't count your adventurers until they hatch! Ha! 
Please help us. 
Arden-Sul was perhaps the greatest Duke to walk our land. 
She killed the others in cold blood, and she'll try to kill us next! I'm not about to stand around waiting to die! We need to kill Matilde! 
This is all so grisly and horrible, isn't it? The blood and bodies... But I've won so much money! I can't stop betting! I think I need help... 
Shouldn't you be off to Malada to retrieve the carving I want? 
You'd do that for me? Maybe you guild types aren't so bad after all. Okay. It's a deal. Give me a lockpick and I'll tell you about the ring. 
I need a bath. 
He's never harmed anyone, but most people give him a wide berth. You seem curious enough, so I'll be glad to pinpoint where he appears on your map. 
Have you read the latest Black Horse Courier? 
If you're looking for a shield, there's no place better than Stonewall. 
We shall not fail you. 
I don't like to think about zombies. Missing arms, legs, heads. They smell awful, and they're hard to kill. 
Let no one say Lord Sheogorath's justice is without mercy. 
As you wish, My Lord. I'll see that a contingent of Golden Saints is sent to the settlement. 
Who... wha... are you... time is it? Hic. 
That rich little bastard lured us all here by appealing to our greed! Don't you see? He considers us all low class, and wants us exterminated! 
He's talented. The Fighters Guild could do a lot worse. 
Hale is still under attack. Or had you forgotten? No matter. I'm certain they can hold out a bit longer. 
My Lady holds court from 8 in the morning until 6 in the evening each day. That would be the best time to see her. 
The High Elf Faelian now swims in the maelstrom of darkness at the feet of our Dread Father, Sithis. And, there were no witnesses to your handiwork. 
I will rouse the guard, and begin a search for him in the city. Meet me at Olav's Tap and Tack in one hour. 
Oh, that looks just like a little skull I used to have. I would love to have one back, but the Museum just isn't drawing the crowds anymore.... 
Arkay, protect and keep these wayward souls. 
Identify yourself. 
But I fear that our work is not yet done. The area is still overrun with Knights that were not destroyed in the spire.  
Drive them back! 
Greetings, fellow Breton. 
Straight to the point, eh? Good, I like that. 
She's the mage heading up the on-site research. She can tell you more about whatever it is that's impeding their progress. 
Leave me be! I've told you what I know! 
The guild isn't what it once was, but it's still worth being a member. Talk to Dagail if you want to join. 
I'm afraid I have little to offer you - what little money I have must now be spent on a burial. Please, if you'll excuse me. 
There is little time. Please prepare yourself as quickly as possible. The entire guild depends on you. 
But confidentially, I will say that Orgnolf has been acting a bit unusal. His abuse of drink has gotten worse lately. 
Alval Uvani. I'm an evil wizard. I like blowing things up.  
You should consider going to Bruma, and talking with Helvius Cecia. He can teach you more than... well, probably anyone. 
I understand he'll teach light armor skills. 
Wait, this is yesterday's future. I'm the one that's confused. 
The Night Mother? What's this all about? I... I think you should leave now. You hear me? Get out! Gromm! Gromm! we have an intruder!  
Greetings... greetings fellow stalker of the damned! Enjoy your new gift. And don't forget to speak with Ocheeva! She has a contract waiting for you. 
Can't sleep... the walls, they'd fall on me. Can't have that. 
I'm sure you're right. You saved our lives back there. I'm just not ready to give up on our dream... 
You try my patience. Out with it!  
Cyrodiil is surrounded to the north and east by the lofty Jerall and Valus mountain ranges. 
I don't have time for this now. The Gray Fox is on the loose. Take this problem to Itius Hayn. He's also a Captain of the Imperial Watch. 
The Gray Fox himself may call on you soon, though. Wait for contact from him. Keep the guild fences busy. You can find your own work. 
You look tired, my friend. I hope you're holding up all right. 
Someone has replaced the Duchess!  I bet she got sick and died. 
Ahhh. So good to be back home. 
Very good. For retrieving these items, your status in the guild will be restored.  
So now you know everything. You helped me, and I won't forget. 
I understand that Kud-Ei takes good care of her sisters in the Mages Guild. 
The Imperial line is dead, and the gods have forsaken us. 
Don't falter! We have them! We have them! 
Count Indarys recently commissioned a bust of Llathasa. They say the Elves carved it. He put it near her tomb in the Chapel Undercroft. 
What's wrong? 
Thoronir didn't turn out to be such a bad fellow after all. I'm glad he decided to join the Society. 
Find Black Brugo, and execute him for his crimes, and I will make both you and your friend Mazoga Knights-Errant of the White Stallion. 
The Greymarch is over. At least I'll be able to sleep a little safer now. 
Your blood? I wouldn't dream of paying 10,000 gold for your blood. But that is the price for that house. Take it or leave it. 
Have you finished out your contract? You need to find that Stone. 
Another High Elf has been taught the meaning of humility, thanks to the Blue Team's number one Warrior. You really earned your keep this time. 
So like a male. Too stupid to know when to cease his yapping. 
How may I help a guild brother? 
I should've been with them! It should've been me, not one of them! 
Visitors ain't allowed down heres. 
Good work getting that straightened out. I'm glad someone finally came along that was able to make progress with it. 
And that, dear child, is why the Black Hand has chosen you to perform the ancient rite known as Purification. Everyone inside the Sanctuary must die! 
I'd like to get her a gift of a sort. Nothing terribly fancy, and something useful.... How about a nice silver pitcher, and a set of four glasses. 
Oh... I suppose I can make the effort to talk to you. 
Once the strength of the Aureals is shattered, I will be honored to light the Flame as my Lord Sheogorath commands. 
Fare thee well. 
Now that you have both components, I can remake the shell of the staff. 
I'm sure it will be sufficient. Poor, poor Uungor. So misunderstood. And, I know what that's like. Good luck in your endeavor, my friend. 
Sheogorath has left us to think for ourselves and to turn to Arden-Sul's teachings for enlightenment. 
Hmmmm... let me see. 
Ganredhel sure does have a knack for training dogs. I've heard that she will train people as well, for a price. 
I'd be very interested in taking a look at this new Gatekeeper. An entirely new form of life! 
Yes, I'm the one looking for my friend. His name is Henantier. If you find him, I'll be glad to offer you a sizeable reward. 
Trust in Arden-Sul's legitimate teachings. Don't allow the decadent ways of Mania to blind your vision. 
Xedilian is the ultimate test of mettle for the foolhardy adventurer that dares trespass into the Shivering Isles. 
My collection is complete! My collection is complete! Glory days! Wheeeeee. 
Change will preserve us! It is the lifeblood of the Isles. It will move mountains! It will mount movements! 
Then you leave me no choice. My duty to Lord Sheogorath requires me to use force. 
Now how is he supposed to trust you, if I don't trust you? If you'll excuse me, I have work to do. I need to collect five pod pits. 
Come on! We need to get to the Dragonfires before it's too late! 
Me? I'm Magub gro-Orum. Borba and me, we were pals in the adventuring trade. Now I help him run the store. 
My god... no! 
The Anvil Mages Guild is proud to follow the example Hannibal Traven sets for us: mastery and scholarship free of the dark arts. 
With a Purification, we cleanse the Dark Brotherhood of mistrust and treachery. Those who are slain are offered to Sithis as a symbol of fealty. 
An ancient altar where the Gatekeeper was first created. It is near the Gates of Madness in the Fringe. 
This is my first posting after Arcane University. The Countess and Burd like my work well enough. 
The fate of man drifts like seaweed in the net of His mind. 
There's a man in Bliss who believes his own house will collapse around him. 
I knew you'd show up. 
Yes. Seems whoever designed this place only meant for us to get hurt. 
You may want to see if Grey-Throat or Gilen have done more research. 
Once the source of Madness becomes the Font of Order, Jyggalag has won. 
I'm from Morrowind, north coast of Vvardenfell, near Khuul, so I like it here on the Gold Coast. Sometimes I miss home, but not too much. 
This right here is one of my favorites. A lump of amber in the shape of Lord Sheogorath's head! The wonders of nature never cease to amaze. 
Don't worry if you break her toys. I believe she rather enjoys creating them. And, it keeps her from turning her attention elsewhere. 
I believe my master would be very interested in this item. 
You have to watch out for pickpockets in the city. You'd be surprised how many waterfronters earn a good income that way. 
We are over one hundred strong now. We grow by the day! 
He was so young... so innocent. That boy was destined for greatness. Who could have done such a thing?      
I'm not sure where he went, but I would ask at The Count's Arms. If anyone knows where he is, it would be someone there. 
Thank you for rescuing me!  My mother will be so pleased when we arrive back in Chorrol safe and sound.  Let's go! 
The Gatekeeper's dead? Probably got killed by the Gates of Madness falling down on his head. 
Someone ought to do something about him. 
There's no problem, is there? 
I'm so relieved that the Chalice is back in Lord Thadon's capable hands. He seems to be himself again. 
Can't say I'm surprised. Few recognize the name anymore, even though he was famous. Had a book written about him, in fact! 
I hope you are as wise as you pretend to be. The Grakendo has lead us for hundreds of years. 
Huh. That beast looks godly, doesn't it? 
I'm sorry to hear that. Especially since Maric has not delivered the carving either. 
All I wanted was a hug. 
Yes, it's quite odd. Reynald, who I've bumped into several times in Chorrol, acted like I was a complete stranger. 
That's what we're calling it, only because we don't know what it really is. Or was. 
Don't talk such rot. 
Night Mother! I beg your mercy! 
The Mages Guild has been attacked by Necromancers. This proves they can't be trusted! 
I fell for the same trick. In my case, he told me if I retrieved the axe, he'd erase my debts. I was such an idiot to believe him. 
We were doing petty crimes all over Cyrodiil. Small scores; 10 gold here, 25 there. Nothing big enough to have them investigate you. 
What news from Tamriel? 
Pay up, or else. 
I don't know what crimes they commited, but it's your life or their freedom! The choice should be pretty clear! Get going, and watch yourself! 
Would you mind stepping to the side so I can sweep there? 
Hey! You don't even have enough money! Stop wasting my time and come back when you do. 
I'm waiting for that book. 
It's a pleasure to see you. 
Wasn't I clear? 
Wait... You... You lied! Ohh... That's mean! Nordinor.. In Bravil... He sells skooma! Late at night... Go get me some... Okay? 
As it is only your first offense, do not return until you have collected 20 bear pelts. Use this time to reflect on your actions. 
Very well. Let me know if you change your mind. 
All I ask in return is to keep the Brush's existence secret. If word gets around that I have it, I'm afraid more than a lone cutpurse will visit me. 
Relmyna prefers to conduct her experiments in privacy. You will have to deal with her guardians to reach her. 
I know I used you in this matter with the Llathasa's bust, but I couldn't be certain that you weren't working with Myvryna. 
1, 2, 3. My arrows are finding their targets! 4, 5, 6. 
Oh, of course you were! 
Have you changed your mind? Will you help us reclaim our family home? 
Old Baenlin is dead! I hear it was a horrible accident. He was resting in his chair and BOOM -- a stuffed head fell on him! 
I see nothing has changed. How... disappointing. 
I've been preparing to join the guild for years. If you're nice to me, maybe I'll show you a few tricks. 
Ulrich will be spending years in the city dungeons. This should give him plenty of time to reflect on what he's done. 
Take these Bands of the Chosen, then. Wear them, or you cannot enter the Forbidden Grotto, the only way out of the Eternal Garden. 
I'm Hal-Liurz, Count Skingrad's steward. The Count does not accept unsolicited visitors, I'm afraid. I apologize for the inconvenience. 
The Blackwood Company is just plain mean. They've got a bad reputation, but that won't hurt business in their line of work, will it? 
Your stars are not mine. Today the Shadow shall hide you from destiny's cunning hounds. 
It's been the home of the Mages Guild for the longest time. You should see the library they have there! 
Carry on. 
What do you need, friend? 
Cleansing the Tree seems to have convinced him that the direct approach was his only option. 
But I still fear that Bruma will fall before you can complete the ritual. You need to buy Martin more time. Bruma needs more help! 
Come, light the Great Torch for Dementia! 
Look, friend, I'm not running a flophouse here. No gold, no room. No exceptions. 
Are you having trouble with the Obelisks, Your Grace? 
I know you're busy, but I need a moment of your time. 
Relan hears of Syl's torture. Relan likes what he hears. Syl is good. 
Lucien isn't here very often. His duties with the Black Hand keep him very busy, so he trusts me to keep the Sanctuary in order. 
Take what you will! Just spare me! 
You've assisted me in completing the very thing Carahil and his cabal sought to prevent all those years ago... my ascension to immortality. 
I am ready for battle when you are, champion. What say you? 
Keep me informed. I'm very interested to hear where he is hiding. 
Yes. Maglir. Find him. See why he defaulted. I swear, I've scraped things off the bottom of my boots that were smarter than you. 
We've lost too many of the Mazken already. I fear that we will not be able to hold the town for much longer. 
It's a fine place. 
I'll cut you limb by limb! 
What, are you telling me Matilde is the killer? I don't know what to believe! You just stay away from me!  
Oh, hello. Didn't realize anyone was there. 
It is an honor to make your acquaintance. 
It seems only fair to warn Your Grace that those who came before often placed switches far from the door itself. 
If we don't, Bruma ends up a smoking pile of rubble like what happened at Kvatch. 
Stop staring at me. Let's get to work. 
The City Watch and the Knights of the Thorn are always at odds. They think we don't have what it takes, and Farwil wanted to show them. 
How do you know about that? It's private. I don't trust you enough to talk about it. 
Lord Sheogorath, I believe You should leave this place. 
Cutter sells weapons in Crucible, but you won't catch me going there. 
Well... I did... and then suddenly they brandished weapons and robbed me. They sent me away with barely a stitch of clothing! Harlots! 
I'm going to spend some time at the Lodge. Then maybe tonight, I might go hunt me some black bows. 
I got it from a dead Hunger. Those things are mean. Glad I didn't have to kill it. Here take it. It's his tongue! 
I have just the thing for you. A lovely suite on the second floor, for only 40 gold a night. Quite a steal. Interested? 
Finally, I would try speaking to Orok gro-Ghoth who is my Steward. He resides in the Private Quarters section as well. 
You're a traitor to your own race! 
At least you are a woman. I would hate to be lead to my death by some foolish male. 
I've come to some decisions. I intend to donate all of the money I have made, as well as what is left of these stolen items to the temple. 
What're you looking at? 
Move along, you worthless filth. 
I will not forget your service to me and to Cheydinhal. Rescuing my son from the Oblivion Gate was a daring feat. 
I bet I'd make a better Duke than the new one. 
You are Weebam-Na? 
The traitor somehow switched your orders, and has been sending you to the wrong dead drops. You and I have been deceived, dear friend. 
Who will help me? 
This decision is yours. I'm sure Your Grace possesses the wisdom to choose the pieces that will allow the Gatekeeper to best defend the Realm. 
She's a sly one. I understand she's quite sneaky. 
I am Count Cirion, and you have violated the inner sanctum of Vitharn. What say you in your defense? 
Listen, I can't let you fight in a match while you've got a bet down on another combatant. Put your gambling to bed, and then we'll talk! 
I saw a big statue of Malacath, west of Fort Sutch, west of the Gold Road to Hammerfell. Looked like Daedra worshippers to me. 
Mariana Ancharia, hostess of Cheydinhal Bridge Inn. We provide beds and food to persons of quality in the Cheydinhal community. 
I wouldn't want to mix it up with him. 
Our Lady is surely an ancient and powerful elf. Someday, when I am Listener of the Black Hand, I will look upon her beautiful and unholy form! 
Please excuse me. I have things to attend to. 
That good-for-nothing husband's going to be very surprised if he crawls back here. Very surprised. 
But it's not at the bottom of a tall wall. So that means I can sleep without waking up under a pile of rubble, or worse - waking up dead! 
Hmmm. That may be difficult. Syl has been hidden from public sight lately. However, I can give you something that may help. 
Just like Skyrim, except for all the tight-ass Heartlanders around. All work and chapel... no wonder they're so sour. 
Seridur? He founded this group a few years ago. I was impressed with his knowledge of vampires. 
It is on the east side of Cylarne, which we hold for Lord Sheogorath. The Aurmazl Kaneh has her command post there. 
Okay. Here's the procedure. We go to the castle. First we search you, confiscate any stolen goods. Then you pay your fine, and we release you. 
The best I can say is, good luck. If you make it back alive, we'll be waiting for you. 
Are you truly prepared for this task? I cannot be certain what awaits you, but I am sure we will not speak again after you begin. 
Gaaahh! 
Time for you to cash in on my success. 
With all that time in the vineyard, it's a wonder he has time to practice his marksmanship. 
It's been a hobby of mine for years. I've collected cheeses from all over Tamriel, including the rare Olroy cheese! 
Now Faelian's hardly ever here. He's off using skooma, or wandering the city looking for some, I imagine.   
Ah, so you choose to play the stoic, hmm? You remain silent even when faced with my terrible countenance? Your silent obedience is to be commended. 
The great library was the height of logic and deduction.  
Perhaps in the future, Farwil will learn patience and careful planning before dragging us into a situation like that again. 
You may slay me, but we have already won. 
It's that fool Bat gro-Orkul. He thinks his armory is more important than the town or our lives. He's first on the list. Oh, yes! First. 
Reman Broder... he works Surilie's vineyard, I work Tamika's vineyard... Reman spent 20 years in the legion, and he's an advanced Marksman trainer. 
I... can't speak to you... talk to her... 
In order to bring my research on the last king of the Ayleids to its final stage, I need to go to the Throne Room of Nenalata. 
You want the gold? You bring me Arnora's amulet... after she's dead. 
I don't know if I can help you, but I'll try. 
You're my only hope at the moment. Please, you have my authorization to do everything you can to bring him to justice. 
Two of the afternoon watch, and all's well. All's well with you, ma'am? 
I told you he wouldn't cooperate. Your best bet is to shadow him and see where he goes. 
My friend! What can I do for you? 
We're still in Cyrodiil here in Bruma, but just barely. We build for the cold, just like in Skyrim. 
I've heard that J'skar has great skill at making things explode. 
Um. Oh, no. I lost count. Crap. Okay. Well, what do you want? 
I'm glad he's dead. I know that's a horrible thing to say, but I think you understand. 
It's not a normal ring, you see. You may find it slightly difficult to carry. Don't say I didn't warn you. 
A shame about Thadon. He lived life to its fullest. 
Let me know when you have found and eliminated the Mythic Dawn agents in Bruma. 
You have the Attenuator, the Manual, and a map. I'm certainly not going to carry you there, so I'd suggest you get to it. 
So. You get over to Lord Drad's estate. Get my ogres loose, and get them out. Do it now, for me... the Boss. 
The Black Horse Courier is run by three Khajiit brothers. They buy freelance stories with an Imperial stipend, and give the papers away for free. 
The Black Arrow, huh? I like it! Yeah, that'll do nicely. All right, it's time to see if you're crazy good or just plain crazy.  
I hope the book helps you find where Garridan may have fallen. 
There's nothing more to say. They're all gone. 
I'm Ulene Hlervu, Castle Mage. Perhaps you've been warned off me as a scandalous, blasphemous scoffer and cynic. 
Keep your heart true... and your eyes open. 
I used to be a dog. I got better. Not a better dog, though. I'm a terrible dog now. Tomorrow...who knows? Ravel may know. Talk to him. 
Training? Well, my dear, good business sense is just something that comes naturally to me. 
You'll see, you Imperial dog! When I get out of here, all of Tamriel will know my name! Valen Dreth! Valen Dreth! 
He never told me anything else about the baby, but I knew it was his son. From time to time he would ask about the child's progress. 
Not for that price. Try again. 
Defend the Altar! 
To get the taste of Khajiit cooking out of their mouths! Hahaha! 
Ulen Athram. Of the Kragenmoor Athrams. Made my fortune in the flin trade, and now I'm here in the city, living the life of ease. 
Fearing one day someone might manage to kill my child, I have been preparing a new body. 
Oh, I almost forgot, Borba gra-Uzgash at Borba's Goods and Stores will have everything you need to make the place more livable. 
I know of him, but I don't figure I need to tell you about it. 
Fine. You don't scare me. Beat me, torture me. I'll never talk to you. 
Well, what are you waiting for? Get! 
Dead, finally. Good work. Did you retrieve his ring? I want that as proof that the Blackwood Company didn't defeat him. 
I've heard tales of a woman who used a blunt weapon in horrible ways people had never seen. Irene Metrick, I think her name was.  
The High Elf Faelian lives in the Imperial City, and fancies long walks. Speak with your fellow family members. They may offer their insights. 
Sheogorath's pet! His head will make a fitting ornament for our Lord Jyggalag's throne room! 
What nonsense! 
Wonderful! Follow me, and I'll show you around my little collection of Oddities. 
Isn't Tertius a dreamboat? I'm Romana Faleria. I'm such a lucky girl. 
Die tree scum! 
What plan? What are you talking about? 
You have some nerve addressing me after slaying my son. You're lucky I didn't have you executed on the spot! Now get out of my sight! 
It is my honor to sacrifice myself on the Altar of Despair at Lord Sheogorath's command. 
Did you hear about the two Argonians that walked into a tavern? The second one should have seen it coming. Ahaha! 
I told you, I'm done with those books. I'm sorry I ever got mixed up with those maniacs! 
I've just received word from the Countess of Bruma that an Oblivion Gate has opened outside the city. 
Shrines are secret for a reason. People hate us. Ignorant fools. 
I've had a look at the place myself, and it could use some furnishings inside. Quite barren in there I'm afraid. 
They're all dead? Well, you'll have to take over for them. Get back there and clear out that mine. Get moving! 
There's a rumor going around that the Undercroft may be haunted. 
Your money or your life. 
Sure. In the Arena, you can make a lot of money, real fast. And you can get dead, real fast, too. 
Your safe return speaks volumes of your success. 
All right. 
The Greymarch is upon you. 
Who's talking to you? I'm not. 
Felas ran off with them and left me to die! Me! That ingrate! Disloyal cur! Imagine, leaving me here all alone! 
May your arrows always strike true! 
Some blasted mage. Had a theory. They've always got theories. He thought there was a Manic and a Demented in each of us. 
I don't mind betting, but it's not worth having to hear a lecture about it. 
As a token of our gratitude, as you did this at the risk of false imprisonment or perhaps your life, we reward you this bounty of gold. 
We need to get Hieronymus Lex to lift his siege. I have put together a plan. 
The Gatekeeper is still dead. That's fine. He never did anything useful, anyway. 
I present to you this dagger. It's an enchanted blade, known as Sufferthorn. Its prick is deadly, I assure you. 
Ahhh... Rosentia will be so pleased! 
How are you? 
Right. Well, my contracts await. Maybe we can talk some more later. 
She's always busy, that's for sure. I have heard she's a good teacher, though. 
A lovely little Oddity -- a key made from a Hound's Tooth. And no one even knows what it opens, imagine that! Shall we move on? 
Don't be fooled by your next opponent. The little dagger he uses is actually a powerful enchanted weapon called Shimmerstrike. Now go get 'em!  
After examining it for a bit I noticed a small word carved on it in runes. Using a book from my library, I translated it. The word was nonsense. 
The Aurmazl Kaneh would wish to speak to you at once. Proceed through this door to our main encampment at the Altar of Rapture. 
Welcome, Imperial, to the Tournament of Ten Bloods. To your right, through each of nine gates, another Chosen awaits you. 
Finally... back to the real world. 
The Amulet of Kings is a sacred symbol of the Empire. Most people think of the Red Dragon Crown, but that's just jewelry. 
Looking for a room? 
The traitor somehow switched your orders, and has been sending you to the wrong dead drops. You and I have been deceived. 
Look, you horse's ass. I've never trusted city guardsmen. Never. So I'm definitely not going to start trusting you, Tyrellius. 
I've heard Edla Dark-Heart was once an assassin! 
It's true what everyone's saying -- Kvatch is lost. The Daedra, they swarmed in.... The Town Guard never had a chance. 
My Lord Sheogorath! Please kill me! 
In the wrong hands, the Crown of the Ayleids could be very dangerous. And Umbacano is definitely the wrong hands. 
You need to leave this place, mortal. Quickly. 
We have already been through this, and I admitted my guilt. 
How dare you mock him, even in death! 
Travel to the Imperial City, and speak with Palonirya. 
This shield, like a true friend, is always willing to take a good beating. 
I shall pass the news on to the Council. Most troubling, indeed, to know that these are not merely myths. 
Not so loud, please. What a headache I've got. I'm Agnete the Smith. 'The Pickled' they call me. Sure wish I was pickled right now. 
I suppose I've got something for you. We need a weapons shipment delivered to Desolate Mine. That's your job. 
... Slash 'N Smash... the BIG Orc Weapon Shop. BIG weapons. For BIG heroes. 
You may want to speak to Phintias at the First Edition bookshop in the Market District of the city. I know he goes there occasionally. 
Now that Duke Thadon's happy again, I'm sure he'll invite me to the palace to perform! Oh, who am I kidding.... 
I'm not running a charity here, you know? I need the gold, so you come back when you actually have it. 
You get me some... now listen up... sk...skooma. You know what that is? Get me some skooma and... and... we'll be good, good friends. Okay? 
What's your interest in the old woman? You'd do well to keep your questions to yourself. 
I am honored, mistress. 
Indeed. I'm surprised Earil hasn't taken matters into his own hands. 
You've certainly done your part protecting Xedilian. Should Sheogorath ever decide to visit, I'll be sure to inform him of your proficiency. 
The Resonator of Judgment is back on. I read about that somewhere. It helps keep the Realm clean of vagrants and ne'er-do-wells. 
Have you seen the prisoner? 
Anything else? 
I've sighted the Forlorn Watchman again. Every time I see that ghost, it gives me the creeps. 
She's the best in the city. And, she'll teach others. It'll cost you, though. 
The Council has turned on Traven. Things couldn't possibly get any worse for the guild. 
Do you know Areldil? I understand he has some unique skills. 
Amazing, you actually swiped the stolen head right out of Timberscar Cave? Ha, those goblins won't know what to think now! 
Not that it's anybody's business, but I have noticed voices coming from Jearl's house. But I've never seen anybody but Jearl go in or out. Strange. 
I suppose I can stop to chat with a friend, but I'm really busy. 
I'm fed up with the senseless feuding, blood spilled for no good reason. Glad the Watch put a stop to it. 
There are no finer Chestnut horses to be found anywhere in Cyrodiil. They are not as hardy as most, but only the Black horse is faster. 
Instead, they sent soldiers to sneak into the keep. The defenders in the bailey failed to stop them from opening the main gates. 
My name is Margarte. Professionally, I'm a trade consultant... I offer Advanced Mercantile training, by the way... 
Can't you see I'm busy? Without the translation, this book is useless. Now go away and let me work. 
Very odd, but then, it's really none of my business. 
Assassins attacked my sons. A secret passage here leads out of the city. 
So am I. I can't sell them for any less, but if you change your mind, come back. 
So long. 
I'll have the ritual ready in the Great Hall when you arrive. Farewell. 
Yes, and we have for quite some time. Though the information he has provided is limited, it has given us a sense of their scope and power. 
There, imbue the Staff with power from the Font of Madness. Soak the staff in the waters of the land, and it will open its full power to you. 
Don't worry, this one will back you up when the time comes. 
A splash of blue here... a dab of green there... 
Welcome to the Mystic Emporium. Calindil is here, with all your needs, under one roof. Look, and buy. Nothing could be easier. 
Ma'zaddha is clearly withholding something. It would seem that direct pressure has no effect, so we'll have to try another route. 
Hey, what's wrong? Aren't they waiting for you up in the Arena? 
Ironic, then, that I come to you now as Speaker for the Dark Brotherhood. My name is Lucien Lachance, and my voice is the will of the Night Mother. 
I... I cannot believe it! You survived! We were certain that your light had been lost! 
Clever ruse. I wonder how many have died falling for it? 
Arch-Mage Traven was right to ban Necromancy from the guild. Look at what they've done; they've gone and killed several of us! 
She holds public audience in the Great Hall on weekday mornings. If you need to speak to her, that's the time to do it. 
Not much more I can do to help you. 
I certainly don't care to help people who show up on my doorstep wanting something. Are we getting the picture here? 
I like the West Weald itself, but I'd rather avoid its proprietor. 
I'm just glad we escaped with our lives. Oh, don't tell Farwil I said that... 
The doorways into the Realm proper. You may enter through either one. Really, it depends on which aspect of the Realm more suits your disposition. 
That's why things are so peaceful here. Just look around... and there's a town guard. Prevents all sorts of misunderstandings. 
One of the oldest trees, named the Tree of Shades, lies in the halls of Milchar. Milchar is a place of ruin, root, and mania. 
I don't know what you can do for us in this situation. I mean, Ulrich is the Captain after all. Perhaps you could speak to Garrus. 
Still, for whatever reason you are here, you mean Ciirta ill, yes? Don't bother refuting me, I know the truth. Yes, I do. 
Any friend of Martin's is a friend of mine. How can I help you? 
I'm busy, here, okay? You mind giving us some privacy? 
The more folks hunting goblins, the better. That's what I say. 
Ah. You must be the one I got the message about. How can I help you? 
She does love to show off her skill. I suppose you can learn a lot from her, though. 
Whatever you may think of me, I still protect my own. This is my city, and Mehrunes Dagon will not have it while I remain Count of Skingrad. 
I knew one day someone with unyielding virtue would heed my words and speed my release. You risked much to perform such a selfless act. 
I personally wouldn't go looking for him myself, but you might keep it in mind if you ever run across him. 
Peryite save us! 
Of course, should you be caught murdering them in the streets, the guards will respond accordingly. I can't be connected with this, remember? 
Legion duty here in Cyrodiil is usually a dull affair. In the East, though, things are a bit more challenging, and one can make a name for oneself. 
Another mortal dares to summon me, and already I am bored. But enough about me. Let's talk about you.  
Count Hassildor will only consider buyers of distinction. You just aren't famous enough. 
That little tramp is as guilty as sin, you hear me? She's the killer, and if we don't keep our eyes on her she'll do it again! 
May shadow hide you. 
These days I get nervous whenever I see a Watchman. Maybe I'll just stay inside. 
I've seen Shameer at the Tamika Vineyards practicing archery. He's really good. I might try to get some pointers from him. 
I greet you. Thaurron, Journeyman of the Mages Guild. 
Ah, you again! A pleasure, I'm sure. No time for chatter now; I have a few important things to attend to, or did I? Ah well... 
Blessings of Mystara upon ye. 
You don't appear well, milady. Perhaps you should rest. 
The guilds are north, near the Great Oak. 
Now with the Resonator of Judgment working, there won't be any adventurers running around. Who am I going to find to kill me now? 
First you need to get out of here. Through that door must be the entrance to the sewers, past the locked gate. That's where we were heading. 
Nice, friendly folk in Anvil, even the Countess greets me in the street. Well, except for that Newheim the Portly. He's a mean old scroat. 
You'll have to do better than that, you pasty-faced mongrel of an upstart race. Back to the slave pens where you were bred. 
I'm glad the Great Torch burns again. Cats hate fire. 
Well, well! 
I've much to tell you. 
Shove off. 
Well, it's never happened to Malvulis, has it? You know why? 'Cause she could sail better than you in her sleep, you old fool! 
Return to me when you have spoken with all of them. Then we shall talk of training. 
Absolutely. 
But Brother, what of the contracts that require subtlety! You must at least strive to earn the bonuses that are offered? 
Once again, Syl uses pain to get what she wants. How long before every one of us is forced to visit Herdir's chamber? 
They cannot understand why I trust you. They've not seen what I've seen. 
Don't forget to check with Bittneld, the Captain of the Guard, my Steward, Orok gro-Ghoth and my herald, Laythe Wavrick. 
Incredible. I can't believe he's dead. 
You are a diplomat as well as a warrior, it seems! I would prefer more men, of course, but if we must offer battle now, so be it. 
Wow! You're the Grand Champion! I saw your fight against the Gray Prince!  You're the best! Can I... Can I follow you around? I won't get in the way! 
I find it surprising that you're speaking to me again without having completed your task. 
When I bowed the knee to Jyggalag, my eyes were opened. 
How interesting! I've heard of these glowing roots, but never had the fortune of seeing one. Unfortunately, I know nothing about them. 
You'll always get a fair deal here. I'm Nilawen. What can I get you? 
Sounds like the Skingrad branch of the guild can't even keep track of its members. How appalling. 
More trouble. 
Follow me, my friend, and watch my back. Dovesi must be brought to justice, and I'm the one to do it! Let's go! 
Greetings, Champion! I'm at your service. 
It's almost as if he grew up in Skyrim. I don't think the church likes it, but his healing skills are invaluable. 
You coming to the gathering tonight? 
There was nothing I could do. I just ran. If I hadn't, I'd be dead. 
Or, we can create the illusion of the adventurer dying and his spirit rising from his corpse. Good fun to be had for all! 
The great thing about bows is that they allow you to kill your foes without getting blood all over your dress. Here you go, dear. 
She probably takes on more than she should. Between smithing and training, she's always hard at work. 
You do this for me, and you get the gold. All of it. All I need as proof is that damn amulet she always wears. Show that to me and the money's yours. 
You're the one with the book. You tell me how it works! 
Shall we start the ceremony? 
You are a liar! Lynch had specific instructions not to disturb me. Since you came from below decks, you must have gotten past Lynch. 
S'wit of a thief. 
We're with you, Captain! 
The Madstone awaits, and so does your reward if you retrieve it. 
It's a shame all the smaller bookstores are gone. I guess they just couldn't compete. 
Stay sharp, Associate. 
Spotted a minotaur out by the ridge. He nearly had my poor Bessie here for lunch! Fear not, the monster's now rotting in a ditch, I assure you. 
Sheogorath leaves in the middle of the Greymarch. Perhaps I should take over ruling the Realm. 
So you think I'm responsible? I suppose you're right, as the manor used to belong my grandfather, Lorgren Benirus. 
Now, of course, there is business to attend to. As you have assumed the mantle of Sheogorath, there are matters that deserve your attention. 
Sir, I must warn you that threatening a city guardsman is an offense punishable by a fine of no less than 50 gold. Pay or be jailed. 
8, 9... Syl's rounding people up again. 10, 11... It's hard to count when you are being tortured. 
Foul things, they deserve the death you've brought them. 
You? You wouldn't know a good sword if it stabbed you in the throat! 
Well, there it is. Not the best job I've seen, but you did it. 
You'll pay for your treachery! 
Syl has made her escape through the hidden tunnel in the gardens outside her quarters! She must not get away! 
Of course, I like to wave it around anyway, it makes me feel more like a legitimate painter. 
I hear the Count's got someone to sort out that business with Mazoga the so-called knight. 
If I didn't know better, I'd say he purposely tossed it down the well behind the guild hall. Why he would do such a thing is beyond me. 
Rolis tried to make it through the door - he's the one that realized this wasn't going to work. One of their patrols spotted us, and Rolis went down. 
Fine. Let's move. 
By the way, thanks for recovering Captain Renault's sword. I'll see that it is given a place of honor in the halls of the Blades. 
I've got the diary, and I will turn it over to Armand the next chance I get. 
Our last score was a tax shipment being delivered to the Imperial City. We robbed it, and in the midst of the chaos, Jorundr killed a guard. 
Hail Martin Septim! 
Our stronghold at Pinnacle Rock is under attack! The forces of Order broke in and routed us! You must go to Adeo at once and aid her! 
The Flowing Bowl attracts the worst Anvil has to offer. Always be on your guard. 
What a joke! Let's be rid of this thing and continue on our way. 
There's another mystery in House Dementia. Someone needs to write a book about that place. It'd be a best seller. Lots of intrigue! 
You risk much by speaking to me. You should leave this place. Now. 
Are we clear? Ignore her request, go to this place she has described, and return with the book. This is far more important than any petty squabble. 
All Thieves Guild members have sworn loyalty to him. If there is such a thing as a guildmaster, he's it. 
Oh, so you've heard of it? 
So, you need to find this High Elf, hmm? Why don't you take a trip to Summerset Isle, ask around for him there. Idiot.  
I'll try to speak in fewer syllables. 
I am The Stranger. That is all you need to know. That, and I am no-one to be trifled with. 
Ni-ni-ni-ni-ni-ni-ni-ni-ni-ni! 
You fought well. I would almost grant you the honor of kindling the Altar, if you were an immortal. Farewell. The waters of Oblivion await me. 
Belisarius, how are you? 
You don't have the gold. I hope you didn't think I was just going to give it to you? 
You're a fit one. Been running a lot? 
He is a skillful thief. I seem to remember something about him. Something recent. Something important. Something is missing in my hand... 
Ciirta is dead, and now the Apostles fear that there is no one to lead them to the light. 
What else do you need? We don't want any trouble. 
Looks clear. Come on. We're almost through to the sewers. 
Wonder why Solstheim wasn't on the old maps... not that anyone should care. 
Run! 
You destroyed the Sigil Tower at Ganonah. My kin say you fought well. 
I will mourn for him during my own, private time. For now, I cannot help but rejoice. You have brought safety to the guild, and I thank you. 
Take your time. 
Now, thanks to your rude interruption, I have to start my day's work all over again. 
Have you not heard of the Dark Brotherhood? Of the remorseless guild of paid assassins and homicidal cutthroats? 
Yes? Can I help you? 
Maybe we're on to something here. We'll see how it plays out. It can't be worse than what's happened before. 
No sweat. 
Excuse me. Can I help you? Are you looking for Prior Maborel? Or Jauffre? 
Good luck with Irlav's project. 
Good. Let's go. We're not out of this yet. 
I heard the most disturbing rumor. Someone told me Francois Motierre has been murdered by the Dark Brotherhood! It's not... It's not true, is it? 
Killed anything? 
Don't worry, we'll get him. 
The Torch only matters to those in New Sheoth. 
If I can send you back with something worthwhile, Irlav may forget all about our delays. 
Why does the prey approach me? 
It's a shame that Selena doesn't join in our fun, but she takes her role as an Alchemist very seriously. If you need supplies, she's the one to see. 
It's a myth. Deluded fool. 
He's too much! Killed all my men! Get out of my way! 
My scouts recently discovered another way through the ruins to the Altar of Despair. 
Sure, he'll be a bit put off, but you won't be dead. At least, you probably won't. That's better odds than you're getting here. 
As you command, m'Lord. 
Well, you did accomplish your task. There's no denying that the Golden Saints are defeated. 
Maybe the best thing to do is fight them with a weapon. 
May your kills be quick and many. 
We won't let you down, ma'am. The daedra will be sorry they messed with Bruma. 
Stay away! You don't know! You can't know! It's in there! It'll kill us all! 
Well, you sorted out the Blackwood boys, all right. Nice work. Now maybe we'll see a little more guild contract work here in Leyawiin. 
It was not always so. Once, I ruled this Realm, a world of perfect Order. My dominion expanded across the seas of Oblivion with each passing era. 
You've got it. I'll have the two Mountain Lions brought out to the Arena. Now get up there and give the people what they paid for!  
Sorry, friend, but we've got nothing more to talk about. If you're ready to fight, talk to Ysabel and she'll arrange the match. 
I hear she wants a "cure" for her latest disease, but isn't willing to pay for it. 
Hello, my little friend. I have something that might interest you... 
Leave us, creature of light. 
I owe you a debt of gratitude. 
Leave me alone!  I can't talk right now! 
Spread the word. The world is coming to an end. But it's nothing to worry about. 
Can I help you, sister? 
Your Speaker should look for this person in the city of Mournhold, in the Dark Elven homeland of Morrowind.  
You've started the job; now you must finish it. You need to get back to Leyawiin. How can I help? 
Feel this! 
Have you changed your mind? I miss my husband, and fear the worst. 
The very thought of what Agarmir was doing sickens me. I hope those poor souls rest in peace now that this is over. 
I've heard that Arentus Falvius at the chapel can conjure up creatures. 
Just because the Isles didn't come crashing down around our heads doesn't mean everything is fine. 
I've been trying to get through "Mysterious Akavir." It's a fairly interesting read. 
Time. Time is an artificial construct. An arbitrary system based on the idea that events occur in a linear direction at all times.  
Something lost upon the ground? It's likely to show up at Ahjazda's Things Found. 
Poor Thadon, he was such a handsome man... I enjoyed our midnight meetings. I hope the new ruler of Mania is ready for me. 
Despite what your Council may think, I've not thrown in with the Necromancers, and would never do so. You may pass along that message. 
Please hurry. 
I believe that Sinderion in Skingrad could serve your inquiry better, as his area of expertise centers around things of this nature. 
I'll tell you what else I'll do since you seem so resourceful. If you find any more bottles of the wine, I'll gladly pay you well for them. 
I can remove them, but I will need time. Follow me. There's a spot in the next Grotto where we won't be disturbed. 
In fact, he instituted the rites of becoming an Emperor, which included the construction of the Amulet of Kings. 
The Tiber Septim Hotel is clean, comfortable, and quite exclusive. I don't mind paying a little extra for a little privacy. 
Welcome to 'A Fighting Chance'. I'm Rohssan, proprietor. I sell the best swords in the City, and I offer Advanced Training for Armorers. 
The Arcane University is getting restless. They have not gotten their Icestaff back. 
Well... maybe Thoronir wasn't responsible for digging up those corpses, but good riddance to his insane prices. Nice job. 
The High Fane dates from the Late Ayleid Period, following the fall of White Gold Tower, a very troubled time for that ancient people. 
You stand on holy ground. 
He may look slow... okay, he is slow. But what do you expect for this price? 
Is it safe for us to return to Weatherleah yet? 
Maybe the new Gatekeeper will keep the peace out there. 
Indeed. I believe Martin's ascension may signal the beginning of a religious awakening across Tamriel. 
Then we are done. 
Hmmm. No. Never seen one of those before. Strikingly beautiful. 
I'm sorry, although I wish to spend time speaking with you, I have much business to attend to. Please be brief. 
Syl's torturing people again? I'd hate to be locked up in a tiny cell. That'd be torture enough. 
Do you have the Arrow of Extrication? 
Any new information come to light? 
That's all. For now. Good job, though. You got Viranus home safe, and I think it'll do him good. I'll pay him for the contract, and this for you. 
Hmph. Ok, I'm stumped. If I had more time, I'd buy that off of you and bring it to Sinderion in Skingrad. He's the expert on strange plants. 
Smart she is, or so they say, eyes as sharp as keen as a blade. 
I trust that as a member of the Guild, you would do the right thing and acquire this text before Earana does. 
I've seen her in the canals a number of times. Other times, I've seen her sneaking around the city. 
Truly, you are an asset to the guild. I reward you with the rank of Wizard, and teach you a most powerful spell. 
You have great faith in my powers of forebearance. Do not test me further, mortal. 
6, 7... Good work! 8, 9... I'm the only Jastira this town needs. 10, 11.... 
What do you need, Sparkles? I'm always here. Can't afford to sleep. Can't be too careful. 
Your Grace, there is trouble! You must come quickly! 
Now get out of here. 
I'll stay here until you're ready to continue to the Elder Council Chambers. Don't be long. 
Heard anything more about the Blackwood Company? 
Very well then! I will send you to darkness! 
The guild offers access to spells you can't find anywhere else. See Falcar here in town if you'd like to join. 
Be aware, though, that your rank can be stripped for failure to uphold the tenets of the guild, or at my discretion. 
I've been hearing disturbing tales about Oblivion Gates opening all across Cyrodiil. I hope it's just wild talk. 
Once their main force is destroyed, with your help, we can easily take Rapture from the few survivors. Then, I will gladly kindle the Flame for you. 
That's okay. I'm sure I can find a buyer soon. 
My fate is in your hands. 
I won't risk my Guard attacking that infernal Oblivion Gate. We'll hold the walls and hope for the best. 
All right, then. Just don't forget. 
For Tamriel! 
Yes, the Gold Road does pass through Skingrad.  I, too, find it fascinating. 
You should ask Drarana Thelis about that. 
The Fighters Guild has competition in Leyawiin. Called 'The Blackwood Company'. Very tough. Maybe too tough. 
The sooner we reach Cloud Ruler Temple the better. Lead on. 
About time someone showed up. 
Good people of the Imperial City, welcome to the Arena! You've come to watch the Grand Champion battle some of Cyrodiil's fiercest creatures! 
Baenlin is dead, yes, but you did not fulfill the contract precisely as directed. I will grant your reward of gold, but the bonus is forfeit. 
Normally, I wouldn't approach a total stranger like this, but Gilen seemed so insistent. Please, forgive my audacity... 
A powerful Sorceress. Maybe a genius. And a complete lunatic. All in all, my kind of person. 
If you come across any unusual ingredients in your travels, be sure to remember me and bring them here. 
You will not make it past the sewers. Of this I am certain. 
Well isn't that just the Oddest thing! A dagger that heals people. Who would make such a thing, and why? I absolutely adore it! 
I heard what happened to him. I wonder if the Mages Council will do anything? 
It's obvious that young Primo comes from wealth. A chest full of gold would be mere spending change for him.   
You wouldn't think there would be two of those in the world, now would you? Sorry. Keep looking and I'm sure something truly Odd will turn up. 
You're more intelligent that I expected from a mortal, and a male at that. Away with you, then. 
Each Black Bow you bring me means another Black Bow Bandit slain. 
I am Lucien Lachance, a Speaker for the Dark Brotherhood. And you, you are a killer. A taker of life. A harvester of souls. 
I see you have some. I'll buy them in groups of five for 50 gold. Interested? 
All right, this is it! 
I don't know you, you don't know me, everybody's happy. 
Hrol Ulfgar has been murdered, and the Dalvilu are responsible! They will pay for their treachery, the wretched Dunmer! 
Have you heard, my friend? One of our fellow guests has been murdered! This bodes ill for our stay, and our search for the gold. 
Syl had folks tortured again. So what? Real torture is my mug being empty. 
You heard about any new contracts? They'd tell us, wouldn't they? 
Blow away, windbag. 
No, I didn't really care for her, you commoner scum, but I never wanted anything like this to happen to her! 
Let's start with Bernadette Peneles.  Be outside my house at 6 am, you'll see her watching me.  See where she goes and who she reports to. 
Gawk at me will you... 
Forever foes the ghosts can't thwart, they fight for control of their long dead fort. 
Did you hear that someone played yet another prank on Jeanne Frasoric in Bruma? I don't know how she keeps falling for these things. 
The Elder Council and the bureaucracy have managed the Empire's affairs for decades. The Emperor rules, but the Council handles all the details. 
What are you waiting for? You signed up for this, maggot! Now get up to that Arena and fight!   
She seems skilled in its use. I can see why the Fighters Guild has her training others. 
You want to buy or sell, the City is great. You want free? Go down the holes, kill some monsters. Sell your loot back in the city! 
See that you do so immediately. This is the one task which you were assigned. If you cannot complete it, you will be removed. Are we clear? 
I'll buy just about anything, for the right price. 
I swear that when I passed by Benirus Manor last night, I heard someone scream from inside. Velwyn Benirus will never sell that deathtrap! 
But we have not eliminated the threat against Bruma and Cloud Ruler Temple, only delayed it. I will warn the Countess of the danger. 
Sickly Bernice is always looking for a miracle cure. 
I explain myself to you so you understand me. And so you can explain to the Countess. 
What do you want, ashborn? 
That means the killer has been inside with us all along. You and I aren't murderers, so that leaves one person! It's Nels the Naughty! 
This is your out, friend. Leave it alone. How about we just march on back to the shrine and tell Clavicus the deal is off? 
The fragrance, the sharp, startling odor... the sheep's cheese... ambrosia! Nectar! 
So he really is innocent, then. Interesting ... perhaps they have been using him as a decoy, to draw my attention away from their real spies ... 
You've helped me come to my senses, friend. There's no time for evidence gathering, no time to collect proof! Dovesi is the murderer! 
If you talk to Horkvir, he'll know what can be done. He's a smart one. 
No Dark Brother or Sister has successfully infiltrated the Imperial Prison in over three hundred years. This will be a true test of your abilities. 
There are rats and goblins down there... but from what I've seen of you, I'm guessing you are an experienced Thief. Am I right? 
Farewell, My Lord. 
Very well. Come back if you change your mind. 
Life might be easier if Order wipes everything out. Everything would be grey and plain. Like my life. 
Slowly but surely, maggot. You got a good streak going. Don't sissy out on me now! You ready for another match, or what? 
It's nice here. Lots of pests for Relan. Lots of blood. 
But only if you can prove to me the sincerity of your position, and the depth of your conviction.  
We're trying to bring the comfort of the Chapel to the Nords here, but Bruma's Nords stick to their heathen gods and uncivilized practices. 
Unless there's a drink in this for me, you might as well stop talking. 
Aren't you precious? Do you really not know? Haven't you noodled it all through yet? 
Yes, ma'am? What can I do for you? 
Don't make me show you to the door. 
Excuse me, fellow magister. Is now a good time to talk? 
You see? You see what I have to deal with? I can't recall if I'm coming or you're going without the Chalice of Reversal. Oh, now you've upset me. 
Good cheer and jubilant welcome, lady. 
Hmph. Whatever it was, it's gone now. 
Inside the cave, there's rumored to be a shrine to Sheogorath. That's where the staff can finally be dropped and the scamps should remain behind. 
Good to see you again, ma'am. Shall I escort you upstairs to see my master? 
This had better be good... 
I hope Martin knows what he's doing with that evil book. I fear for what it could do to him if he's not careful. 
Have you accomplished the mission? 
How may I serve? 
Then leave. 
Tread carefully; I don't know what evil lurks within that gate. 
It seems she's upset about the murder, but there's something else. It's almost like she's glad there's less competition for the gold. Greedy old bat. 
Or he did, anyway. He told me he was leaving Anvil. I'm sorry, but that's all I know! 
You'll keep your nose out of this, if you know what's good for you. 
Master Umbacano is a fine gentleman. Mad for old Ayleid stuff, true, but he's got the dosh, so it's all right, ain't it? 
Have you brought to me the daggers? 
Really, ma'am, you'll need to start thinking for yourself. It is one of the basic requirements of godhood. 
Don't be shy. Join us, and do well by doing good. 
You're ready to fight? Good, good! All right then, head up to the Arena and give the people a great show!   
Have you seen Varon Vamori recently? 
Oh... I see. Well, if you change your mind, come see me and I can fill you in on the details. Please, reconsider soon... I'm worried about him. 
Speak to Arctus and Dervenin, the High Priests at the Sacellum Arden-Sul. They can explain what needs to be done. 
What? They took it from Jauffre? Things are worse than I had thought. 
Maybe now that the project has had some positive results, we can go home. 
I am in Fighter's Guild. 
I'm a knight-errant now, and I don't care who knows it. 
A dead Gatekeeper means more adventurers in the Isles. 
Orrin is a respectable fence, if there is such a thing. He's got a decent amount of gold, but is a tough negotiator. Go to him instead of Luciana. 
The Gatekeeper, dead! This could be the end for all of us! 
Warrior? You? Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! Just... Just look at you! Ha ha ha ha ha ha!  
And now, if you need training, I'd be ever so happy to provide it. 
Your Grace! You're alive! 
Hey! That's me you're talking to! Reistr the Rotted! Hear me? Reistr! Wow! I got this a-MAZ-ing itch right on my thigh! Can't touch it! It's rough! 
The relic was stolen from us not long ago. A group of men was seen leaving the Chapel the night the stone was stolen. We believe they were bandits. 
I shall offer you whatever skill I have. 
Kvatch? You've seen it. Kvatch doesn't exist any more. 
Welcome to Bruma Castle. What's brought you here today? 
Better keep an eye on her. 
This is a personal errand, you must understand. Just between you and I. The Mages Guild has nothing to do with it. 
Welcome to this holy library, Lady Camoran 
Hmmm. Hieronymus Lex looks like the best choice. I was about to give the position to Dairihill's cousin. 
If you light the Great Torch on the Mania side of the Sacellum, you will be a hero to the people of Bliss, I assure you! 
Someone should write a book about the problems we're having with our doubles here in Split. 
We made it!... errr, I mean... victory is ours once again! Huzzah! It's a shame that Bremman didn't make it though. He was a good knight. 
Maybe Theranis will return soon, maybe not. If you grow bored and change your mind, ask me again. 
Come on! We have to protect Martin until he can light the Dragonfires in the Temple! 
The new Gatekeeper will keep more adventurers in the Fringe. More business for my inn. 
I understand that she is no longer with us. The apostles will need another to lead them to the light. Now is my chance! 
May the Madgod watch over you. 
She's all right, I guess. Not that it's any business of yours.   
Down with this false Paradise! 
Why are you still here? 
Now, either buy something or get out. 
Have you ever lived on the streets, struggled to survive? This Sanctuary is my home. Here I have the safety and love I've searched for all my life. 
The guests believe there is a chest of gold hidden in the house, and have agreed to be locked inside until one of them finds it. 
30 should do it this time. Yes, that would be perfect. Oh, and as usual, I'll have the moderate Elixir ready in 24 hours. 
What is it? I need you to go get Ajum-Kajin. 
Greetings, citizen. How can this Legion horseman be of service? 
Against all hope, Martin cast him back into Oblivion! He will not trouble our world for long years to come. 
I present to you now this key. It unlocks the well behind the Abandoned House above. Use it to gain hidden, quick access to this Sanctuary. 
Nooo! 
The lighthouse is... is just outside the city walls. I think the robed man has lived there for quite some time. In... in the cellar. 
How may I assist you? 
We'll see. 
Just this way. 
Sure. 
This is one of our finest White horses. Take good care of him. 
No offense to you, friend. It's not your fault. And perhaps you can help. 
Not only has Necromancy been banned from practice in the Mages Guild, but the Guild won't deal with anyone who openly uses it. 
Thank Akatosh you're here! I have deciphered the final item for the ritual to open a portal to Camoran's Paradise! 
If that's correct, then Bothiel would be most likely to know something about it, as the caretaker of the Orrery. She should be on University grounds. 
I can't recall, ever loving moments, like this moment, with you. 
I don't know nothin' else, honest. 
Excellent. A fine example of a Daedric shrine. Sorry for the trouble getting here. Let's keep moving. 
Speak with Jeanne Frasoric in Bruma, and see that she is all right. 
I believe we had a contract. Here's my part. 
Seems the only way he's going to tell us anything is if you end up in jail with him. 
I have seen dragons. Perhaps you will see a dragon. I won't say where I saw one. Perhaps I did not. 
Hello, I'm Nanette Don. I wasn't sure why I came here, until she showed up. Now I know. I'm going to be a powerful sorceress. Just like Relmyna!  
I've browsed Claudette's shop, but I haven't spent a lot of time there. 
Indeed, it may well be. 
Thank you so much again! Here is a small bit of change for your time. 
I don't recall inviting you into my house. Leave, quickly, or we will have a problem. 
Barely a week ago, I left Harm's Folly to go buy supplies as I usually do once a month. What a fool I was to leave my wife alone. 
Perhaps you're mistaken, and we have spoken of it. I simply can't recall. I could think so much more clearly if I had the Chalice. 
Ta! Come visit again! Or I'll pluck out your eyes. 
She's frightened, of course. No one that young should be exposed to such horrors. 
Are you quite sure, Inquisitor? Very well... Please don't have too much fun without me. 
I greet you, Chosen One! A victory in my Tournament of Ten Bloods brings great honor. 
Your staff does not make you a Daedra, foolish mortal. 
While I continue to study the Mysterium Xarxes, you should keep searching for the Armor of Tiber Septim. 
I believe you have some news for Lord Sheogorath. Perhaps you should be speaking with him instead of illuminating me with your presence. 
Get out of here before you get hurt. 
Perhaps my Lord will fortify the walls? 
For millennia this drama has unfolded, and each time, I have conquered this land, only to be transformed back into that gibbering fool, Sheogorath. 
Skullcrusher, huh? I like it! Yeah, that'll do nicely. All right, it's time to see if you're crazy good or just plain crazy.  
We shouldn't be seen talking until the mission is accomplished! 
He's always getting himself into jams with the careless ways he performs his experiments, and well, I'm afraid he's done it again. 
You are like an unholy vision. So beautiful. 
Please hurry, we are anxious to return home. 
I've faced your kind before. You're a coward. You use stealth and lies to destroy innocent lives. All of that ends now! Prepare to meet your doom! 
Did your human master let you off the leash? Crawl back under his table. Maybe he'll throw you a bone to gnaw on. 
We store goods here until the buyer can collect them, or until the ships come in. 
You can go now. Run along. Scoot! 
Count Janus Hassildor, at your service. A 'thank you' might be in order at this point. 
He's got some issues, that's for sure. Personally, I'd just steer clear of him. 
However, it is too late to disturb him. If you'll return in the morning, I'm sure he will be glad to speak to you. 
Summoned by prey. The hare crouches before the fox's muzzle. 
Scar-Tail was once as a brother to me and Ocheeva. But his act of treason destroyed any vestige of that relationship. His death was well-deserved! 
No sign of trouble, Your Grace. 
The merchants of Cyrodiil would sleep more soundly, knowing this Key is gone from the world. But why tell them? 
You... you murdering dog! How could you have killed all those people? For the gold, is that it? You filthy peasant!    
I said you weren't going to like it. 
Ruslan and I were shopping at Jensine's when he accused us of stealing. We turned out our pockets to prove we were innocent, but he didn't care. 
Very well. 
Snow. We need more snow. Can't have enough snow. 
Well, well. You're early, Mage. 
Take that! 
Hmph. I care little. 
I'm afraid there isn't much else to tell you. Just be careful. 
Then guide her to Fisherman's Rock. Please. 
But we will cross paths again before the end, I am sure of it. 
Perhaps, while you spend time collecting these ingredients, you can consider the ramifications of your actions. 
I hear that my army has been restored. Perhaps I should join up again.... 
As unlikely as your story sounds, I believe you. Only the strange destiny of Uriel Septim could have brought you to me carrying the Amulet of Kings. 
I'm glad you stopped by. I have a... situation that you might be able to help with. 
How do you do? 
I make sure my guards treat the local Nords and their ways with respect. 
Let me come with you. Let me help you kill Mankar Camoran. I am not without power. 
I'm not worried about the Gates. We'll be safe enough inside the walls. 
I try not to buy anything from the Demented, especially weapons. 
It was wonderful! Your show was amazing! 
Oh, back again? I don't know what else you could need. I gave you the list. That  should tell you where you can find my children, and what they want. 
I think Rena Bruiant may actually love dogs more than her husband. Strange couple, those two. 
Tilse Areleth has quite a collection of things for sale at Common Treasures. 
Not only that, but we'd like to make you an honorary member. If you're ever in need of our services, we'd be happy to provide them for you. 
Oh, Gogron! He he he he. Your methods may be crude, but your heart is always in the right place. 
I suppose I can trust you. In fact, maybe you can help me with a bit of a problem, and make some money for yourself in the process. 
She murdered all those innocent people, and I delivered justice, just like any Legion soldier would. I... I only did what I thought was right...   
Come to this altar. Join with this body. Quintessence of Flesh joined with the Essence of Flesh. Absolute in mortal. Immortal bound to contingent.  
I'm sure she tried to con you out of half the money. Can't say I'm sad to hear about Tyrellius either. Good work, good work. 
I have nothing more to say. We shall speak again only after Rufio lies dead. 
And I do hate to disappoint you, but Mucianus is in no condition to be leaving. He's a Worm Thrall now, and shall be quite content here. 
Have you ever seen Ra'qanar get into a fight? 
You know what I think. We should go home before the goblins find us and kill us all. 
It's come to my attention that the post did exist and it happens to be the last reported location of the Draconian Madstone. 
Take care, father. 
When? I didn't know that! How can this be? 
I... I saw his face. I saw the King of Worms! 
Thank you for stopping by. Stay healthy. 
So soon? Not a surprise, I suppose. We'll get to that later. No need to burden your little brain with it now. 
Approach the shrine, if you dare. 
Okay then. I'll just take this gold from you, and I'll head out there right now. No one should even know I'm gone. 
The Leyawiin chapter is just drifting along. Dagail isn't much of a mentor or leader. She isn't even coherent most of the time. 
I'm the chairperson for the Society of Concerned Merchants. We formed this group a while back to keep a nice fair economic balance in town. 
You there! Stay away from the Gatekeeper. Let us handle this! 
We must free Staada as soon as possible. She will know what to do. 
Thadon finally has his precious Chalice. But, such things do not matter to those of us who work for a living. 
The Gnarl are strange creatures. Hit them with a fireball, and they get stronger, but they hate other elements even more. 
Good to see you, Brawler. Your training's going well, I hope? 
I'm Tsrava. I'm an Advanced Trainer in Acrobatics. Did I mention I hate dogs?  
You MUST have a fast horse! Travel quickly to ruined forts and caves nearby! It will pay for itself in precious time saved! 
Thank you kindly! 'Knight of the White Stallion.' Sounds good. Damn good.  
You've served Sheogorath well. Farewell. I go now to kindle the Altar of Despair. 
I should visit Renoit's more often. 
Glad things are settled here. I can finally get some rest. 
If you can find him, he can teach you a lot. 
Ah, don't let the name fool you. I had a bit too much mead a few years back, and there was this tavern wench.... Anyway, just call me Nels. 
Just go unlock Jeanne's desk with that spell I taught you.. Find her Manual of Spellcraft, and bring it here to me. 
You never know when you might need a good strong potion. Best to stock up now while you can! 
However, be prepared to spend a little coin. They won't tell you anything for free. At least not anything true. 
My dog died, so that Khajiit isn't following me right now. However, I'll be getting a new dog soon, and I just know he'll be back. 
Well met, traveler. Are you seeking treasure as well? Gortwog demands riches, so all of Tamriel will respect Orsinium. 
Hungry? Thirsty? I can help with that. 
There is much work to be done. When you return to the Sanctuary, speak with Arquen. She will serve as your humble servant and guide.   
That's Mirili Ulven. I know she's always looking for help. 
I can say without hesitation that none of this is my fault. Could've told you it was coming, though. 
You've given me new hope, friend. I really believe we can make Cropsford a home for ourselves. 
He's a fairy tale. The Imperial Watch pretends there is a thief king named the Gray Fox who controls all the thieves in Cyrodiil. 
And so we meet again. What can I do for you this time? 
Whatever comes out of that portal... Cheydinhal is ready. 
I got nothing to say. 
Very well. I can see you're familiar with Mankar Camoran's "Commentaries." 
She's always looking for new items for the Museum of Oddities. 
Hail, Champion! 
Please indicate on a scale of one to ten, how much pain you are feeling at this moment. 
Don't let Toutius Sextius catch you following him. He's much more dangerous than he looks! 
You come to me for knowledge, for advice? I would sooner see you flounder in a pool of your own blood. Good luck, worm. 
The horror. The horror. 
While my mother didn't survive, Reynald did, and for that I'm grateful. But we both want more - we want our home back. 
They're coming for me. Those Knights. I should have seen it coming. 
Aren't you going to take care of this? What am I paying you for? 
Then go find him. Tell him I want to see him right now. I'll meet him here. 
Those Destruction spells are dangerous. I hope the Mages Guild keeps a tight lid on that. 
We have a new Sister who wishes to bind herself to the service of Lord Dagon. 
All right, maggot. Looks like you're suited up in your Battle Raiment and all set to go. The Red Room is just over there. 
And, as a small token of gratitude for your service to the Empire, I have ordered a suit of Imperial Dragon armor made for you. 
You have failed Namira. Cursed forever are you. 
Have you spoken to Martin yet? The plans you found make it clear that time is short. 
Thank you for letting me know. I'm sorry that you had to be a part of all of this. 
Good luck, and hurry back with more of the Nirnroot! 
You have earned the reward. The Thieves Guild was always good to Ahdarji's dearest mate. I am grateful that the memory is still honored. 
Blessings of Julianos upon ye. 
Be nice to have someone else to do the... uh... dirty work. 
Oh. Yes. How do you do? 
Can't say I've heard anything myself. Still, that's odd. 
You're no better than the others. 
Unless... well, if you think you have a chance. How do I know this isn't some sort of trick? 
Once you locate the Mythic Dawn's shrine to Mehrunes Dagon, we may have a chance to recover the Amulet! 
Well met. Welcome to the Bloated Float. She's the finest inn on the water in all Cyrodiil. 
Have you made up your mind? I'm getting tired just waiting for an answer. 
Then to hell with you! 
Thadon's dead? They're all just bags of meat to me. 
Oh... I see. 
I don't know where it came from, but a mysterious gate appeared outside the walls of our city. The way the guards are reacting, it must be a threat. 
The Madgod has vanished? Perhaps He simply stepped out of our time until the Greymarch passes. 
Hmm. Strange. 
As always, you're a welcome sight. 
Thadon and his Chalice can both rot in Hell, for all I care. 
We have some of the best Bay horses in Cyrodiil. They are hardier than the Chestnut and faster than the Paint horses. 
The Spellslinger, huh? I like it! Yeah, that'll do nicely. All right, it's time to see if you're crazy good or just plain crazy.  
Alga has a lot of good tales to tell. I wish I could tell a story like she does. 
Let's go to the Imperial City at once, before the enemy can recover from Mankar Camoran's death. 
Go fetch me Blood Liqueur, Osseous Marrow, Dermis Membrane, and Essence of Breath. 
I am Naspia Cosma, Cheydinhal's Steward. I offer introductory training with Blades, and may condescend to accept you as a student. 
Try our wines and cheeses, and Salmo's sweetrolls. See the castle... but don't expect to see the Count. He doesn't mix with strangers. 
You've already been warned that this will weaken you, so do take the necessary precautions. 
Well, will you look at that. Quite a bit of gold you have there... so beautiful, isn't it? 
Our targets? Weak willed men who are easily fooled into believing they will have their way with us. Hahaha... men are so gullible. 
Please, go find Pinarus, and those mountain lions! 
You're kidding. Everybody knows Nocturnal. She is the daedra lord of shadows. The Mistress of Mystery. The Saint of Suspicion. 
If they survived, they will proceed to the next chamber, and so on. 
The people of the waterfront are very poor. Traditionally the city has not collected taxes from them, even though by law they could. 
It doesn't hurt that our new master is a famous tough guy. Should bring us more contracts. 
Affirmative. None shall break the line. 
Yes. S'krivva gives you greeting. Luxury imports, exports are S'krivva's fair game. 
I was hoping you'd say that. 
Doomstones have red runes, and are associated with stone circles. Runestones have blue runes, and appear as solitary monuments. 
Hey, come on now! There's no need to get violent! 
Are you prepared to pay the blood price? 
If someone from the Council were to stop by, and find him gone, it'd look bad for me. I can't have that. 
Any Brother or Sister who can complete a contract while following a specific request will receive a valuable bonus, oftentimes a powerful magic item. 
If you're looking to unload some goods, you've come to the right place. 
Leaving me to die in peace, eh? 
Isn't it obvious? Two of us have been murdered in cold blood, and that little tramp hasn't batted an eyelash. You figure it out. 
Wisely answered. My people and I are in need. Maybe you can help us. 
I'm glad to see your ego is not larger than your vision. Now, let us talk no more of this. 
You're a bold little thing, aren't you? I'm afraid you're of no use to me. Goodbye. 
Creatures have been reported in Deepwallow, Lord. Perhaps you should intervene... as it is your job. 
If you're here to help, you'd best go see Caranya. She'll tell you what we need. 
Settle down, pondscum. 
Is it? Is it, now? 
I suppose Count Hassildor keeps Skingrad running smoothly, but you hardly ever see the man. 
I'm so happy to see you again! 
I've heard them. They're pretty stupid. 
I haven't seen Vidkun around town lately. I guess they're keeping him pretty busy at the Mages Guild. 
They were part of some sort of brotherhood. They would roam Cyrodiil in search of legendary treasures and the like. 
What? What are you talking about? Don't you want to have fun? Come on, don't be shy. Or are you here for something else? 
Oh thank you! My collection is finally complete! 
I am the Gray Fox, but you have not been betrayed. 
Cheers to Sheogorath! 
Learning a bit about alchemy would be handy, but you have to be in the Mages Guild for Felen to train you. 
Have you seen Erthor around town lately? 
If you help us seize the Altar of Despair from the Mazken, I will be honored to kindle the Flame of Agnon for my Lord Sheogorath. 
My advice is to close quick with the skirmishers... the petty spellcasters... but the shamans are real trouble. 
Everyone here died in the Master's service. As the Master promised, we are now immortal, like the daedra. 
That's nothing compared to Morrowind. Thanks. 
Death to the Fanatics! 
Amantius Allectus is complaining about crime in the city. Someone actually broke into his house and stole his diary. 
By all means. What do you need? 
Trespassing is against the law! Guards! I'm placing you under arrest! 
I'm afraid you misunderstand. I already have more servants than I need. 
Please accept my pardon, Lord, if I gave you such a false impression. The fault is entirely mine. 
You'll never leave the Feed Bag on an empty stomach. 
Excuse me, citizen. 
Well, just shut up and listen to me. The next shipment will be sooner than I expected. Just have the money ready. 
We don't have any horses for sale right now. You bought our last White horse. 
This is a personal matter, and will have no bearing on your standing within the Dark Brotherhood. Would you like to hear more? 
Enjoy your stay. 
That's why we've got to get in there and make sure he's safe. We owe him our allegiance, and besides, he'd do the same for any of us. 
Eyes as blue as a cerulean sea...uhh...what... 
What is it? 
Do you think we have a chance, sir? 
Earil owns a magic shop in town called Earil's Mysteries. If you want to know more, I'd suggest you ask him yourself. 
There's evil afoot, citizen, and I've little time for chatter. What is it? 
Good, good! You'll need all the help you can get if you're going to defeat Jyggalag and stop the Greymarch. 
I can't wait to get back to Skingrad. I ain't cut out for this damned weather. 
Are you looking for a horse? The Wildeye Stables have the best Paint horses in Cyrodiil. 
We are not afraid of the dark. The Night Mistress gives us eyes to see night's secrets. 
I'm sorry to hear that. 
Congratulations on your victory, ma'am. 
Yes. Only then can I create an appropriate vessel to hold the power that is inherent in the lord of this realm. 
Have you found me a safe place outside to sleep yet? 
Three of the afternoon watch, and all's well. The way I like it, ma'am.  
A waste of time, of course, worshipping gods in the first place. But at least they're not raving lunatics. 
... Was I insufficiently clear? I beg your pardon. You do not interest me. We will not be having further social discourse. 
So, you saw Bernadette Peneles, did you?  She WAS watching me and following me, wasn't she? 
Hello again, fellow vampire hunter. 
I don't know all of the details, but the amulet is a conduit to get to that training ground. 
You have done well so far. I hereby promote you to Apprentice. Good luck. 
Let's be done with this. 
Here is the reward you were promised. Even though the bust is gone, you've earned it. 
No one works harder than Marie. 
I'm still having the floors scrubbed. What do those things eat anyway? Yuck. 
The Black Horse Courier brings the news of the people to the people. We are funded by the Empire, so our broadsheets are always free! 
Mannimarco is no more! The guild is saved, and we have a new Arch-Mage to lead us. 
What can I do for you this fine day? 
You'll make a fine commander one day. Come. Let us surrender to the madness of battle! 
Find these necromancers. Destroy them and their abominations. Do this, and earn the gratitude of Meridia. 
To prove he is the true heir, an emperor must first light the dragonfires in the Temple of the One in the Imperial City. 
They wanted me to convert Vitharn, but I fooled them. I put them on the list. Oh, yes, they're on the list now! 
Cloud Ruler Temple is home to the Blades, and has served us well. But I fear an assault. Mythic Dawn, Daedra... maybe both. We must be ready. 
How unfortunate. Don't be a stranger. We have a fine selection of Bay horses if you change your mind. 
These zealots believe her to be some sort of savior, or deity, or something. Their doctrine is very confusing. 
Well now, what do we have here? Caught in the act and no gold to pay your fine? I'm confiscating your stolen goods. Now it's off to jail with ya! 
Don't let the guards catch you. 
The conspiracy has been discovered and eliminated. That is all you need know. 
Jensine's isn't bad, especially if you need to make a quick couple of septims. 
Did I know him personally? Of course not. He lived 300 years ago. 
It's Martin. His security, I mean. I'm just not sure we're doing enough. He is the last of the Septim line. His death would spell our doom. 
When Lord Dagon Himself walks the earth, our victory will be complete. He will rule over Tamriel and the Mythic Age will be restored. 
While I'm getting oriented here, you should follow Jauffre's orders. 
Remember when we first met in Kvatch? I told you that I didn't want any part of the gods' plan. 
The note from Thadon, talking about some secret rendezvous with someone from Syl's court. I'm sure it's important to someone. 
If the Empire isn't going to stop the skooma trade, who will? 
Replacing Thadon with this... outsider? This is how it ends. I should have seen this coming. 
Will do. I'll get right to it. 
You're the Gray Fox! Thank you for everything you've done to help us here in the waterfront. 
You might find 'Glories and Laments Among the Ayleid Ruins' useful. I have the library's copy at my table if you need it. 
The Blackwood Company seems to be winning the battle for mercenary contracts in Cyrodiil, but I wouldn't count the Fighters Guild out just yet. 
She was a ruthless woman, and I'm glad she's gone. Such a waste... 
I have not read the works of Mrs. Ottus. I'm told some find her guide books useful, though she apparently has strong opinions on some matters. 
I imagine that we will not have to wait long, Your Grace. 
And now it seems there is an heir to the throne after all, hidden at Cloud Ruler Temple... and perhaps a hero as well? 
Word's come down from the captain. No breaks until further notice. You ask me, he knows something. There's trouble brewin'. 
I love the other Atrabhi! And I certainly wouldn't be happy if you killed her. Really. I wouldn't be happy at all. If she were dead. I swear. 
Twelve midnight, and all's well. Hope it stays that way, ma'am.  
Up here is a little beauty. The Ring of Desiccation. Walk on water and breathe underwater at the same time. Odd, if you think about it for a minute. 
You're not leaving this prison 'til they throw your body in the lake. Oh, that's right. You're going to die in here, Breton! You're going to die! 
Now, you were after some training? I think I can accommodate you. 
Gods! Pox and rot! Get away from me! 
We need to get to the castle. That's where Count Goldwine and his men should be. Last I saw, they were trying to fortify the castle from an attack. 
I'd love to have one of Ushnar's old dogs for my museum. They're very interesting. 
Try the big goblin den called 'Derelict Mine' out east along the Gold Road. 
It seems quieter than usual at the Mages Guild. 
Come back when you've learned something. 
That's Falcar's responsibility. He takes it very seriously. 
Your Elixir is ready! 
That Xedilian place just sounds positively stuffed with Oddities. Surely something could be spared for my museum? 
I don't think there are any fences in this town. 
Look no further. I'll buy your hot goods. 
I'll go back and wait in the County Hall. You'll tell me when I'm a real knight? Please? 
Lord Sheogorath doesn't like to be kept waiting. 
You'll need to receive a recommendation from each local guild hall in Cyrodiil to advance in the guild, and be given any sort of responsibility. 
You've been told what you have to do. 
I really have to wonder where Neville was when someone was getting slaughtered just a few rooms away.  
You approach the Shrine of Hircine. Are you hunter, or are you prey? 
Do you miss your home, love? 
Know this: there will be no further leniency. Any more violations, and you will be permanently expelled from the guild. 
Are you trying to insinuate that Nels might be the killer? Maybe I think you did it. After all, murder is a common crime of the... low-born.  
Talk... talk to Ulfgar. He's sure to have the key to the cellar. You know, if... if you want to get down there! Now please, just let me go! 
Good day, Jauffre. 
I'm glad that's over. I have work to do. 
You'll see those Knights of Order around them during the Greymarch. Drawn to them, like flies to honey. Or rotting flesh. 
If there's anything you need, please ask. My resources here are limited, but I will help in any way I can. 
Do you have any more questions? I'm afraid I know little more. 
Shops are near the fountain and up the street west to the chapel. 
Are you here about the Amulet? If so, Caranya has it. 
Is it true that Arentus Falvius will teach people conjuration? 
You've done it! Color me impressed. On second thought, don't. I like what I'm wearing. 
Now, how may I continue to assist you? 
Begone, mortal. 
I understand strange creatures have appeared around them. 
My father was a great man! I'll not hear your lies!! 
I am here to end your miserable life, to... But... I can see the confusion in your eyes. You... You have no idea what I'm talking about, do you? 
My friend! It is good to see you again. You risked your life to save me, a stranger. You are truly among the blessed of Arkay's children. 
No more will the gate threaten the good people of Cheydinhal. The Knights of the Thorn have triumphed once more! 
Have you recovered the Armor of Tiber Septim yet? We need to open the gate to Camoran's Paradise as soon as Martin deciphers the whole ritual. 
All you need to do is visit the statue once a week, get the list of names and locations, and pass it on to me here in the Sanctuary. 
Ciirta is dead, and Ra'kheran has fallen. Who will guide us now? 
I'm glad he's willing to teach others. Lockpicking has gotten so much harder recently. It's more interesting, but it's harder. 
The blessed curse of vampirism now flows through your veins. Be patient. Wait the entire three days, then sleep. Your dreams will guide the way. 
What now, guildmate? 
He's a tough one, that's for sure. I wouldn't want to cross him. 
We're looking for recruits. Think you're tough enough to join the Fighters Guild? 
Please, hurry so you can accompany my sons. They're probably waiting at Weynon Priory by now. 
Oh, here! Take this scroll. I was going to use it when the walls fell on me and I got trapped. But now I don't need it anymore! 
Please, return anytime friend. 
You have a lot of nerve accusing my father of such a heinous crime... and with no proof to back it up? 
Since the Xivilai Anaxes, lord of the Savage Garden, has fallen, you must now face me in battle. 
Ciirta guides us to the light, but... her obsession with Sheogorath keeps us from achieving it! Ra'kheran, now he -- I've said too much. 
You're the Gray Fox! 
Remember Kvatch, that's our watchword. We won't let that happen here, don't worry. 
Both inns are next to the west gate. 
Ever vigilant. That's my motto. They'll sneak up on you. Because they're sneaky. Sneaky fur. Sneaky whiskers. 
If you're all alone in the woods and you see a troll coming, you run. Problem solved. Next question? 
It's been a long day. Quite pleasant to look forward to seeing you here. 
To what do I owe this pleasure? 
Nine of the morning watch, and all's well. Good morning to you, ma'am.  
Oh! You must mean the orphanage contract! Well, it's true. The children actually tried to defend themselves. Poor dears. He he he he he.  
Your cause is already lost! 
Foolish adventurers are being pulled into the Resonator of Judgment. 
Consider that combat is not your only option. Your Grace has made use of the chimes within Pinnacle Rock already, and they can be useful once more. 
Individuality is an illusion. The details of my existence are no more important than the history of a stone.  
But the fruits born of that labor were the essential components of true Flesh. 
Questions? 
But I'm afraid your little game is over now. I've killed more assassins in my day than I can count. So let's get this over with! 
Come to have a few words before you slit my throat? That's right, I know you did it. I can't prove it yet, but you mark my words: You're going down! 
A real thigh-slapper, that one, eh? Phew. I heard lots others, only I can't remember them. 
Another chamber, another victim to eliminate. Hurry, the anticipation is overwhelming! 
Our little transaction has been concluded. You may return victorious to Jeanne. Lucky you. 
Am I, really? I think not. Be that as it may, on what authority do you disturb my work? 
What do you think of the Khajiit jokes Dar Jee has been telling? 
It appears that you got all of them. We never found evidence of any other members. Nice work! 
Well then... I suppose I must believe you. At least now I can be sure... [Scribbles something on a piece of paper.] Here. This is your last task. 
Now we're counting on you to help Martin claim the throne and put an end to this terrible war. I know you won't fail us. 
Behold the new god of madness! It is I, Kishashi, who has defeated the forces of Jyggalag! 
I'm the Fighters Guild Champion, Modryn Oreyn. I don't believe we've met. 
I've seen plenty of Ayleid ruins. You'd think they'd be picked clean after 2000 years, but, no, there's still great treasures there. 
This will be my greatest achievement yet. 
The Black Horse Courier has a story about Rythe Lythandas. Here. Take my copy. I'm done with it. 
Praise Arden-Sul the Chalice has been returned. 
And it would've been so much fun, too. 
I'm really not interested in speaking to you right now. 
Near Brindle Home you will find Melus Petilius. A good man. An honorable man. He disgusts me.  
Never mind. A trick of the wind, perhaps. 
They've opened one right in front of the city gates. Until that Gate is closed, the best I can do is try to hold these barricades. 
Victory to the Demented! 
I understand he is an extremely upright citizen. As good as they come. 
Pretty quick fingers you've got there, friend. 
Are you here to end this nightmare, and free us all from the Savage Garden? 
Things at the Mages Guild seem tense. That Falcar fellow sure keeps a tight rein on things. 
I shall have her brought to the torture chamber at once. Meet me there shortly. 
Didn't you see that Oblivion Gate just outside the walls? Mara preserve us from the fate of Kvatch! 
I have researched what I can, but acquiring the cure is beyond my grasp. I cannot risk drawing too much attention to myself. 
There's more research to be done, of course, but the initial findings are quite encouraging. I'll let you know when I have some more information. 
Aggh! They're dead! All of them, dead! Why? What's going on here? We need to get out of this place! 
You can guess the rest. We got in over our heads. People died. My friends died. 
Martin is safe, and the Temple is secure. But there's a storm brewing. I can feel it... feel it in my bones. The worst is yet to come, mark my words. 
I fear the worst, but Umbacano Manor remains in my charge, and I will keep it in readiness for his return. 
Who? Oh, her. 
Shh.  Not in front of the stranger. 
There are enough people in the Shivering Isles. 
Cloud Ruler is many things. Temple, fortress, safe haven. But it's also my home. I'll gladly die defending these walls, if it comes to it. 
I don't know who built it. It was here before any of us arrived. It looks like other people lived here before. 
I... J'baana was informed already.... The delays are not my fault... 
Save your breath. He's the only one who knows I have it. He's tried to get it from me for years. 
Farwil is a Dunmer, and he's wearing steel plate armor. His shield should bear the crest of the Knights. Nothing but the best for the Count's son. 
The Countess sent Captain Burd to deal with that Oblivion Gate outside of town. We're all praying that they'll be all right. 
This is all happening so fast. 
Before you can begin work for the guild, you'll need to do something for yourself. 
You know, stranger, there comes a time in every man's life when he has to admit that he's lost the fight. Well, I've fought and I've lost. 
Ask and I will listen. 
What's new with you? 
In Crucible, there isn't a man named Hirrus Clutumnus trying to convince people to kill him. He's very happy with his life. 
Sorry, I'm too busy to speak to you now. 
You should be helping out Norbert Lelles. What's on your mind? 
Good to see you again, ma'am. Martin was worried, but I knew you would bring back the Amulet of Kings for him. 
My gut instincts tell me Nels is the killer, but still I lack the proof I need to confront him. Maybe you can convince me I'm right. 
On some level, they're aware of my presence. Whether they covet all that I have, or simply wish to see it destroyed, I do not know. 
I don't know what I'd do without them. Their little pink noses, their scaly little tails. Please, get to the basement and find out what's happening. 
Either way, you will have a piece of blue sky. 
News of your success in the Fringe precedes you. To further cement the victory I have an important task for you to perform. 
So, the deed is done. How do I know this? You will find that the Dark Brotherhood knows a great many things. For you are now part of the family. 
Sherina is good with a blade. She knows it, too. 
Good luck, investigator. 
I don't know him personally. But he was very eager to get his hands on Volume 3 of Camoran's "Commentaries." Came all the way from Valenwood! 
Ugh. You're about the ugliest barmaid I've ever seen, and that's saying quite a bit. Come to bring me another round, have you? 
I have the book stored safely for now; I shall hold on to it until the Council decides what should be done with it.  
Don't worry about me; there's no time! Get moving! 
As you command, sire. Guards! Form up and protect the Emperor! To the Temple of the One! 
The people will rally around you. You'll have their love, their admiration, their complaints! Whatever. As long as it keeps them on Our side. 
We have a charter from the county, everything done official and by the book. 
Well, you've talked to one side. Perhaps a visit to the Golden Saints is in order? 
Come on,  it'll be fun watching them get knocked around up there. I'll lead, you'll follow. 
Again with the niggling little details! Hold your tongue. Or I will. We'll get to that, all in due time. For now, you've got other work to do. 
Bring these to me, and I will reward you well. Ahjazda has many, many things. 
Have we not covered this? I believe you've mastered your new skill. 
Too bad someone didn't bring me this Chalice for my Museum. Would have made a fine addition to my collection. 
Very well. Many serve the Empire in their own way. But we would be honored to have you, if you change your mind. 
The undead are foul, unnatural things. Some of my rivals take pleasure in these abominations. Not Meridia. I wish these creatures destroyed. 
If you want to know more, there's one person I can think of to teach you, though she's a bit... odd. You'll need to find Bralsa Andaren. 
Jyggalag never stood a chance. 
Morning. 
Take care of his contract. We'll discuss him later. 
You are in good spirits today, milady 
Phillida has dedicated his life to eradicating the Dark Brotherhood, and he becomes rather irate when our duties take us to the Imperial City. 
Eronor, a lay brother, tends after the sheep and our little farm. 
Guild rats! Get 'em! 
You've seen wayshrines in the wilderness? Those who've pleased the Nine may receive Blessings of Willpower at the Wayshrines of Mara. 
He killed them all. Just... slaughtered them. 
Where is Our Lord? Does he go to get the Fork? 
Yes. It's outside of the Imperial City. I heard it's a place where many of the heroes from past wars are buried. Sort of a subterranean graveyard. 
Every resident of Split has a double living in the town. 
Another of Sheogorath's foolish schemes! 
I am powerless without more magicka. 
This is the second complaint against Audens. I will personally go and arrest him. 
I can't teach you anything you don't already know. But there is someone who might be able to... 
Damn, I knew it! You're working for the city guard aren't you? I didn't think they would be stupid enough to send someone alone, but so be it. 
There's nothing to be done here. We must press on. 
The palace intrigues of the House of Dementia are of no interest to me. 
Why aren't you finding Pinarus? 
Good hunting. 
You want the leader. You want Muurine. But no amount of torture will get a confession from her. 
I'm a busy man. What is it? 
I hear there's someone trying to get into the Shivering Isles. It's all part of a plot to overthrow the Realm. You'll see. 
Brother Piner, Father Jauffre, and I are members of the Order of Talos. 
You've got what you need from me. I can't tell you anything more. 
You know better than to contact me here. Meet me at the usual place. Dareloth's Garden, at midnight. 
Prisoner, I don't have time for your games. Do that again and die. 
You'll need to acquire recommendations from all the local guild hall leaders to advance further in the guild. 
The Lonely Suitor certainly seems to be a source of great pride for him. 
Thadon got his Chalice back. I heard he uses it around women. Better steer clear of mine. 
Forsake the flesh, and you shall know the light. 
The path is yours; lead on. 
Okay, we'll wait here. Just let us know when it's safe to proceed. 
Slay the sacrifice. Lord Dagon thirsts for blood. 
It's really quite ingenious! 
You have arrived at an opportune time. You may have the honor to be initiated into the Order by the Master himself. 
My name is Umog gra-Marad. I'm employed by Master Umbacano as a night guard. 
Those of us who've changed the most, we call The Brethren. Live down in the caves, to be nearer the Deep Ones. 
You must find a way to destroy the Hist, though I can imagine Ri'Zakar will have it well guarded. Expect an unfriendly welcome at their hall. 
With his keen mind and eyes, the Imperial measures you. Give him what he seeks. 
Welcome to Shardrock. 
Oh, please. Don't even get me started. That madman won't be satisfied until everyone in town is dead broke... or in jail! 
Honestly? I don't think she likes me. It's because I'm a Dunmer. I heard her say something to Neville, and it wasn't very nice.   
It's you. Hi. 
Hey! What are you doing? 
Oh, come now. How many times has Malvulis saved our necks, huh? Captain Tussaud keeps her on for a reason. She's a better sailor than any one of us. 
I could help you, yes. But I won't. Your failure will give me much joy. 
Peryite guide your actions. 
You now have the power to summon Dark Seducers. They've always served the Duke of Dementia. I think they have a thing for pain. 
That's not Amiable Fanriene. Amiable loves tall walls. 
You're still speaking. Stop. 
Never compromise. Never blink. Never wink at injustice. Never quit trying to make this a better city for everyone. 
He's almost here. I can feel it. You won't like Him as much as Me. He doesn't even carry a cane! More the giant, bone-cleaving sword type of Prince. 
The Mazken are unworthy to guard the Altar of Despair. 
Reman Broder, retired Archer, presently a grape-grower for the Surilies, at your service. Are you looking for advanced training? 
Hello, I'm Una Armina. Perhaps you've heard of my Museum of Oddities? 
Greetings, investigator. 
I'm astounded that the very thing we decided to fight turned out to be in our midst. 
May we forever serve the Night Mother. 
You'll want to speak with Him soon, as I believe He has plans for you. You will find Him in New Sheoth, in His palace. 
They're certainly NOT dangerous. They're quite tame, actually. 
Profaning the remains or souls of the dead is just wrong. And I'm uneasy about tampering with other's minds and trafficking with Daedra. 
One of the guards owes me a favor, you know. I could get us put in the same cell. Would you like that? You should have some fun before the end. 
You should not be in this place. It is best you leave. 
Welcome, Argonian, to the Tournament of Ten Bloods. To your right, through each of nine gates, another Chosen awaits you. 
Oh, spare me. You're lucky I bothered to send someone after you at all. In the future, would you please be more careful? 
Remorse? Ha! 
They can be overloaded and rendered inert by placing the crystalline hearts of the Knights into the obelisk itself.  
Chancellor Ocato! The city is under attack! Oblivion Gates have opened, and daedra are inside the walls! The guard is overwhelmed! 
I yield. 
Should you decide to further waste the guild's time, Raminus Polus at the Arcane University can reinstate you. 
There's only one last thing I can say about Marksman training. If you want to be the best, you have to learn from the best. 
You will come to know it well, in time. I have seen it. 
Every time it gets quiet, they come back stronger and in greater numbers. 
Hurry! Pick that lock open. 
Yeah? What're you lookin' at? 
I'd be happy to craft you Amber weapons, but you need to bring me Amber. Consult the information I have posted in the store for details. 
Get to it, rat girl. 
You've done nothing to prove yourself worthy of my time. Not a chance. 
If the Resonator is working, it means fewer people to steal my things. More of a chance to find what I've lost. Good in my book. 
Irlav should be waiting for you. 
Flee while you can, mortal. When we next meet I will not know you, and I will slay you like the others. 
Welcome, Miss Herrick! Welcome! I'd been hoping to have a chance to chat with you. I get the sense that you avoid me. 
Do you know Mandil? I hear he's good with locks. 
Ummm... Okay, then... I guess I'll trying looking down in the basement. Maybe you could search upstairs or something, hmm? 
The little Dark Elf? She seems a nice enough girl. But to be perfectly honest, I've never trusted their kind.   
What do you want? 
Behold, Dragonheart! 
Your desires are my command, my lady. 
Did you really have some important reason for interrupting me? I thought not. 
Somebody help! 
Nothin' in it for me, so I've nothin' to say to you. 
Let me give you some advice. Glarthir is crazy. So far harmless crazy, but I keep an eye on him because it's my job to. 
What do you mean, she goes somewhere? Where does she go? 
As I feared it would, My plan has failed. The Greymarch is upon us, and I must go. 
You wouldn't happen to be in the market for a home would you? If you are, I just happen to be selling a manor located right here in Anvil. 
I've never actually met any of them, I swear! 
I keep it locked away tight. If I were to try cooking with it, the smell alone would draw rats for miles! It's a lovely conversation piece, though. 
Lord, where are you? 
This is all so strange, isn't it? I don't know why I was invited to come here, but the gold could really help my family. I do hope I find it. 
Maybe the Emperor is right about you. The best way you can help is to let us do our jobs and don't get in our way. 
Tidewater Cave? Tidewater Cave! Why... why do you ask about this place? 
Hello there. Welcome to Aerin's Camp. 
Yes, Master. Whatever you say. 
Say, that gives me an idea. You look like the adventuring type. If you can retrieve six bottles of Shadowbanish Wine, I'll gladly pay you well. 
Very well. Three days, then. Don't be late. 
Then don't go around, flinging accusation and hearsay. If you dare accuse someone of a crime, you must have the proof to back it up. 
If it's broken, I can fix it. 
I am compiling a taxonomy of every living thing in the Shivering Isles, the weather, changes in the moon and stars, and their interrelationships. 
Do you have the boots? 
I'm your prisoner. 
Are the creatures gone? I want to get out of here. I've been trapped for days! 
Hold up. I don't like this. Let me take a look. 
I don't visit the Museum of Oddities, but Una Armina is always looking for new items to display. 
Tierra, get these civilians to the camp south of the city immediately, and then report back here at once! 
Here in this case is a disgustingly deformed Swamp Tentacle. Such a freak of nature has never been seen before, and hopefully not since either! 
No! Sheogorath, protect me! 
This is your last chance to get ready. Once you're asleep, there's no coming back until Henantier awakens. 
Then I declare you to now be an Associate of the Mages Guild. Welcome to the ranks. 
Do not tarry. The time of Preparation is almost over. The time of Cleansing is near. 
Hey, you. Yeah, you! Come over here. 
I hope I didn't use too many big words. 
Now, if you believe what you're saying is true, go get me the proof! 
Yeah, sure. And I suppose I just end up rotting while you spend it all? Forget it. 
I follow the Emperor's orders, but that doesn't mean I trust you. 
Greetings, Madgod. I normally don't stop to chit-chat, but it's truly an honor. What can I do for you? 
I think Leyawiin would be better off if we removed all the dirty Argonians such as yourself. You wouldn't have a problem with that, would you? 
Welcome, High Elf, to the Tournament of Ten Bloods. To your right, through each of nine gates, another Chosen awaits you. 
I'm surprised she discussed it with you. She wanted to keep it from the others... I should speak to her about that. 
Yeah, you think Bruma's cold, try a winter in the Wrothgarians. Bruma's a day at the beach. 
When I asked her about it, she said it involved her spell research. I suppose at the time it sounded good enough for me. 
Get a cure! And keep your distance. 
My word! You startled me! Are you real? 
I understand about duty. Don't get me wrong. Should've been more than one guy on this job, and I've got my family to think about. They come first. 
The guild has quite a few connections, and it always helps to know the right people, wouldn't you say? You should think about joining. 
Kud-Ei will do anything to help her girls out. She recently got Ardaline out of a bind, and I hear it wasn't completely within guild rules. 
Seek out Raminus Polus at the Arcane University. He alone can open the guild to you again. 
Since we disposed of the creatures that had taken up residence here, it's been nothing but a fight to figure out how the place works. 
Seems to me, some things are worth paying full price for. 
Yes. I understand. He wants an Ayleid Crown. But does it have to be my Ayleid Crown? What if you brought him... another crown? 
Then let us trust a bit less to faith, and a bit more to our own strength. I shall guard the medicine cabinet myself. Just in case. 
But now I must go. The Dragon waits. 
No one can experience the City for you. You must go, walk, touch, see, feel, talk to everyone. 
If I may confide in you, dear friend, I'm very worried about the poor boy. The trauma of murders... it could scar him for life! He deserves better. 
The rules say that he isn't to practice dangerous experiments at his home. It must be done in the guild under the watchful eye of an associate. 
Works for me. More contracts keep the men busy and out of trouble. It also helps bring in more gold, which benefits us all. 
My collection is complete. Thankfully, you won't be interrupting me anymore. 
Good luck to you. 
Greetings, friend. Have you come seeking the light? 
Cheydinhal will mourn his loss. 
She is the love of my life. I would do anything to save her. 
A contract is a secret pact one enters into with the Dark Brotherhood. They provide us with gold, and we remove someone from existence. 
I'm going to Cloud Ruler Temple. My place is at Martin's side. 
You do? You are too pretty to worship in this place. People like you. Like to hear you talk. When you are more loathesome, you may return. 
Kud-Ei has always watched over me, and it's good to know she cared enough to seek help when I was in trouble.  
But why say no, when it's so much easier, and more lucrative, to say yes? Or are you here for something else? 
I may not have liked the man, but I'm particularly troubled by his death. Neville was a capable fighter. Who could have killed him, and so quickly? 
With the help of your armies, the incident has been cleared up. Your loyal subjects have sent this in tribute. 
I understand Oreyn is looking for you again. Get to Chorrol and speak with the man. 
This ground is sacred. Show respect. 
You may find the enormity of your task daunting at first. Use Herdir's talents to aid you with those who are unresponsive to questioning. 
Goodbye, Knight. Remember to carry our symbol proudly as a beacon of hope for all Cyrodiil! 
Too bad about Aleron. Didn't need him anymore now that yer here. At least now he's free of his debt... ha ha ha ha! 
I've heard rumors about this. I hope they stay out of the city. 
Now the day has ended, the battle has been won. A new day dawns on the Isles, the past has been undone. 
You should return what you have stolen. 
Of course, that point is infinitely debatable by those of us who prefer to believe in the value of personal choice. 
Look for something in his possession that can be linked to his crimes, and we will have him. 
I heard there is a good smith in Chorrol. 
Any luck on those bottles of Shadowbanish Wine yet? 
The Mages Guild has made more than a few enemies since Necromancy was banned. 
I follow Adeo, your Grace. If she follows you, then so do I. 
Food! 
I'd kill for a sweetroll right now. 
The Greymarch is upon us, and the Ordering begins. Armies of Order sweep My Realm. Death. Destruction. Then I have to pick up the pieces. 
Who now knows the tale of how this Dwemer hammer came to embody the power of one of their most bitter foes? 
Just... just leave me alone, all right? I don't want no trouble! 
Seridur is a nice enough fellow. For an Altmer, that is. I think he and Gilen, and that Argonian, Grey-Throat, have some kind of a club. 
The enforcer will not appreciate your little show. He'll likely attack you on sight, but you must resist the urge to fight back! 
I just knew that Julienne would have more information. 
Be cautious, and return home soon. Good luck. 
We were ordered out to attack the daedra coming out of that Oblivion Gate. Captain's the only one who ever knows what's going on. 
Whelp of Vitharn! 
Right here. I'm the best in the business. You've gained quite a reputation in the guild. Let's see what you've got to sell me. 
I'm afraid I can't rent you the room if you can't afford it. Sorry. 
Amiable Fanriene thinks his house is going to fall in on him. 
Yes. Sealed forever. Mehrunes Dagon and his ilk can never threaten Tamriel again. 
It's not safe here! Leave before he comes back! 
Make sure not to eat nightshade. It's very poisonous. 
Eight of the morning watch, and all's well. Good day, sir.  
This arrowhead advances my plan to... nevermind. I may have need of you again in the near future, if my plans hold. 
Remember, the Mysterium Xarxes ritual will consume the physical form of the artifact in order to release its daedric power. 
I'm afraid you have failed the test. I warned you to stay close. We can try again some other time, perhaps. 
Are you sure you want me? If not, I'd rather just sit down a while, or maybe take a nap. 
Yes? What do you want? Out with it! 
I understand they've been taking a lot of the contracts that used to go to the Fighters Guild. 
May all your days be filled with enlightenment and mirth! 
Some see only the conflicts between northern and southern cultures, but I see the way they are stronger when woven together. 
Lots of us on the Waterfront are down. We can't do that dungeon stuff like you adventurers. We got no money, and no skills. Nobody wants us. 
Didn't I tell you no weapons allowed? Clearly this isn't important to you. We're done here. 
Look for yourself! Their brains are addled. Got no sense! Perfectly normal people went in there. And this is what's come out. 
Yes. I buy stolen property. Shall we negotiate? 
You've already rented a room. I'm sure there are no problems. 
Interesting... it looks vaguely familiar, like I once had one of these on display. I only wish I had the funds to buy it off you... 
Oh, my! 
You have your task. Return as soon as you have the information. 
Behold as two Heroes meet in the fighting pit for an epic battle worthy of song! Combatants... begin! 
Seems to me that Ardaline has an admirer in Varon Vamori. 
You're right. I know. I'm just worried. I'll try to calm down. 
Bah! Suit yourself! 
So, this mystery adventurer has breached our defenses. I better prepare a special dish to commemorate this event. 
No one leaves this Chapel until the Captain gives the all-clear. I have my orders. 
He's an odd one. Drinks like a fish, but runs like a rabbit. 
Why do you approach the Duchess of Dementia? Do you seek death? 
I warn you though, what we've seen so far is nothing compared to the battle that likely awaits us. 
You have come to kill her, have you not? I can sense it all through you. You stink of violence. It is glorious! 
He dares to touch the sacred Xarxes! Kill him! 
I've never seen my Lady so happy. You've done well. 
Though I am replicant to spread rumors, I am led to believe the philogy of skeletous beings makes them resistive to magic. 
Lex has pulled city guards from several districts to the Waterfront. Last I heard he was pacing the slums there. 
Why... won't... you... die? 
The obelisks operate by reflecting and focusing energies in order to create a portal to this Realm. 
This is what the Madgod sends against me? 
We stole it. I won't try to hide that now. I'm all that's left now, though. We may have stolen the stone, but we weren't the last ones to do it. 
Why do you fight for the Madgod? 
I'm not much of a reader, myself. 
Now then, I propose a toast. To Umbacano, may his purse never run dry! 
Syl's rounding up people again. I better go stash my Skooma. Or... I would if I had some. You have any? 
She's just back from a trip south, they say. Haven't seen hide nor hair of her myself though. Stays indoors all day long, I guess. 
I'm Tolisi Girith. I'm a maid at Riverview. And it's no picnic, I'll tell you. 
Our home and sanctuary here in the Shivering Isles. 
A new ruler for Dementia! This is the stuff epic novels are made of. 
Sometimes, people who are invisible are trying to get some privacy. Diram will be glad to talk your ear off about the whole mess. 
A time I find most fascinating. The drawing on the bottom of the page I gave you depicts a carved panel from the central chamber of the High Fane. 
Agghhh! Whhhhyyyyy.... ?? 
Can't say I'm sorry to see there's one less Nord in the world. Still, I don't appreciate someone getting murdered right under my nose. 
Dead? Dead! What happened? A journal? Let me see that... Blackwood Company! Bastards! Rank amateurs!  
Yes, my child? 
You think you've gotten rid of them all? You do? Well, you haven't! There's one in my basement right now! Go get it! 
Please hear me out. 
The Blackwood Company has taken that much of a foothold in Leyawiin. Those sons of....  
You think I'm ugly, don't you? And that she's a prettier smith? Is that it? 
They dream terrible dreams and one day soon, they will rise up, consume us and the rest of the Shivering Isles. Get out while you can! 
No Fork for me? Very sad Big-Head. Sadsadsadsad. Come back when it sings to you. Songs of returning. 
The Grove and the Tree retain a number of psychotropic properties that supposedly bring one to personal revelation. 
If you want luxury, there's nowhere better than the Tiber Septim Hotel. 
Wrong, fetcher! I'm tired of this conversation! Time to end it with steel! 
Duke Thadon's got his happy juice back, I hear. Good for him. He's always kept things very orderly. I like him. 
I don't know what you're talking about. I'm not sure what you're accusing me of, but don't do it without any proof! 
Don't touch anything! 
So, she's dead, eh? Hahaha. Finally! Finally someone has wiped that stupid smug grin off her face. Good, good. 
Those who believe the runestones to be Dawn Era artifacts, created by the Aedra or Daedra, often describe them as Lorkhan's birthing gift to mortals. 
Ita Rienus, Spells, Recharging and Training in Mysticism. And idle chatter. At your service. 
Ever since that gate appeared, the city guards have been on alert. I hope they can protect us. 
Remember me if you find more Shadowbanish Wine! 
Someone new around? Not one of those horrible cats, I hope. 
All right, my friend. You've got 25 gold down on the Yellow Team. Good luck, and enjoy the match! Oh, and if you win, come see me for your payout! 
Now, our business here is concluded. I suggest you return to your Council. 
You may try to speak to her. If... if it doesn't go well, come see me. 
Write this down: "Green Emperor Way Where Tower Touches Midday Sun." 
You're in charge. Let us know what positions we should take up, but be quick about it. The Necromancers could come out of there any time now. 
Oh, thank you! 
Well... alright. I think we'd be better off sticking together, though. 
Hello there. You'd look great in my newest work. 
Stick together! 
The Float has three decks. This deck is the inn deck, the next level up is the tavern deck and then there's the top deck. 
I'm awful. Just awful! Why I became a juggler I'll never know. My mother pushed me into it. 
You'd better explain yourself. Now. 
What can I do fer ya, sir? 
Why... thank you! This will be enough to pay off my debtors. Please, keep the sword and armor until I can pay you back. Thank you again. 
Shadowstep, huh? I like it! Yeah, that'll do nicely. All right, it's time to see if you're crazy good or just plain crazy.  
As you can see, he was no match for the combined power of the Black Hand, even weakened as we are. 
Keep an eye out for my things, won't you? 
If you're interested in assisting the Countess, you can always seek out Tolgan. He's usually in the Castle. 
Please. Have a seat. 
It's about time. I guess I have to reinstate you now. Try not to repeat this mistake in the future. 
I don't know. She took the Argonian less than an hour ago though. He put up quite a struggle. He was bleeding all over the place. 
I don't have time to gossip about the guild right now. 
I hadn't heard that Thadon was replaced, I was too busy perfecting my latest culinary creation. 
I really can't help you with anything else. Please, go see Gilen at Seridur's house. 
Well, that Society is putting more pressure on me. So maybe we better cut back for a while. 
Leave me to my work if you want the Elixir made properly. 
You're welcome. 
He's dead? I bet he died of some horrible disease, didn't he? 
The Gray Fox has a task for you. Meet him at Malintus Ancus' house in Chorrol. 
I'm done talking to you. 
I can only pray that you break the Tenets and surrender to the guards. I will beg Lucien for the right to kill you. 
Now go, child of Sithis. Go and rest. You'll need it. 
M'aiq wishes he had a stick made out of fishies to give to you. Sadly, he does not. 
Huurraggh! 
I have died seven times, each more painful than the last. But still, I return! Would you like to hear about it? 
I prayed to Akatosh all through that terrible night, but no help came. Only more daedra. 
Praise be to your Brothers and Sisters! Great shall be their reward in Paradise! 
All's well, I hope, Jauffre? 
I've heard there's a Vaermina shrine at the headwaters of the Reed River, though I've never been there myself. 
Fools! Now you die! 
Then go, Syl. Return to your quarters. Before I send you back in pieces. 
Besides, won't it be a grand surprise when you make his heart burst from too much Greenmote? Thadon loves surprises! 
Surprised? Nothing is for free, mage. 
Well, then. Thank you, Martin. 
I've heard he knows his way around. 
Happy times and happy days, my lord! 
I've tried to tell all my children to flee the Realm while they still can, but none listen to me! 
He was a good man when I married him, but greed took a hold of his heart. While I'm not happy he's dead, I'm glad he's at peace. 
While you're in the Market District, see  Rohssan's weapons at A Fighting Chance, and see Varnado and Maro Rufus at The Best Defense for armor. 
The pinnacle of Ayleid magic. Once every Ayleid city had its Great Stone, but they've all been plundered over the centuries. 
This place is sacred. Please respect our privacy. 
Oh, no! You believe trolls killed them? That's horrible. Please, if you can kill all of those trolls, we'd greatly appreciate it. 
As you wish. Don't worry, the contract will be available whenever you're ready. 
Oh my, that is Odd! I've never even heard of such a thing before. We'll find a nice place for it here in the Museum. 
Oh, it's you. My brother goes on and on about you. I know you saved us and everything, but it does get tiresome after a while. 
They are a rather superstitious group, living their lives based on omens and prophecy. One such prophecy, the K'sharra, was of particular interest. 
All right. The pickpockets and pilferers ain't going to catch themselves. We'd best be off.  
Good. Now everyone is armed. We're going to have to clear the goblins out of this place before the miners can return. Let's go. 
He think she keep our secrets in it. Look. Look! It nothing but gibberish. My neighbors, they weird. Now, I must go bite something's head off. Bye. 
I think the rumors about Necromancers are completely untrue. I've heard some crazy things, and I don't believe any of them. 
So, the bloody-handed Duke comes to claim another victim! 
Sorry, I have a lot of work to do. 
I'm talking weekly shows, fights pitting you against... are you ready for this? Monsters! And maybe even some wild animals! Sounds great doesn't it? 
New Sheoth is the capital of the Shivering Isles. We Aureal guard Bliss, the Manic district of the city. 
A rival collector has an item which I very much want to add to my collection. But she stubbornly refuses to consider any of my offers. 
Your Speaker should look for this person in a small settlement just outside the city of Snowhawk, in the Nord homeland of Skyrim. 
The doors are unlocked now? Interesting. It doesn't really matter to me, though. I can come and go as I please. Sheogorath has judged me worthy. 
Gods protect us! What is happening here? 
I await your decision. 
Uh huh? 
The Resonator has been reactivated. Why, if not to protect us from the coming storm? 
I don't believe I asked for your opinion on this matter. I am done speaking with you. Please leave my estate. 
Oh, but you must be the one Orc weakling, huh? Captured by Imperials. How pathetic. You're going to die in here, Orc! Like an animal in a cage! 
There are torches in the barrel. 
Really? But I already have Din's Ashes. I'm afraid someone must have taken advantage of your gullibility. 
Only thing worse than an ogre is two ogres. Tough bastards, and spells seem to bounce right off of 'em. 
Her wines are excellent, and she's a fine person as well. 
We've lost control of Pinnacle Rock. Syl let them in... We had no idea she would turn on us. 
Fimmion hungry. Sweetroll for Fimmion. Pants for you. 
Greetings, favored of Hircine. 
Good luck. It's a brave thing you're doing. 
Ulrich will not buy his way out of this one... he'll pay, I promise you. 
Good fortune, Volendrung. 
That giant torch is on fire now. Great. The thing's likely to fall over and land on somebody. Me, probably. It's not safe walking around anymore. 
Julianos and Dibella and Stendarr are all Lorkhan's betrayers, posing as divinities in a principality that has lost its guiding light.  
If Lord Rugdumph had used the Blackwood Company, who knows how it would have turned out. 
I would like the Helm returned, so that it may be kept safe here in the University. I fear Irlav has made himself a target for the Necromancers. 
You need to track down Maglir. Again. Look for him in Bravil. Now go. 
Do you need something? 
I didn't know Seridur was a vampire. I swear! 
Find comfort in your powerlessness. 
Your stars are not mine. Today the Apprentice shall serve you at the forge of destiny. 
Lord Sheogorath's mood seems improved now that he has an army at his back. 
How does one best describe our Dread Father? Imagine a perfect, cloudless midnight, cold as winter ice and shrouded in shadow. That is Sithis. 
Greetings, my Dunmer sister. 
You've got to be light on your feet to make it around here, and that's something I'm good at. Maybe you can be, too. Take care. 
How could this be? No mother should outlive her child. No, never! 
Fantastic! I will mark Fetid Grove on your map. Good luck to you, friend! 
I just thought you'd like to know, I'm overjoyed to bid you hello. 
You lookin' for him? I might be able to help you... for a donation. 
Make them leave! Now! 
She is a scavenger, and has no respect for the power of the Arcane arts. She has no business here, and I will not aid her in any way. 
What are you waiting for? Choose a button. 
Ah, well, in all honesty, no. But our wines are very good. And much cheaper than Tamika's very fine product, I assure you. 
Go ahead, please. 
We agreed I would meet the Sponsor. You need to get out of sight before you blow the whole meeting. 
Ah, a second Ancestor. Excellent. I had wondered whether the first was just luck, but I see now that you have some skill at this work. 
Hello, Journeyman. 
Oh, don't expect to summon dear Haskill anywhere but in the Realm. He dislikes leaving My presence. I get that sometimes. 
This is a harsh, dangerous task for you, I realize. Your unfamiliar face makes you most useful, however. 
If spells and magic are what you seek, head to Earil's Mysteries and take a peek. 
So we're stuck. All we can do is wait for them to come out. Then they can't hide any more than we can, and it evens the odds quite a bit. 
You wonder to find me here? Discretion is our watchword. Only a few of us have the honor to serve publicly in the Imperial Guard. 
I am the chapter head of the Cheydinhal Mages Guild. It is quite an honor... but they had no choice, since I'm the only semi-competent one here. 
I've heard word of your great deeds. It's good to meet someone else striving to be known throughout the land. 
He was furious when I told him I'd helped you, and then when I threatened to report him to the Council of Mages, I thought he was going to kill me! 
I wonder if the Resonator of Judgment hurts those inside? 
The new Gray Fox. The cowl suits you. Me? I am much happier without it. 
I don't mean to sound ungrateful. I know I would be dead by now if it weren't for you. Thank you. 
My crown, the one Umbacano covets, belonged to the ruler of Nenalata. 
Is it not safe? Do you want me to wait here? 
Watch my child destroy the interlopers, or run to Sheogorath. Either way, tell Him of our doings here. Send Him my tribute... and my affections. 
But of course its beauty is a mask for its deadly power, like everything crafted by the Ayleids. 
I see you have been playing rough with the other boys. They are weak and you are strong! 
Speak, brother. 
The barrier can't be broken by you. It's too tough... use the chime! Ring the chime, and that may shatter it! 
You've run a maze like a good little rat, but no cheese for you yet. Well, maybe a little. 
Damn Watchman. I bet they're all crooked. 
Ooh, good idea! Maybe the chest is hidden under the floorboards! All right, I'll head down there and start looking. 
The Fanatics? What's to understand? They were just after my power. But it's mine, all mine. 
You are the Duchess, yes? And Sheogorath has sent you to find Ciirta, has he not? He finally seeks to kill her? 
I saw a wraith once. It threw a curse on me I'll never forget. 
How nice! It's just what I wanted. 
Pity. I'm eager to see how you fare on your first assignment. Well, the contract will still be here when you're ready.   
You thought you could escape Lord Sheogorath's justice? Your stolen goods are now forfeit, and you can either pay reparations or face the dungeons. 
The Gatekeeper is my child, the consummation of Sheogorath's wisdom in the womb of my genius. It was a painful and bloody birth, but well worth it. 
Safe journey to you. 
The supporting glyphs all point to Oblivion, but the signifier of the main symbol matches nothing ...  
You think that's funny? 
You have earned a place of honor in the rolls of our Order for recovering the holy relic. 
He's back to his normal routine now, all safe and sound. Enjoy taking credit for the work. 
From darkness to light. From the depths of despair to Arkay's glory. Save these poor souls. 
Do I drop the sweetroll or hand it over and come back later? Dunno.... 
The skooma trade is making a lot of money for the tribes in Elsweyr, and a lot of that is going to the Renrijra Krin. 
No doubt the Council is trying to get you to bother me further. I ran Caranya out of here just a short while ago, and told them to leave me alone! 
The armies of Sheogorath march again! 
We kill for profit, for enjoyment, and for the glory of the Dread Father, Sithis. We are family, with bonds forged in blood and death. 
Then you want to know about the Gray Fox. 
I went about my business while others fought. Thus I earned my doom. 
Yeah. I used to be Fighters Guild here in Chorrol, but I done some incarceration for Trespassing and Theft. Couple of times. 
As you wish. I will wait here while you prepare yourself for battle. 
Hmm. Well, that's your choice. 
None shall pass. 
If you're interested, go talk to Llevana Nedaren. She seems the most outspoken against Ulrich and his new fines. 
Yes, I have the staff Varon sold me. I'm afraid I'm not willing to part with it. I paid good money for it, after all. You understand, of course. 
I don't care what you have found. I am telling you, I am not the one you are looking for! And I will speak to the Countess of your accusations! 
Stand back, prisoner. We won't hesitate to kill you if you get in our way. 
There is much wisdom in your words, my friend. Have you discussed this with the others? 
Let's hope the Saints and Seducers can protect us. 
Exhausted Mine is not far to the southeast. Be careful, its many twists and turns hide the Goblin hordes. 
Intruder! Protect the Scrolls! 
As you wish, My Lord. I will tell the residents you will be handling it personally. I'm sure the survivors will be delighted. 
So, how'd you like to get together later and leaf through my octavo? 
It never fails to amuse me how easy mortal man is to manipulate. 
Oreyn says the new guy went down and sorted out the problem in Leyawiin. Trouble like that is just making things worse. 
Too bad... I already have a deformed Swamp Tentacle. But next time I'm sure you'll find something truly Odd, don't worry. 
I had to have the painting back, so I decided to steal it then hide it behind the painting in my quarters. 
Is your weapon stained with the foul blood of the ogres? 
The roots of the Tree of Shades run into the heart of the Shivering Isles.  
Once I've perfected my act, I'll be the toast of the Realm! 
She's ready to sail, don't worry about it. We'll get you back home in one piece. 
Januarius and I have been in service to three generations of Caros. We're very proud of Count Marius and his lovely new bride. 
If she thinks something is odd, she'll put it on a shelf for everyone to look at. 
Who are you? What do you really want with me? 
You look like you can hold your own in a fight. 
To this day, an Arena combatant lives by Shinji's credo: "The best techniques are passed on by the survivors." To be the best, learn from the best. 
I suppose there's something I can have you do while you're here, though. A little errand. And a lot of fun. 
I don't know what happens now. There are troubled times ahead for the Empire. 
... And now, his new wife, so beautiful, so fine. And wise? Oh, yes! The new Lady Leyawiin is daughter to Countess Arriana Valga, County Chorrol... 
A most interesting text, is it not? We are fortunate that at least one necromancer took the time to record the information. 
I've heard Tun-Zeeus has some fine blades at the Dividing Line. Of course, he'll talk your ear off about them if you let him. 
You beatin' those twins is a good sign. You got a lot of fight in ya. Let me know when you're ready to get bloody again. 
That is good news. 
Strap this shield onto that big arm of yours. 
You want Light Armor? Pah! Why wear fluffy flutter, when you can wear real armor? But if you MUST have Light Armor, talk to Maro Rufus. Idiot. 
Cleared them out, did you? Good work, you two. I see big things for you with the Guild. Here's your payment. 
I don't like cats, which means I don't like you. 
They say it's the Dragon Blood, that flows through the veins of every Septim. They see more than lesser men. 
If the gates fall, the enemy will flood into the Isles. We will be helpless to stop them. Now that you've arrived, perhaps we can slow them down. 
That's horrible. 
You must receive a recommendation from every local guild hall in Cyrodiil before you may advance through the ranks of the guild. 
You've got the hands of a smith. Must have spent some time repairing your gear. 
I'm also a trainer in the arts of Alteration. I love magic, too. I love everything. And everyone. You, too. 
That poor boy didn't deserve to die. He was rich! He had no business even being here, looking for treasure that might not even exist. 
Brellach is ours! 
Mighty bold of you, asking for training. What makes you think you're worth my time? 
Prisoners may not accept gifts. 
How kind of you. When I'm restored to my rightful place, I will give you a palace in the clouds... or was that a palace made of clouds? 
Look in the Lonely Suitor Lodge. 
Oh, sorry. I wasn't aware that being a courageous hero was a requirement around here.  
If she's not in prison, you might try searching the Imperial City for her. Maybe you can convince her to teach you what she knows. 
We need to find out what happened with him. It's all suspicious to me. 
Let's go. 
I have everything for the budding alchemist under one roof. Far more than Thoronir would ever have, despite his horrid business ethics. 
I don't like to think how Vilena is going to take this news. He was my responsibility. I'll be the one to tell her. 
I'm close to understanding the complete gate-opening ritual. The final section is almost within my grasp. 
Huh? What do you want? Sorry, can't talk... now. I'm with my... my lady friend here. Talk to me... later... Not here... Not in the hotel... Okay... 
Head downstairs, and the room will be straight across from the door. Sleep well. 
The Emperor is dead. 
Then I'm lucky you're here to save my skin. Come on. Let's do this. 
Good riddance. 
There was a huge creature... something out of a nightmare... came right over the walls... blasting fire. They swarmed around it... killing... 
Better be moving along, outsider. 
Well, well. You interested in Acrobatics training? You'd be quite a challenge. I'm Ida Vlinorman. 
Ah, returned from the Fringe I see. 
May the Scalons tremble in your wake, My Lord. 
I believe you have some news for Lord Sheogorath. Perhaps you should be speaking with Him instead of illuminating me with your presence. 
You do? Give them to me, and we can start now! I did not think that it would be so easy! 
You're to meet him at Seridur's house which is located in the Temple District. He said all will be explained when you get there. 
Get outta my way, and keep followin'. I'll show ya a thing or two... 
With all due respect, sire, there must be another way. The risk is too great! 
Bring me a matrix and enough Ore, and I will forge you a new item and bleed the magic of the matrix into it. 
Ah-Malz at the Fighters Guild has gotten to be an expert on goblin hunting. He just hates the things. 
Something big is coming. The end of it all. And I'm going to be ready. 
M'aiq thinks his people are beautiful. The Argonian people are beautiful as well. They look better than ever before. 
I'm here for my book. Mankar Camoran's "Commentaries," Volume Three. 
You're trying to drive me out of business. 
The forces Order have been defeated. Perhaps now I can sleep. 
Well, forget about it. Invitation only. And no invitation for you, stranger. 
What do you mean? I'm an upstanding citizen! I have nothing to hide! 
Surprised by Eronor's uncanny way with sheep? 
Another one! 
You can make a good deal of money in our gang. But you have to be willing to show a little skin if you know what I mean. 
Splendid. You need to go to the city of Skingrad, to the large house known as Summitmist Manor. There you will meet up with five very unlucky guests. 
You want information from me? After what you put me through? 
Good. Have her meet me in the Chapel of Talos for a council of war. That seems a fitting place to make such desperate plans. 
I understand Hirrus Clutumnus is begging for people to kill him. 
When she stopped in the garden, and Seridur stepped out of the shadows, my heart sank. Then, suddenly, he was upon her! 
She's the one you want to talk to if you actually need something to get done around here. I don't even know why Dagail is still around. 
She must hate her job, people complaining to her all day. 
Well then, you must excuse me. I have important business to attend to. 
Renee Geonette. My husband, Salomon, has a court commission to compose a symphony. 
I'm going to stick around the guild hall. It's what I'm not being paid for, if you catch my meaning. 
Hello, my friend. 
Afraid to say, I don't have any more contracts for you. I don't think Azzan has any, either. You did pretty good work, meat. 
No mortal may enter the halls of Brellach. 
Ranarr-Jo sent you? Did you know that once he was king of the Shivering Isles? Before Sheogorath? In fact, I was his queen.  
Hmmm. Yes, yes, I see your point. And the others feel the same way? 
There isn't a Khajiit in Crucible who believes the world is about to end. 
Have you seen Valus Odiil recently? Spends all day in the tavern since his boys left. 
You killed my mother! You ruined my life! I will destroy you all! 
That's fine news. 
1, 2, 3... is this important? 4, 5, 6... I'm counting... 8, 9. Oh, no. I missed 7. Speak up before I get mad! 
Madgod's blessings. 
With those Oblivion Gates opening everywhere, it's only a matter of time before another city goes the way of Kvatch. 
Phillida may be retired, but he'll likely have a bodyguard, probably a member of the Leyawiin City Watch. You may have to dispose of him as well. 
My betrothed is gone! I cannot live without her. I only hope I can take a Fanatic with me. 
Excuse me? You want to question me about Matilde? Two people have been murdered, you fool! Get your priorities straight! 
So you're ready to fight the Gray Prince, are you? Well you can't go out there without a name. You know, an Arena name!   
Did you hear the news? Ulrich Leland was thrown in the dungeons for stealing money from the city coffers. Haha! Justice for the little guy! 
I have a lovely room on the corner, if you're interested. It's 20 gold for a night. 
Come back to laugh at the pathetic old man, have we? To the pit with you! Leave me alone. 
I've never been here before. And I won't be back, unless the boss wants me here. 
I already told you, she never showed up. 
Within its walls live those who determine the fate of the guild. It is our stronghold, our sanctuary. 
You got a problem? 
This is the Savage Garden. At the top of that mountain lies the Terrace of Dawn, which leads up to Mankar Camoran's palace... Carac Agaialor. 
The cure you seek is ready! 
Hey, do you mind not trampling on my crops? What do you want? 
Do you understand, or do I need to use even smaller words? 
It is a wonderful city, and I'm proud to have served her for 40 years. But I'm ready to retire, let the young folks take over the reins. 
He was very upset when he found out I didn't have his book for him. I doubt he'll be in any mood to talk to you about it. 
Whatever you're looking for, I'm sure I don't know how to find it. 
This is Lynda Carter... 
As I said, it's located right by the main gate. 
I do not care to describe it. You will know it when you see it, I think. It is not something one of the ogres should have in his possession. 
There is but one path forward, and I hold the key. 
I really don't get it. 
And... you didn't hear it from me, but I think you should go speak with Oreyn. Now. He'd like your help with a couple things. 
A contract is fulfilled by a skilled assassin such as yourself, who keeps the Dark Brotherhood's end of the bargain. So it has always been.  
I shouldn't sell it to ya so cheap, but I know you won't ask too many questions. 
Don't bare your teeth at me, you beast! How about you use those fangs on my double? 
The Resonator is attracting again. Aren't you a cute little thing? Do you want me to scratch behind your ears? 
Wake up, pretty Redguard! Ah, there you are. How do you like your cell, huh? Roomy enough for you? 
Hello there. I just finished a lovely conversation with Uncle Leo; it seems he's not feeling well today. Lost an arm. 
You've made your choice... now leave me be. 
It's good to meet you. The name's Pyke, and I welcome you to my humble home. Please, make yourself comfortable. 
Do you want to know a secret? It was I who killed the Gatekeeper. I poisoned him with an apple! 
Hello. You haven't seen my sons, have you? They went off into the forest to fight those monsters, and I'm worried about them. 
The realm has regained an army. Let's hope it can protect us. 
You are being promoted to Shadowfoot, and may now use Orrin of Castle Anvil as your fence. 
I'm getting to safety; you should too! 
I've often thought about joining the Fighters Guild. I've heard you can make a good living there. 
If Captain Matius is waiting on you to get that gate raised, you'd better get moving. 
Thought I sent you to Harlun's Watch. 
We kiss the Ring. 
You've got nice bones. 
You heard about the Fighters Guild members tearing up a tavern in Leyawiin. As if they didn't have enough problems with the Blackwood Company. 
I'm going to bleed you slow! 
Not your average skill for a priest, but I suppose there are those who will always want to learn. 
They say, "Behind every great man is a great woman." Mama said, "Men are squishy. Use a shield instead!" 
It took two tries, but you finally made it. You have earned the right to join the Thieves Guild. 
It appears we'll be busy for the foreseeable future. Thank you. 
Then why do you waste my time!?  Do as you agreed, and meet me here tomorrow night! 
Why can't they understand me? 
May we all bask in the warm safe glow of the Great Torch. 
A rousing success, mortal! And it appears you joined in the festivities as well. Good for you. You need to lighten up a bit. 
Hmmm... maybe I should start betting with Hundolin as well. 
You honor me, Your Grace. 
Anyway, sorry to go on so long. I'm sure you've got things to do. Just wanted to thank you personally. 
Help! Murder! 
I'm Yvara Channitte, Countess Bruma's steward. The Countess makes policy, leaving the details of administration to me. 
You can't possibly think that Primo had anything to do with the murder, do you? That's madness!   
Right! The one in blue! You remembered. 
Well, you did your part of the bargain, now I'll do mine. The gold is buried outside the walls of Bruma, near the North Gate. 
That's Owyn. He is in charge of the Arena. Arranges the fights, trains combatants, that sort of thing. Been that way since Gaiden Shinji. 
Halt! 
I don't know exactly what's going on, but not long ago, a gang of thieves calling themselves The Blackwater Brigands stormed the ship. 
Yes? Is there a problem? 
She must be so lonely. Don't you worry, eh? I'll take care of her long after you're dead. Oh, that's right. You're going to die in here! 
Where shall I stand, your Grace? 
Why must I be such a soft touch? 
In any case, the other is also a real Ayleid Crown... just not the right one. 
I understand my Lord has told you what is to come. It is one of the Great Mysteries of the Shivering Isles. 
I've put those days behind me. But the bitter wisdom that one has been a fool is not without value. 
Oh! I almost forgot. Here's your finder's fee. Worth every single coin, I assure you. 
Good. Please go to Bruma; I have not heard from Jeanne Frasoric for a few days now, which is unusual for her. 
What? Excuse me? Did... did you say die? My... my children? No... No! Don't hurt my precious babies! I won't let you! 
Suit yourself, but I have a feeling that you'll be back. 
Say, could you pour me another? I seem to have run dry... 
If it exists, it would be an artifact of great -- and evil -- power. 
I'd love to hammer Madness Armor to hold your shape. But you must provide some Madness Ore. Inspect the information I have posted. 
You'll regret this. 
Look out! 
Before I go on, let's clear something up. Are you here asking about the sword or the person. Which is it? 
Ooh, a secret assignment, you say? Come on, can't you give your old pal Mraaj-Dar a hint? Who do you have to kill? Anyone I know? Ha ha ha ha! 
What a pity. For the Breton, it is over. 
I'm sorry. I don't think I'm going to be much help. 
Tove the Unrestful in Bliss is collecting items to build something. 
I hope to have at least part of the Mysterium Xarxes translated in a few days. Speak to Jauffre about those spies in the meantime. 
Greetings, daughter of Skyrim. 
Best way to take out a skeleton is with a big weapon. Forget spells. Just smack them and watch the bones fly! 
Unless you need something, let's continue on to Weynon Priory. 
Have you ever seen Fathis Aren conjure up a creature? 
All but one. The Great Stone of Miscarcand is reputed still to shine in the deep darkness of its ruined halls. 
Let's go kill the Gatekeeper. We might die. But there's worse things. 
Torture may be a necessary evil to accomplish Syl's goals. Make sure Herdir accompanies you to talk to Anya.  
There you are! Welcome! Welcome! 
I'm Adanrel. I'm discouraged. 
Our rivals. The so-called Golden Saints. One day, Sheogorath will finally recognize their bull-headed stupidity and expel them from the Realm. 
Shocking! He hasn't been killed in ages. 
They say a lost son of Uriel Septim has reappeared in Bruma. Troops are flocking to his banner from all over Cyrodiil! 
Isn't Honditar an athletics trainer? The hunter in Chorrol? 
I'm not telling you that. Anything else? 
[Gasp!] Surely you're joking! Are... Are you sure? I mean, I'm excited by this news of course, but think of the ramifications! 
The Fighters Guild got Azani Blackheart's ring. Not the Blackwood Company. Apparently the Blackwood Company made the whole thing up. 
Where would you like me, your Grace? 
She's afraid for her life, as we should be! There's someone else in this house, my friend. Someone hiding somewhere, killing us off one by one! 
It's gone. I suppose you're going to tell me you don't know anything about that. Suit yourself. I know Umbacano is the one who had it stolen. 
Where to buy weapons? Where to buy anything, if you can afford to travel, is the Market District in the Imperial City. 
Once again, the Great Torch burns bright as Arden-Sul foretold. 
I've told you all I know. Leave me alone. 
What next friend? 
No, they're dead. I know it. 
I serve Lucien Lachance and the Dark Brotherhood, and will guide you as directed. But you will get no additional help from me. 
Thadon isn't dead. He's just hiding. 
I'm sorry, sir. We're all a bit jumpy. What did you need? 
He's been around forever. It must be 300 years or more since he took charge. I'm not sure he's even human. 
I'm retired from public practice. I only take students in Alchemy to support my hobbies. 
Hail and welcome, friend. Hail! 
You should be helping out Elante by now. 
Trayvond has the best shield spell outside of the Arcane University. If you can cast it, it's definitely worth adding to your selection. 
I understand there's a Knight of the Thorn in Hale. 
You have more? Amazing! Well, as promised, your finder's fee once again. 
Ancient Wayshrines of the Nine are scattered through the wilderness. The righteous who pray there receive powerful divine blessings. 
I can speak for the Count. Rosethorn Hall is a stately manor currently occupied by Vandorallen Trebatius. 
Back to take me up on that offer, eh? I knew you couldn't resist. 
Wonderful thing, wine. It's all about the balance. The flavor, the bouquet, the consistency... just wonderful. 
Didn't you hear the explosion? Some damn drunk of a wizard started hurling fireballs at passersby. Took four guards to haul him in.  
To think that Bruma was where Martin Septim chose to reveal himself as the true heir to the throne for the first time! 
Besides... I'd have a full-scale political crisis on my hands if I tried to pull any troops out of the provinces. 
Well, ain't you the high-tom-titty? You want something, I guess, or you wouldn't be messing up my air. 
I'm always glad to see you, handsome. 
Have you seen Alain or Valdemar? Rielus fell in the lower chamber. We were separated ... the fog blinded us ... 
Finally, Lord Sheogorath has sent someone to assist me! 
I fear that our work is not yet done. The area is still overrun with Knights that were not destroyed in the spire.  
Run along back to Lord Sheogorath. 
So, what did you discover about the upstanding Davide Surilie? 
Say it. 
It's good to see some reinforcements from across Cyrodiil. It's been too long since we all stood together in a common cause. 
Haven't written me off yet, huh? Good. If you're willing, there's more work to be done. 
My job right now is to get you to safety. 
We speak West-fashion for the comfort of our Western clients, but we invest the fierce pride of our ancient races in each of our mercenary contracts. 
If you need something recharged, I can take care of it. 
I hope the Guard can hold off the daedra, but you think about what happened to Kvatch, and you can't help but worry. 
The staff will allow you to manipulate objects normally out of your reach. A handy, and often amusing, spell. Is this what you'd like? 
I'm Avrus Adas. I'm the priest of Zenithar at the Leyawiin Chapel. 
Doomed! We're all doomed! 
Welcome to the Five Riders Stables! 
It's swept the Fringe. That's not good. See if you can't hold them off there. Because, if you can't, everyone is going to die. 
Greetings, Journeyman. 
I've not always been happy with the standards of conduct in the Mages Guild, but Hannibal Traven's reforms are quite encouraging. 
Good day, stranger. Soris Arenim is my name. 
Uhm, Your Grace... now doesn't seem to be the best time for conversation. Perhaps your survival should take precedence at the moment. 
We must not let down our guard. 
The Chalice, remember? Don't forget, because if I forget then no one will remember, and it might cease to exist. Reality is fickle like that. 
Why do you summon me? You are not one of my faithful. 
If you want to hear the tale, I suggest you talk to Farwil, our commander. 
If the Throne of Madness remains empty when Jyggalag storms the palace, he will prevail. But there is a chance that the throne may not be empty.  
I'll find Itius Hayn first thing in the morning. 
That guy asks way too many questions. 
But Sancre Tor became evil long ago. No one has returned from the Shrine of Tiber Septim for many lifetimes. 
All the merchants are tired of his thievery. Ask any of them. 
Thadon seems upbeat again. I know how hard it is to get anything done when you're not feeling up to it. 
What a disappointing turn of events this is! Leave the Arena now, combatant from the Blue Team, and hang your head in shame! 
I know what you're thinking! Gogron, he's too big to be sneaky! Well you're right! Me, I like to just go in and hack my targets to pieces. Ha!  
Yeah, right. 
Our Bay horses are faster than the Paint horses and tougher than the Chestnut. You'll be proud to own one. 
Please show your respect for the Imperial Palace by keeping your voice down. 
Weep, fettlekyn! 
Someone new in the Isles? Don't care. Plenty to drink for everyone. 
The Temple District is by far the most desirable address in the city. Why? Because I live here, of course. Don't you agree? 
I've made some progress with the Mysterium Xarxes, finally! 
Were you looking for me? 
No matter. Soon you and everyone else will be dead, and I will be left a mad god, ruler of a dead realm. Again. 
Cutting a man apart, little by little... such sticky sweet victory. 
If you can get me safely to the top deck, I can steer the Float home. But I'm not budging until the coast is clear. 
You must infiltrate Fort Sutch, find Roderick's medicine, and replace it with a poisoned bottle I will provide. But you must remain undetected! 
Just hold the ghosts off while I figure out how to open this damn door. 
You and four other operatives will stage high profile thefts, all at the same time. Hopefully that will force Lex to reassign the Watchmen. 
Selene'll get what's coming to her when we arrive home. 
Something you need? We still need work. 
I tried to warn him. I tried to tell him it was a mistake to leave with the Helm. 
So... you took care of the thieves. Excellent. You'll want to talk to Lelles to close out the contract. And get paid, of course. 
No more! You're frightening me! 
Someday I hope you will invite me to eat with you in the palace, Lord Sheogorath. 
You don't know anything about being a knight, so shut up about it. 
We had a feeling you'd be surprised when you saw us in our real uniforms. I see you have a puzzled look on your face. Ask away. 
I've heard that you closed the Oblivion Gate outside Anvil. I honor you for your bravery and service to my city. 
Rescued him yourself, did you? Well, good for you. 
Welcome to the Halcyon Conservatory. 
Perhaps not quite as easy to find as garlic, but if you're determined, you'll find it. Keep your eyes open, as it often grows in the wild. 
Don't worry about the Elytra's stingers. They aren't poisonous. 
The Dark Brotherhood must seek out a Nord named Sonje. She has need of our services, and we are only too happy to oblige. 
It's just up the stairs there. Second floor, the east wing. All the comforts of home. 
Please leave. I have no wish to speak with you any longer. 
In fact, I'm pretty sure you just attacked me. I think I need to arrest you for assaulting a member of the Imperial Watch. 
I had a feeling you'd accept. Good. Then let me tell you how you're going to find the Madstone. 
You got some Skooma, yeah? Right buddy? Pal? To share? Come on, pass the Skooma already! 
Oh. All right then. Let me know if you change your mind. 
No time to talk. Attack! 
So sayeth Lord Dagon. Praise be. 
Yes. I'm a priest. Do you need a priest? I don't think I'll be much help to you. 
The history books detail his life as a warrior for the Order of Diagna, but he was also the first Blademaster. No Shinji, no Arena. Simple as that. 
You approach the Shrine of Mephala. The Webspinner watches you, stranger. 
Again we meet. 
What can I do for you? We need to head to that shrine. 
We trusted you to help, and you betrayed us! It would be best if you left this town and never came back. 
I'm not sure I can make this much clearer... 
I hate these interruptions, but I suppose they are unavoidable. 
Reynald Jemane? No, don't know anyone by that name. There's a Guilbert Jemane in town however. Maybe he can help you. 
Killing their chief should weaken the Black Bow Bandits, but they're still going to be a menace to travelers. 
You know, I saw your fight against the Gray Prince. Nobody thought that Orc could be beat, but you showed them all! Ha ha ha ha ha!  
Those Knights of Order are always causing trouble. Don't worry, though. I'll figure out what to do. 
Changed your mind, have you? The offer's still good. 
In the west, in Old Colovia, that's where men are men. That's the Gold Coast, West Weald, and Colovian Highlands. 
You've interrupted my tree growth measurements! You've ruined a whole day's work! Why can't you just leave me alone? 
We'll hold this area. You head to the back of the castle, and find the Count. 
Yes, I'm selling my grandfather's house, Benirus Manor. If you're interested, I could let you have it for a modest sum. 
We should leave at once. 
I'm telling you: don't bring that sword back to Clavicus. It'll ruin him, I'm sure. I mean, not completely: He's still a Daedra Prince and all that.  
Leave me in peace. 
If they continue to marshal their forces there, we won't be able to contain them. Make sure they can't. 
I've heard the Resonator is a dangerous thing. 
Afraid to say, I don't have any more contracts for you. Maybe Azzan has some, but I don't know. You did pretty good work, meat. 
Then your punishment is death. 
Please! Don't insult me! You don't have enough money to pay for my bread. Come back when you do! 
I was sure he was part of the conspiracy. Sure of it. I guess it just goes to show ... well, we'll see what it goes to show, won't we? 
We must prevail. 
As a pirate, Gaston Tussaud has certainly spilled his share of blood. Someone wants revenge, and they've hired us to extract it.  
May his soul finally rest in peace. 
You are no better than that renrij Maric. S'razirr should have known better than to trust you. Get out of this one's sight. 
This cannot be. No one but the Emperor is permitted to handle the Amulet. Let me see it. 
Sadly, you chose not to leave Phillida's severed finger as a warning to his successor. Your laziness has cost you your bonus, I'm afraid. 
Yes, my dear. Just drink this, and it will all be better. 
Unfortunately, when Sheogorath faded, the power of the Staff faded with him. It must now be remade. 
Aye, they're staying here. Won't say how long they'll be in town, but as long as they keep payin', I ain't too worried. 
Damn that woman! She promised a four part split when we recover the Golden Galleon. She never said anything about splitting it five ways! 
So, have you managed to persuade Herminia Cinna to part with the Ayleid Crown? 
The information I have for your guild will not be met with smiles and hand-shakes, I fear. 
Greetings and salutations! 
I've sometimes thought I'd like to make a pilgrimage to the wayshrines, but my duties prevent me from such extensive and dangerous travel. 
The clever mages made it possible. Magic and iron. But this is not the time to talk. You drink your gift and go with your new brothers. 
That's fine. Feel free to look around on your own. 
Please, tell me you have my remedy... I can't hold out much longer! 
Nibenay is a region of mixed farmland, parkland, and forest. 
We'll need a few days to digest this new information. Should J'skar arrive here, we'll see to it that he's well taken care of. Thank you. 
Greetings! Looking for some more work, are you? 
The sixth guest has finally arrived! Well it's about time! Do you know how long we've been waiting? It seems like an age!               
Sheogorath take your soul! 
I saw them haul her off to jail. She was not happy! Ha ha ha... 
Yeah. Buy a goddam book. It's a bookstore, ain't it? Don't just go peeking at them! Buy one! 
Until our paths cross again... 
You'd think that after all this work, I'd finally be able to get some sleep. 
I had intended to give you My staff, the symbol of My office. But life has gone from it, as it goes from Me. It is now dead wood. A useless twig. 
I've heard Azzan can sign you up for the Fighters Guild. That's someone I wouldn't mind working for. 
Now... you've seen the Great Torch that burns brightly over New Sheoth? No? Because it doesn't. It should. But it doesn't. You'll fix that. 
Due to outstanding fines owed to the city, Aldos Othran's property has been seized and is now sealed until further notice. Good day. 
I've got news for you. Vilena wasn't happy when she heard about Viranus. No shock there. She expelled Oreyn from the guild. It's a damn shame. 
I'm looking for results from you. What have you found out? 
That's where you're going to get the Flame of Agnon. Do you listen to anything I say? Do your ears work? If not, I can find use for them. 
They've been unable to solve the Oblivion Crisis. The Empire is falling apart. Only a legitimate Emperor offers any hope. 
Aleron... my sweet husband... 
Do you have business in the House of Dementia? 
Be cautious, friend. 
At the beginning of the worlds were five. Fire, Water, Earth, Air, and Light. Darkness turned into day, the void took form.  
Well, that's that. The killer is dead, and this nightmare is just about over. All we have to do now is find a way out of here. 
Then it is only a matter of time? I await your report. 
Whomever arranged this contract wants it to look like Roderick died from his illness, so discretion is essential. Attack no one! Be seen by no one! 
Besides, I don't know if they'd have been happy to see me. 
The Amulet of Kings! I fear that was the target of this attack. I kept it in a secret room in Weynon House. 
Don't take too long. 
The Great Torch is lit in the Sacellum Arden-Sul. Have you read the book about Arden-Sul? It's fascinating! 
It is a terrible responsibility, being Bravil's First Citizen of the Ale Tub, but I suffer under the burden like a Sure-Green Orc. 
All right, this is it. Your last fight against the Yellow Team. I guess you could say they saved the best for last. The three best, actually. 
You've brought the sword! Now give it to me, as we agreed. Umbra and I have unfinished business. 
Did you find the room? Remember, upstairs at the end of the hallway. Last room on your right. 
Well, I haven't ever seen her, so I guess you're out of luck there. But, if you want... I could train you. I'm pretty skilled myself. 
I wasn't far off. In any case, rats and goblins won't give you any trouble. 
I've got another contract for you, meat. I assume you won't embarrass yourself. 
Take my helm. With it, you can take my place in the defense of the gate. Defeat the Devoted Fanatic in combat, and the curse will be lifted. 
We understand each other perfectly. 
Here you go. I shaped these to your exact measurements. Need some help getting them on? 
Hmmm. Perhaps you'll be able to assist me. I'm after some skooma dealers. 
Do I like the fights? Of course! Everyone likes the fights! The thrill of battle, the sting of defeat. A wonderful time. 
Justice has been done. And henceforth, you shall be known as Knight of the White Stallion. 
Look closely and you'll see a tiny skull. These pygmys used to live in the Shivering Isles until they were all eaten by Grummites, poor dears! 
I'm afraid you're in for a tough time, friend. The city's in bad shape, and it will be difficult to make it to the Guard House by yourself. 
Oh, that's great! That's really too much! 
Thank you for your courtesy, sir. If you ever need a friendly ear, I'm always available, night or day. 
I guess you don't know how to talk to a knight. So I'll teach you. Say, 'Yes, Sir Mazoga'. 
Eridor says I ain't supposed to chat with people in town. Sorry. 
I... I heard what they did to Lucien Lachance... Is it true that Arquen feasted on his entrails?  
I know what purpose this Soul Gem is meant to serve. It is meant to house my very own soul, to be absorbed by Mannimarco and increase his power. 
Oh, is this about joining the Mages Guild? I suppose I could spare the time, if necessary. 
I don't think this thing is going to open again. You are the worst escort in history. I'll find another way out. Get going! 
Don't take too long raising the funds. I have several other interested buyers. 
I suppose that's a good offer. Very well. 
The only people that stay here are stragglers on the Green Road. Me, I got no place else to be. Besides, I think Manheim is sweet on me. 
Surely the Inquisitor has considered that with direct evidence, Ma'zaddha may now be more responsive to questioning. 
When I speak to someone like you -- a noble citizen of the Empire -- it reminds me what I'm fighting for. I salute you! 
Yes, Arch-Mage? 
The Madgod has given you a task. Surely, someone of your copious talent should be able to handle it. 
Your staff will give you power over ice. Is that what you want? If not, we can start over. 
I'm on your side! 
Track down the spies and kill them. Find out what they know, and what they're plannning, if possible. 
The characterization is completely accurate. I despise the gods and those who bow before them. 
Oh, I think we both know the answer to that. You're here because you know something. You're plotting behind Lady Syl's back, and you've been caught. 
Yes, love. With you here, everything will be fine. 
Helvius Cecia. I do a little of this, a little of that. And I serve the Nine. Praise their Names! 
I admit I had my doubts about you, but something told me I was doing the right thing. Many thanks. 
I'm sure Kud-Ei will keep her in check. I know she has Jend teaching other mages now. 
And now you have a reward. Please, take it. It's everything I have left of value, but it's the least I can do. 
I'm just here doing research. If you need spells, talk to Ita or Delphine. They'll be happy to help. 
What do you mean nobody can see you? Where's the fun in that? Damn the bonus, I say! Just walk in there and stab him! 
A strong post to sharpen my claws. That's what is needed. 
We have a lot of paperwork and follow-up investigation to do. Please, leave us to it. 
Your Grace has restored the Wellspring, and saved us. For this we thank you. 
Have you seen the latest Black Horse Courier? Quite a story, don't you think? 
When they get here, the guards will arrest you for trespassing! 
The enemy's blade will glance across the smooth metal. A gentle caress. 
For Cheydinhal! 
Marinus Catiotus. Ida Vlinorman and me, we're associates. Same interests, same styles. 
How delightful! Welcome. 
Falcar at the Mages Guild seems to be angry all the time. I avoid him when I can. 
If I had a question about heavy armor, I'd probably ask Varnado at The Best Defense. 
Bother me again, and you might live to regret it. 
Pfft. I was done with you anyway. I can only talk to an ex-Legion pig for so long before my ears start bleeding. Besides, I need a drink. Ha ha ha! 
Don't know if this is true, but I heard a gang of all female thieves is preying on the married menfolk of the town. 
Greetings, child. 
I'm Amantius Allectus, the writer. I'm working on a new edition of 'Lives of the Saints'. 
He seems on edge, doesn't he? I guess you can take the man out of the Legion, but you can never take the Legion out of the man. 
I don't understand the fascination with sheep. Certainly seems to know everything about Mysticism, though. 
For the Madgod! 
Take my good friend Aldos Othran for example. In the last month, he's been fined six times! SIX! All for being drunk and disorderly. 
I knew of his thirst for vengeance. I could have informed my Listener. But I refused! Refused to reward such incompetence! Ungolim was weak. 
She is staying well out of sight. No need to take unnecessary risks. 
Don't spend all the money from the reward in one place. 
The adventurers will have to overcome their feelings of greed as they set their eyes upon the huge piles of treasure locked behind that gate. 
Thank you, Arch-Mage. It has been a pleasure to accompany you. 
There is nothing more to say. Leave me. 
She was here a second ago... 
Please, I do not wish to speak of her. My wife is buried here, and I only wish to visit her grave in peace. It is a sacred place to me. 
With this blade I have severed the Septim line forever. 
The traitor must be brought to justice! 
Yes, of course. I will wait here, Arch-Mage. 
The Thornblade it is. Again, I thank you on behalf of all the citizens of Cheydinhal, and I especially thank you as an elated father. 
Barthel Gernand is my father. I'm worried about him. I think it will break his heart if we can't build Cropsford. 
A mission? Well... of course! I'm sure we can do this. You say this came from Oreyn himself? Well. Perhaps I should speak with Mother first.... 
You've made a real mess of things here. 
You and Viranus have business to attend to. Why are you wasting time here? 
Well? 
I've had plenty of time to ponder my deeds since I came here. Ponder, and regret. An eternity of regret. 
Your assistance may be needed in Hale, Lord. If you are otherwise occupied, I'm certain the survivors will understand. 
Are you ready to go? We need your help getting to the castle, but we need to move soon. 
I've bought a good number of things at Colovian Traders. And Gunder is a friendly sort. 
Fithragaer. Battlemage. Sent by the Council to find this traitor.... 
I have my own interests, and they occasionally require resources that are difficult for me to acquire. Soul gems, for example. 
The citizens will likely know more. I imagine many have noticed their presence here. 
I was in Cheydinhal last week, and I'm sure I saw Reynald Jemane. He acted like he didn't know me, though. 
And finally, we shall raise our goblets to the great Arden-Sul: poet, thespian, author, lover, virtuoso, and artisan extraordinaire. 
You're going to Xedilian, one of my favorite spots in the Isles. It's a little place I use to take care of unwanted visitors. 
Well, well. The Gray Fox, in person. 
You can wear whatever ever you want, of course. We don't want you getting killed out there! 
I'll ensure that her stay in jail is not long. Obviously, I had no love for Ulrich, so I'll do what I can on her behalf. 
If we work hard, Uncle Iniel says he'll set us up in business together, maybe a little fruit orchard, or maybe tomatoes. 
Madgod's blessings, Duchess of Mania. 
If you kill something, let me know! 
I'm really impressed. You made getting past that pillar look easy. 
Chancellor Ocato is expecting you. Proceed. 
I bet he does. That Brithaur sure is a pain in the ass. 
Have you spoken to the other guests yet? I suggest you get to know everyone. Who knows how long we'll be stuck in this house together? 
The Ayleid city of Lindai was a bitter rival to Nenalata, the city of the so-called "Last King of the Ayleids." 
This is bad news for Bliss. The news is not better in Crucible, though. 
Suppose that the runestones are divine, and that the secrets of their magics are revealed only by divine revelation. 
In the Imperial Sewers. Here is the key for the gate to that section of the sewers. I picked the pocket of Ocato himself to get it. 
This is your last warning! Get out, or I'll call the guards and have you arrested! 
I see. Please find me when you do. The Count is eager to receive it. 
I don't have time to talk. My work cannot wait. 
Please tell me you have more Nirnroot for me. 
You gave those Maniacs something to think about, lighting the Torch for us. Well done! 
Must have been knocked on the head. Talks all sorts of rot. Meek as a sheep, though. 
Our only hope is to recover the Amulet of Kings from Mankar Camoran. 
She's a hard worker, and they make some fine wine. 
You aren't brooding on that little unpleasantness at Malada, are you? 
I haven't approached him myself, as Ulrich has eyes everywhere. However, he doesn't know you well enough yet to suspect anything. 
You should be elsewhere right now, shouldn't you? 
I'd grown to become fond of him. I wanted to take him into my house, but I was afraid. And now look what's become of him. 
As I said, I fully understand. I shall be here when you feel you are prepared. 
There is nothing more important now than locating Martin and bringing him safely back here. 
I like eating at the Flowing Bowl. Maenlorn runs a quality inn. 
As I mentioned, I have no more contracts available. You'll need to speak with Ocheeva. Unless... you would like to discuss another matter?  
Have you recovered the Madstone? 
Well done. Bruma will never fall while you and our intrepid Captain Burd are on duty! 
The King and Queen is a fine place, and it's much more reasonable than other places in town. 
Some made it into the Chapel, but others were just run down in the streets. The Count and his men are still holed up in the castle. 
Not here. The Garden of Dareloth, on the Waterfront. Midnight. Be there. 
I've been looking for you! 
Welcome to Weynon Priory, a monastic retreat dedicated to Talos and the Nine Divines. 
So, Ogier sent you, eh? Well then, he usually sizes up people well, so you may be just what we're looking for. 
It's clear that they're in love. Good for them. 
I prepare the way for my Lord Jyggalag. 
With no Emperor to serve, the Blades now return to our ancient role. We will bide our time until the next Dragonborn arises. 
The only way you're getting off this boat is when we throw your corpse over the side! Hahahaha! 
We have awaited your arrival, messenger. 
Anaxes is free. Order is restored to the Savage Garden. You have served me well. 
The successor is invited to a huge celebration... a night of hedonistic revelry; wine, song, and, of course, Greenmote. 
It's probably the finest inn in all of Cyrodiil. 
The Countess still seems quite sad. I hear someone tried to find the item stolen from the castle, but they had no luck. Oh well. 
M'aiq knows much, tells some. M'aiq knows many things others do not. 
I haven't seen anything, except for that stranger wandering around. 
I knew Our Lord would protect us. 
He's a clever one, no doubt about it. Eyes in the back of his head, always seems to know when I'm watching.  But that's where you come in. 
Why would he want to sleep in a bedroll and give me his bed? Sounds queer. I bet it's just another trick to get my head all twisted around. 
How are you faring in your campaign against the remnants of the Black Bow Bandits, Sir Knight? 
This city life is killing me. Work all day long. Drop dead, and they toss you in Lake Rumare. Just need to make my money at the Arena and live easy. 
It is good to be back here. It raises my spirits just to walk these ancient halls again. We will prevail. We must prevail! 
What else can I help you with on this glorious day? 
Next up is a Dark Elf. I've never seen him fight before, but he's got a bow as well as a sword, so be ready for a ranged attack! 
I had just been telling Uncle Leo that something big was coming, and now this conspiracy. And they thought me part of it! 
Yes? Do you require assistance? 
Hope is gone. The Imperial line is dead. 
What the hell's an ogre going to do with the Stone of Alessia? Eat it? 
Captain. Carry on. 
They call it the 'Stone of Alessia'. And they got it back. That's all I know. 
I haven't seen death like this in a long, long time. It's a bit more than my nerves can handle, I'm afraid.  
Are you sure? Well, all right. I can't give you a better offer. 
You approach the Shrine of Clavicus Vile. You should not be here unless you have business with Lord Clavicus. 
There's also the Bloated Float on the Waterfront, but that's not a very nice neighborhood. 
Oh, you're such a sweetie! 
So do we all. But what path can be avoided whose end is fixed by the almighty Gods? 
Back at the end of the First Era, raiders from the continent of Akavir attempted to gain a foothold here in Tamriel. 
Terrible jokes. Just terrible. 
Ah well, it's been a good life I suppose.... 
Go talk to Armand or S'krivva. Pay the fine and you'll be reinstated. 
Assassins attacked my sons, and I'm next. 
Just remember not to deviate from the Ritual's guidelines. One would hope you can do that. 
Two people have been murdered, and neither of them was Neville. Watch your back around him.   
We cannot talk now -- we don't have very long until the next wave arrives.  
Finally, no need to sleep with an eye open. 
That's just like one that's gone missing from my Museum. If only I had the funds to replace it. 
The day is ours! Come and celebrate, we will feast and dine until we can eat no more! 
Ongar lives in Bruma. He doesn't have much money, but he's the only place you can sell hot property if you are new to the Thieves Guild. 
What's the plan, sir? 
I don't help just anyone, you know. 
7, 8... Don't like that other Jastira. 9, 10... Not one bit. 
Greet the new day, sister. 
Perfect corpses to count! Finally! 
Where to sleep? The Tiber Septim Hotel in Talos Plaza is nice but expensive. Luther Broad's Boarding House in Elven Gardens is just okay. 
I could handle them myself. But it would be... unwise to display my prowess in public. That is the folly of the young and proud. 
The Great Torch is lit! This calls for a celebration. Break out the Skooma! You brought the Skooma, right? 
Put your hands and your voices together for the two brave Heroes who have come to rock the very foundations of this Arena! Lower the gates! 
It was brutally sacked thousands of years ago by humans led by Alessia. The Imperial City is built over the ruins of that ancient city. 
What can I do to you? 
Some work would be a gift from the gods. If you've found something, tell Vantus. 
Aerin's a very gifted acrobat, and could teach you anything you needed to know. 
I've heard that the new Gatekeeper is fearsome. The ground will soon be red with the blood of those that would challenge him. 
What is it, Sister? 
I have to sell it soon, as I have pressing matters elsewhere. You're welcome to take a look at it. It is located across the street from the Chapel. 
I've heard he never leaves his laboratory. He's certainly dedicated to his craft. 
You've brought him back. Good. I want to know the size of their forces, and who is leading them. I also want to know the source of their strength. 
Never mind. I must continue to channel Lord Jyggalag's power into the pool. 
Do you call that juggling? You should be ashamed of yourself. 
Hello again. You don't happen to recall how many steps you took in getting here, do you? I was just wondering. 
The ringing of the chimes is said to help call the souls back to Brellach, guiding them to us, so they may return to our Lord's service. 
Now where did I put that pestle? 
You ripped me off blind. I hope you're happy with yourself. 
I'm glad she was finally able to get someone over here. I've been gathering all the research I could on her, ummm... "little problems" shall we say? 
So, she's dead eh? Hahaha. Finally! Finally someone has wiped that stupid smug grin off her face. Good, good. 
Hieronymus Lex actually collected taxes from everyone living here on the Waterfront! Your job is to recover those taxes. Are you up for it? 
Oh yes! There's one obscure text that references these gems. I believe it's still around here someplace, unless Falcar never returned it. 
No, I didn't like the man. But why should you care? Please, just go away.  
It is my hope that this woman you seek will know more. 
Goblins are filth. More power to him. 
Those that are lucky enough to merely go insane will be granted a place in the Shivering Isles as a permanent resident. 
And the best I've ever seen is an Archer named Alawen. Not sure where she is now; last I heard, she had a camp east of Anvil, out in the forest. 
I panicked. By the time I awoke, her body was gone. I knew Seridur was a respected member of the community. 
I could get kicked out of the guild! 
Once you've got it, get to the Guard House, find the passage, and open that gate. Then we can get inside the castle and secure it. 
She worked in the Chapel of Akatosh in Kvatch. I haven't seen her in quite some time. 
Our fortress and sanctuary here in the Shivering Isles. 
I therefore can only reward you with this gold, and hopefully you will learn to be more careful with your accusations in the future. 
As always, you fail to disappoint me. Your target is a Dark Elf named Valen Dreth. He thinks he's safe in prison. He is tragically mistaken. 
So, the mighty Ulrich Leland has fallen. Apparently Llevana Nedaren snapped and killed him. Good riddance I say. 
There are some things you shouldn't skimp on. Spells are one of them. 
Everyone in Summitmist Manor is dead! There was some kind of party that went horribly awry, or so I hear. 
Now that you have the wood, speak with Delmar at the Chironasium. 
First they starve you. Then they beat you. Then, if you're lucky, they kill you. That's right. You're going to die in here! 
There are rats and goblins down there... but from what I've seen of you, I'm guessing you are an experienced Assassin. Am I right? 
I hope she takes care of herself as well as she takes care of others. 
Ah, so you've returned. Come at last to challenge me for my Grand Champion title? 
Aren't you the curious one? You know what they say about curiosity, though, don't you? 
Hello and well met. 
You'll find her at the Water's Edge settlement. It's marked on your map. 
It's a modest home in the center of town. 
The Gnarls can help you. Those that have not been poisoned may be able to reverse the spread of Order. Do not slay them heedlessly. 
While I continue to study the Mysterium Xarxes, you should keep searching for the daedric artifact we'll need for the ritual. 
Honor suits you well. May your journeys always be safe. 
Come on. My men will need all the help they can get today. 
When you're ready for work, go and speak with Vicente Valtieri. He handles all assignments for new family members.   
At least now we have a name to put to our enemy. Mankar Camoran and the Mythic Dawn will pay for their foul crimes. 
Unfortunately, the notorious Redguard Valley Ogres ransacked the place and probably took all of the loot back with them. 
The blade has been coated with a rare poison called Languorwine. One drop in a normal human bloodstream will mimic the effects of death immediately. 
I've heard. He's even afraid of Khajiit. He once hid dog food in a Khajiit's clothes, just so his dog would go after her. 
We'll stand our ground as long as we can. 
I'm glad our Duke has regained his Chalice. 
Yes, rats. I'm sure she can explain it to you better than I. She lives here in Anvil. Go and talk to her. Good luck! 
Fantastic! You actually found 10 of the Nirnroot. I'll begin making the Elixir of Exploration right away. 
How could this happen? How could I have let my guard down. That poor old woman is dead, and I should have protected her.... 
Mama always said, "You catch more flies with honey than salt." Like that thing that sucks in the adventurers. 
Go and see for yourself! Kvatch is a smoking ruin! We're all that's left, do you understand me? Everyone else is dead! 
I have the book you seek. With it and the Master's three other books, you will possess the key to enlightenment. 
I'm surprised at your attitude. Here I thought you were a patron of my Museum. I only hope you change your mind one day. 
Are you sure? That can't be right. She's my... I mean she doesn't seem to be the type. 
I swear, you will not get past me! 
We'll talk when we're closer, so I can show you what we're facing. Not now. 
From these Gatekeeper bones I can make some arrows. 
May you bleed well! 
That's where you come in. We want you to slay this vampire and cleanse the city of his filth before he can feed or kill again. 
Really? It just so happens there is a modest shack overlooking the canal. 
Mara's mercy on you. 
Look, it's a fancy party. You seem a fine enough sort, but not so nice as I'm going to just let you in there. At least not dressed like that. 
You'll be back... 
Certainly not. 
I kept my oath. Mogens Wind-Shifter is dead. Now I return to Castle Leyawiin. Come visit me there some day. 
Well, I'll be here every day from noon until midnight. Let me know if you change your mind. 
Up the stairs you must go, to the first door on your right. That is your room for the night. 
Greetings, Magician. 
That's Ysabel. She's sort of the Arena den mother. She handles the logistical stuff, as well as the training of the Grand Champion. 
I have need of your services once more. 
Here, please take this apron as a token of our friendship. It's not much, but perhaps it will help you in the future. 
Andel Indarys is an intemperate, bibulous philanderer. And a Dark Elf. Other than that, he is perfectly suited to be a count. 
Jyggalag is gone, but I bet he brought a ton of diseases with him. We still aren't safe. 
But I'm afraid the information isn't free. You do me a small favor, and then we'll talk about this cure you seek. 
Ah, I see you've been successful in the Fringe. How can I assist you, Your Grace? 
You are a citizen of Tamriel, and you, too, shall serve her in your own way. 
A caliper a day makes the skyboat... wait, that doesn't rhyme. 
The castle is on a hill outside the walls, south of town. 
Then prepare for the fight of your life! If I fall, you'll just end up rotting in jail with Jorundr. Either way, no gold for you! 
So careless, these creatures. 
Finally something interesting. 
Hey there. I'm Horkvir Bear-Arm. They call me that because I once wrestled a bear, not because I work all day out in my garden without a shirt on. 
Colovian Traders is a good shop. Perhaps I'll visit Gunder soon. 
After only a few years passed, the Grummites began moving in. Ghastly things! 
Gelebourne? That's odd you should mention that name. Raynil told me that he was the last vampire he hunted. 
Feed me, Lord! 
I... can't believe what I'm seeing in this book. I'm mortified. To think these things here were once on the bodies of the recently deceased. 
I even trusted them to open up the shop in the mornings. I can't imagine what turned them to a life of crime. Sad. Well, here's your payment. 
I myself was training as a Blade when I received the call to serve Talos in a different way. 
You won't believe what's happened! Francois Motierre has been killed! Murdered by the Dark Brotherhood! It's true, I saw the body myself. 
So far, we haven't had to draw one drop of blood. The best part of the whole thing is that the men are so embarrassed, they won't tell the guards! 
You cleared that up. You must be exhausted. 
Yeah? You think? Okay, I'll just try to calm down. Calm down, Dovesi, calm down... I'll just take it slow. I can do that. Thanks again, dear friend. 
Here you go. 
I hear Black Brugo is dead. 
Fine, but hurry back when you do! It's coming soon. I can tell! 
Syl torturing her own staff? Kinky. 
We know how to deal with criminals in Bleaker's Way! 
Well, well, if it isn't the Butcher! How's our new Grand Champion, huh? You ready to make me some money? Ha ha ha ha ha!  Ahem... 
Oh, no. You'll not drag me into Syl's mess. She made this bed, now it's up to her to burn it. 
Why don't you take that book to her, see what she makes of it. I'll keep running down leads on the Mythic Dawn network. 
Good luck, Brother! I hope you don't get killed! I mean, um... well, you know! 
Don't talk to me. Talk to the one in the robes. 
That's too bad. 
Sickly Bernice is convinced she's dying. No wonder no one wants to eat at her Taphouse. 
No. I'm sorry, but even if what you say is true, I won't abandon these people to their fate. 
If the Mythic Dawn manages to open a Great Gate here, the city will need a stronger garrison for there to be any hope of defending it. 
Fortunately, Dyus has such an intimate knowledge of things to come that he sees no purpose in taking any action, since the outcome is written. 
How goes the battle? 
Hmmmm... 
As a member of the Dark Brotherhood, you must abide by the Five Tenets. They are the laws that guide and protect us.  
Would you learn from me? Then meet me during the day, out under the waves in the bay. 
Then approach the Shrine. 
Saying goodbye is like ripping out a little piece of yourself. Ahhh. 
Yes, he just arrived in town recently. I believe he's staying at The King and Queen Tavern. 
Umbacano nearly did us in this time, and no mistake. 
Pyke, the Knight of the Thorn, lives in Hale. 
The Dawn is breaking! 
I can't believe it! The Gray Prince has been beaten! There's a new Arena Grand Champion now, someone called Skullcrusher! 
Order take you! 
So, you want to find the secret escape route? Easy enough. 
Where can you get sheep's cheese but in Skingrad? And why? Because only in Skingrad is Uuras, Master of Sheep's Cheese! 
Behold, the Spellslinger! 
Varon Vamori really has a silver tongue. 
I'm sorry. It's just that I haven't been given many contracts since my brother... since the accident. Let's go. 
You prefer silence, then? As do I, my dear child. As do I. For is silence not the symphony of death, the orchestration of Sithis himself? 
Have you got the key? You must get the Keeper's key -- it's the only way into the Sigil Keep! 
The time for speech is ended. Come! 
She remained young while he aged. Not too long ago she was found slain. It's all hush-hush. Nobody knows exactly what happened. 
I'm not some commoner to take up a sword. Let the rabble risk their lives, not me. 
The Forbidden Grotto is the only way out of the Savage Garden. 
Need a book? You've come to the right place. 
Clever you are, but I can sense a liar. No matter, I do not care to know why you are here; I only care that you wish Ciirta harm. 
I bid you welcome. 
No. She is not one of them. 
Take it easy. You'll be fine. I know this is a lot to take in all at once. 
Vitharn! 
The Countess seems much happier now that the item that was stolen from her was returned. 
You must not have heard me the first time. Good day! 
Please... get her from my sight. 
Let's celebrate the relighting of the Torch! Drinks for everyone! 
Good that you took care of it. This whole Blackwood Company business is starting to chafe. 
Forgive me. I loved my husband dearly, and to lose him this way makes no sense. Anything you can do to help would be wonderful. 
Thank Sheogorath it was only a settlement, and not Crucible. 
Really? Then you've just become a homeowner. Here is your house key. 
Would you be willing to collect some Flame Stalk for me? 
If you're ready to go get Black Brugo, I'm ready to follow you. 
Although you may not think so to meet him. He lives quietly as a monk at Weynon Priory, near the city of Chorrol. 
Hello there. Is there something I can do for you? 
Good afternoon, ma'am. 
You can't fight now! You have a bet down on an Arena match. Look, finish up with our gambling, and then you can fight. 
Have you ever done any shopping at Thoronir's store? 
They follow the teachings of Mankar Camoran, whom they call the Master. A shadowy figure in his own right. 
Cheydinhal sleeps more soundly tonight, thanks to you, friend. What can I do for you? 
I believe the rugged climate of Bruma suits Narina Carvain. She's tough and cold, but you always know what to expect from her. 
But, perhaps now's not the time. You've made it this far. Farther than anyone else. Well done! 
If you need something enchanted, Calindil has the goods. 
Agggh! 
Stand back, and let me take care of this. 
Ugh. How messy. Well, now that you possess Syl's Heart, I'd make my way to the Sacellum as soon as possible. 
I've heard rumors, but they're nothing more than that. Imperials trying to harness the power of the Ayleids... they're not fools. 
I prefer the chance for freedom. 
What harm had he ever done to you? The means justify the ends, is that it? 
Very well. I hate to deny a dedicated... scholar... like yourself. I'll sell it to you, if you must have it. 
You'll pick that lock, and I'll collect the bones. Then I'll make some arrows, and we'll kill the Gatekeeper. Sound good? 
Chancellor Ocato has performed heroically. No one else could have held the Empire together during this crisis. 
Farewell, my friend. 
All right. I'll just take these from you. I'll need them for my report to the Council. 
Hello again. I'm sorry, but I have little time to chat. I am quite busy with affairs of state and all that. 
You've messed this place up. I'm tired just thinking about it. 
Ah, yes. Another scoundrel who served time in an imperial jail. The Gray Fox is offering you a chance to join the Thieves Guild. 
Hiss! 
Thanks so much for getting us here safely! 
Listen, that's all I know, really! Maybe Ulfgar Fog-Eye can tell you more. He's the lighthouse keeper, and probably rented out the cellar. 
I might accidentally kill it. If that happens, just bring me another. Once I have it, I'll make sure it's worth your while. 
We're pretty sure he's still hiding out in Fort Caractacus, although he never answers when we've tried to find him. 
Here comes another one! 
Such riches shouldn't go to waste. We must get in. 
I haven't seen you here before. Awww, and you're all alone too. How sad. 
Are you sure? You will not easily heal the damage done to you. This is a permanent sacrifice you are making. In fact, it is likely you will die. 
You'll have to do better than that, you yellow-faced pointy-eared monkey. 
Some say the Legion burned the town to the ground, but it's still there, for those that go looking for trouble. 
So, Thadon has the Chalice again? I wish I had time to loaf about and drink Felldew. 
Thank Y'ffre that Mirisa was there! Without her, the goblins would have surely killed us all. 
Get outside of town, if you get a chance, and hike north along the coast. Great views and good hunting. 
Theranis? How did you know about him? He was my cellmate. At least until the Pale Lady took him away. 
I think I know why you're here, but I'd speak to my herald, Tolgan, first. I believe he has something for you. Then return to me. 
Go in peace. 
Isn't that abandoned house a bit spooky? 
Do Lynch and Minx know about this? 
I am the healer, Marz of Black Marsh. By the grace of Mara, I am available as an Advanced Trainer in Restoration. 
Patience, Antus. He'll be here as soon as he can. Don't be so anxious to go rushing into battle. 
I... I'm sorry. You did all you could, I'm sure. Thank you for trying.  
Hello, Warlock. 
You need more experience before I can use you on a commission job. Ongar tells me that you haven't turned in much loot yet. 
As you wish, My Lord. I'll see that a contingent of Dark Seducers is sent to the settlement. 
Read your histories: a strong army guarantees a strong Realm. Good thing Sheogorath's armies are back to full strength. 
If you're looking for the most powerful spells, you'll want to speak to Borissean at the Arcane University. If you're allowed in, that is. 
I have trained my entire life for the crisis that is now upon us. When the moment comes, I will gladly lay down my life for the Empire! 
Open wide! 
Begone, weakling. I have no use for you. 
If you're thinking of making Chorrol your home, you should join a guild. It's hard work, but steady money. And people get to know you. 
He turned up dead. I guess someone finally got tired of his crazy behavior. 
Now this is what I'm talking about! You kill him up close, face-to-face, and you still get the bonus! I wish all the contracts were like that! 
There's one sure way to stop a tongue from flapping: cut it out. Shall I demonstrate? 
We thought you and Mother had both been killed. If we had only known! 
Let us speak of the information I have for your guild, so that you may pass it on to your Council, and they may decide how to use it. 
Traven sent word that he wanted you in charge, so you've got it. You're in command. Tell us where you want us. 
Best shops in Anvil? Norbert Lelles handles rare books, exotic ingredients, and gems, and they have fine weapons at Morvayn's Peacemakers. 
I thought about joining the Mages Guild, but that Falcar fellow was very intimidating. I ended up changing my mind. 
I'm Maknok gro-Coblug, the Riverside groundskeeper. Rogmesh, my wife, is the cook at the Big House. 
A little bird told me that you've been asking around town about Glarthir. Our resident "eccentric." I'd like to know why. 
You will be paid a modest sum. Do you want this job? 
Mirel was very convincing as well... 
Could be all of them. Every last one. None can be trusted. 
We're a small, select organization of crime fighters. We're going after the crimes and criminals the Guard overlooks. 
Drop your weapon! Hand over your stolen goods and face the Lord's justice. Pay your due reparations, or it's the dungeon for you. 
Inaction conflicts with your purpose. The longer you are here with me, the further the balance shifts towards your enemy. 
For the adventurous, open-minded thinker, daedric worship holds many rewards. 
If you see a Shambles dying, stand back. They'll take you with them. 
We seek the light with an open eye and an open heart. We carve the flesh away, seeking the light within. 
You look like a bright one. 
If you're here to bet on a fight, on the other hand, you're talking to the right man! There are matches all day long, from 9:00 AM to 9:00 PM. 
I think it's a shame how they took that land from Elsweyr, and Argonians are afraid it could happen to them, too. 
And yet suddenly everyone shows up on my doorstep, needing information immediately. Nevermind that I might have things of my own to work on. 
When shopping there search every nook, you never know what you'll find until you look. 
Stay back, prisoner. 
Without a full 30 samples, I can't extract enough of it to produce the stronger Elixir. Come back when you've found that many. 
Well, then my request is small. Prove to me that you are capable of serving Molag Bal in your own way. 
Fair enough. Fathis is also the wizard in the tower southeast of town. He keeps his most treasured items there, not in the castle. 
Yuck. 
It can't be! 
He hasn't bothered me since. 
The Gatekeeper dead. That concerns me. 
Are you willing to trade places with these souls, to bear the full weight of their pain and afflictions? Weigh this question carefully. 
Shadow hide the hunter. 
Hauls-Ropes-Faster can run faster than anyone I've ever seen. Of course, he can't often walk a straight line. 
One more corpse! Well done. 
The guild of Mages might know more. Speak with Raminus Polus; he may be able to guide you. 
It is time for decisive action. I have one more duty for you to perform. 
Who was that I was talking to? Not Sheogorath. 
I'm afraid I can't just write one out of hand. That would be against protocols, you see. 
She has forbidden me and those who support me from carrying weapons. And suspicious would it look if we were to wander around gathering them. 
Sheogorath has disappeared! How can I be expected to paint at a time like this? 
I really wish they would stop yelling. 
You really shouldn't be here! 
The guards claim there's no evidence of them, so they won't lift a finger. That's why we have to be the ones to deal with them. 
The bodies were those of some beggars who used to wander the streets looking for handouts. Vampire probably thought no one would miss them. 
Silent even as Listener? Good. For now is the time to meditate upon all that has transpired. And please, help yourself to this crypt's treasures. 
There's some kind of cover-up going on with the Fighters Guild's Fallen Rock Cave contract. 
You there! Stop where you are!   
The people of New Sheoth must feel some relief. 
I'm sick of all this fighting with the Atius clan. I'm glad Uncle Iniel put his foot down. 
Hey, you're the one they call the Hero of Kvatch, aren't you? The one that closed the Oblivion Gate and saved the city? 
WHAT!? How in Oblivion can I be dead? 
I wish to welcome you to this Sanctuary, my newest Brother. 
Be careful. Davide Surilie is the ringleader. You must NOT let him catch you watching him! 
If you wish to replace Thadon, try a less direct approach that will involve cunning and subterfuge. He isn't likely to see you coming. 
I've never really thought about it. I've heard the money is good, but that's a bit too much risk for me. 
You seek my help? 
I followed the bones. They lead me here. I just moved in when I got here. No one seemed to mind. Everyone here seems to be waiting for something.  
I'd buy my armor at "The Best Defense" if I could afford it. You know... in the Market District... the Imperial City? 
Ganredhel does seem to love her dogs. She taught me a little something about acrobatics, though, which was helpful. 
Looks like it is time for a promotion. Due to your performance, I name you Journeyman of the Fighters Guild. 
Sometimes I can hear the screams of the prisoners when I'm in my chambers. 
I'm glad you are reasonable and open-minded. Perhaps Sheogorath's faith in you isn't misplaced, after all. Now, let's not speak of this again. 
While carrying out a contract, you may have the opportunity to earn a bonus if certain parameters are met. Now, let's begin, shall we? 
Hey, you're not supposed to be here. 
You've pleased the Madgod! You must be proud of yourself. I, for one, still would like to eat your eyes. But, good for you! 
Take for example that good-for-nothing husband of mine, Gogan. He cared more about their charms than my own. 
I don't envy the High Chancellor his position. It can't be easy trying to rule an empire without an emperor. 
You said you wanted me to solve this myself. And I am. Drastic measures. Didn't want to, but you're right, it is the only way. 
Did I not tell you to avoid contact with us? Travel along the road, and act normally. We shall be shadowing you. 
Can't get in without Sheogorath's Blessing. That's what Relmyna says. That's the reason we're all waiting here - for Sheogorath's blessing. 
Well. The guards must've been careless. But Captain Dione has the guard on full alert. We'll be safe. 
The surviving members of the Black Hand know that you're innocent, they know you were only following orders. They believe I am the traitor!  
Ma'zaddha was able to provide some useful evidence, even if he did not survive to see it put to use. It's time to confront Nelrene again. 
I'm afraid he and the rest of the Knights are off on a mission... a secret mission. 
I thank you for your help in killing her. Now, I can lead my people towards the light.  
This staff will allow you to trap the souls of enemies you defeat, if you can do so before the effect wears off. Is this acceptable? 
I will not be able to help you; I am not a warrior. But take these bottles of turpentine, they might help. Do be careful. 
Do me a favor, don't say anything to the other guards that I fell for it, ok? Thanks. 
Carve a happy smile. Let the blood wash over your hands. 
Don't you dare touch anything in my house! You'll ruin my research. Hmmm. Would you be willing to run an errand for me? I'll pay you. 
Don't trust her, sweetie. Not a thing she says. If she tries to get you alone anywhere, get away as fast as you can! She's a cold-blooded killer!  
I thank you for trying to save him. 
Apparently worship the Daedra Lord Mehrunes Dagon. I've been tracking their agents in the Imperial City. I guess they noticed. 
We may have to torture dozens of people before we find one who knows something. How exciting! 
I'll have to proceed cautiously with the Mysterium Xarxes. It is exceedingly dangerous. 
I hear that Earil is fed up with Brithaur's antics. He really wants something done about it. 
Greetings, sister. How does the light find you this day? 
I... do not feel well. Please, excuse me. 
Aye. I'm Ulfgar Fog-Eye, master of the Anvil lighthouse. Visit the lighthouse any time. Fine view of the town and harbor. 
Thank you...thank you so much. I can't tell you how grateful I am. You always have a home here at the Grey Mare. 
You must learn to broaden your thoughts and hold your tongue! Allow me to explain before jumping to conclusions! 
I'm Lum gro-Baroth. The cheerful one. My brother, Kurz? He's not so cheerful. 
I don't even like to walk by that place. 
You've got it. Good. I'll use it to prove it was we, not the Blackwood Company, who killed him. Good work on this. 
You would break our bargain? You dare to trifle with me? Take care, mortal. Clavicus Vile watches you now. And waits. 
Have you found Weatherleah? Is it safe for us to travel there? 
You've done good work here! Now, please, don't hurt me. 
Not long ago, one of those foul gates manifested itself just outside the West Gates of our city. Nothing's come out of it yet, but we fear the worst. 
What? Necromancers at the cave? 
There are two ruined forts south of Bravil. One is close to the road to Leyawiin. The other is out on a point of land that projects into Niben Bay. 
If the Count is still alive, it's my duty to assist him, even if it means giving up my life. If you're with me, we need to get going. 
Horrible creatures! Replete with horror and evil. They roam freely eastward of the estate. I look forward to you exterminizing them. 
You will not stay in Leyawiin. You just visit. Of course. Too many Argonians here. Already. People here don't like Argonians. Too many already.  
I never understood Syl's methods. Wouldn't a nice talk and a basket of hot biscuits get her the information she needs? 
She can make armor. And weapons. I've also heard she's found ways to make magical versions, as well. 
I grew up here in the Imperial City, but I was born elsewhere. My mother was a servant in the employ of Lord Lovidicus, and resided at his fortress. 
Greetings once more, assassin. When you're ready, I have a most important contract. One that has been sanctioned by the Black Hand itself. 
It cannot be permitted! She must be stopped! 
So, the Night Mother has spoken! I will make sure this information reaches the appropriate family members. Ah yes, here are your weekly earnings.     
Hello there. I suppose I should make the effort to introduce myself. I'm Horkvir Bear-Arm. I hope there isn't anything I can do for you. 
I've heard she'll do anything for other guild members, and that she's an excellent trainer. 
Hello, good lady. 
Let's stick together! 
The end is in sight. 
If you want my help, you'll need to join up. Fighters Guild members only. 
Not a bad idea. We can use more men in the ranks. It has its advantages. It gives the guild a greater presence. Makes people notice. 
Leave us alone. Your quarrel is with Mankar Camoran, not us poor fools. 
What do you call the time between one victory dance and another? The Jig-lag! Get it? 
You'll never take me alive! 
I heard he will buy calipers and tongs from people he likes. 
This is important to the Countess, and no one is going to muck it up. Got it? 
The K'Sharra has come true! 
And, hopefully, we kill the traitor in the process. Until the Purification is complete, no given Sanctuary will ever be considered secure.  
The only reason he stopped doing that is because we got married, and he wanted to settle down. I'm afraid thanks to Raynil, that time is lost. 
I'm afraid I've told you all I can about it. I'm sorry I couldn't be of more use. 
I see no reason to shelter you from situations the guild deals with on a daily basis. This is the important work, the work that matters. 
Once a week, you must visit the statue. Talk to it. You will be presented with a list of names and locations.   
Our Lord has protected us once again. 
What a horrible turn of events. 
Beware the Obelisks! 
My sisters, on the other hand ... I wouldn't mind if they had stayed invisible! Ha ha ha! 
Of course I'm in danger. But I'm needed here. I can't leave. 
That's a silly notion of course, but it just goes to show the attention to detail Rythe uses when he paints. 
I wish I could tell you more about them, but that's all I remember from speaking to my colleagues here at the University. 
You find the room okay? Right at the top of the stairs. First one on the left. You really can't miss it. 
We'll try again, I suppose. What does the name Hazadir mean to you? 
What's this? Black soul gems? 
Anyone capable of handling it should have access to that power, don't you think? 
Wake up, Redguard! Ah, there you are. How do you like your cell, huh? Roomy enough for you? 
I suppose if you need a shield, that's the place to go. 
No one like that staying here, I can assure you. I don't want that kind of clientele. 
Ah yes, and what of our Duke of Mania? 
Lord Sheogorath has never succeeded in doing so. They continue to grow in numbers until Jyggalag himself arrives. 
It had been our position to sit back and watch what unfolded, but that time has clearly passed. We cannot tolerate these attacks on the guild. 
I'm Wilbur, owner and proprietor of The Count's Arms. We make beds and food available to guests. Can I help you? 
I do not wish to set eyes on you until you can cleanse the guild's honor by paying blood price. Go now. 
If you're smart, you'll steer clear of the subject around the Guildmaster. Perhaps you and I will have time to discuss it more later. 
I will sing of your charity. She runs the Fighting Chance armory on the far east side of the Market District. 
You'll need to be careful on this mission. Sometimes new recruits have complications. They are not used to our methods. 
Captain Renault? 
I like you, too. 
Do you require assistance with the task Sheogorath has given you? 
Wait here with the Emperor. Guard him with your life. 
So be it. Head upstairs, and look for the last door on your right. That's your room for tonight. Sleep well. 
Greetings, mage. 
Hafid Hollowleg says that Jerall View has been doing good business. 
Apparently, he can teach you the basics of lockpicking. 
Have you found Black Brugo? 
I'm Voranil. I'm guessing you're angling for an invitation to one of my super parties. 
Your stars are not mine. Today the Warrior shall prove a stalwart companion when fortune fades. 
Have you heard? That big galleon down at the Waterfront? Someone killed the captain! Right there on the ship! 
Luckily for us, Raynil arrived in town. He said he was a vampire hunter, so we asked for his help. 
Everybody's talking about the Hero of Kvatch! They say she actually went into an Oblivion Gate and destroyed it. 
Not every day we get a new Duke! Let's celebrate, you and me! Whaddya say you buy the first round? 
I also learned that the staff makes the owner move much slower than normal. I suppose it's another way the creator upped the annoyance factor. 
I hear he'll buy calipers and tongs from people he trusts. 
If you want... come to... to Lorkmir's house. I go there every day. Every day. From 11:00 in the morning 'til 5:00 at night. I just go and... relax. 
The Fighters Guild is a family business. With Vitellus dead, Viranus is in line to succeed his mother. 
Why, you will, of course. It has always been Sheogorath's intent for you to be the new Madgod. 
Should your travels happen to take you to a place where it grows, keep your eyes open. 
Thadon's got his cup back? Isn't that nice? I certainly can't lay around drifting on Felldew all day. I've got too many important things to do. 
All I can promise is that you'll be making a lot of money. Are you in, or are you out? 
Gaston and I make great wines, reasonably priced. Skingrad has two great vintners - Tamika and Surilie. I'll never say a word against Tamika's wines. 
We had just set up at Cropsford when Mirisa came running in. Said goblins were heading our way. We barely escaped with our lives! 
Hear out Seridur, first. Then we'll speak. 
Yeah, well, I guess you can't blame Captain Montrose too much. This is his big career move, after all. Got to impress that lot upstairs. 
I've never been that interested in the Mages Guild, myself. 
I never thought it would come to this... the Amulet... Martin must use it against Him! We have no choice! 
Puny Elf! I'll pick my teeth with your spine! 
Isn't there something just wrong about buying "discount" spells? 
It's a problem, all these doubles walking around. And it's tiresome. Didn't used to be like this. 
The darkest days surely lie ahead. But I know that the Blades will stand true for the Empire, as they always have. 
Good luck, Your Grace. May the voice of the hidden guide you to the way. 
Fool? Visionary! Change is in the air, Thadon. Breathe it deep! Bathe in its scent! Bottle it up. Save some for later. 
Though his body is beyond Oblivion, his soul encircles us... always watching, waiting to pounce with lethal aplomb. 
Ah, there you are! Look... I've been thinking, and... Well... I guess I just want to say I'm sorry for the way I've treated you in the past.          
But... I never learned anything by being smart. And you seem to be a right skipper. 
I have it on good authority that the city watch sent someone to stop that gang of women from robbing the town's men. Good show I say! 
Stand your ground! 
Speak, madwoman. 
Never mind. You've done your job. Here's your payment for it. 
I've been doing some thinking. About you. It's kind of interesting that you were the last guest to arrive, don't you think?   
Let this be our little secret. 
Certainly. When the ruler of Mania has decided it is time, he will choose a successor from his court. 
What, you couldn't be bothered to find out what Volanaro wanted you to do?  
Fine. And you? 
Hello, Master-Wizard. 
These are perfect for my research! Thank you. Now go. Shoo! 
It's over, citizen. The crisis has ended. But at what cost? We are an Empire without an Emperor. The future is uncertain, at best. 
Please, I've much to do. We'll speak again soon at the meeting place of the Order. 
Look around. What good is a priest? 
What news of your task? Your face looks grim. 
I think I'd rather take my chances with a disease than have that man try to heal me. 
There's someone new in the Shivering Isles. One more person to worry about. 
I've deciphered part of the ritual needed to open a portal to Camoran's Paradise. 
That young man has more nobility in his pinky finger than you have in your entire body, you uncultured swine.   
So, you think Nels did it, do you? I would appreciate you keeping your opinions to yourself. 
When I was younger, and living in Vvardenfell, my parents instilled in me the code of an-eye-for-an-eye. It's hard not to see that through. 
Alas for the honor of Valenwood, the Wood Elf has fallen. 
By Shinji, you did it! You beat them all! You're a Champion! My friend, you have brought honor to the Blue Team in ways I can't even describe! 
Yes, the poor girl is dead. What a shame. Well, I guess she won't be finding the gold, hmm? Hehehehehe.   
Yes, I followed the priest here. I'll be safe here, won't I? They can't come on holy ground, can they? 
Fool! Did you wish to have us both put to death? 
She's hiding in Dynari Amnis' house in the Talos Plaza district. She's one of the few that escaped when Lex invaded the Waterfront. 
What madness has stricken the Black Hand, that they would trust such an important task to someone so very useless? 
I don't know what else to tell you. 
After I'm through with you, I'll find Roland and finish what I started. I knew hiring you was a mistake, but I had to keep up appearances. 
You're right. Even if I persuade you, he'll send someone else, someone less amenable to reason. 
Now that this battle between good and evil has been won, and the day is ours, you should go speak with my father. 
But I'm a smart, law-abiding evil wizard, because I only blow up my own stuff. 
How'd it go? 
Strange ruins, huh? You'd have to be crazy to go in there. I'm just here for the scenery and fresh air. 
Look around. Count the true believers. How many of these people really have faith? It's easy to have faith when everything's fine. 
I myself was able to kill perhaps two score of them, but they just kept coming. Only Bremman and I remain alive. 
This is the only way to stop this invasion from Oblivion? 
Haven't I? Hmm, perhaps not. It felt like rather a long time, but then long times get longer when you're standing around thinking about them. 
What would you like to know, Inquisitor? 
Thank you for your understanding, My Lord. I am required by Your own command to ask You for any items You may have inadvertently borrowed. 
Someone new on the throne of Mania? I hope it's not one of Them. 
Good point. Allow me to formally introduce myself. I'm Countess Narina Carvain. I assume you've noticed all of the Akaviri relics I'm displaying. 
The Imperial Palace is at the center. The six districts are arranged around the Palace like spokes of a wheel. 
Why, Brother? Why? 
Our Dark Elves left Morrowind to get away from the Church and State, and they don't like it when Imperials get all holy and patriotic with them. 
That high-born little worm won't get away with this! He'll pay with his life! Come on, you watch my back. I'm going to take Primo down! 
Then I got nothing to say to you. 
Can we just leave? I don't like the looks of this place. 
This is no place for you. Get back to the encampment at once! 
His alliance with Lord Vivec during the Akaviri invasion is just one example of his cunning and ingenuity. 
Know this -- if you truly wish to become a Champion, you'll have to go through me. If we meet in that Arena, I will make you beg for death. 
Oh, you mean my research subjects? Don't trouble yourself with their fates. They are volunteers, of one sort or another.  
The best source of information are the beggars. Their eyes and ears seem to be everywhere. 
You have something to say, dungheap? 
I heard there's a new ruler in Crucible. Of course, I hear lots of things. Like that! Did you hear that? 
The staff and the scamps are gone! You must have made it to Darkfathom Cave. 
Let me confide something in you, my friend. Dovesi is the spitting image of my own daughter! Her skin is darker, of course, but that sweet face... 
I understand the merchants of Crucible are having problems with Brithaur. 
I've liked some of Scribonia's work. Haven't read everything, though. 
Have you seen the statue? It's in the southwest corner of the town. That's the High Elf explorer, Torval the Pilot. 
If I may, I'd suggest that you put us in the best possible positions based on our abilities. But it's up to you. 
You did it! You made it to Gladiator rank, same as me! Here's to a long, successful career, my friend! 
What is your business in this place? 
You haven't truly eaten a decent meal until you've had my Strawberry Harrada, Greenmote Lime Surprise, and Spiderling Under Glass! 
We live at your whim, Lord Sheogorath. 
I should have stayed in Hammerfell. 
I will serve you well, Lord. 
Do you like a stand-up fight? Or perhaps a bit of treachery is more your style? 
Yes, you. We need to talk. 
Gorgo gro-Shura. Soldier of fortune. Which means, more-or-less, unemployed and thoroughly pauperized. 
Gave it a wide berth. I'm a goblin hunter. Don't want to tangle with those Daedra worshippers. 
I've seen enough in my time to know that anyone is capable of murder if they have the right motivation. 
His brothers were less... successful. 
They say the heart anchors the soul to the man. Think of this while the heart of your enemy beats in your hand. Then squeeze. 
It's not quite that simple. Hassildor is powerful, to be sure, but the Council does not consider him to be a threat. 
I heard that the Countess is quite upset lately. Apparently someone stole something very personal to her. 
Have you ever seen a couple more in love than Orintur and Eilonwy? 
Thank you for convincing her to meet with me. 
I find the fact that my father was a "notorious master criminal" absurd. He was a peaceful farmer, nothing more. 
She commands the Aureals here at Cylarne. She has just arrived with reinforcements from Brellach to end this stalemate once and for all. 
Yes, I've heard some of the finest mages in Tamriel belong to the Mages Guild. 
Syl has tortured her courtiers again, I hear. Poor things. 
Okay, so I don't like Matilde. What makes you think I like you any better?  
Please, be careful. Anything you find is of no use to us if you do not survive. I believe we are dealing with powerful forces here. 
Please help me recover the painting of the Count. It would mean so very much to me. 
It appears you've spoken to Llevana. I know she sounds a bit like a raving madwoman, but she isn't far from the truth. 
Once they break themselves on our defenses, Cylarne will be ours, a gift for our Lord Sheogorath. 
The Dark Brotherhood must seek out a Khajiit named Dahlima. He has need of our services, and we are only too happy to oblige. 
How can I help you... Sir? Miss? You all look alike to me. It's so hard to tell. Are you here to see Thadon? 
It's so good to meet you. 
You've made your choice and forsaken the name Arden-Sul. I have no wish to speak to you. 
The ritual of Purification is complete. Well done. Sithis has been appeased, and the time has come to acknowledge and reward your unwavering loyalty. 
Martin cannot stay here. We have driven them off, but they will be back once they learn of Martin's survival. Which they will. 
Thank Sheogorath we're safe. 
A nice enough guy, I suppose, but there was that awful scamp incident last year. That's when Adrienne told him he needed to practice somewhere else. 
Quickly, hurry to Silorn while there's still time. 
Here. Take this lockpick. Careful, it's the only one I've got. You open the door. I'll kill things. Let's go! 
Going so soon? Come back when your blades need sharpening. 
And please, let me know if there's anything you need. My resources here are limited, but I will help in any way I can. 
By the way, thanks for recovering Glenroy's sword. I'll see that it is given a place of honor in the halls of the Blades. 
I'm as ready as I'm going to be. 
Have you seen that new galleon down at the docks?  
Just because you run the law in this town doesn't put you above it. You're going to pay for what happened to Aldos. 
For this match we've got some fresh meat, two brand new Pit Dogs! So let's not waste any time! Let the battle... begin! 
I'll teach you a spell to unlock things. What you need to do is get into Jeanne's desk, and bring me her Manual of Spellcraft, okay? 
Passwall is only the first, I'm sure. Where are the armies to protect us? 
No, not now! Don't you remember what happened last time you touched my tears? Keep away! 
Did you hear Eitar stirring things up again? 
I've told you what I will. The Chalice is a corruption. Felldew is a poison, not an amusement. You're better off leaving the Chalice where it is. 
A prisoner recently escaped from the prison, using a set of secret tunnels connecting to the Imperial City's sewer system. It's a perfect way inside. 
Only you can eat the fruit of madness. 
My tale actually begins with the father, Albert Jemane. He was once in my employ, or should I say the employ of my organization. 
I mean he's really disappeared. No one here has seen him in days. Volanaro thinks maybe a spell backfired. 
Welcome to The King and Queen Tavern. We treat all our patrons like royalty! I'm Ley Marillin, your loyal seneschal. 
Something on your mind, furlicker? 
No. 
I'll wait here then. Let me know when you've made up your mind. 
Guards, I think Syl forgot how to use the door. Kindly show her out. Before I forget myself. 
For a really good sword, try 'A Fighting Chance' in the Imperial City. 
I don't like the way he's poking around. 
If you don't like it, take it up with Ulrich. 
No, my friend, it's all right. It's just that, being a Septim is much... lonelier than I could have imagined. Perhaps my father felt the same way. 
I've heard that there are new adventurers coming. I wonder what new discoveries they will bring to us. 
He's young, well-educated and obviously full of himself. Not much different than any young nobleman, really. 
Fantastic! Let's be off then. 
Getting hungry, and could do with a drink. But I'm still sharp, don't you worry. 
Well, go ahead. You know what you're looking for. I'll just go back to my reading. 
You will travel to the Gardens of Flesh and Bone. There you will gather mystical components needed for the ceremony. 
The Elder Council Chambers are closed to the public for the duration of the emergency. 
Eye of Nocturnal? Doesn't sound familiar to me. 
Welcome aboard, ma'am. It will be an honor to serve with you. 
Emperor, Amulet, and Dragonfire--with these divine gifts, the daedra of Oblivion have been kept at bay for thousands of years. 
I'm Jantus Brolus. I'm the Illusion Trainer. 
I don't know why the guards haven't taken care of her yet. 
Buy us a drink! 
Had we been blessed with his constant presence, the Isles would be a Maniac's paradise. 
You won't get any of my blood! Get away from me! 
He's quite an accomplished brawler. I wonder if he'd teach me something about it. 
You need to find the Stone of St. Alessia and return it to Cirroc at the Chapel of Talos in Bruma. Now, get to it. 
Rindir always keeps a fine selection on hand. It's almost as if he knows my skill level perfectly. 
Think of me fondly when you bury this axe deep into your foe's skull. 
What I need you to do is go to the Bruma Castle Dungeons and speak to him for me. Convince him to tell you where the gold is and then we split it. 
No time to talk now, you must hurry to Boreal Stone Cave! 
My vision will yet be realized! 
No, that blasted Inquisitor got to her. We'll need to find someone else. 
All I heard was that it was important to Dagail, and it was missing. Kalthar didn't tell me anything more than that. 
That's not very motivational. 
Order's purity protects me. 
Snak gra-Bura, owner and proprietor. We board horses. And... well... we don't actually sell horses. Anymore, that is. 
There's something about Ra'qanar I just don't trust. 
I can't believe Arch-Mage Traven sacrificed himself to save us all. How noble of him. 
I have told you all that I know. Mannimarco has come to Cyrodiil, and I believe he means harm to your guild. Traven must know this. 
The Fighters Guild is east, by the bridge to the castle. The Mages Guild is south, by the bridge to the port. 
Beast people and other savages. Work cheap and fast. "No job too tough." Not fussy, either. Fighters Guild better watch out... 
You can bet on either the Yellow Team or Blue Team. The opponents are always evenly matched, so your chance of winning is 50/50. 
I have to admit, I'm going to miss you, Dreth. The late-night beatings, your pitiful little cries for help... 
She really doesn't seem to like her sisters. Sad, really. 
Well, fine. I see that only true Knights understand the meaning of honor. Good day. 
So it has not all gone against us. Thank Talos for that! We gained Uriel's heir, and lost the Amulet of Kings. 
Problem? I supose you think that everyone with stunted magicka has a "problem." You're nothing but a bigot. You're on the list now. 
I just don't trust those mages. I especially don't trust ones who can play with your mind like that. 
And as a token of my gratitude, I grant you the role of Courtier of Mania, with all of its entitlements. 
To be frank, I'd prefer a career in the Arena to this paper-pusher's position. 
Surely you will do what is right, won't you? 
The Greymarch continues, and Lord Sheogorath believes you may be the key to stopping it. Do as he commands. The Realm depends on it. 
I'll wait on the tavern deck until you clear the top deck. That's where the ship's wheel is located. 
HOLD! 
If all you say is true, Raynil will answer for Bradon's death. 
Nevertheless, I still serve the Empire in my heart and will not abide such talk! Walk away from me now, barbarian, or you'll regret your arrogance. 
I'm also providing you with a unique key that was supposedly found with the diary. I'm assuming it will prove useful when you arrive at the site. 
If you ever need anything, just let me know. I have friends in all sorts of high places, you know, so I can get things done that others can't. 
But, if it will get everyone to leave me alone, fine. I did work out a counter-spell last week... if I can just put my hand to it... ah! 
It's a matter of trust. And I don't trust you enough yet. 
I'm ready to fight. Where do you need me? 
My eye? You seek to remove the light from me? Why? 
Pretty, isn't it? And quiet. Not much work for us. 
It is SO hard to find a man you can trust in this big city. Sure, Tertius has had his share of girls. Just look at him. But all that's changed now. 
I suppose we should get back to my father. Time for me to be a noble again. 
They were buried with my grandfather in the family tomb. The sword and cuirass were enchanted, and should cover my debt. Please, get them for me. 
The best spells are closely guarded by the guild, but are available to high-ranking members. You should consider joining. 
Was my sin so great that I must suffer for all eternity? 
Tove the Unrestful, in Bliss, is definitely NOT collecting items to build something. He couldn't build a rock with a stone. 
Nice to see you again. Is there something you require? 
Welcome to the Great Hall of Castle Chorrol, milady. 
Yes? What can I do for you? 
Four of the night watch, and all's well. Wish I was in bed, sir.  
There's nothing more to do here. Go! Before someone suspects us! 
The evidence we need to incriminate Ulrich must lie within his quarters. You must sneak in there and retrieve it without being seen. 
How may I serve, my Lord? 
Thadon's a fool. Who cares about his precious Chalice? 
So keep your dogs away from me... unless they want some advanced lessons in plunging from great heights... 
I don't want trouble! I keep to myself, but I see Ma'zaddha and that Dark Seducer, Nelrene, meeting behind the buildings late at night sometimes. 
You don't have my coin, so you don't get any training. I haven't changed my mind. 
Very good. Let us hurry to the Gray Mare! 
I didn't expect any of us to live this long. Maybe we're not doomed, after all. 
A magic item without a charge is like a sword without a blade. 
I believe that you may be able to persuade her to part with the item, where I cannot due to her prejudice against me. Are you interested? 
I don't see anything here we could use to incriminate Ulrich. You must return with something more tangible. Be careful. 
Now my poor husband is the slave, and the ogres are his masters. They haven't harmed us, but he's never worked so hard in his life. 
The Path of Dawn is difficult. But the rewards are great. 
By the gods, there's a psychopath on the loose! 
I lived in the Imperial City for a while, but city life just isn't for me. I'm much happier in Chorrol. 
It's been an honor to host you, Lord Sheogorath. 
If you wanted your daughter rescued, who would you hire? Blackwood Company? Not me. Can't trust them. 
Thank you for your help. Here, take this. I was using it to ward off Cindanwe's evil mind control magic. I don't need it now. 
Ah...you're here. Joy. You'll want to speak to the Lord Sheogorath. 
Once each era, I was allowed my true form, conquering this world anew. And each time I did, the curse was renewed, damning me to exist as Sheogorath. 
I can't believe it.  
You helped us at Cylarne. The Mazken do not forget their friends. 
Have you had any luck recovering the Stone of St. Alessia? 
You? You bested Lynch? I always knew he was out of practice. Oh well, I suppose it's up to me to do his job for him as usual! 
Syl's torturing people? To death, I hope? It was me. I did it, whatever it was. Come take me away and kill me. I'm the culprit. 
Are you interested in joining the guild? Talk to Falcar here in Cheydinhal, if so. Otherwise, any leader of a local Mages Guild hall can help. 
Oh, look, an Imperial in the Imperial Prison. I guess they don't play favorites, huh? Your own kinsmen think you're a piece of human trash. How sad. 
The Greymarch is over, the war has been won, but at what cost? This timeline will never be the same. 
I know of her. What's it worth to you? 
The Heretic is a misguided man whose belief has gone astray. Steal a robe from their back and among them you can stay. 
There were three guys in the Lelles break-ins? And the new guy didn't let any get away? I like that. 
Have a seat. 
You don't have enough coin to buy one. 
However, many of our clients request that their contracts be carried out in a specific manner. A certain place, a certain method of elimination.  
Delphine Jend. Creator of the celebrated 'Enemies Explode' spell. Advanced Trainer in Destruction. And Mage Destined for Great Things. 
After speaking to the Count and reviewing your testimony, we decided to reduce Llevana's sentence as she was acting for self-preservation. 
Maybe now that Jyggalag is gone, Sheogorath will finally return my affections. 
Look, I don't know you very well. Why would I help you? 
Make sure she's all right, will you? It's not like her to avoid contact with the University for so long. 
I knew it! It's her! That Dark Elf tramp killed them all! We've got to get out of this place!  
Without any solid evidence to back that accusation up, you don't have cause to assume that is where Agarmir gets his merchandise. 
With your permission, I take my leave of you now, Scholar. 
What's going on with you? 
In the old days, the Colovian Estates were always in the thick of some war or rebellion. But that's ancient history. 
I've come from speaking with Count Indarys, and I've news for you. 
You have been found guilty of theft. As such, your guild privileges have been suspended. 
Adventurers are being sucked up by that Xedilian place again. 
Have you found her?  Is she safe? 
Varel Morvay's been a good master. I like the town and the people. No reason why I wouldn't want to be here for many years... just like the master. 
Is there something wrong with you? Someone has been murdered! My feelings about that old crone are hardly important right now!  
Yes sir! Let's move out! 
You're free to go at any time of course, just up that hallway. Good luck to you! 
I'm Ernest. This is the Horse Whisperer, Anvil's only stable. Park your nag here, or leave him for the wolves. Your choice. 
There's never any charge for you, friend. Upstairs, first door on the left. 
He is my husband, a kind and gentle man. He has given me everything I might ever desire. 
Very well. I will wait here until you return. You... you will return, won't you? 
Need I remind you once more? 
I took the other one, and that should've been enough. I shouldn't have to go through all this, just to get rid of her! 
Do what you must to make him talk. If you can smooth talk him, fine. If you need to rough him up, so be it. But don't kill him. We need him to talk. 
Don't bring up religion around Else God-Hater. She's likely to use that sword of hers on you. 
The plan should work, with the Shadow's blessing. 
Well, here we all are. It's funny how money can bring people together, don't you think?   
Bring me Lonavo's ring as proof he's... been dealt with... and I'll give you the bounty on him. 
If you're not careful, the brethren will have to teach you a lesson. 
Your work is done here, Your Grace. I'm sure Sheogorath will want news of your success. 
She deals in half-truths at best, outright lies at worse. If you have any information about her, or about her intentions, I expect you to inform me. 
How he must have mocked me, with my poems, and my painting, and my meaningless revelry. 
You idiot! You ruined everything! 
It's our natural barriers that keep us safe, mostly. Mountain borders north and east, open sea to the west, and bogs and rainforest to south. 
I'm afraid I didn't have any more advice for him than I do for you. With the Orrery in such a state of disrepair, I have no point of reference. 
Ah, yes. Arch-Mage Traven was quite fond of making potions in his spare time. So much so, in fact, that it became difficult for me to meet his needs. 
Haven't you heard about these gates to Oblivion opening up all over Tamriel? 
You can say what you like, but I'm never going back to Kvatch. 
Always she wants to strike at Sheogorath. She needs people and she leads them here with lies. 
Brother Jauffre? He should be in the Priory House, I think. 
The bastard took every coin I had with me. I don't know his name, but I know his face. 
Do be careful. I'd hate to lose another useful Associate. 
Sad that Raynil slipped away like that. 
Haha! She fooled you but good. This isn't her real amulet, but a clever fake. The true amulet has a red stone. 
There isn't much more to say. I'm sorry. 
Get inside. The Gray Fox is not a patient man. 
Say your piece or stand aside. 
You are stupid, so I'll make myself clear... you are stupid. Go away. I don't want your blood and puke all over me. 
As a matter of fact, he's already late for his appointment to pick up the book. 
... a pickpocket. But relax. You're safe from me. You look like you might take offense. Too risky. 
This is a situation we can both benefit from, Associate. You do me a small favor, and I'll happily send along a glowing recommendation. 
Good, I guess. You're now an Associate in the Fighters Guild. Report to me or Azzan in Anvil for contracts. And don't screw up. 
Now listen, I bet you're wondering what's next huh? Where does a Grand Champion go from here? Well I've been thinking... 
Alessia Caro visits her mother in Chorrol regularly. A dutiful daughter... and a dutiful wife, I hear. 
Do you know what happened to Mercator Hosidus? I haven't seen him at the castle lately. 
Farewell, Arch-Mage. 
The successor then gathers the drug-tainted blood and brings it to the Altar of Arden-Sul in the Sacellum. 
You can usually find her roaming around New Sheoth, or spending a lot of time on the palace grounds. 
Don't be so cruel! I hope you die a horrible death. 
Now I know for sure that they are all in on it. And therefore they all have to die. Starting with you!! 
I'm feeling much better now that the house is free of those ugly creatures. 
Ugh. That's foul. 
I can get them off you, but I'll need some time. 
Go away. 
This looks just like the one I have... well, had in the Museum. It seems to have been misplaced. I wish I had the funds to buy it off you... 
Of course it's all just made up to give them an excuse to keep us down. 
Now that Henantier has returned, things are as they should be. 
We're doomed, doomed I tell you! 
So, have you taken care of those thieves yet? 
If you are looking to buy a horse, go inside and talk to Isabeau. 
Then you should run along. Fly, fly! Take off, now. Scat! Make tracks. Get going. 
The strange thing is, I think you might actually be telling the truth. 
Sorry. Only one copy of the Black Horse Courier per customer. 
Go there. Take the Felldew from the Elytra, eat it, and your journey begins. You will be thankful to Thadon when this has passed. 
It's our home away from home, isn't it? I guess you could say the Blademaster and Battle Matron are our mother and father, huh? Ha ha ha ha ha! 
Your body will be preserved as a Worm Thrall. Your soul is mine; I intend to study both to learn more about the source of your power. 
I'm glad that's done. I need a nap. 
Oooohhh... 
I keep hoping that I won't wake up the next time they kill me. But I always do. We will never escape this nightmare. 
If you change your mind, I'm certainly not going anywhere. 
Maybe I'll never see the sun again, but neither will Arnora! 
While Lex is a problem for the guild, his unwavering loyalty and resolve make him the perfect protector for Lady Umbranox. 
Good work tracking down the Mythic Dawn's secret shrine. We finally took the fight to the enemy. 
What can I do for you on this fine, fine day? 
I'll see you in the Imperial City. 
Harvested from the spore trees that dot Bliss, the Greenmote is refined and kept in storage for use by all. 
Well then, it's back to the open road for us, eh? Stay safe, my friend. And stay clear of those Goblins. Little buggers have been getting cocky... 
They're getting more active every day. Not a good sign. 
These are words that the Maniacs would have you believe are "sins." 
If you can find J'skar, I'll write the recommendation immediately. 
What I hope you will now see is that while the guild can be disjointed and misused, it can also achieve some wonderful things.  
Good! 
Horrible things, those Arena matches. Simply bloodshed for the sake of bloodshed. Barbaric, I tell you. 
It's good we've killed him. I'll need his ring as proof that we did the job. 
Cyronin Sintav. I'm a Sintav. That's all you need to know. 
Hmph! 
Fine. Play it that way. Let me give you some friendly advice. Glarthir is crazy. Maybe harmless crazy, maybe not. 
I understand there's a new Gatekeeper. Rebuilt much faster this time around, unless I'm mistaken. And I never am. 
Let's be civil, shall we? Please, have a seat. 
Bah. I liked when Thadon was in a bad mood. Foolish Maniac. 
Have you ever spoken to Deetsan about the Mages Guild? 
You look concerned. Is there something you want to tell me about Glarthir? 
You again? I thought I'd made it clear I'm not looking for a friend. If you're here to buy or sell something, get on with it already! 
She was so beautiful. And now she's gone... 
He was a buffoon, but I didn't wish him dead, you cold-hearted villain!   
If you want to learn more about light armor, you might talk to Dul gro-Shug. 
Why? Why? Oh, no real reason. 
I thought we were all doomed for a while there. I carved my last will and testament, but I won't say where. 
Thadon had her called aside, separating her from the group. He meant to divide our numbers when Order entered, making us easier targets. 
Stay safe... if that's even possible. 
That's too bad. I already have one of those. Can't very well have two in a Museum of Oddities, now can we? 
Do you take me for a fool? How do I know you aren't acting as an agent of Dementia? 
I am also your missing husband, Corvus. 
It was a privilege to fight by your side. 
Once you buy, you get the key to the front door and the deed of ownership. That's the deal. Would you like to buy it now? 
We really taught those bastards a lesson, didn't we ma'am? 
That Oblivion Gate threatened us all, yet only you took action to destroy it. You have my thanks, Hero. 
Have you heard "The Fall of Dagon" yet? "Take heart, the mighty hero cried! He looked up at Dagon and cursed his foul name..." 
The Fanatics are about to break into the courtyard. 
So, did you follow her? She's behind it, isn't she? Tell me what you found out! 
Heh, you should have seen the old biddy trying to talk to young Primo Antonius. She may be a noble, but he looked down on her like a scullery maid.  
Thanks to you, Cheydinhal is safe. 
Three years ago, my village in Skyrim was attacked by bandits. We went to the nearby Imperial Legion outpost, but they refused to help us! 
Ho hey, sweet lady of Wayrest! Ho hey, sweet lady of mine! Oh I'll see you again,  yes I'll see you again, sweet lady of Wayrest so fine! 
Be patient and wait for the others. I need both the Wood Elf and the Argonian before I can begin. 
He never comes here. He stays in Carac Agaialor with Ruma and Raven. But these caves eventually lead to the Terrace of Dawn in front of his palace. 
What is it, muthsera? 
Of course he says he's never been here. 
Don't tell me you've never heard of him! He's famous for his skill with a blade. And at his young age.... He'll be a legend one day, mark my words. 
Thank you. Know that I would not ask such a thing of you if I did not feel it was urgent, or that it was beyond your capabilities. 
Watch your back. 
How may I assist you, my lady? 
Vlanarus Kvinchal. Kastav is my brother, all right, but I'm nothing like that deadbeat. 
Well, I must be going. Take care. 
The Dividing Line between a live hero and a dead one is a sharp sword. Get the best you can afford from Tun-Zeeus... 
Here is the new List of Candidates. Hieronymus Lex has a glowing recommendation. 
The assassinations. What else is there to talk about? Perfectly planned and executed... the Blades perfectly useless... a complete disaster. 
Do you think anyone in Bravil knows more about Tamriel than Ita Rienus? 
I suppose there's no harm in telling you what happened. Word is bound to get around Bruma anyway. 
You will have to travel the Old Way. Once used as an escape route for Imperial Emperors, it has been forgotten for centuries. 
Testify against a Watch Captain and accuse him of corruption? I don't think I'm willing to risk doing that. 
Excuse me, my lord. I need to clean right where you're standing. 
I cringe whenever that name is mentioned. His inventory has to be stolen or something, because his prices are so low, they're below my cost. 
I'm tired of working with you anyway. And you're a lousy swordsman, Rellian! 
Well, then. I trust my servants didn't give you too hard a time getting here. Haha! Perhaps the Duchess would like to explain her business? 
Fighting's easy. Just lead them out on the water and shoot them full of holes. If you've got a bow, of course, and can walk on water. 
What do you get when you cross an adventurer with the Gatekeeper? A dead Gatekeeper! 
It is a doorway, an invitation. Perhaps you will accept it for what it is. 
They say that Oblivion Gates have opened outside cities all across Tamriel! Gods preserve us! 
Hairballs attacking me. They were everywhere. It was the strangest dream. 
This was the essence of Mankar Camoran's plot. He was undone only by the merest... chance... but his complete victory remains perilously close. 
I'm only talking to you out of loyalty to Sheogorath. Otherwise I'd cut you open and pull all your insides out. 
Any friend of the Society is a friend of mine. Have a look around. 
Oh? I know you're the one who ratted me out to Oreyn about that other contract. Go back to Oreyn. Give him my regards. We're done talking.  
Blessings of the Lady upon you. 
Words... fail me. I knew that Thoronir obtained his goods through dark dealings, but I never would have imagined this. 
You will find her company most welcome, I believe. 
We rarely get real trouble here. The Watch puts a stop to rough stuff damn quick. I'm mostly ornamental at the Bloated Float. Makes folks happy. 
It's true that he's settled down. Still, he can teach you the basics of lockpicking. 
Consider the implications of that, as you handle a small matter for me. 
Urjabhi helps his brothers, Ra'Jiradh and Hassiri, to run the Black Horse Courier. Others write. We organize, we deliver. The news never stops! 
Lots of them dead, just like it should be. 
There isn't much more to say. He'll be missed. We'll have to inform the Count... if we get home. 
What we do here is our own business. Don't interfere. 
No one was here, so I thought I'd settle in. 
A new scent is here. Who can it be? 
The painting was of my lost love, the Count Valga, and it has been stolen from my bedchamber. 
They call me Cutter. For a truly inspired blade, I can forge Madness Ore! Here. Hold onto this parchment. It lists what I need. 
Of course, dear Listener! I am with you! 
Varon Vamori should give it to you once you've persuaded him, if you understand me. 
He's usually praying in the Priory chapel at this time of day. 
You should ask Horkvir about it. Our Horkvir. Not the other one. He'd lie to you, I'm sure. 
Every person in Split has been divided into their Manic and Demented halves. 
Ah, the Masque of Clavicus Vile. You are wise not to let yourself get further enmeshed in his plots. 
She really is a gifted orator. I wish she'd teach me how to do that. 
Rena and I moved to Chorrol so we could have a nice, comfortable home for our dogs. It's a lovely town. And our dogs are so happy here. 
Foul vermin! 
We is most pleased... eth... ified. 
I have it on good authority that the newest addition to the Brotherhood is an annoying whelp unworthy of licking my boots. How's that for gossip? 
You are indeed a force to be reckoned with. I shall take the ashes; finally, some part of him can be put to a good use. 
M'aiq prefers to adventure alone. Others just get in the way. And they talk, talk, talk. 
No precious army will bring back Lady Syl. Without her, who will let me do what I do best? 
I'm Felen Relas of the Mages Guild. I handle Alchemy training for the Anvil chapter. 
The most useful thing that I can tell you about Ciirta's followers is that they will not harm anyone who is wearing their robes. 
I believe this carving will shed new light on Ayleid history, if I am able to examine it closely. I would like you to retrieve it for me. 
A good price for a good customer. 
I'm Kastav Kvinchal. And, if you listen to that witch of a sister of mine, Bronsila, I'm also a dog and a pig. 
Oh, don't forget to make use of dear Haskill. Between you and me, if he's not summoned three or four times a day, I don't think he feels appreciated. 
Phintias has the best bookstore in the city. Of course, First Edition is the only bookstore in the city. 
Regulus Terentius, Count Bravil. I'm really rather busy, and I doubt that you have anything to say that I need to hear. 
The Greymarch is upon you, fool! 
Don't be fooled, the Ritual isn't over. 
Filthy vampire! She took my cellmate Theranis a few days ago. If it hadn't been for you, I would have been next. 
my current disp is 70 or higher 
Take your time, and hurry back. I might not be waiting for you when you return. 
Now, we've much to do. Lady Syl is not a patient woman, as I'm sure you've seen. Shall we begin? 
You probably couldn't find it on your own. I'm coming with you. If we make it, I'll open the door for you.  
Yes, it's true. I lost the family ring to those sirens. I'm ashamed about the whole incident, but not ashamed enough to ask for your help. 
You have rebuilt the Gatekeeper. Good show! Perhaps Your Grace should proceed on to Lord Sheogorath to give him the news? 
You want me to mistrust him, don't you! You want to turn me against him! Maybe... maybe you're the murderer! 
The esteemed cat burglar honors me. 
I woke to screaming and fire. I ran. 
Hello, Magician. 
What I've heard is that they live in total darkness in a secret underground labyrinth. 
A gift, for me? 
The book "Modern Heretics" is the best introduction to daedric cults. The library here has a copy if you need it. 
How dare you accuse me without enough evidence to back up your story! 
Your task would be to make the first two signs of the prophecy occur. Your predecessor already put plans in motion for the final step. Good luck. 
You fiend! Are you suggesting Dovesi is the murderer? You'd do well to watch your mouth, and your back!   
Dervenin, High Priest of Mania at your service. What brings you to this holy place on such a fine day? 
No! We hold them here. 
Druja has a wide variety of spells for sale, if there's something you need. Most of them are simple, but they're a good starting point. 
And be cautious of killing my allies. I cannot forgive that crime. You will know them, as they are also forbidden to carry daggers. 
They train blunt, blade, heavy armor, and block in one of the guildhalls. Is it Anvil? 
You're very good with a bow. It's a shame I can't help you any more. If we were better friends, I might be able to give you one last piece of advice. 
If you wish to bring ruin to your victims, you may choose to animate some of the corpses and watch as they satiate their hunger. 
Nivan is murdered! How could this have happened? Everyone was fond of Nivan, including the Ulfgar clan. We must find the assassin. 
Do me the service of freeing Anaxes, and I will reward you with the Bands of the Chosen and passage to the Forbidden Grotto. 
There's got to be some way to end this nightmare! 
So, to stop the war, all you need to do is sneak into Timberscar Cave, find the stolen Tribal Head, and return it to the Cracked Wood Cave goblins. 
Very well. Don't think I doubt you. The rulers of Bruma have long had dealings with Cloud Ruler Temple. We know whom they serve. 
Just like Sheogorath to abandon us in our time of need. He has been ever fickle. 
I guess we've got a room available. 30 gold per night. Take it or leave it. 
What does she need assistance with? She has Ormil under her own watchful eye in his cabin. Something isn't right here. What happened to Lynch? 
You ain't one of me crew. What business ye be havin' here, mate? 
Wellspring Grove is owned by the Mages Guild. You're not a member, so I'm afraid you're not supposed to be here. 
Old, worn, and wicked. Wet, wounded, and wild. Empty as the eastern horizon, dusk on the Niben. Solemn and bitter as the grave. 
Ten of the morning watch, and all's well. How are you, sir? 
While I understand Bruma's need, Chorrol's own defense must come first. 
You will go far in this business, my friend. You know when you've won, and when you've lost. Until we meet again! 
Ah! The classic fire trap. Always a favorite, especially in the colder months. 
We are honored to have Grandmaster Jauffre, or Brother Jauffre as he prefers, as a resident here. 
I kept my oath. Mogens Wind-Shifter is dead. 
Yes. I am Varon Vamori, Wit and Wordsmith. Bravil's foremost Bard and Advanced Trainer in Speechcraft.  
As a vampire, the Count has few allies he can trust. 
I've always liked the place. Mog does a nice job, although I sometimes confuse her with Ugak. 
Come with me. You'll be searched for stolen property, then released. 
They make grand boasts, and talk a good talk, but that's all they are. The real work goes to us, the City Guard. 
You have lifted the curse. All of Vitharn thanks you, Lord Sheogorath. You may keep my helmet. It never did me much good. 
Go away! I don't want whatever you're selling! 
But now, we can begin anew! I bestow upon you the title of Speaker. You will take Lucien Lachance's place on the Black Hand! Welcome! 
You're a Hero, my friend. That crowd is out there for one reason: to see you destroy the Yellow Team! Now go give 'em what they want! 
I should probably wash up before heading home. 
I fear for what Umbacano may unleash using that Crown. He is blind to the true nature of the Ayleids. 
The Black Hand has learned that the Dark Brotherhood has been infiltrated. By whom, and for what purpose, we do not yet know. 
Until your return. 
Look. A fly. Buzz, buzz. Hey. Look everybody! I'm talking to a fly! Buzz, buzz, buzz! 
If you visit Hale, you won't see Pyke, a Knight of the Thorn. In fact, there is no such thing as a Knight of the Thorn. 
I don't see a problem with those two. It's a bit odd, but that's their business. 
I was slain after the battle was over. Three townsfolk hiding in a cellar attacked me when I entered their house, hunting down survivors. 
It is with the warmest regards I welcome you again, my friend. But you have returned a bit too early. I should have the painting done soon. 
I'm telling ya, lad, it's bad luck. A woman onboard a pirate vessel! Back in my day, it never would've happened. 
I see the vast horizons of thought, while you cannot see past the tip of your own nose.  
Well, well. Raminus was right in sending you out there. Good work. I'll be sure and put in a good word for you. 
Could someone muffle the door? The sounds of combat are disturbing me. 
The alchemist was paying so much for the scales that I'm close to having enough saved so that I can retire. 
Speak to each of the Aureals to give them your orders. 
I screamed and ran out into the street. Some city watch were nearby and heard me I suppose, as they arrived quickly. 
Marz is an excellent healer, but doesn't she seem sad to be here? 
It's a poison, plain and simple. It'll make you wish you were dead. And given enough time, you will be. 
I don't like the way she's poking around. 
There you are. Listen, I've searched every inch of this house. It's sealed up tight. There's no way in or out, and there's nobody hiding anyplace. 
A lot of history has this place. It was I who led the apostles to steal the stones from Cyrodiil when the original temple was destroyed. 
Please, get those things out of here. 
Thanks again for bringing Pyke back his Medallion! I've never seen him so full of happiness. 
I thought about it when I was younger, but it just wasn't for me. 
If that creature visits again, I think I'll have choice words to say. 
Ha! Made you Guildmaster? Amazing. You earned it, though you'll likely muck it all up. So, what are you going to do with your newfound rank? 
Just head through the door here on my right and take the stairs down. Be on your best behavior, though. Owyn is a bit... cranky by nature. 
I'm thinking of heading over to Renoit's to buy some books. There's quite a selection. 
If you see my good-for-nothing husband, Bjalfi, tell him I want back what he stole from me! 
You need to get out of here. There's no telling who will come first, the Blades or more assassins. 
You will, soldier. Once they're secure, get back here immediately. We'll need every available blade, and there'll be plenty of fighting to go around. 
The Gatekeeper takes care of most of the unwanted, but he's dead. We'll have to remedy that soon, as well.... 
If Parwen wants to spend all day hunting goblins, I think it's great. Those things are a menace. 
The Gray Fox dares to steal from Fathis Aren? 
I hope you've made the necessary preparations. 
Twelve noon, and all's well. Everything all right, sir? 
Remove the prisoner. 
We don't much like spellcasters in Hammerfell. Wizards steal souls and tamper with minds. If you use magic, you're weak or wicked. 
Yes, well... Anyway... Now that we're all here, I guess we can start looking. I'd wish you good luck, but I wouldn't really mean it.       
If Baenlin is eliminated in any other manner, or if the manservant Gromm is killed, you will forfeit the bonus. Now go, and may Sithis be with you. 
The painting will reside with me for the rest of my days as a reminder of the man I once loved. 
Have you ever wanted to learn to use destructive magic? I hear J'skar can teach you. 
Don't get too close. 
Master Spellmaker Gaspar Stegine, at your service. New spells. Old spells. Good spells. Bad spells. They're all fun for me. 
I'm sorry to burden you with my problems. I'll do my best to have an answer by the time you return with the Great Welkynd Stone. 
He can't leave. He still has work to do. 
What can I do for you today? You here to bring me some Nirnroot? 
Take care of the rats. 
Hail, fellow horseman! All's quiet in your stretch of the wild, I hope. 
Well, it's a bit rugged. Nothing like the Arcane University. Have to go to the Imperial City to buy anything. But it's good enough, I suppose. 
Some people want special bows that take too long to load and need special arrows called bolts. M'aiq thinks they are idiots. 
I feel sure the Master will recognize my efforts and summon me to the Forbidden Grotto soon. 
I am Nivan Dalvilu. 
People who fought, died. People who ran... they at least had a chance. 
Just as a member of the Dark Brotherhood cannot kill a fellow family member, a Shadowscale is forbidden from slaying another Shadowscale. 
You'd best get that to Irlav back at the Imperial City as soon as possible. He'll want the mages there to examine it more closely. 
As promised, here's the ring. I bought it from a shop in the Imperial City many years ago for an ex-lover of mine. 
Good work ending the goblin war. The settlers are very pleased. I'm pretty impressed as well. 
You have proven yourself worthy, and have earned my respect. What I know, I shall teach to you for a fee. 
If it isn't the newest member of the family. Let's get one thing straight -- the Tenets prevent me from killing you. But I don't have to like you. 
You've been told what Sheogorath wants. The rest is up to you. 
If you're here to kill that fellow in the cellar, then... good! I won't call the guards or nothing! He's doing... unnatural things down there!    
Count Leyawiin placed a bounty on the heads of the surviving Black Bow Bandits. 
Not much of a speech, was it? Didn't seem to bother them, though. 
He's not much to look at, but you won't find a better bargain in Cyrodiil. Take good care of him. 
That's what you did at Kvatch. It wasn't the gods that saved us, it was you. 
The Five Claws is a very clean place. Witseidutsei wouldn't have it any other way. 
The Chalice is one of the Duke's prized possessions. He has been at a loss without it. 
My work with Savilla's Stone has revealed that I need something special for my plans. 
What is it, Associate? Don't tell me you're here for a recommendation. 
You want to join? You'll need to speak with one of the local guild heads. That'd be Carahil here in Anvil. 
Please, don't waste time speaking to an old man. Go and help my sons. 
Dulphumph gro-Urgash, Scalon killer. You'll keep quiet, if you know what's good for you. Never know when one might be sneaking up behind you. 
Is Your Grace prepared to enter Brellach now? We cannot delay for long. 
Welcome to the Mages Guild. I'm Teekeeus. What can I do for you? 
Excellent. The room is on the floor upstairs, at the west end of the hall. I do hope you rest well. 
Amazing. Sheogorath returned just in time. 
Ah, Chorrol. Easy access to all the other cities of Cyrodiil. 
We'd better find Jauffre. 
A happy customer is a returning customer. 
Welcome, good citizen. I'm Brother Piner, and this is Weynon Priory. A monastery. Can I help you? 
Look into it for me, will you? You can find Skaleel at the site. Access is restricted, so you'll need this key. 
Jump on my sword while you can! 
Just leave. 
The Arboretum. That's where J'mhad likes to go. Always quiet, always green.  
Forgive me for saying so, Your Grace, but I find taking orders from the Duchess of Dementia to be... unsettling. 
Yes. He's a very clever man. Something not quite trustworthy about him, though. 
I only wish to return home and be with my wife, Ursanne. 
Then we'll send you in there where you charm the man and get him to come out to some location we pick to rob him. 
Tradition dictates before each master smith dies, she hides these magical molds in the world. Like pouring salt into a wound. 
Ah, you again. Have you seen any of Ma'zaddha's things? A shiny spoon, or a broken bottle? I can't find them. 
Go take care of the rats. Then talk to me. 
Davide Surilie and his brother make some fine wines. It's a really impressive vineyard. 
A gate can be opened from the outside, however. It will be more difficult, as I will have to temporarily bind myself to the book. 
Is that so? Perhaps your Council has not been entirely honest with you.  
The Tiber Septim Hotel is very nice, but very expensive. There's the Bloated Float at the Waterfront. Sleep on a boat. And cheap, too. 
Suppose that the runestones existed, for whatever reason, and in whatever form, long before the coming of the Cyrodilic emperors. 
The Dragon Throne is empty, and we hold the Amulet of Kings! 
What do you want? You a big mouthed gossip? Fine. I hear there's a new arrival. You happy now? Why don't you bother someone else? 
I suppose you're trying to turn me against Matilde, eh? Make me think she's the killer. I've got news for you friend -- I know it's you! 
It's the only place worth visiting in the Imperial City, if you ask me. I only make the trip if I can't find a specific book here. 
New books? Who has the money to afford all those books? I know I don't. 
Hahaha! We made a solemn pact not to let anyone else join the gang. I can remember it clearly even though it was... 
I agree with the Watch Captain. This Atius-Sintav feud has gone on long enough. I can control my people. I hope Iniel can control his. 
Time is short. You must speak to Sheogorath immediately. 
Keep moving. 
He's sure got his hands full, between smithing and training in light armor. I don't know how he does it. 
Are you ready to accept the staff? 
Did he mention me, perhaps? Or was there something else you wanted to discuss? 
Sorry, no time to talk! I have to deliver these copies of the Black Horse Courier! Have you heard of the Blackwood Company? Read all about them! 
I hadn't heard that Syl was replaced, I was too busy prefecting my latest culinary creation. 
Let's find this Fat Newheim guy. Whatever his name is. He apparently knows where these bandits are. 
You can take that one, but let's not make it a habit... 
Borba gra-Uzgash. We've got everything the adventurer needs. I'm an old adventurer myself, and I know what's wanted. 
Valen Dreth has been imprisoned for many years. His tongue is sharp, but his body is limp and frail. He will prove an easy, pleasurable kill. 
Yes, Seed-Neeus was so worried.  Nice to get a bit of good news for once, isn't it? 
I'm just tired. I can't face it. I have to start over, from nothing. 
You are fortunate that my duty forbids me from satisfying my honor. 
My master trusts me to decide what to show him, I'm afraid. 
Unfortunately, Dovesi doesn't seem to like me very much. But I don't blame her. The young ones tend to have problems with authority figures. 
You Elves are all the same! All flash and no fury! 
Dark days, my lord. 
You know, I think the mutton here in Chorrol is the best in all the Empire. Mmmm... that's good mutton. 
Well, my thieving days have finally come to an end. I promise never to set foot in any of the shops in Crucible ever again. 
As you wish, Ulrich. Come my lovelies! Your feast has arrived! 
Yessir, I worked too hard to collect that money. I'm not about to let anyone steal it from me. 
My dear friend, the Dark Gift is yours! You are now a vampire! A creature of the night! We are now kin! 
Kud-Ei runs a tight ship in Bruma. She may not always play by the rules, but I wouldn't want her on my bad side. 
The Shivering Isles hold many secrets but few remain unseen by mortal eyes. 
So, Nels is dead. I don't condone murder, of course, but I can't say he'll be missed. As a rule, I find Nords rather... vulgar.      
You'll want to get all the details from the messenger. Unless you already have. You haven't, have you? 
You're going to stop him, though. And the first thing to do is to make my people feel safe. Otherwise, they tend to go work for him. 
The two Altars, blessed Despair and holy Rapture, feed the great Flame of Agnon above us. 
Please accept this Black Band as your reward. It is a ring whose powers are quite useful to those who value... discretion. 
Hey, there, Pit Dog! How's life treatin' ya? 
What have we here? A visitor? 
Samuel Bantien used to be able to pick any lock in the city. He's settled down now, though. 
I'm on my way to talk to Itius Hayn. 
No sign of pursuit, sir. 
You've got it. I'll have the Boar and the Wolf brought out to the Arena. Now get up there and give the people what they paid for!  
No, Zoe. I don't. Everything I want is right here with you. 
I fear this place has addled your wits. This is no dream, but a waking nightmare. 
Hrol Ulfgar leads the Ulfgar clan. He is a fierce warrior and a wise leader. All the Dalvilu respect the man. 
Just make sure you understand our rules of competition for this match. Fighting the Grand Champion, well... The rules are a bit different. 
I can rest easier now, knowing that my children are all better protected. 
What are your orders, m'Lord? 
The guild's been attacked? Did you find anyone alive? 
I said move! Or by my ancestors I'll put you on the ground with a split lip! 
She didn't take the news well. Oreyn has been expelled. And, I'm sorry to do this, but you've been demoted to Defender. You'll be fine, though. 
What do you need, Champion? 
Yeah? What do you want? 
Very well, I see little harm in telling you. 
Very well. Let's finish this. 
Goodbye, darling. 
You mean you were unable to return? 
But, please -- come and see us in Chorrol. It would be wonderful for us both to be able to thank you for helping us find each other again. 
Which... um... leads me to something I may have failed to mention before. My ancestors will see my "revival" as a desecration of their tomb. 
Ah yes. "Commentaries on the Mysterium Xarxes," wonderful! You have a scholarly interest in daedric cults, then? 
I'm not from Chorrol. I'm afraid I can't tell you anything at all about the town. 
Greetings, Listener. Come close, and I will share with you the information I have garnered. For someone has prayed to the Night Mother yet again. 
A group of Battlemages were dispatched to Mucianus's last known location, with the intent of bringing him in for questioning. 
Lord Sheogorath, in His wisdom, wishes for you to relight the Torch, to help ease the worries of the populace. 
Did you hear? I helped rebuild the Gatekeeper! He has my eyes.... What? I got new ones! 
There may be a connection to Dagail's father. Have you spoken to her about it? 
There's just something wrong with that guy. And he has an odd smell about him. 
The Amulet, where's the Amulet of Kings? It wasn't on the Emperor's body. 
Then everything is as it should be. The Ritual was followed, the blood brought to the Altar... 
Shall I continue with you, Lord? 
Ciirta lied, but when she is done, I will lead the Acolytes to the light! 
You can't be too careful. 
Bye now, sweetie. I look forward to seeing you again. 
I see you've returned. How exciting for you. 
Honored one. 
Hloval dances a little too close to Sheogorath, if you know what I mean. Those born with stunted magicka shouldn't become priests and healers. 
I saw Valus Odiil at the Grey Mare again today. Hasn't been the same since his boys took off. 
They're all the same, full of mead and something to prove. We lost a lot of good men up there. A lot of good men. 
Leave me alone. Sheogorath's armies are coming. You better run away! 
I believe he's currently residing somewhere north of Bravil. Spends most of his time in Niben Bay, I understand. And I do mean IN Niben Bay. 
She's been watching you. Observing as you kill, admiring as you end life without pity or remorse. The Night Mother is most pleased... 
Don't worry, I hold no grudges. You bested me! I am man enough to admit it! 
Eh? 
Nothing there, I guess. 
Another possibility in that direction might be Kemen. It's an old Ayleid ruin. 
I'm following them. 
Since you seem so adept at finding the elusive Nirnroot, if you wish to bring me more, I'd be more than happy to compensate you. 
But we need to act quickly. Camoran will not take long to recognize his danger. 
You can find Cairn Bolete growing in caves. They're said to mark the place someone has died. 
Darkest blessings upon you. 
You don't have the money, so I can't let you stay in the room. I'm sorry. 
I warned you! I'll call the guard if you don't leave! 
Jobs for the Fighters Guild? Hmmm... try Margarte. If she's not at home or at the Five Claws, she's probably out looking for alchemical ingredients. 
Finish it. 
Your first duty should be to name your second-in-command. I can think of no one better for this job than Modryn Oreyn. 
Welcome to Border Watch. A pleasure to see you. 
I welcome a friendly face in these dark times. How can I be of assistance? 
The Fighters Guild got Lady Rogbut out safe and sound. With the Blackwood Company, you never know.... 
A grim fate indeed, but one does not cross the Order of the Black Worm without suffering greatly for it. 
Bruma cannot hold off the hordes of Oblivion alone. You should ask the rulers of the other cities of Cyrodiil to send help. 
We're saved! Sheogorath has protected us once again. 
You've seen his Knights. Not the warm and cuddly sort. Not a bit of original thought in their lifeless husks. So, you're going to help Me stop him. 
Yes. Ahdarji is the name. Poor Ahdarji, all alone, now that Qa-Dar is gone. Poor widow Ahdarji... 
However, I'll tell you for free that there are many secrets in that Castle. There are secret ways, and secret people. Find the blacksmith. 
Can't wait to get out of here. 
Behold the new hero of the people of Cyrodiil! Behold, your Arena Grand Champion, the Crimson Blade! 
My whole life I have waited for this moment! Die! 
I know you meant well... and I suppose there was no need to put your life on the line for a stranger. 
I don't have time for this; I must get back to my next catastrophic waste of time. 
Well, well, if it isn't Shadowstep! How's our new Grand Champion, huh? You ready to make me some money? Ha ha ha ha ha!  Ahem... 
I sure hope you know what you're doing. 
Rumor has it that there were strange circumstances with her death, if you know what I mean. 
Yes. That's it. I'll go. Away. Far away. Working for them is like working for us, but without all the dying. 
Why aren't you in Water's Edge? 
A little stab in the back won't hurt too much. Then I'll have the magicka I need. 
Please go away. 
I'm Bogrum Gro-Galash, your host at the Lonely Suitor Lodge. It may not look like much outside, but that's just the weathered Bravil look. 
I warned you! Now the guards will arrest you for trespassing! 
Every now and then he looks over at me and smiles. I think he's sweet on me. If Nels finds the gold, maybe he'll want some company.  
Normally, this would be a matter for the local law enforcement. Due to certain circumstances, however, the Council has become involved. 
They've reached the Altar! 
Die, cur! 
I hear Thadon's happy again. Dammit! Why is everyone so happy all the time? It's not fair. I just want to die. Is that too much to ask? 
I've never seen anything like this. It's horrible, just horrible. I'm just going to keep my head down, and follow my orders. 
You probably cheated me, didn't you? 
You do as you will. You may leave the way you entered. Your life will be none the worse for your time spent here. 
With the two of us working together, we're sure to find the chest before anyone else. What do you say? Do you want to team up? 
Very well. There's a research project going on at one of the Ayleid ruin sites on the eastern side of the province. 
Welcome back, my friend. 
You've done well for yourself. 
We've got to get out of here! 
Amazing. And insane. I'll look into it further. 
Are you here to see Thadon? I would be, if I were you. Thankfully, I already have cause to speak to him every day. 
Another round of torture in Crucible? At least if you're in a cell, no one can sneak up on you. 
And don't get caught. Be cunning. Don't spoil my scheme. And don't die... that would spoil everything. Ha-ha-ha-hah! 
Not much to tell about me, really. I'm from Morrowind originally, but my family moved to Valenwood a few years ago. 
Your service to the guild has not gone unnoticed. Henceforth, you will carry the rank of Defender. Bear the title proudly. 
All hail the Champion of Cyrodiil! 
I warned you! You'll be arrested for trespassing! 
Oh, I certainly hope so. I still want to find the gold, of course, but is it even worth it? I just want to go home. 
It's just a sport. Chapel climbing. The Watch doesn't like it, but you don't climb chapels while the Watch is standing around. 
Wonderful! I had a good feeling about you from the moment that I saw you. 
An intruder! Help! Don't hurt me! 
One more coin and I can git a pair of shoes. 
Syl anticipates plots against her, so expect heavy resistance that may require a great deal of fighting and physical exertion. 
Gladiator. It's not very often I get to call somebody that. You're doing the Blue Team proud, kid. Now go kill somebody before I get all weepy! 
I don't like being disturbed. 
Good. And you? 
So I've heard. 
Right then. The bed is just upstairs, at the back of the inn. Sleep well. 
Perhaps you'd better speak to my steward. I'm afraid I have little time to spend with visitors to Skingrad. 
I arranged for the notable Celia Camoran to want to read a particular Elder Scroll. Don't ask how. However, she will be... unavoidably detained. 
This match is mine, weakling! 
Suit yourself. I'm practically giving them away at that price. 
I'll miss him dearly. Don't feel upset, I know you did the best you could to bring him home. 
I should have known they could find it. Little can remain hid from a Daedra Lord. I underestimated the enemy. It will not happen again. 
Retreat! Retreat! Fall back to the town center! Now! Now! MOVE! 
I'll need someone who's at least an Apprentice for this job. Maybe you're ready for advancement? 
Normally the peasants do that work, but pod pits are special. They hatch into beautiful birds! 
All right, my friend. You've got 50 gold down on the Yellow Team. Good luck, and enjoy the match! Oh, and if you win, come see me for your payout! 
Their poisons are truly impressive. I prefer to avoid the magnificent creatures. 
The Count's Arms is a very nice place for a meal. And Wilbur has an extensive knowledge of wines. 
You chose well. The Great Torch shines as a beacon of Mania to inspire and enflame all who gaze upon it! 
Greetings! How are you on this fine morning? 
Don't let the ogres get me! 
Matilde seems like an upstanding citizen of the Empire. She respects the law and recognizes the Legion as Tamriel's greatest defense against evil. 
He's caused us no end of trouble with his magical experiments, but nothing as bad as this. 
You're out late, ma'am. 
I... I'm glad you wanted to talk. You'll always have my sword, of course. But you have my ear as well. Anytime. As a friend. 
Sheogorath is even more handsome in real life! 
Don't go stirring up trouble. 
How can He leave now? That's impossible! 
Do you have the time? 
*Gasp!* Here they come! Oh my, Aunt Margaret! You are looking the worse for wear... 
I argued against it, but eventually agreed to maintain order in the Council. I regret that decision, and that is why I wish to send you there. 
Ogier Georick has a good selection of ingredients at The Main Ingredient. 
I'd stay away. I understand the ghosts are locked in an eternal battle for the keep. 
Do sit down. 
What matters is that we act. That we do what's right, when confronted with evil. 
Emperor Uriel Septim? You think the emperor is my father? 
Perhaps further conversation should wait until things are a bit more... relaxed? You seem to have your hands full at the moment. 
Elante is a scholar, interested in researching Daedra worship. Meet her in Brittlerock Cave, help her find the shrine, and keep her safe. 
Even if I do think Nels is the killer, I wouldn't share my thoughts with the likes of you.  
If only we had our home back... 
What's the news from the other parts of Tamriel? 
Thanks, friend. 
I suspected Mercator was involved in their cult, but was unwilling to move against him without knowing the identities of his allies. 
Your stars are not mine. Today the Lord shall prove a faithful patron in your quest for glory. 
Are you ready to earn your recommendation now? 
Baenlin... Oh Baenlin... I loved ya, old man. I loved ya... But I couldn't protect ya... Oh Baenlin! Waaaahhhhh! [sobbing] 
I think I'd better be the one to handle the meeting. You'll be my backup. Keep watch from above in case of trouble. 
You are most generous! He lives in the Temple district on the far east side. He's an early riser, usually up by sunrise. 
  
Ma'zaddha may have returned with more information by now. 
You don't look well, my friend. You should seek a healer. 
Falcar did leave this behind; I think it fell from his notes as he left. I didn't pay it much attention, but perhaps it will be of use to you. 
The coronation of each new Emperor is sealed when he uses the Amulet of Kings to light the Dragonfires in the Temple of the One. 
You have done your part, so I shall do mine. What I know I will teach you. 
My new Gatekeeper is a miracle. He's perfect. 
When people learn more about the Blackwood Company's methods, they won't be so eager to hire them. 
I own the Black Waterside Stables. Are you shopping for a horse? 
You're getting on my nerves. What do you want? 
No trouble here. No nothing here! No fun. No work. Nothing! Blackwood Company's got all the work. There's nothing left for us! 'Cept for drinking. 
Surely you have heard of us? If not, I invite you to spend some time in our fine library. All are welcome here. 
As you can see, I have plenty of space here for new Oddities, so think of me when you run across anything Odd! 
Bloody scamps. I could skin them all. 
What! That really pisses me off! 
It's good to have a bit of good news in these dark times. What can I do for you, Hero of Chorrol? 
Release me... 
As you wish, your Grace. 
When you are ready, speak with me again, and I will deliver you safely to the only place you can truly call home -- the Cheydinhal Sanctuary! 
You've returned. I trust you've weighed the importance of your new position. For you will soon hear words that will change lives, alter destinies. 
Go away! I know what you're here for! Just leave me alone! 
Okay then. It's upstairs, the room at the west end of the hall. That's to your right when you come out the door. Enjoy. 
All right, Brawler, this next match is going to be a challenge. Turns out there are two Wood Elf sisters who always fight together.               
I'm afraid that's not my arena. You'll have to speak to Mercator about seeing the Count. 
I've heard much about your deeds from my people in Bruma. 
Black Brugo is dead, right? So I'm going to be a knight? 
I can't believe a Mages Guild associate was found dead in Cheydinhal. What kind of place are they running there? 
Sendockle the Klen. Do you understand? The Klen! 
If things go badly, forgo the plan and simply kill the mark any way you can. You'll lose the bonus, but at least the contract will be fulfilled.  
Who are you? How did you get this? What do you know of the Emperor's death? 
The room at the end of the hall upstairs is yours for the night, just like we agreed. 
The Armor has been there ever since. Before evil came to Sancre Tor, this shrine was a place of pilgrimage for all Blades. 
We must get out of this place! 
Our warriors will scour the halls of Brellach, removing any last elements of opposition. Then, we will immediately return to our duties. 
Adamus Phillida is dead! I could feel my heart swell with the Night Mother's love the moment that Imperial pig issued his last breath! 
Here. I happen to have the key you'll need to enter the royal burial chamber in Lindai. I hope you'll make the right choice. 
We'll never hold them! 
Have it your way. The honor of having one of their items on display in the Museum is enough for most people. But not you, it seems. 
And I shall continue my vigil at Roderick's side. It's just a matter of time before our leader returns to us. I can feel it in my heart. 
If only my arts included open lock spells.... 
Keep the Ring safe. 
If we succeed in recovering the treasure, you give this one half of what you're getting paid. 
Barthel Gernand. He talked us into selling our comfortable house in High Rock to start a new settlement here in Cyrodiil. 
If you need any more of those, I might be able to get some later. 
Syl had called her aside, separating her from the group. She meant to divide our numbers when Order entered, making us easier targets. 
Where has Sheogorath gone? Who will save us from the cats? Won't someone think of the cats? 
Yes. I like the Grey Mare as well. 
And you've been demoted to the rank of Defender. Hell, even I don't think you deserved that. But, it is what it is. Move on. 
Here, kid, this is your payout for the victory. There's more where that came from if you can keep on winning. Now go unwind before your next fight. 
How fair thee, friend? 
Even if the Resonator of Judgment is working again, I bet it won't deter Them. I'm still not safe. 
Well, if I can be perfectly honest with you, I find Neville quite attractive. Redguards are so... exotic. Don't you think? 
You don't see a lot of Human-Bosmer marriages. I don't know if it's even legal in Cyrodiil. 
Please... No... Primo can't be the killer. But it's either him... or you... 
You're being sent to assassinate Adamus Phillida? Oh, finally Ocheeva has come to her senses! You'll be killed, and we'll finally be rid of you!      
But you can be sure Adamus Phillida will suspect the Dark Brotherhood was involved, and will launch an investigation. 
He's in great shape, that's for sure. Maybe he could teach me something about his training regimen. 
The Greymarch is complete and the House of Mania still stands tall. 
Pardon me. I'm sorry to trouble you, but I was sent to ask for your help. 
Justice? Hahahahaha! I been avoidin' that all my life, mate! Let me show you how! 
Oh, yes. You see, I am a student of chronomancy -- the magic of time alteration. 
How goes it? 
Hey, take whatever you want. It's none of my business. 
We'll get through this. 
Ha ha ha ha ha! "My kind," as you like to call us, are plenty happy serving our own needs while your useless Empire crumbles down around you! 
Until you find a way to close that Oblivion Gate, there's nothing I can do but try to hold our position here as long as I can. 
He's dead, and one of us killed him. Maybe it was you, eh? Maybe he found the gold, and you murdered him for it!  
The walls between our worlds are crumbling. The Mythic Dawn grows nearer with every rift in the firmament. 
You got a great deal there. 
Pretty soon, the beastfolk all knew how to read and write... which was handy, since it made them better slaves for the Ayleids, hahaha. 
We have to get Martin to the Temple of the One or Mehrunes Dagon has won after all. 
They haven't walked among us in many hundreds of years. Now that they've returned, there's no telling what may happen to us. 
Without recommendations from the local guildhalls, you'll never see the inside of it. I dare say that's one of the few things Traven has done right. 
I don't care much for jokes. If you're serious about the room, come back with some gold on you. 
These are foul times for us. Armand is under house arrest, again. Our business in the Waterfront is totally shut down. 
My Lord, there aren't enough pages in all the books in the world to hold your glory! 
Can I interest you in some of my wares? 
I'll make it easy on you. I won't throw a single punch. I just want to see what you've got, anyway. So, is it a deal? 
Then go. Take with you my blessings and the hope of the empire. 
You heard any more about the rat thing in Anvil? 
For your service, take this token, that your deeds might be entered in the Book of Fate. 
I'm really busy... oh. Sorry. You closed the gate, yes? Thank you. What can I do for you? 
I don't run a halfway house, you know. When you have the money, then you can have the room. 
What more can I do for you? 
What's the matter? What did you do? 
Goodbye, I don't expect to be seeing you anytime soon. If I were you, I'd get out of Bruma fast before the guards catch on that she's dead. 
Best not to speak of him now. Go on about your business. 
Hey, friend, do you think you could help me out? I'm caught a bit short at the moment... anything at all would be much appreciated. 
The vintner made it special for the Legion soldiers posted at the forts when they were active long ago. 
Arrogant fool! I curse you to remain trapped here with the shades of my people. 
Whatever you need, friend. 
I'm Contumeliorus Florius. I'm in charge of enchanted item recharge in the Mages Guild here in Chorrol. Get it? "In charge!" 
Thanks to you, his sinister plans have now been revealed to me. 
I... I don't understand. Who would kill him? And why? Is this about the gold?   
They've heard the same rumors I have about the Necromancers' Cult. 
It fills my heart with warmth to see you again, Brother. 
There's just no accounting for it. Sad, really. 
I don't know if you're religious, but a lot of folks are, and the Stone is important. Talk to Cirroc in Bruma. He'll fill you in on the details. 
He's an Imperial Legion bulldog. Scum, if you ask me. Kind of like you. 
In the meantime, I'll keep an eye on Kalthar. 
Have a copy of the Black Horse Courier. It's the only way to get the real news. Feature story on the Gray Fox. 
I was Casnar, loyal Blade of Emperor Tiber Septim. I do not know how long I have been dead. It feels like an eternity. 
Very well. I'll have my steward register the deed of ownership. Here is your key. 
Careful... 
It is good to see you, Lord. 
I've provided Raynil's description to all of the Bruma soldiers and even dispatched his description to guards in other cities. 
His meaning is unclear to me as well. The Emperor seemed to perceive some threat from the demonic world of Oblivion.  
You again? You're becoming a real pain in my arse, you know that? I thought I made myself clear. You don't belong down here. Now get! 
Too big for me. Loud. Dirty. Clowns, fools, brutes and thieves everywhere. I want to throw my gold away, I just dump it in Lake Rumare, save time. 
A hated one. 
If you want to give me a hand, go speak with Jensine at her "Good as New" Merchandise store. She can clue you in and maybe offer some coin. 
There's no more to say about him. He will not be missed. 
The Guild is going to hell in a hogcart. Look at what they give me? Keld of the Isles? Ohtimbar? Both Guardian rank? Phah! Useless. 
Hey, is that you? I hear something over there.... 
The dark arts contained in the tome called for him to dig up the recently deceased in the nearby crypts under the cathedral. 
Outrageous! And you have the nerve to brag about it to my face? I have half a mind to call the guards and have you arrested! 
You've gotten them? Wonderful! But... their names are familiar to me. All of those men have worked for me! Amazing. 
I've heard the dogs that J'bari keeps drive her crazy. I've also heard she knows a lot about acrobatics. 
You are impertinent, mortal. I did not offer to answer questions. 
Don't you? If you don't, you might. You wouldn't fall for her, though. Not the type. 
I... I must get to the Grey Mare. Must get away from here...  
I'm going to open a tavern. Not that I'd welcome your patronage. No pigs allowed inside, you see. You Legion types tend to stink up a place.   
I can't tell you exactly where it is. I wouldn't want your quest to be a "bust." 
You handled yourself pretty well back there. Just keep out of our way, got it? 
Here's something truly Odd -- a Soul Tomato! A tomato that can act like a soul gem! No one has yet been able to explain it. 
I saw Irene Metrick recently. She jumped clear over a table at the inn. 
I'll tell you what. Kill six of the things, bring me their fangs as proof, and I'll reward you well. Please, you're my only hope. 
Whoa! 
Aggh! They're dead! All dead! And you... you're the only one left. It's you! Oh, gracious, no! Stay away from me! 
Reconsider? 
Now, get going. Before I change my mind. Or my mind changes me. 
So, he told you another one of his tall tales. I hope you didn't believe him. What's he got in store for me? He send you to kill me? Is that it? 
You won't see me there. 
Our Lord is always acquainted with Sorceress Verenim's current whereabouts. Her affections have caused Him unnecessary annoyance in the past. 
Glarthir is acting even stranger than usual, don't you think? 
Always a pleasure. 
Feel free to browse, friend. 
Ugh! Darkness, give me strength! 
Come on! We need to help the Grandmaster! 
Oh. Are you sure? Well, think about it, and if you change your mind, let me know. I really do need some money, you see. 
You worship the Nine Divines, perhaps? Have they ever helped or harmed you? Of course not. 
Have you heard about that ghost of the old man that looks out into Niben Bay each night? They're calling him the Forlorn Watchman... spooky. 
Jantus Brolus is apparently an excellent mage. 
Darkness. 
Here for more work, are you? I've got one last contract for you. First, though, a bit of bad news. Oreyn spoke with Vilena about your last mission. 
Several of the cities have sent aid. They're mustering on the plaza outside the castle, if you want to review the troops. 
I think I saw a copy last time I was at The First Edition Bookshop in the Market District. 
The Count has instructed me to tell you that he will be happy to speak to you again once the Oblivion Gate threatening Skingrad is closed. 
Everyone is tired of Brithaur's antics. 
It looks bad. It is bad. But we're tough. We'll rebuild. 
Can you believe that fool even bothered to collect this paltry sum? You can keep it. I merely wanted the Watch to know they went too far. 
Now that someone's been killed, Matilde may be a little frightened for her own safety, but she's still more concerned with finding the hidden gold. 
Viranus is just a kid. But he did pretty well at Nonwyll Cavern, I guess. 
Being the first person to discover Welkynd Stones growing outside their natural environment, I was worried a rival researcher would snatch them. 
What an odd ruin. 
Thadon is gone. I wonder if he left anything worth keeping... 
Then leave here. Run away. Run away quickly. Come back when you are worthy. 
See, I told you! These buildings just aren't safe. A huge Obelisk fell over and destroyed Passwall. 
Oh, what a pretty colored moth you are! Don't fly into the city. There's a big torch there. Bad news for little moths. 
Yes, I did quite a bit of traveling. Back before I met Silgor, and decided to settle down. It's all about pacing yourself. 
We've got to clear this area so we can pull those people out of the chapel! Kill anything that moves! 
My men and I are at your disposal. What are your orders? 
As you wish, Arch-Mage.. 
A troublesome lot. I expect you to deal with them. 
He would have had it destroyed or taken it from them and kept it under lock and key in the palace. 
May Malacath forgive us for what we've done. 
It's a shame such a good smith wastes her life in the bottle. 
You've got it. I'll have the three Minotaur Lords brought out to the Arena. Now get up there and give the people what they paid for!  
Make those bastards pay! 
Yes, of course, here is your precious gold. Now I need you to investigate one more person for me. 
For the Empire! 
Given the need for swift action, the normal customs shall need to be overlooked for now. We shall be right behind you, Your Grace. 
The armies are back together now, I hear. I'd never have let them get lost in the first place. 
Is it true that some of our guildmates were killed? Oh, how horrible! 
Welcome back into the guild. For getting Lex reassinged, you are being promoted to Shadowfoot. Congratulations. 
You should be off like the wind, solving problems and doing good deeds! 
Were I injured, I'd seek out Marz. 
I hope you can forgive me. I had no idea. 
From now on, you will receive all assignments directly from me. In fact, your next contract is available now. 
Make it quick. 
The whole town is on edge with that Oblivion Gate open just outside the walls. 
One of the night watch, and all's well. Take care, ma'am.  
He is a bit nutty. Probably just a harmless old fool, though. 
Welcome back, my lady. 
This right here is one of my favorites. A lump of amber in the shape of your head, my Lord! A very popular item, too, if I may be so bold. 
Our stronghold at Brellach is under attack! The forces of Order broke in and routed us! You must go to Issmi at once and aid her! 
Please, just take what you want and leave! I won't call the guards, I swear! 
You're back. Thank Talos! 
Bone, branch and stone of the body, giving shape and structure.... 
I'm sure all of Bruma joins me in saluting your help in keeping the hordes of Oblivion at bay. 
I wonder how he could have miscalculated so badly. Those old Elves didn't seem as glad to see him as he expected, eh? 
Tertullian, Sergius, and Cicero... the Three Verus Brothers. I'm Cicero. 
She's ridiculous. I suppose some may find it amusing, but not me. 
I've given up trying to figure it out. It's just beyond us. Why Denel stays down there, I have no idea. He's just asking to get killed. 
Welcome. Let's talk. 
What we do is perfectly legal. Others have no right to interfere. 
War has come to the Shivering Isles at last. We stand ready to protect these lands. 
Dog? You greet me as a Breton, the mongrel race of Tamriel, motherless lackeys of every great empire that ever conquered your homeland? 
Perhaps you could help us? But why should I trust you? You might be, you know... one of Them. 
The rebuilt the Gatekeeper. I thought they should have done that a long time ago. 
How may I be of service to you, milord? 
Be aware, though, that your rank can be stripped for failure to uphold the tenets of the guild, or at the sole discretion of the guildmaster. 
Although... I hesitate to guide you towards this path. The secrets of the past will surely aid Jyggalag, but I fear that we have no other choice. 
You'll have to speak to Dagail about that. 
I hear tell that the daedra make their way through these and invade our lands. It's sort of a door to the world where they live. 
You should speak to Skaleel before you do anything else. She's in charge of the project. 
My guards are strong and true, but even the might of the Blades cannot stand against the Power that rises to destroy us. 
Every few days she comes for one of us. Some return, some don't. Those that are taken three times never return. 
Hmmm... you don't seem to have enough samples on you. Remember, I need at least 10 to get started. 
Yeah, you heard me. No matter what the law says. No matter what they told you. You're going to die in here! You're going to die!   
So what you're saying is you really, really need these arrows? Go ahead. Take them. What would I want them for? 
Now, as you know, in any standard Arena match you're forbidden from looting the corpse of a fallen opponent. Well this ain't any standard match.   
I've already surrendered. What more do you want? 
It's stupid. And chapels and priests and folks groveling on their knees, they're stupid, too. 
Here you go. Don't spend it all in one place... unless it's here of course! 
Go protect Elante. She's doing important research. 
Haven't seen it myself, and don't intend to. Being this close to one makes me nervous. The good news is nothing's come out since Farwil entered. 
I heard that Velwyn Benirus was killed. The Manor claims another victim. 
And you'll need an offering. I think a lesser soul gem, a head of lettuce, and some yarn will do the trick. Yes. That's what Sheogorath wants. 
Nels is a Nord, and like all Nords he's a lawless barbarian with no respect for authority. 
Take my ring. Let it bring pain to others who would wish it upon you. Namira blesses you. 
The best way for a blade to slip into a man's brain is through the eye socket, ear hole, or through the nose. 
HARG! 
The Mystic Archives have a large collection of books. Look around, and you may learn a thing or two. 
When Arden-Sul couldn't divine the traitor's true nature in their hearts, he became distraught and took his own life in the same way. 
Good to know. I try to steer clear of the big bugs. 
Syl tends to jump at shadows. 
Oh, my head... 
I hear a new puppy dog has arrived on the Isles. I bet he's really cute and cuddly. Like you! 
Not here. Didn't I say that? I'm never here when Jyggalag walks. It's one of the Rules. 
Greetings! 
The Daedric armies are whole again. If only I could live to see them in battle. The chills are getting worse, though. 
I loved her, and then she was gone. By her own hand. It's said any soul on the Hill can be released if their remains are brought to them. 
Why do you bother me? 
Pinarus Inventius, hunter, woodsman, and marksman, at your service. 
I've always wondered who the Night Mother really is. Some say she's an old woman who lives somewhere here in Cyrodiil, but I'm not so sure. 
Not smart to carry around broken equipment. 
What can I do for you? Do you have questions about these break-ins I've been having? 
You're good. 
They've sent an enforcer to kill me! His name is Hides-His-Heart, and he's on his way here now! That's why I hired you! So you can fake my death! 
One of the night watch, and all's well. Take care, sir.  
He can't be the killer! He can't! I won't believe it! Get away from me!  
The Fringe is under attack! Probably a cat conspiracy. 
Listen. Those people in Passwall need me. Can you imagine how they'd ever get along if I died down here? 
We're making progress. 
Have you ever met Luciana Galena? 
Our Lord cannot be gone. 
Are you all right, sire? We're clear, for now. 
Where are they? 
Thank Sheogorath it was Thadon who was killed, not Syl. 
What can I do for you? Looking for some work? If so, the Fighters Guild can always use able-bodied new members. 
A Shadowscale hatchling is trained in the arts of stealth and assassination, and lives a life in service to the mighty kingdom of Argonia. 
Brothers, kill this pretender! 
They built a new Gatekeeper, did they? Hope they didn't use anything of mine when putting him back together. 
Viranus needs to stop hiding behind his mother's skirts if he expects to run this outfit someday. 
RELEASE! 
Work is good for money. You know something, tell Vantus. He'll put me to work. Give me money. 
The Gatekeeper has been rebuilt, which means the Realm is a little safer for now. 
She's offered a reward, but as far as I know, nobody's taken her up on the offer. Not sure who's missing either, she's keeping quiet about it. 
Leave me alone, you ghoul! Can't you see I'm mourning for that poor, sweet boy?  
Buh-bye! Nice talking with you, Lord. No need to come back any time soon. 
You must not have heard. He went crazy and killed Davide Surilie with an axe! Nobody can figure out why. 
Sithis has blessed us with you, dear Listener. He is our Dread Father, and his wisdom and terrible fury know no bounds. 
The Gray Fox requests a meeting. Please travel to Ganredhel's house in Cheydinhal. 
A new adventurer in the Isles. Perhaps this adventurer has some Skooma? 
You left that Nord in pretty rough shape, Warrior. They'll probably have to ship her back to Skyrim in pieces. Nice work. Here's your take. 
I live to serve. 
I gathered those who could see the light and I led a revolt against him. We were... slaughtered by his Dark Seducers. I alone was spared. 
An intriguing choice. And I have a task in mind that will test your wit, and your loyalty. 
Have you come to revel in the glory that is the Shrine of Sanguine? 
Until I see you summon a Faded Wraith here before me, you shall get no training from me. 
Ah, you're back. I told Jauffre not to worry.  
Sheogorath has left. Where did he go? It's a mystery! I love mystery stories. I wonder how this one will end. 
my disp went down 
We must recover the Amulet of Kings and relight the Dragonfires, before it is too late to stem Dagon's invasion. 
If you need training, Athragar has a reputation for being very good with Alteration. You might consider speaking to him about it. 
I'd have to say I'm partial to the Great Hall. On those cold nights, nothing warms your bones better than a roaring fire. 
I suspect the traitor Thadon. Jyggalag has never had an original thought in his existence. 
Two people are dead, you pathetic little worm. Take your gossip mongering someplace else.  
Your choices are Destruction, Illusion, or Mysticism. Which will it be? 
She looks pretty shaken, doesn't she? I can't tell if it's genuine fear or just really good acting. She's as much a suspect as anyone, don't forget. 
What is this interruption? 
I'm glad Jyggalag is defeated. Can't imagine a grey world.  
It should be burned to the ground. All those skooma-muddled Khajiit laying around all day... it's disgraceful. 
It's an Ayleid ruin, southwest of Cheydinhal. We suspect there are some interesting things inside, so a research project was established. 
I'm retired from adventuring... but you might try the old mine they call 'Rickety Mine' out east along the Blue Road. 
Curious that you should inquire about it, as it has recently gone missing. You wouldn't happen to know anything about that, would you? 
Today you die! 
The Aureals think to take us by surprise! We will teach them what happens to those who trifle with the Mazken! To the Underdeep! 
I'm glad that the Resonator is working again. Enough riff-raff around this place already. 
Where is Syl? Have you seen her? That traitorous coward! 
You have to admit, this is a good place to live. Friendly folks, I think. 
A small settlement to the northwest of here, on the other side of the Silver Road to Bruma. 
Betraying the Dark Seducers! The biters bit, so to speak. Most ingenious. I must say, I really didn't think you had it in you. 
Oh my! I almost forgot! 
They made the journey, and arrived back all right, but then... Someone murdered them! All of them! Now their spirits are haunting the ship! 
Now is not the time! 
You've done well. Already I can feel the Fountainhead renewing itself, flushing the taint of Order from its veins. 
New blood. What is it? 
Oh, yes. You still need that, don't you? Well, are you ready to take care of that matter for me now? 
I don't trust that old hag. She pretends she likes you, and then stabs you in the back. Who knows. Maybe she'll REALLY stab you in the back. 
Whoever this new person in the Isles is, he'd better steer clear of Deepwallow. 
The signs I read show the end of my path. My death, a necessary end, will come when it will come. 
You may pay me now, or Armand Christophe later should you choose to return to my good graces. 
The citizens of Passwall must begin to rebuild. Much has been lost, and I fear that this is only the beginning. 
A new ruler for Dementia. Certainly the end times are upon us. 
Fighters Guild, aren't you? Done many jobs for them recently. Yes. What makes you want to join us?  
The Tears look beautiful in my collection. A thousand thanks once again. 
There's more. Argoth -- he's dead, the artifact gone. Sounds like a set-up. Maybe they made a deal with Blackheart. I don't know. But I'll find out. 
I knew it! No one can fool Ra'kheran. I am the wisest here, more wise even than Ciirta. And that is why she must go, yes. 
Aren't you off to a good start! That's important. For me. Really, your work is going to save me a lot of time. 
He goes on and on about the guild. He's very proud of it. I understand he teaches Illusion there now, as well. 
At least, that's what the people of Cyrodiil have come to believe. Maybe it's time someone stepped into that Arena and proved them wrong... 
Your stars are not mine. Today the Steed shall speed your progress on the road to destiny. 
Emperor Uriel? Do you know something about his death? 
Knights of Order have appeared in the Isles. I hear they come from the obelisks. 
The manservant's name is Gromm, you say? Sounds like a Nord. Probably a big one. If he catches you, get ready for a serious fight.  
Watch your back, citizen. 
Lord Drad took my ogres. Says he owns them. Lying maggot! They're MY ogres! 
Isn't the Guilded Carafe a nice shop? 
He's really skilled at using light armor. Luckily, he's willing to train others to use it, as well. 
Soft flesh... brittle bones... snap snap... Love how they crack. 
Well, what're you just standing there for? 
So we've all been keeping quiet, hoping the spell will wear off. But we're running out of patience. 
You'll see. Things will change. 
I thought so. A few rats and goblins won't give you any trouble. 
I'm Rena Bruiant. I love dogs. Doesn't everyone? 
Yes? What is it you want? 
I heard that Oblivion Gates are opening all over the city! 
Seldom is the subject ever bro-... wait a moment, did you want to hear the history of the Ritual? 
Don't just stand there. Move. 
Someone relit the torch of Arden-Sul. Maybe they'll come here next and save us. 
You know where the bust is hidden? 
That's right! Exactly! 
I'm sorry, but I have much to do right now. Please excuse me. Oh, and you should inform Carius of this if you haven't already. 
Yes... that's right. Somewhere in Skingrad I believe. He said he tracked Gelebourne down and killed him. 
Mazken for the Madgod! 
So you and Jauffre have said. If it is true, if the Emperor really was my father, then I should be able to wear it. 
See Azzan in Anvil for contracts. 
If there's some sort of connection between the seer's stone and Dagail's father, I don't know about it. Maybe if you ask her, it will jog her memory. 
I hope you're more successful uncovering his scheme than we've been. 
But we never said anything about Dagail's father. How would he know anything about that? 
What did you learn from "Knightfall"? 
Not me. I've got plenty to do at home. 
We've been watching the site for a while, and have tried to stay out of sight ever since the original plan was blown. 
That's just talk. 
Weynon Priory is a monastery devoted to the praise and worship of Talos and the Nine Divines. 
You're the best the Blue Team has to offer? Ha! 
Another mortal. Quaint. 
Don't you know? You don't, do you? Well, it's lucky you met me. Here you've been walking around as if nothing could happen!  
Hmmm... good. This has to be from one of the beasts. Excellent. Soon, you'll have them on the run. 
Go on.... 
Everybody needs a copy of the Black Horse Courier. Imperial Watch raids the waterfront. 
So? An Orc wants to see me? And this interests me how? Did I forget how much I like you so I should do this favor for you? 
Happy hunting, my Brother! 
These names offer few hints to the origin or function of the stones, though they assist scholars in identifying each type of stone on maps 
Well, yes. Apart from enjoying his painting, reading a good book, or a rousing night of erotic bedroom games? 
My mother owns Northern Goods and Trade in Chorrol. 
The Tears are small crystals, bluish in appearance. Quite beautiful I'd imagine. 
Yes. He then removed their hearts from their bodies and used his ancient scrying technique known as visceromancy to read their lifeblood. 
I thought they were related to the Grummites. 
It is clear from the text that Mankar Camoran's "Commentaries" come in four volumes, but I've only ever seen the first two books. 
But don't worry. The guards always treat the pretty ones nice. Right 'til the end. Oh, that's right. You're going to die in here, Nord! 
I am looking for the complete set of ten for my collection. They were once part of the Temple of the Ancestors in the ancient Ayleid capital. 
You here looking for work, meat? Maybe you want a contract? 
Was that...? Nah, just my imagination. 
I've heard things, to be sure, but I don't really know anything about them. 
I think something's missing from this shelf. Or it could be just my old brain playing tricks on me again. Oh well, let's continue the tour, shall we? 
Sorry, I must check in at Leyawiin Castle. Excuse me. 
I've been looking for you. 
Have a look around. You won't find better prices in all Tamriel. 
Passwall must have a new dawn. The struggle will be great, but I have no doubt that we shall overcome this dark time. 
What luck! You're trespassing! I'm a guard! And I LOVE my job! 
That filthy Argonian actually had the temerity to try and ransom it to me! 
I don't like to talk about it. I don't remember much. 
This life, it's... well, it's too painful. Everywhere I look, I see death, dying, and decay. When I dream, I see a world without sunshine. 
Assassin! Why are you still here? Have you not opened your sealed orders? Go now! The Black Hand obviously has need of your abilities! 
Things are coming along nicely here. Soon enough, they'll have no choice but to do everything I say. 
We are from Cheydinhal. 
If you have any questions about the merchandise, you've but to ask. 
It appears this level of pain causes you some distress. Interesting. 
That's a good deal, right? I wouldn't offer it to anyone else, just you. So what do you say? 
Very well... I shall be your guide to Cylarne, then. Proceed. 
I hear he's a sight to see. 
I'd do anything for him. Anything at all. Eat my own young if he asked me to... 
They were traveling the road from the Imperial City when a bandit raiding party struck. He barely escaped alive. 
But now is not the time to worry about the future. Let's just give thanks that we're alive. 
Fimmion hungry. Want sweetroll. Fimmion like pants. Love sweetroll. 
We will remain out here until the gate is either closed, or something emerges from inside. We need to warn Cheydinhal of impending attacks. 
We've got some work to do if we're going to stop the Blackwood Company. 
You've got Jeanne's book, I see. All right, then. I'll just take that from you.... Meet me in the living quarters just after 10 PM. 
You've overstayed your welcome here, I'm afraid. 
You are too late, fool! 
If you wish to contact him, wait until nightfall. Even then, I doubt he will receive you. 
I am yours to command, oh great Listener! 
I hope you're here to bring me good news. 
I trust you have reconsidered your position. Are you now ready to help me? 
Hurt me all you want, Herdir. You know I won't talk. 
Look at you! You keep coming back for more! All right, Warrior, you ready for a match? 
You should not be here, mortal. Your blood is forfeit, your flesh is mine! 
Your victory at Xeddefen was well won, but the war still carries on. 
I know you did all you could, and for that, I thank you. Now, please... go in peace. I wish to be alone. 
I'm quite behind on current events, I'm afraid. I can't be of any help to you. 
I enjoy the wines that Tamika makes at her vineyard. And they're reasonably priced, as well. 
Greetings. How may I help you? Are you perhaps interested in joining the Fighters Guild? 
I know, Neesha. And I meant no disrespect. It's just that... I hate waiting around like this, watching him suffer! 
We of the Dark Brotherhood serve the Night Mother, who is the bride of Sithis. The Night Mother rules her children with a terrible Black Hand. 
To Cutter's in Crucible you should go for bladed weapons to thwart your foe. 
Oh, and do be careful with what I've given you. It's very valuable, but... well, slightly dangerous. You'll see what I mean. 
Why would I care if someone is helping Thadon? 
He has requested that you personally travel to Skingrad to obtain this information. 
I bet you don't know the first thing about smithing. Have you read up on the history of the craft? I doubt it. 
And there are always lots of pieces. 
So, Tertullian sent you, eh? Well then, he usually sizes up people well, so you may be just what we're looking for. 
We don't know that, Sire. The messenger only said they were attacked. 
I can't fight, and who knows what's guarding the shrine? Plus, do you know how dirty caves are? It'll ruin anything I wear! 
The Resonator of Judgment is fixed! How horrid! New adventurers mean new exhibits! 
Say what you're going to say. 
How does the day greet you, friend? 
I part with it reluctantly, so guard it well. It is what began my search for the High Fane, many years ago. 
I know I am only a lowly male, but I am at your service. Shall I follow you into battle? 
It's the waiting that gets to me. Why don't they just attack and get it over with? 
With Oreyn? He was dismissed! I should expel you now! But... no. It isn't Oreyn who is to blame. I fear it is I. 
Allow me to be your guide. 
Don't be shy. 
To use the apple, simply dispose of any other food and put the apple in its place. If someone is inclined to eat, and they taste the apple... death. 
You are the last defender of decadent Tamriel. I am the midwife of the Mythic Dawn, Tamriel Reborn. 
Come with us. Your destiny is bound up with mine, and with the fate of Tamriel itself. 
I've been looking for just the right owner for a special home I have. 
A new person wandering around? Did anyone check to see if this person was diseased? 
You approach the Shrine of Boethia. Tread lightly. 
Fine. 
I fear the worst. 
Caroline. Don't let me keep you. 
Once you are inside the palace itself, you need to find the reading room. The blind priests will deliver a scroll to you there. 
I will tell you what I can. What would you know of her? 
Just do your job. 
Have you met Adrienne Berene, our Skingrad Mages Guild head? Not the most pleasant person, I'll admit. Don't mind her. 
Have pity beautiful lady, I gots nothin' ta eat. 
Here are some keys. They should allow you access to many of the restricted areas in Castle Chorrol. 
Take me there. Now. I'm in a hurry. 
Greetings. Do you have business at Castle Skingrad? 
It is a high honor. Only six other Champions have been awarded in the history of the Empire. 
My followers are trapped between worlds; their bodies here on this plane, their souls in Oblivion. I would have you reunite the bodies and the souls. 
1, 2... Sheogorath's got his army... 3, 4... in the barracks... 5, 6. 
Don't forget. Camoran Usurper burned Kvatch, too. Kvatch was rebuilt from ruins once before, and she'll do it again. 
Justice has been done. And henceforth, Mazoga and you shall be known as Knights of the White Stallion. 
Maybe I can teach you a little bit more about how to talk to people. And, of course, here's the payment for the contract. Thank you. 
Seek her out, and learn whether she can help. She lives somewhere along the river, east of the Imperial City and south of Cheydinhal. 
Please, visit any time, My Lord. 
We are a small community. Mostly keep to ourselves. Can't say it isn't nice to see a new face around, though. 
The Pants! The Calming Pants! Finally! These Pants are key to my survival. 
On the other hand... you have different fingers. Oh ho ho ho! 
A new ruler in Crucible? It doesn't concern me. 
Be careful, that brute was absolutely huge! 
Besides, they are furthering important research into the nature of pain and suffering, of life and death. 
Well done, champion! Your progress is swift and sure. Perhaps you will reach me after all. 
Here is your key. The house is on the main plaza, between the statue and the Chapel. 
He's all business. That's probably good in his line of work, though. 
I haven't time for fools. 
What do I care about a big torch in the city? I'm too busy to worry about the games of city-folk. A giant garden, that'd be something. 
Let me be clear: whoever delivers the carving will receive the reward. All I care about is the carving. 
See anything you like? 
I welcome you to our family, and this Sanctuary. May you find yourself at home here, in the loving embrace of our Lady the Night Mother.   
You need to finish out the contract with Biene Amelion in Water's Edge. What's the status? 
If it please my Lord, she requested also that I inform you that time is of the essence, in her humble opinion. 
Wait, I know you... You... You're the one! That day the Emperor was killed! They went through your cell! You lucky strumpet! But... You came back? 
It might be nice to learn how to make better potions. 
I think I'm ready for this, but I worry about Antus. He's never seen a fight like this before. 
So good to see you again! 
No.... no! You... you stay away from me! One of you is the killer... stay away from me!  
I just don't trust them. I know they're efficient -- a bit too efficient for my liking. Some endeavors demand time and care. 
What am I to do? I'll never be able to re-enter that cave alone. 
This first chamber is the Chamber of the Gnarl. 
No... no... not again... 
A Gnarl! You've earned your reward. Follow me. 
The Blades saluting me and hailing me as Martin Septim... 
The legions patrol the roads, and they've always been sufficient. I can't imagine we'll ever be at war with the provinces... not in my lifetime. 
Alas, we hold only the Altar of Rapture. The treacherous Mazken hold the Altar of Despair. We must control both to light the Flame. 
You should wait outside his house and see what he does when he's not watching me. I'll meet you here tomorrow night to get your report. 
Five of the night watch, and all's well. You're out late, sir.  
The sisters are hard to tell apart. It's Ugak you'll want to find if you need a mount, though. 
Blessings of Stendarr upon ye. 
I don't recall using teleportation, and yet there I was. Alone. Naked. 
Destruction spells can cause a lot of damage. Knowing enough could make you a dangerous person. 
So the spy says to her, "You're not paranoid if everyone's out to get you!" Ha! Like Syl! Paranoid! Ha! 
Gorble. Can't you hear them gorbling? 
You are a damn fool. 
Sit down. Now. My patience is not unlimited. 
There's probably a growing pile of bodies near that new Gatekeeper. I should go count them. 
They have given in to their instincts, and are little more than animals. They need to be exterminated, one way or another. 
I am Biene Amelion. 
Why? What's he done? 
My men and I should be able to keep busy for now. Thank you for your help. 
Then get out of here until you can. 
Come back with help. I don't know how much longer we can hold out in here. 
Sorry, no time to talk! I have to deliver these copies of the Black Horse Courier! Here, have one of the latest editions, free as always! 
What do you think I'm standing around here for? It isn't because I like being in this place! 
I wondered if you'd come back. I admit, I've had my doubts about your story. 
Did you say something to Bittneld? That was very sweet of you. Now he stops by here every day. 
The tedious to-ings and fro-ings of the armies of Sheogorath are of no interest to me. 
If you try and cross me, I'll tell the town guard. 
The Count fears the worst, and has posted guards here so we can watch and see if anyone comes back out. So far, nothing. 
The guild is accepting new members, but it may require some hard work on your part. Are you sure you wish to join? 
You're here about that recommendation, I presume. I'll need to speak with Erthor before I write it. 
Excuse me. Perhaps you're an adventurer? Could you assist me in acquiring something for my crystal collection? 
Sounds like the Empire has given up on stopping the skooma trade in Elsweyr, and I hear tribal chiefs are supporting the Renrijra Krin. 
Sithis be with you. 
They worship the daedra lord Mehrunes Dagon, according to the teachings of their leader, Mankar Camoran. 
You, however, can act with impunity, and so will take care of this for me. Then I will tell you what I know. 
Relan understands the Great Torch burns again. Relan thinks this is a good sign. 
If Captain Burd and the Guard can't close that Oblivion Gate, then what? Will Bruma be destroyed just like Kvatch? 
With pleasure, My Lord! My Aureals will gladly die in Your service! 
Please, Blade, say what you will, but let us forgo these absurd formalities. I am no "lord" yet. I would remain plain Martin for a while. 
So, are you ready to search for the chest of gold? I'm confident I'll find it. Not that I need the money, of course. My family is quite wealthy.   
The cavern is a short distance east of the castle. Far enough from town that few residents have reason to pass by it, thankfully. 
Well, you know the drill. You let me know when you're ready for a match, and Agronak will head up to the Arena and prepare for your arrival. 
Please, just leave me alone! Either you or Nels is a murderer. I just don't know who to trust anymore! 
Oh, my dear! I gave up witchcraft a long, long time ago. 
What? He's promised not to come around here anymore? Fantastic! Took you long enough though... 
Are you just going to stand there? 
You've got it. I'll have the two Ogres brought out to the Arena. Now get up there and give the people what they paid for!  
The Captain said you've been inside one of those Oblivion Gate things. Said you knew how to destroy them. I sure hope you can help us. 
I have the sharpest blades. I test them out on myself before I put them on sale. They are deliciously keen. 
We're back. Thank Peryite! 
You going to visit the Lucky Old Lady today? Wish for good tidings? 
Unfortunately, that's all we know. We don't know which district he calls home, which establishments he frequents, or anything about his schedule. 
Do my ears deceive me, or are you actually suggesting Dovesi might be the one behind the murder? Back away now, cretin.   
Well well, look who we've got here! 
Meet me at the Fighters Guild in Leyawiin. We've got work to do. 
The Imperial Watch is asking around for anyone that might have seen Audens Avidius. He's escaped from prison! 
Expect Brugo and his boys in Telepe, Middas, after midnight. 
Are you trying to take advantage of me? I'm not making that deal. 
Many are the evenings we spend around the cooking fire, sharing stories of Elsweyr. The smell of our food travels for miles! 
You know us as Dark Seducers. A name given us by our enemies. But we are the Mazken in our own tongue, Sheogorath's only truly loyal servants. 
So... the brothers have once again reclaimed Weatherleah, eh? Good for them! 
I have been happy enough in the Count's service. But I am not so happy about his lovely wife, and her Nibenean advisor. 
After that, I spent the rest of the night in my quarters... reading. 
Ahhh! You have returned from your investigation, and I am eager to hear the results. 
This way! 
Ah, here you are! I have good news, of a sort. 
Bladesman, I was wondering if I might have a word? 
First you murder, now you steal? Have you gone mad? You're a disgrace. I will offer you one final chance. 
Oh, dear. I just can't seem to remember where that is. What a shame. 
Skingrad is the wine-producing capital of Tamriel. You must sample our local wines. You'll never taste better. 
Kud-Ei seems to be in good spirits again after Henantier's return. I heard she enlisted a stranger's help in the search. Good show I say! 
A neat bit of work we did to reassign him to Anvil. One of my better forgeries. 
City-Swimmer certainly lives up to her name. I've seen her in the canals many times. 
The skies are marked with numberless sparks, each a fire, and every one a sign. 
Let's not keep the Blades waiting. 
I think I heard that he'd retired, and was living out his days at the old Roxey Inn here in Cyrodiil. You might try there. 
This is none of your business! 
Now, if you'll excuse me, I must speak to the Count. Please, meet me at the Cheydinhal Bridge Inn in two hours. 
Good enough. 
I'm tired of wasting time with you! 
There are no guild halls in the City, but the Arcane University is on an island outside the walls, south of the Arboretum. 
I don't have time to chat right now. With that Oblivion Gate looming outside the city walls, we're bracing for an attack. Perhaps we can speak later. 
Hasten back to the palace... Sheogorath must know! 
It's you again! I'm so pleased to see you! 
Rona, my dear, it's time to wake up. 
The residents of Split are still in need of your help. At your earliest convenience of course, My Lord. 
You dare torment me? Valen Dreth? Let me out of this cell, you fetid piece of Guar dung! 
Stay away from Vitharn. It's said the dead walk there. 
Swift hunting. 
I hope everyone can forgive me for not doing a better job checking up on my sources. 
Something has gone seriously wrong at the Arcane University. I heard that a high-ranking member was killed in some sort of ambush. 
See you. 
I think it's a disgrace that Khajjit can swagger around Leyawiin, boasting how they whupped this Argonian silly, and beat that Argonian to a pulp. 
He's staying over at the Newlands Lodge, but you also might find him walking around town. Good luck. 
It is an honor to bargain with a thief of your reputation. 
Thoronir is quite a character. He's dirty and underhanded, but he provides a service. 
Well, where is it? I sure don't see any. I'd expect you to at least have some vampire dust. Don't try to pull my leg. 
I am busy. Get out. When I am ready to conduct guild business, I'll leave the door unlocked. 
I'm Jayred Ice-Veins. Do you ever wonder why things look better without their skin on? 
I'd stay inside the city walls if I were you, there's no telling what's going to come out of that gate. 
We're usually called upon to take a life, but not this time. This contract requires us to stage the assassination of a marked man. Are you ready? 
They think I don't know. They think I don't see. 
Oh... Really? Everyone in town? 
This is madness! There are now only three of us left -- myself, you and Primo. I know I'm not the killer, but what about Primo? What about you? 
Look. It's big, see. REALLY big. Only way to learn it is to walk it. Look at everything, talk to everyone. 
My children? Whatever for? Oh! Oh, dear, excuse an old woman's stupidity! You're here to pick up my gift list! 
My name's Quill-Weave. I've had some success selling stories about the lives of the lower and criminal classes. 
If you can figure out how to use the pillar, I'd be thrilled. You're welcome to try your hand at it. 
I'm not sure if you're really concerned for the kid or trying to convince me he's a murderer. Either way, I ain't listenin'. 
You'd be surprised what you can find there. 
Fellmoor must be a lovely place to live. You should visit there, right away. 
I found "Istunond's Cosmology" at the bookseller's. Haven't had a chance to read much, though. 
I'm sorry I ever laid eyes on that thing. 
And what, I'm supposed to take your word for it? Sorry friend, but I'll need some sort of proof. You got any proof? 
Feel the wrath of my ancestors! 
We're all doomed. Jyggalag has won. Sheogorath is dead. The forces of Order are victorious. 
Everyone loves an advancement match, so let's watch as these two brave Myrmidons face off in a battle to the death! Combatants, to arms!   
Want to learn more? Visit the Waterfront District of the Imperial City. Find the Garden of Dareloth at midnight. Then ask your questions. 
I can bring her around for a short time. You must be quick. 
I've nothing to say to you. 
Report us? Oh, no. Why, we might never get work from the guild again! And that would be different how, exactly? 
It's... it's you... you're the only one left. You did it! You killed them all! 
Kill! Kill the cat! Good dog. 
Is it true that Samuel Bantien used to be a thief? 
This Nord is an animal... a glorious beast. Watch her teeth... she bites! 
The other choice is more mental. They are designed to make the adventurers lose their grip on reality, much like the residents of Mania. 
I can teach you no more. But I myself learned a few tricks from a Wood Elf Hunter; I'm sure she could teach you a few things as well. 
You also have the ability to affect the weather in your Realm. As it is an extension of yourself, it will often have an effect on you, as well. 
The Fringe attacked? This may be our last day alive. Let's make the most of it. 
You're not going to like it. Jauffre doesn't like it. The Countess of Bruma certainly isn't going to like it. 
Are you still talking? Find us work. And money. 
Ah, so Motierre has escaped? Well done! As payment, I am pleased to award you this amulet, Cruelty's Heart, as well as another advancement in rank. 
Please leave me alone. I have important things to do. 
Syl has gone on another one of her rampages in Crucible. I'm certainly glad I live on the right side of the wall. 
Wonderful. I'll have the deed transfered to you. Here is your key to the door. 
Hello, Associate. It seems you've obtained the final recommendation you required. 
The Gatekeeper dead. Let's drink to the Gatekeeper! 
No! Let him go! 
Arise, my people! The restoration of Tam Riel begins today! 
The hunter is cast out of the pride. You are no longer a member of the Thieves Guild until the blood price is paid. 
You are the toast of Anvil, my friend! It may be only a temporary respite, but everyone feels better with that Gate closed. 
Thadon has died. I hope he didn't go quietly. 
I never want to see one of those gates again. 
If you get this, my disp is between 70 and 30. You should get info refusal for any lower. use Angry and Happy to raise and lower my disp. 
Morning, ma'am. 
And so it all falls into place... yes, yes, it all makes sense now. [Scribbles something on a piece of paper.] Here. This is your last task. 
Here it is... my pride and joy. A Grand Elixir of Exploration. Use it in good health, my friend. 
Gasp! Oh, thank goodness it's you, sweetie! Please, don't wander too far away. I feel safe with you. 
They've stopped it up. You... you must make it to the Wellspring, and let the waters flow... 
You've got a lot of nerve, showing your face around here after what you done to us. 
Any Shadowscale who lives to come of age is accepted into the Dark Brotherhood as a full member of the family. So it was with myself, and Ocheeva. 
Methredhel has delivered the diary to me. She has earned her place in the guild. You did not do so well. 
Alright. Anything I can do for you, just let me know. 
Yes, quite an amazing place really. Wonderful for relieving one's tension as you watch those troublesome adventurers suffer... no offence. 
That woman is a bit off-kilter. I don't even want to know what she's got in her basement. 
You bless me, Lord. 
Your attention is still needed at Highcross, though I realize it must be inconvenient for you. 
In fact, give it a try. Summon our friend to you now. I'll wait. 
Your life in the Sanctuary is over. Those contracts are behind you. Now, you will serve the Black Hand. You will serve me.  
I've spoken with Hermaeus Mora beneath the full moons! I've... 
Our only hope to weather this Oblivion invasion is to defend our walls and be damned to what happens outside them. 
I'm Rufrius Vinicius, Fighters Guild Hand-to-Hand trainer. 
Thank you for purchasing.... 
Thief! I will get Hrormir's Icestaff from you, dead or alive! 
I'm afraid you've missed the party. The guest of honor has already left. 
You did not expect to see me again, did you? You have no grasp of the power that my father has at his command. 
See anything else you're interested in? 
It gives me great pleasure to see you again, my lord. 
I'm afraid I can't remember what he said about them. Perhaps you should make the trip to Skingrad and ask him in person. 
I'd like to offer you a reward for your efforts. 
I think I'll stay here for awhile. Someone has to run this town. I'm certainly the best qualified. 
So, you've come back. 
Right then. You lead the way -- just try not to get us killed. Well, try not to get ME killed. 
Is something amiss? You have an ashen look on your face that tells me so. 
Oh, yes. I remember. I think it's directly south of Chorrol. Place was overrun with ogres though. Nasty brutes. 
Right! We're off! 
Something fundamental must have changed to make them possible. 
Seriously? 
What you want? It's okay. R'vanni doesn't mind. R'vanni likes it.... 
I'm a FREE knight. I don't have a lord. You got a problem with that? 
However, his shame attaches to me, and though the matter is too small for my attention, it is not too small for one of my servants. 
Hello. We haven't met, have we? I'm Sister Marie Palielle, the chapel healer, and trainer in the Restoration Arts. 
Hello again, my friend. 
Ah... you've got it. Looks fresh, too! I realize that you'll be paid by your superior, but take this as well. It might come in handy in your work. 
Yes... yes! Their commander, Kaneh, is gullible enough to take you at face value... 
It's a fine place, and Olav treats people well. 
You're the Gray Fox! Please don't hurt me! 
Just as I suspected!! They've gotten to you too! Not one of them involved in the conspiracy, and you expect me to believe that?! 
Very little is known of him, not even his name. 
Ahdarji trains, yes. Light Armor is the skill. Ahdarji must work very hard, now she is all alone in the world. 
There are those who prescribe a mystical quality to the Grove of Reflection in Milchar. If you ask me, the matter is purely practical. 
Unless you have word of the Gray Fox, my time is limited. 
Our job is to protect Cheydinhal from any aggressor. We are sworn to this duty and would die before letting any harm befall her. 
If you need light armor, talk to Maro Rufus at The Best Defense. 
Hail, friend! 
I'm glad to have you at my back. Okay. Let's do this. 
While carried, the scales will magically enhance your Strength, Intelligence and Agility... but diminish your Personality. A powerful tool indeed. 
The Council has agreed to keep his nature a secret, and in exchange he occasionally provides us with useful information. 
Well, well. So you've experienced both shades of madness. Wonderful. You seemed fulfilled. Full of fill. Bursting at the seams. Seamless. 
Okay, listen up. There are no disqualifications in a Grand Champion match. That means you can wear whatever armor you damn well please. 
You fight for the Blue Team. You fight against the Yellow Team. In order to fight in the Arena you must wear an Arena Battle Raiment.    
I don't understand what Glistel is doing with Malintus Ancrus. I mean, have you seen her? And have you seen him? I just don't get it. 
He's Reynald. I'm Guilbert. 
The risk is great, I know. I was at Kvatch. I saw the terrible power of the daedric siege engine. 
There is only one task with which you should be concerned. Intercept that soul gem before it reaches Mannimarco's hands. 
He's not available right now. You can either wait here for him, or come back later. 
Unfortunately, my master is only interested in the rarest and most unique Ayleid artifacts to add to his collection. 
I'll be waiting. 
On-Staya Sundew. Castle Leyawiin's steward. And chief advisor to Count Marius Caro. In theory... 
Alas, we have not seen the Altar of Despair for many years. It is in the underground part of Cylarne, which is controlled by the Mazken. 
Even worse, you killed the Listener! The Black Hand without a Listener is like a hand with no thumb. Even the Listener's successor is dead!  
Enough talk. 
She was a child, and some sick murdering dog struck her down in cold blood. I swear, if I find out you did this I'll kill you with my bare hands. 
Dementia is not outside the reach of my Lord's justice, whatever you may think. 
I'm glad it's working again. 
I'm sorry, I'm very busy now. There's still much work to be done. Good day. 
He knows a lot about it. Plus, he'll teach others how to use heavy armor. 
You're revolting. 
Arkay's blessings upon you. 
Only the Earl has a key. I have been warned never to enter it, on pain of death. 
Over the centuries there have been dozens of Gray Foxes. To the rest of the world he seems immortal and unchanging. I am hoping to be the last. 
Yes. Yes... I accept your challenge. Go... Go speak with Ysabel. Tell her you're ready. Then we'll... We'll meet in the Arena. Yes, that'll do... 
I'm cursed with ugliness, not stupidity. 
Ah! Cheydinhal... it's good to see its walls again. 
This is so embarrassing. 
I stand ready, Lord. 
I can't believe it. 
For my weakness, the Master sent me here, to torture my former comrades who showed similar ingratitude for his gift of eternal life. 
Don't get too close to the prisoners. 
I really wish you had followed my advice. 
Grrrr! 
Perhaps I could make you into something useful. Let's find out. 
You have complaints against merchants here? You file complaints with me. I fill out lots of forms, which go to a lot of people who ignore them. 
Oh, dear. This is worse than I'd expected. 
Her majesty cannot tolerate a liar. It is I who makes the rules here. If you need anything, you come to me. 
Of course the Blackwood Company is violent. That's what fighting is, isn't it? Violent? 
Big Head knows a secret about blades. Point them out, never in. Blade is out - poke, poke, poke! Kill the grandpa netch! 
The Count awaits within. Please, do not delay. 
Damn straight. I can only treat myself when I'm feeling flush. 
I've heard Right-Wind is good with a blade. No wonder he's in the Fighters Guild. 
Many guild members could be jailed. Find Methredhel in the Imperial City. She is co-ordinating the guild's response. 
Bless you! Orrin lives in the Castle. Hard to believe, eh? 
So good to see you! Is there anything you need? 
I don't know what you'll find in Camoran's Paradise. 
Ra'Jiradh greets you. His brothers are Hassiri and Urjabhi. The Black Horse Courier is our Imperial news service, chartered by the Elder Council. 
We have all died in the Master's service. Here in Gaiar Alata we are immortal, and wait to return to Tamriel after Lord Dagon's final victory. 
Anya Herrick, dear Inquisitor. She's been named as someone of interest. I do look forward to chatting with her, don't you? 
Until you get some information from Jorundr, I don't have anything else to tell you. 
We don't talk about him in public. The Thieves Guild follows the Gray Fox. However, we make sure that most folks think he is just a myth. 
Samuel Bantien. You want to learn a few tricks about Security, I'm your man. 
Help me out,friend. I need some skooma. Real bad. The good stuff. You know? Been dry for days. Got some skooma for me? I pay well. 
The Divine Avenger, huh? I like it! Yeah, that'll do nicely. All right, it's time to see if you're crazy good or just plain crazy.  
Oh. Yes, of course you're right. I shouldn't be telling stories when he could be in danger. 
How dare you invade this holy place! 
Somehow I think we will meet again. 
Slay the outsider! 
Do you know Othrelos? I'd like to learn how he gets around without being seen. 
You need to find the Count! Get moving! 
While I'm overjoyed to see a friendly face, I'm afraid I have some bad news for you. 
But you, you seem so pleasant! And dressed so well! You must have a very full purse. Very full indeed. You are a very fortunate soul. 
Hello. 
Your Majesty, we need to keep moving. 
My Medallion! I don't know how to thank you! 
Found it, have you? Silenced the hands that betrayed, and took what was mine? Then let me have the stone, so that the voices can be shut out. 
Right now I'm more concerned with the person who's been left for dead in this very house, not with that Legion dog. 
You'll be my champion. You'll grow powerful. You'll grow to be me. Prince of Madness, a new Sheogorath. Or you'll die trying. I love that about you. 
I'm not sure if the Cropsford settlers would be all too pleased about you stirring up a new goblin war, though. 
If you're hungry to read a lustful story, find Sontaire at Books of Bliss and check her inventory. 
Lord Dagon wrote it with his own hand, and gave it to the Master as a sign of His favor. None but the Master may touch it or read from it. 
I can't let you have it for free, I'm afraid. Come see me when you have some money. 
Truly? Very well. I wasn't quite finished with them, but as long as you remain in Sheogorath's favor, I will not conduct experiments on THESE people. 
My poor brother. I can't help but feel responsible. If he'd never known about me, he'd still be alive. 
Blackwood Company's a problem. Not for me. I mostly do training. But we don't see many contracts in Leyawiin guildhall. Blackwood gets them all. 
Calm yourself, Syl. You're making my teeth itch. You still hold your office. I suggest you see to your duties. 
Heard any news from the other provinces? 
Are they gone? 
My name is Agata. I'm responsible for enchanted item recharge for the Guild here in Leyawiin. 
I shopped at Three Brothers a couple of days ago. Not sure which one I talked to, though. 
Can't you settle this peacefully? 
No? Suit yourself. You know what you have to do if you ever want training from me. 
A secretive cult devoted to the Daedra Lord Mehrunes Dagon, the Prince of Destruction. 
But their greatest error was marching through Morrowind on the way to their objective and dismissing the response it would garner from Vivec. 
Oh. It's you again. 
We are kin, yet I cannot help but despise you. Leave my sight, before I do something I regret. 
No. They were taken by surprise. I'm sure the Legion has everything under control. 
I am anxious to hear news of the book. 
Earil has a big problem with Brithaur. I don't know exactly what the problem is, but it's safe to say Earil is making a huge fuss over it. 
He'll try to offer you the same kind of deal, that handsome devil, but he can't be trusted! Make the right decision. 
Word has been sent that the Necromancers have been quite busy, creating black soul gems for their master. 
Seven of the evening watch, and all's well. Everything's fine, ma'am.  
Revenant, you say? And it represents something in the Heavens? It sounds familiar. Let me think... 
Do you suppose the armies will start killing people now? I'd keep an accurate count of all the corpses. 
And look. No jokes about the Heavy Armor, eh? Not every Bosmer sneaks around with bows and arrows. I'm as tough and beefy as any Orc. Got it? 
I thank you for your help. I'm sure your conscience weighed heavily upon you as you led Ulrich to his death. You did the right thing. 
We seek what the darkness hides, and the Night Mistress is our guide. 
Please, speak freely. 
Her... her light has gone out. What will we do now? Are we damned to walk in darkness forever? Who will lead us? 
Gotta run! 
I am your twin brother. When we were very small, our farm was attacked by ogres. My ... our father and I escaped. 
I can't reveal that! It would be far to dangerous. I don't know you that well. 
In truth, I welcome the chance to talk. For I feel a kinship toward you I cannot explain. We are brothers, bound by duty and destiny. 
Bah! See, I knew you'd laugh. Some big hero you are. You're all the same. Nothing to do but laugh at an old man and his troubles.  
Found him, did you? Well, I suppose that's good. 
I don't know all the details, but I heard that she complained to the Council until they removed Teekeeus from his position at the Arcane University. 
As promised, I'd like to compensate you for your efforts. 
I agree.  He's always writing in that little notebook.  Sometimes I think he's watching me! 
I'm not buying a discount spell. That's just a bad idea. 
Bring that book immediately to Thoronir. 
He must have moved the loot when I left our campsite to get us supplies. Brave of him to bury it so close to town. 
I will cast you into the darkness! 
Wouldn't surprise me if you were here spying on me for You-Know-Who. 
Skingrad's wines are the best in Tamriel. I  invite you... try them for yourself. Here, it is perfect for grapes, and perfect for wine. 
Stand fast for Bruma! 
Please, share the hospitality of our home. 
No surprises with this next one, just a High Elf with a chip on her shoulder. Get up to that Arena and make her beg for death! 
Poison is "potion" spelled differently. Both come in bottles, but one is good to drink! Singing potions! Ringing potions! 
I'm sure he was difficult to travel with, and I respect your patience. Most would have given him up for dead rather than deal with his ego. 
Only a real man can swing this hammer around. 
The Principalities have sparkled as gems in the black reaches of Oblivion since the First Morning. 
You fit the bill perfectly. It's a shame it had to end in so much violence, but someone was bound to get hurt sooner or later. 
One theory is that the stones were once magical, but they have lost their magic, either through age and disuse, or because of sin or neglect. 
Now we find out what really happened. And we let it be known. I want to show the people who the Blackwood Company really are. 
I know those sewers well. They will allow you access to the prison, but are home to some fearsome creatures. Tread carefully. 
With the Gatekeeper gone, it's only a matter of time before we have every manner of riff-raff swarming into the Isles. 
He's an interesting man, and an amazing fighter. 
Bet you think you're somethin' huh? You call yourself a citizen of the Empire? No respect for order, no respect for law. You make me sick. 
If the Amulet is truly the key to restoring the barriers between our world and Oblivion, you must waste no time in recovering it. 
The Great Torch is burning again! This calls for a celebration! You can spot me, right? Just a few gold? 
I have to get back to work now. 
Hello, stranger. Luciana Galena. I'm Bravil's Advanced Trainer for the Light Armor discipline. 
I didn't say they took him -- he went with them! I've heard his voice a few times around here. I think... I think he joined them! 
Faelian? Yes, I know who he is. But I'm really not in the habit of discussing such things with strangers... 
Rats, I would imagine. Horrible little things. I always keep a powerful rat poison around in case I see one of the little monsters. 
I have no time to talk, friend. As soon as my father arrives, we head back to the farm. These creatures must be dealt with. 
It means "Magicka Shines." Taken in context with the other inscription about Magicka Darkening, perhaps there's an alternate translation. 
Greetings, Imperial brother. 
She knows so much about us that she can read our minds! But she doesn't know about you yet. So, you must do it. Get rid of her. Get rid of Cindanwe! 
Look out! The northern Obelisk has been reactivated! 
He has taken to asking for money from others to purchase spirits. A porter's wage does not befit his habit. 
This contract requires stealth and subtlety. You possess neither. When you fail, I will gladly take your place. 
What seems to be the problem? 
If they're gone, then there's no point in hanging around here. 
No matter. Will you ask him to visit me? I would be most grateful. 
Find Marana Rian in the Imperial City. She can teach you what you wish to know. 
They sure do sell food. Yup. You can buy food there. 
I've heard of it, but I don't really know what it is. Something about tapping into the power of the weather. Those Ayleids were pretty crazy. 
My husband is down south in Anvil County, working the Valenwood line, hunting down bandits and smugglers. 
You are weak, like the gods you pray to! 
The Blades have occasion to use them in our undercover work, as well as a means to move around the city without attracting attention. 
Lord, it is best You leave this place. 
Oh wait, there's one more thing! I sent Porkchop the boar up to the Arena to help you out. He'll at least keep one of them distracted! Now good luck! 
Very well. I seem to have misjudged you. 
Hrol Ulfgar is dead, and his clan believes our family responsible! This is madness! 
He might come back if he knows I'm still here. I'm not staying here! 
I've told you everything I know! I swear! 
I set out to create a way to conquer my failings, but it seems the tables had turned, and they conquered me. 
I've never used his services, but I hear he's a good teacher. 
Prisoner! Help the Emperor! 
No apples. Don't like apples. Got mutton? Fritters? 
With this gem in your possession, you will be impervious to his attempts to enthrall you. When he fails, that is when you shall strike. 
I hope the Imperial Watch goes away soon. 
I can only hope that Farwil and his knights manage to close that Oblivion Gate. The fate of Cheydinhal hangs in the balance! 
Quite a feat to get past the Gatekeeper. 
If you wish to be reinstated, you must perform a service for the guild. Are you willing to do so? 
Centuries ago, Vitharn was overrun by Fanatics. We were soft and failed to defend ourselves. I was the weakest of all. 
I hope you'll make the right choice. Umbacano must not have the Crown of Nenalata. 
Let's keep my problem with Audens just between you and I. 
If they're out here, they'll be in this area. I can't imagine there are more than four of them. Let's take care of this. 
I cannot believe that the attack on Kvatch is a coincidence. The enemy seem to know all our secrets. 
It is not surprising, considering Morrowind's violent past. We can only hope the troubles subside quickly. 
I will wrap you in vampirism's dark embrace. You'll never even know I was there. But when you awaken, we will be of the same blood.  
The leader of the Dalvilu has been found dead. This is a sad day for all of Bleaker's Way. 
That's what the Empire has come to. I doubt any of the other cities will be sending us aid either. Every man for himself these days. 
There are rats and goblins down there... but from what I've seen of you, I'm guessing you are an experienced Rogue. Am I right? 
Her house is almost directly across the street from mine, southwest of the Great Chapel. Coincidence? I don't think so. 
I will tell you nothing of the three signs. You are an unbeliever and a fool. 
Do you think? I've never noticed anything. 
I'm afraid you lack the funds for the room. Perhaps someplace else would suit you better? 
If that's what you're looking for, there's no one better to talk to than Maro. 
Ha ha! That should keep her occupied. She'll spend months putting everything back in place! 
I'm with you. Completely. 
Wouldn't miss it. 
I'm here to relieve you. 
You should speak to the Grakedrig Ulfri at once. She will be glad of your help to rid Cylarne of the arrogant Aureals once and for all. 
Ummmm.... 
Countess Carvain would prefer if you speak to her in person. She also said to present you with this stipend as a taste of things to come. 
Oh, by the Nine Divines, why do I get all the riff-raff? 
The key to successfully completing this contract is effectively blending in with the other guests. So for Sithis' sake, do not wear your hood... 
Go see Servatius Quintilius. He's new and might be stupid enough to try and do something about it. 
Have you seen the new Gatekeeper? I hear they built him with four arms and no head! Or was it four heads and no arms? 
Wander the streets, fields, and public places of Skingrad to your heart's content. Just don't include me in your social explorations. 
Remember, the portal closes behind you. Anything you need, carry it with you. 
Watch your step in the Silo. Thadon doesn't want just anyone traipsing through there. 
Sheogorath's blessings upon you. 
Did Kishashi send you with something? A certain utensil, or weapon... depending on who you ask? 
So what are you trying to tell me? That Matilde is the killer? Why are you trying to turn me against her?  
The Greymarch is upon you! 
Your decision is a wise one. You would be foolish to think that you might gain the favor of Boethia. 
I need help collecting Swamp Tentacles. I'll even pay you. 
You got your people, and you got your dogs. Dogs are loyal and stupid. People are smart and devious. I'll stick with dogs. 
Thank Stendarr for the chapel here in Chorrol. A lovely place, and the healers are excellent. 
Meet me in my house tomorrow at midnight. I'll have information for you. Just please spare me. 
There certainly aren't any smiths in New Sheoth that collect Amber or Madness Ore. That junk is useless. 
It's all tied together, I'm telling you. The Fringe, the weather we've been having, the price of cheese... it's all connected! 
You again, huh? So what is it this time? Better start talkin' before my sword starts swingin'! 
You should know better than to give heed to rumors. 
What's the latest news? 
If you need more assistance with your training, seek out Marana Rian in the Imperial City. She uses the shadows like no other I've seen. 
You've shown me mercy. I won't forget that. Thank you. 
No. I still can't decide what to paint today. The trees? The sky? It's all so complicated! 
I think maybe he's been following me.  I see him every morning on my way to Chapel.  I've tried to say hello but he always pretends not to hear me. 
Oh, you're back. 
I heard people saying they ran into goblins around here not long ago. I can't stand those things. 
Don't you think Mach-Na runs an excellent bookstore? 
I've heard they're not happy about it, but Lord Sheogorath has forbidden them to do anything about it. 
Thank goodness you arrived when you did! I feared that I'd be thrown to the slaughterfish. 
So? What happened? 
I know you're ready! I already approved your match, you idiot! Now get up to that Arena and spill some blood! 
You do not yet qualify for further advancement in the guild. 
Bah! Don't get your linens in a bunch. You have no authority in this house, or anywhere else. You're not even in the Legion anymore!            
Well, not much to say really. These gates to... other places... ummm, well... it's very hard to explain. I'm not sure I even understand it. 
Sleep? But... Nah. No, I... I'm not tired. Not tired right now. I have lots of... you know... energy. The skooma! I can feel it... in my veins... 
We lost two more in that skirmish, as well as Farwil and I being wounded badly. It was at this point we considered retreat. 
That bastard! Seridur dares accuse me of being a vampire? Me?! Ha! He's the one who is the vampire! 
The priest has reactivated one of the Obelisks! 
Rufrius Vinicius is good with his fists. I've seen him in action, and it's impressive. 
I... I don't remember what happened afterwards. I woke up in the marshes and fled underground. 
This is the Bay Roan stables. Are you interested in a horse? 
I prefer to just listen to people talk. Some of the conversations they have are truly remarkable. 
Sheogorath has vanished? I certainly hope it had nothing to do with the Greenmote Upsidedown Cake I sent to the Castle. 
Just between the two of us, I wish the Countess would worry a bit more about the security of the city and a bit less about her damned painting. 
How can I assist you today? 
By Ysmir's dragon blood, what's wrong with you? Two people are dead! It's hardly the time to chat about that Legion lackey! 
Mortal! You could have just stopped by to see Me. Would have saved you some lettuce, you know. I believe I'm displeased. 
Thank you! Now, we're not quite sure where the estate is located. We'll offer up what we know, however. 
Oh, and don't worry. We'll try to match the creatures to your combat abilities, so the fights will always be more or less "fair." Sounds good, huh? 
This'd be a good time to have a friend with an ear to the ground, what with all the crazy goings-ons in Crucible, you know what I mean? 
If I could use a shield as well as Ambrose, I'd charge people for training, too. 
Francois Motierre hasn't left his house in days. Hasn't come down to the tavern, refuses to have visitors. I think the man's gone batty. 
He's very handsome. But please don't tell him I said so! Hehe!   
I'll tell you what. I'll take the book, and then if you can read me the inscriptions, I'll see if I can find translations for them. 
Blessings of the Shadow upon ye. 
Fall back! 
Don't worry, we'll keep the Emperor Martin safe here. No enemy has ever taken Cloud Ruler from the Blades. 
The captain's down! 
If the Fringe has been attacked, Crucible could be next. 
Help Theranis bring back this book. If Theranis is unwilling or unable, bring back the book yourself. Are you agreeable? 
She doesn't leave home much, but apparently Luciana Galena has a lot of experience fighting in light armor. 
Unfortunately, the Chalice is locked away as well. I have no wish to retrieve it myself, but fetching it might do you some good. 
One of the Gray Fox's top bosses, they say. Spends all day drinking at the Oak and Crosier, but he's been asking questions about the Jemanes. 
Doing a bit of digging, I'm afraid Rosentia's been stuck with the Staff of the Everscamp. Nasty bit of "fun" by Sheogorath, I'd say. 
I must confess... that Nord was a disappointment. 
The daedra seemed to come out of nowhere! 
Here we are: "Magicka Darkens." Hmm, that's an odd one. Perhaps it's not a literal translation, then... is there another inscription like it? 
You've taken up enough of my time. 
Sorry. I'm new in town. Don't know a soul. 
Good. Follow me, and don't worry. You can trust me. 
What is the meaning of this desecration? Who has disturbed my ancient slumber? 
A new Gatekeeper! Excellent. We might be onto something with you, after all. That should keep out the stragglers. 
Yaaaaa! 
Then what are you doing here? Come back when you have the money. 
Earil's Mysteries sells a number of unique spells. Doesn't sell any mysteries, though. 
Die! 
Sheogorath has fallen and you seek the means to foil the machinations of the Prince of Order. You seek the Throne of Madness. 
You've seen this with your own eyes? I must be sure it isn't a trap if I'm to take such a risk. 
You want to be the best? Then you'd better head over to The Best Defense and talk to him. Getting him to train you will be no small feat, though. 
Nivan has been murdered, and by one of the Ulfgar clan! Barbaric Nords! Mindless animals! They will pay for their actions. 
Yes, Seed-Neeus is worried sick about her.  I hope nothing has happened to her.  Sweet girl, but naive. 
Yes? Is there something you require? 
Miscarcand is one of the most extensive Ayleid ruins in Cyrodiil. It was the capital of one of the ancient Ayleid kingdoms. 
His room is downstairs, in what I like to call the Private Quarters. Use that hatch in the floor over there. But don't expect a warm reception. 
The Necromancer's Amulet and the Bloodworm Helm have been taken. 
We keep the Greenmote safely tucked inside the Greenmote Silo. You can imagine the ruckus if its location was known. 
I'm afraid so. My father had a bit of an issue with gambling. I'm afraid he built up a rather large debt. Now that he's gone, the debt is mine. 
How about you just keep walking? 
I do hope it didn't cause too much trouble. 
Still... If I could prove who I really am, and show the world that an Orc can be noble in blood as well as deed... Maybe... Yes! You could help me! 
Your business is appreciated. 
I've never seen a dead Gatekeeper. I should add him to my list. Did I ever tell you I've counted over a 900 dead rats...? 
Ah, summoned again. My Lord does so enjoy that, as is His prerogative. I'll assume you're done for now. 
I really don't have time for the likes of you. 
I'm offering a reward for information leading to the arrest of the Gray Fox. Until he is turned over to me, the Waterfront is closed for 'business.' 
I don't know! Isn't that wonderful? It could be any of them... All of them, perhaps. We'll just have to start torturing people to find out! 
I had hoped we'd spend more time together, but yes, I realize you're being honest. Thank you for your time, Nelrene. 
As long as the Blackwood Company has access to the sap, we are all in danger. I fear they no longer know what they do. 
I know of at least one soul it stole. Lenwin. She's the one who found the blasted thing. I suppose you want to hear about the person now. 
Do you really believe they sent you here for a book? No, they sent you to spy on me.  
Blood, liquid nutrient, that ocean which casts pearls of life upon the shores of existence.... 
But my message is actually one of comfort. The world is ending, and we can't do anything about it. Once you accept that, you'll be at peace, like me. 
Jastia Sintav. Jena's my sister.  
Order's time has come. The Greymarch is upon you. 
What's wrong with you? Farwil may have been a pain in the rear, but that was no reason to slay him! 
I don't know what to say. 
And now, three people lie dead, and you look as if you haven't a care in the world. It just looks a bit... suspicious. That's all I'm saying. 
You'll need wood for the staff before Delmar can assist you. 
Yeah, I still got rooms. What do you need? 
I swear I didn't know that was your pig. Eh? Oh. Sorry, I looked like someone else just then. 
I've got something for you. Could be tough. There are some escaped fugitives for you to find, meat. 
I want him dead. I need him dead! His bones are calling to me. Rumor has it you want him dead, too. 
It is my great honor to release my soul to Oblivion in service to Lord Sheogorath. Farewell. I will not walk these lands for many a year. 
Can you really do it? Can you bring this eternal nightmare to an end? 
It is an honor to speak with the living legend of the Dark Brotherhood! Your deeds are an inspiration to us all! 
Impossible! You defeated the three of them alone? I - I'm humbled by your skill, and fear that assaulting you would lead to my own quick demise. 
We might be able to use someone of your talents... if you've got a clean record, and a good reputation. Are you interested? 
I don't have any horses for sale right now. You bought our last Black horse. 
My name is Ancus Afranius. I do whatever comes to hand. Or nothing, when I can afford it. 
So, what does he do? What else? Casts a spell. You can see how well that went. Two of each of us walking around this place. 
Reman Broder is great with a bow. I think he could shoot the grapes off the vines, which is handy, since he works at the vineyard. 
You're not easy to get a hold of. What have you found out? 
Ambroise Canne is really good with his shield. Even better than Falus Calidus, I think. 
Suddenly weapons appeared in their hands and they cut the Prior down before he could move! They saw me watching and I ran. 
If he were smart, he'd thank Sheogorath it's out of his hands now. And, of course, he'd never risk himself traveling through Dunroot Burrow to get it 
Using magicka, I will slow your heart rate, your breathing, your movement, and your thoughts until they may as well not be functioning at all. 
The Earl of Imbel was attacked and killed in his own home. I heard the body burned in the sunlight. 
Sheogorath is gone. Better carry a blade, just in case. Use it on your enemies, if things get bad. Or on yourself, if things get worse. 
The enemy comes. Prepare yourself. 
This place is so strange. Dreamworld, you say? It's more like a nightmare. I don't like this place at all. I feel like I shouldn't be here. 
My favorite town? Anvil. Lovely old stone buildings, and the harbor at sunset is beautiful. 
It's the Great Hall. Those high windows -- they're not nearly as secure as they should be. If an assassin or spy should gain entrance... 
Othrelos. I'm a Sneak... Advanced Sneak, in fact. And I train Sneaks. No law against it.  
I am Countess Alessia Caro, wife to Count Marius. 
Let's keep moving. 
Great! 
This has gone far enough. It's past time I dealt with this madman once and for all. 
You came to watch these two Bloodletters do what they do best, and they're dying to prove their worth! So let the bloodletting... begin! 
It takes a skilled fighter to move well in armor that heavy. 
Others assign the runestones to the Merethic or Early First Era, primarily on the basis of their simple, even crude design and craft. 
Brodras has been teaching Fighters Guild members how to better use heavy armor. Odd for a Bosmer, but he's apparently good at it. 
Drunk with madness! Madness for all! 
Your Grace! We didn't expect you here. Aurig Desha is in command. You should speak with her. 
I can't accept that offer. 
Fort Runestones are stones with green runes, found singly or in pairs, in the ruins of some subterranean First Era forts. 
So, the accident has been staged, and Baenlin lies dead. Well done! You have more than earned your reward and bonus.  
Should you go looking for it, I hope that it would be for the sole purpose of bringing it here. 
Take your flies and your sores over there. 
But, this is all new! A fresh idea! Something I hadn't thought of, until I did. It's sure to work, even though it might not. 
It pleases me greatly to offer you this reward, and a well-earned bonus. Go now. Rest. I'll have another contract ready whenever you are. 
You again? Really? 
You have my assurance that my men and I will do everything in our power to keep the people of... Skingrad safe. We're here to help. 
If she means to escape, she'll do everything in her power to stop you. 
Is that man-cat gone yet? 
Roland was very much the loner. He never married, and was rarely seen outside his house. I'm surprised his secret wasn't discovered sooner. 
Oh yes... it's the miracle remedy for any disease!  I was told about this wonderful solution by a recent patron of my establishment. 
This is unbelievable. How can the gods let this happen? 
Perhaps they have learned the folly of attempting to touch a Daedra Prince. Take this, with my blessing. May it bring you order. 
I think I may have figured out the hidden message in Mankar Camoran's books! Do you have the third and fourth volumes with you? 
Determine what she's after, and how we may be rid of her. I do not want her here, spreading her lies. 
The day of Madness is over! 
The Greymarch has swept the Fringe. Order gathers its forces there as we speak. And I hate when people gather forces in My Fringe. 
It's somewhere in the Imperial City. The beggars will help you locate it, for a price. I can sell you lockpicks if you need them. 
We can't wait to return to Weatherleah, now that the ogres are dead! 
Any time you wish to visit me, I'll be here. 
Our situation is desperate, she controls our minds... but wait, I've said too much. 
Don't keep the Gray Fox waiting. 
Charge the courtyard! Leave none of them standing! 
She's upset, you idiot! Murder has that effect on people! 
Oh, that man disgusts me! I find his entire manner offensive. Why, just before you got here he told the most off-color joke about an Argonian maid. 
If you find something unique, it's worth checking with Una Armina. 
Flee, Fanatic! 
Don't you even care that Nels is dead? Maybe you killed him!  
You don't have the scroll? Then we have nothing to talk about. 
Why do I come to the Arena? Honestly? I love the way the combatants move. It's like an... an erotic dance. The bodies, the sweat, the... oh. I, um... 
You are talking again. You will stop. 
You take care now, buddy. 
Merchant's Inn in the Market, King and Queen in Elven Gardens, the Tiber Septim in Talos Plaza, and All-Saints in Temple District.  
My name is Hagaer. I don't get out much. Too many books to read. 
You're back. What news do you bring me? 
That's me, genius. Down here, I'm the boss. I don't care if the Emperor's ghost is floating around. In the Bloodworks, he answers to me. 
Tadrose Helas teaches smithing at the Fighters Guild. Well, when she has the time. 
Ah, ten Welkynd Stones. Most useful for my research. Thank you. And now, I am at your service. 
For Vitharn! 
Yes? Is there something else I can help you with? 
Arden-Sul has willed it to be... the Gatekeeper is dead and the newcomer to the Isles will join us in praising his name! 
I was terrified of him at this point. Two days later, the Bruma City Guard traced us to our makeshift campsite. 
Please tell me you have some good news... 
If I'm to buy the wine from you, you need to have it with you. 
Then we'll settle this the old way. With blood. 
I am glad to hear that he survived, but I fear he will take the Emperor's death particularly hard. 
Speak with J'bari in Leyawiin. He can teach you all that you need to know. 
All right, all right. We can deal with this. You'll have to get it back, that's all. 
I have the highest respect for my father... I just wish he could have seen us cross blades with the enemy. 
As you say. Perhaps fate will return you to us, someday? 
We find Blackheart and get that weapon. We'll finish this contract and let all of Cyrodiil know what happened here. 
You take what I get. I get notice at the last second, and I have to jump on it. No time to be picky about it. 
Have you found anything for me? 
Both vineyards, Tamika's and Surilie Brothers. Vintage 399. Oh, what a good year that was... 
I'm sorry, but I don't know yet. The Xarxes... it clouds my mind and haunts my dreams like nothing I've ever experienced... 
Make all possible haste in reaching Dylora. She will be able to better inform you as to what happened, and what is required to secure Pinnacle Rock. 
If you'd like to stay, I'd suggest getting a room at the Border Watch Inn. We don't get many visitors, but S'thasa serves a fine ale. 
Umbra is my blade. It is who I am. Who I was meant to be. 
Irene Metrick and I spend a lot of time together, true. We're just good friends. But don't tell Elisa. She wouldn't understand. 
I appreciate the interest you're taking in helping us with our situation. 
Ready for duty? 
Oh, right, how could I forget. That time we were almost dashed upon those rocks, near the city of Firsthold. That was somebody else at the helm. 
You avoid answering my question ... 
Hindaril is destroyed? 
Very well. Take your time. 
He is an old and powerful Necromancer. Traven will recognize the name, even if you do not. 
Yes. I've heard of mages who seal portals with an ingredient as a key. Makes the door impossible to lockpick. 
I've already given you the scroll. Stand in the middle of town, read it, poof! It is exactly like magic. 
Guild members who have access to the University can craft their own spells, not to mention chat with the most important people in the guild. 
I have seen what you have done, child, and how you must make amends with the guild. 
He's a saint. Sure, he spends a bit of time at the Tap and Tack, but you can't blame him. 
Sunlit freedom! Yes, I stole that ring from Ahdarji. When I went to sell it, the fence told me I was too hot for him. 
Once you've rested here, you need to continue along the Gold Road, heading east towards Kvatch. 
Lord Dagon will welcome your soul in Oblivion! 
Some bloodthirsty monster killed that woman in cold blood. It's obvious to me one of the other guests killed her to eliminate the competition.  
So I guess I'll have to go see what this is about. Thank you. 
Well, well, if it isn't the Messenger of Death! How's our new Grand Champion, huh? You ready to make me some money? Ha ha ha ha ha!  Ahem... 
I spoke with Deetsan at the Mages Guild recently. I've never seen someone so happy about being in the guild. 
You... you're the only one left... By Azura, no! Please, please don't kill me. I beg of you! Spare my life! Aggghhh! 
What do you call someone who wants to kill you? Nothing! 
It's just down the road from Passwall. It's where Relmyna created the Gatekeeper. 
Are you mad? My life is on the line and the entire Brotherhood is at stake! We don't have time for this nonsense! 
Unacceptable! 
I've heard him talk at length about the Mages Guild. I understand he's been teaching members about Illusion, as well. 
Oh, and perhaps you saw the sign outside. Slight mistake, you know. Bit of bad luck there. So, what can I do for you? 
Welcome. My master instructed me to show you up immediately. Please follow me. 
You are unproven, or at least insufficiently proven for the tasks this one has available. 
Things Found? More like Things Found in the Trash. 
You did it! You closed that damned Gate! Now we have a chance to take the enemy by surprise. 
The Black Hand welcomes you! 
Here they come!  
Just look at the Yellow Team's Dark Elf! You can see the murder in his eyes! Can the Blue Team's Bloodletter even hope to survive? Let's find out! 
You are a rogue hunter. Membership in the Thieves Guild is denied. Leave me now. 
So the Anvil break-ins were an inside job? The Fighters Guild took care of it? Good work. 
I can't believe it. Pfft. 
You're awake.... good. I didn't want to disturb you. I suppose you're wondering what I did with Selene? 
I can't believe they're here! 
Please, don't dawdle here... get to the Mages Guild! Hurry! 
Aye, there's a bed free if you need it. It'll be 10 gold for the night. What do you say? 
Okay, I'll head over there now. 
Look. I don't know you. I don't really want to know you. If you insist on talking to me, go right ahead. But I won't promise to be nice. 
I won't forget your service to our new settlement. Who knows? One day Cropsford may be a thriving town, and all because of you. 
Don't know. But it's too late to go back now. 
I shall also overlook your... transgression, and send a recommendation to the Arcane University. 
Memorial Cave, eh? Be very careful. That's obviously his true lair. There may be others with him. 
Shouldn't have any more problems with those cats. 
I've lived in Leyawiin all my life, and I must say, the Count has found himself a pretty little bride...and a smart one, too.  
Should you need something, I will be happy to oblige. 
It is always a pleasure to welcome another Dark Sister into our ranks! Truly, the Night Mother smiles upon her trusted daughters! 
Your Strong Elixir is complete. I think you'll be pleased with the results. 
I'd like my mind back, if you please. Or not. It's really up to you, Lord Sheogorath. 
I need to rest now, regain my strength. Don't forget to take the heart of the Argonian Agent. Present that to Teinaava, and he'll be none the wiser. 
If you need anything, talk to my father-in-law. This whole expedition was his idea. 
No stopping now. Some things can't be stopped. Trust me. I've tried. 
You have the items. Contrary to all prediction. Once again, you defy the path set before you. 
Lucky I'm not makin' ya swim. 
Oh, and don't worry, we're tossing all of his junk out as well. 
I'm the warehouse watchman, Damian Magius. 
Good, good. But let's not be too hasty. We must be sure of our findings. If there's any doubt, any doubt at all, it will weaken our position. 
One of the afternoon watch, and all's well. I hope I see you well, ma'am.  
No, you're not ready, because you've got a weapon equipped. You think I'm stupid? You take off that weapon, and we'll try this again. 
I went to the Chapel to get rid of a rash I'd picked up. Tumindil healed me right away. 
Sweet, sweet Skooma. Give it here. Give it here! 
I suppose I've got something I could use the Guild's help with. I need ogre teeth and minotaur horn for my alchemy experiments. 
Hmmm... don't know that you're dressed for it, but you seem a really likeable sort. I'll let you in. I'd better not regret this. 
Primo may be young, but he's no fool. He knows that the murder of two innocent people doesn't bode well for his own safety. 
You won't find a better property for sale. It's just inside the main gate, near the bridge to the chapel. 
Fight fire with fire! 
No... no! When I looked into Dovesi's face it was like peering at my own daughter. I... I feel like I've lost her all over again. 
Instead, he has confined me to this place and forbidden me to die. I have not seen another creature until fate, predictably, sent you to me. 
Did you hear about Bradon Lirrian? A vampire hunter named Raynil Dralas made his way into town, snuck into his house and killed him. 
Do you have a death wish, boy? 
I can't believe nothing has been done yet. The place is a skooma den, pure and simple. 
Until next time. 
You are here to help rebuild the Gatekeeper. That is very good of you... considering what you did to him. 
Thadon has told you what he wants. Consider speaking with the others in his court, particularly his steward. 
I can't tell you any more than I already have. I'm sorry. 
Hey! Whoa! You shouldn't sneak up on people like that! 
She shouldn't even be here anymore. Hell, the only reason her father ever fit in anywhere is because he kept a low profile. And look what it got him! 
I know, I know! Sometimes I wish we'd run the matches through the night, too! But the Yellow Team needs their beauty sleep! Ha ha ha ha! 
However, I'm afraid he's slipped through our fingers. If he's as crafty as he's been up to now, he's probably halfway to Vvardenfell. 
She's explored the back country outside of Chorrol quite a bit. 
I understand that S'drassa is still trying to create a potion to cure skooma addiction. 
Her name is Herminia Cinna. She lives here in the Imperial City, in the Elven Gardens district. 
The Great Torch burns once more. Perhaps there's hope for all. Except me. Can't shake this cold.... 
Good afternoon. 
Lead the way. I'm right behind you. 
I'm Hasathil, Heinrich Oaken-Hull's wife. 
Yes, I remember Bradon mentioning that name once. He was part of the brotherhood he had created with Raynil. 
I read one of Casta Scribonia's books not long ago. Terrible stuff, if you ask me. But, some folks seem to like it. 
Terrible. Just terrible. 
You're too kind. 
We leave as soon as you're ready. I want to investigate Blackheart's stronghold at Arpenia. Meet me at the Leyawiin guild hall. We'll go from there. 
To Weynon Priory, then. 
Oh! Errr... Hello. 
Come back when you have the real thing. 
We are thieves, not murderers. That is the province of the Dark Brotherhood. 
We've lost too many of the Aureals already. I fear that we will not be able to hold the town for much longer. 
I do pay a nominal finder's fee, but of course the real reward is your contribution to posterity. 
I'll tell you what. Find me when Falcar's not around, and then we'll talk. After we've spoken, you can have the key. Believe me, this is important. 
Congratulations on your victory, sir. 
But what does she do? She sits in her chamber and dreams of revenge against Sheogorath! She is a liar and has stolen our lives. 
A visitor, yes? 
The former residents are said to fight for control of the sunken keep. 
Your offer is unacceptable. 
Did you know that J'skar trains other Mages Guild members in Destruction? 
I do so love pursuing a contract in the Imperial City! The alleys, the shadows, the challenge of evading Phillida's Legion troops! I envy you! 
The Empire has been saved, but the Septim bloodline, it's... it's broken. There is no Emperor. I can't help but feel a bit... obsolete. 
See ya. 
Have you ever spoken with Ohtesse? She's really a dedicated person. 
In any case, the Flame of Agnon here is always used to light the Great Torch of New Sheoth. 
No! You do not understand! Put away your weapons, I mean you no violence. Perhaps you can help me. 
Right. Let's get to bashing some goblin skulls. 
Yes? What'd I miss? 
Your destiny calls you down a different road. Please help us. 
None? The world is devoid of calipers and tongs? What a sad state of affairs. 
I'm not going out there. What's the point? There's nothing left. I'll just stay right here. 
His inventory must be stolen. It has to be. He prices less than it costs to make some of those things. Go see for yourself. 
I don't want to talk about it. I'm still very angry at Phintias. He promised me he would get one for me. I came all the way from Valenwood for it! 
I'm honored by your presence, friend. 
I am in Nine Divines....I wish I had quests to give...sigh... 
I... I don't know what to say. It all makes perfect sense now. Why else would Raynil have removed this journal from the crime scene in Skingrad? 
Please the Nine with good works, and visit Wayshrines of Stendarr for Blessings of Endurance. 
Falcar must have known, and yet he said nothing. How could he allow this to happen? 
I am Millona Umbranox, Countess of Anvil. I hope you enjoy your visit. I trust you will give us no cause to regret our hospitality to strangers. 
Report back as soon as you can. 
What? You have not eyes to see? The castle, of course! The only challenge worthy of a swift sneaker. 
The fall broke most of the bottles. He didn't want to claim responsibility, but I gave him what for and sent him away. 
The wood used for staves comes from a grove to the northeast of the Imperial City, near Wellspring Cave. 
Fail and fall! 
Whoa, look at the fangs on you! There's a new ruler in Crucible. Don't bite me! 
Travel safe. Raynil wouldn't think twice about harming you. 
How to say this nicely?  He's sort of the town eccentric.  Lived here for years, we've gotten used to his ways. 
However, when I spoke it and held the staff, four scamps suddenly appeared! I thought I was done for! Strangely, they all just stood there. 
We're alive! You did it! You beat that monster! We won! 
The Kvatch Oblivion Gate has been closed! Don't you understand what that means? We can beat the bastards! 
I tire of the self-styled heroes who set themselves in my path, only to prove unworthy in the event. 
Have you helped Captain Burd and his men close the Oblivion Gate yet? 
Lieutenant Rana, Blackwood Company. 
None in the Fighters Guild will speak with you again. We have no desire to consort with common criminals. 
I'm the count, and you have no business talking to the count, right? Good. All straightened out. Off with you, then. 
I heard Ita Rienus talking about the geography of Tamriel again. She's very knowledgeable. 
Time grows short. The cure must be administered as soon as possible. Please, hand it over. 
If you wish to meet the residents of Mania, you'll find them in the settlements of Hale and Highcross. Take care, though. 
The Arcane University is the seat of the Mages Guild in Cyrodiil. Located in the Imperial City, it houses the leaders of our guild. 
We are after the same things, your guild and I. Yet you worry about 'good' and 'evil' and do not accept they are manifestations of the same thing. 
The Gray Prince is nothing but a fake. Haven't you heard? His father was a vampire! He's no Orc. He's a monster. Someone should put him down. 
The arrows are ready. Here are some for you, and I'll keep some. 
That is a relief... I was sure... but you have proved yourself... trustworthy. A friend indeed! 
Well, I don't really know her, but she seems like a very respectable old lady.  
Syl enjoys having people tortured. She's a rank amateur. I could teach her a few things. 
By what authority do you disturb me?! 
I've heard rumors that someone has been keeping a close eye on Toutius Sextius. Seems harmless enough. 
Contained within its walls were the logical prediction of every action ever taken by any creature, mortal or Daedric. 
Let me know as soon as you discover anything else. Oh, and best not tell the others about this just yet. We must be sure, you understand? 
Need to practice more. 
Who told you that? 
Best of luck. 
Smile at your fellow man. Help him when he falls. Remember, these are the times of mirth and cheer. These are the times of Mania! 
How stupid I was to leave them outside all alone like that! All I wanted to do was give them some sun. Next thing I knew, they were gone! 
I heard the Gatekeeper was killed. I do hope one of my hatchlings wasn't responsible. That'd be ever so embarrassing. 
He is daedroth! TAMRIEL AE DAEDROTH! 
Well? What are you waiting for? You have the heart, and the altar awaits. 
What is it... brother? They send you to find me? 
What's a pretty young thing like me doing in this swamp town? I inherited the business from my late husband, and I aim to make it work. 
You're a clever one. 
I will now claim the honor of victory for myself here on the Altar of Despair. 
Did you see that? Twelve balls in the air at once! No one has EVER juggled that many at once. 
The dead walk? Interesting. Sounds like a place to avoid. 
I'm in the Fighters Guild, yes, and I can train for weapon and shield parries. Fadus Calidius is the name. 
The Ring of Desiccation! Perfect. It does everything I need it to. A wondrous piece of craftsmanship! 
I'm through talking to you. 
12, 13... A new ruler for Bliss... 14, 15. 
Not on my watch. Captain Burd will know for sure, though. We all report to him. 
Find ingredients for Margarte, huh? Works for me. I'll let the other men know. Appreciate your help, friend. And Oreyn should be happy. 
All right, then, the Yellow Team it is. How much do you want to bet? 
You want to speak to Sinderion of Skingrad. He's an alchemist over there who specializes in unusual plants, fungi and roots. 
You don't have the daggers yet? Time is growing short. Do whatever you must to get them! 
S'rathad greets you. 
He's certainly a talented smith. I'm glad he'll train others in the skill. 
Well... I normally stay out of the affairs of the great folk that come through Weynon Priory to see Master Jauffre. 
I heard there's a new adventurer trying to get into the Shivering Isles. No real matter to me, unless he can build a boat. 
Then please excuse me. 
All guild members have been instructed to deny you service, shelter, and assistance. From now until your death, you do not exist in our eyes. 
Sorry. But how is this my problem? 
Only after facing the truth will the Tree of Shades give up its branches to you.  
I'm Suurootan, proud owner of Novaroma, a little piece of Heartland Empire here in the lofty Jeralls. 
What kind of party is this? Someone has been murdered! 
Come. We must talk. 
My sword for the dragon! 
I'm Thurindil, son of Julianos and Mohi-Titona, Queen of Akavir. These slugs climbing my spine itch something fierce. Like to dance? 
Been here. Right here! All day! Last night, too! I wasn't there! Not there at all! I can totally prove it! Ask anyone! 
I'm... I'm still alive! 
Do you hear that sound? It's like a horse dying... 
Oh. You again. 
Run into him, have you? As I said, he was incompetent. Couldn't pass a simple lesson. 
And the only way to get into the gatehouse now would be through the passage at the North Guard House. But that's always kept locked. 
I wouldn't mind learning a bit about Mysticism. Seems like a useful skill. 
Excellent. Bring it back to me once you have it. 
Hail, Blade. What news? 
Good to see you again. I told Martin that Mankar Camoran was no match for you. 
Yes? You have something of interest to me? 
Back to work I go. 
So I can at least get blade and blunt training in Cheydinhal, can't I?  
The Dark Brotherhood must seek out a Wood Elf named Naarifin. She has need of our services, and we are only too happy to oblige. 
You'll want to talk to Teekeeus, if you're interested in joining the guild. Any other leader of a local guild hall can help you as well. 
For everyone's sake, would you just leave? Now? 
Though the citizens and creatures of Mania are colorful, they can often be quite deadly. I'm sure you can handle it, though. 
Fall back to the city before it's too late! 
I'm Bugak gro-Bol, and I say you better buy a goddam book. And right away, dammit! 
The four of you have a mission. The settlement of Water's Edge has contracted us to take care of some goblins in the area. 
He's a moron. One of these days, he'll be taught a lesson. 
There is an Orc in Crucible who's deathly afraid of cats. Can you believe such a hulking brute would be scared of something like that? 
We had everything here. Beautiful gardens. Fresh mountain air. Did you know Kvatch had the only Arena in Cyrodiil outside the Imperial City? 
Please make it quick, citizen. My patrol awaits, and a Legion steed can't keep still for very long... 
He is aware you are here, and should be waiting for you. See him at once. 
Areldil. We don't have any business, do we? Then, perhaps, will you excuse me? 
I understand none of the merchants of Crucible are having problems with Brithaur. He's their favorite guy. 
I see. Well, if you see anything around town, let me know. You could be their next victim. 
That Bloodmane Cave gang had an assassin and a high-level mage? Our gold soldier is a regular hard horse. 
Meet you at The Count's Arms. Good luck. 
Welcome, welcome, to the Arena, good citizens of the Empire! 
There never was a client that commissioned the guild to steal Llathasa's bust. Armand used you to flush out an informant that infiltrated the guild. 
So long as the gate holds, the keep will hold. 
There's no point in giving you any more money until you've brought me 10 more Nirnroot samples. Come back when you have them. 
Ah. Good. You should take that to Martin right away. 
Ma'zaddha is reluctant to speak to you, and I assume there's good reason. It would be worth finding another way to get him to talk. 
When the foul portal cursed Cheydinhal with its presence, we bravely entered to do battle with the vermin within. 
There's an Orc named Mazoga up at the castle claims she's a knight. Doesn't look like one to me. 
You've found the book? My trust in you was well-placed, it seems. Hand it over, if you please. 
You can't be here now. Please leave, and quickly. 
The Gardens are in the Fringe, near Passwall. Beware, Your Grace. Creatures of the sorceress' doing and undoing haunt those tunnels. 
Beware the vicious Scalon for it carries dread disease. If this foe bites you, then stay away from me please. 
Strength against strength! 
Secure it at once! It's the only thing we have left! 
What a dumb joke. 
Leave the Emperor in peace. 
I'm no "Gray Prince!" I'm the spawn of evil! I thought my father was a nobleman, not some blood-sucking monster! I... I can't... All a lie! A lie...  
How does one describe utter euphoria? 
Is this a joke? Do I look like I associate with common criminals, let alone grant them access to the guild? Begone. 
And I've been having moments of clarity that are quite unlike me. Like now. 
I'd like to help you, but the cost... I would have to try to obtain another copy for Gwinas, not to mention his disappointment if he found out ... 
I'm content here. Some day I hope to meet the right man, but not a seaman. Never.  
Count Skingrad is a very private person. I handle all the county's public affairs, and consult with the Count when necessary. 
Her steward, Tolgan, occasionally approaches individuals the Countess feels is worthy enough to seek her prize. 
Shhhh. The walls have ears! 
Then again... someone has to keep you in line. Make sure you don't bring the Guild down around our ears. 
There may be only three of us left, but we still can match blades with the best of them. 
I bid you a most gracious welcome, my lord. 
Thanks. That's a very good suggestion. I think I'll stop by the Grey Mare, and perhaps pay my respects to this Emfrid woman. 
You want to know the truth? I thought for sure Nels was the killer. But with him dead, my bets are now on Dovesi.  
As soon as we are out of sight of the castle's main gate, I'll tell you. 
0, 9. Ah, the doll. Poor Desideratus. 1, 5. Fanatics killed his whole family. 9, 6.  That doll is all he has left of them. 5, 5, 9, 4. 
She wasn't a bad sort until she hooked up with that rascal Weebam-Na. That's where you're likely to find her... at Weebam-Na's house. 
She is obsessed with collecting plants and animals. I'd steer clear of her. Now, do you mind moving? I need to sweep there. 
They're coming from someplace in the Great Forest. I don't know where, but Rallus may know more by now. 
It's connected to the rest of the chamber, we know that much. We just don't know how it works. 
You should go back to the Imperial City. Baurus may have learned something about the assassins. 
I kept my side of our bargain. Make sure you keep yours. 
You dare oppose the might of the Imperial Legion? 
I told you a million times, that wasn't my fault! The wheel was covered with gull droppings! My hand slipped! Could've happened to anyone! 
I see you there. What? 
Lachance would not have selected you for a contract unless he had the utmost confidence in your abilities. Best not let him down. 
I thank you from the bottom of my heart. I hope that the amulet helps keep you safe on whatever roads you may travel. 
As you wish. I stand at the ready. 
You're outmatched, Elf! 
Make it quick. The longer we spend down here, the more chance we have of being discovered. 
Rumors placed it in a snowy vale called Pale Pass. That's where Reman focused his attention. 
I'm impressed. It only took him a day to track the vampire down. I guess that's why he does it for a living. 
I'm afraid the Count does not see anyone without an approved appointment. Do you have an appointment? 
I have no more to say to you. Leave. 
The pleasure is all mine. 
You have the hands of an illusionist. 
Whoever brings me the the diary of Amantius Allectus, without killing him, will be invited into the guild. 
Please, follow me. 
I was Alain, loyal Blade of Emperor Tiber Septim. I do not know how long I have been dead. It feels like an eternity. 
I am resident to encounter the minotaur. Its horny protuberants cause me great conflagrations. 
Unworthy, unworthy, unworthy! Useless mortal meat. Walking bag of dung!  
The prey escapes. Return when you have the book or know that Theranis will return with it. 
They seem to live fine on land and water. 
I'm ill, not stupid. That's a bad deal. 
He should be around the camp somewhere. He was with the survivors we rescued from the Chapel of Akatosh. 
Sure would be nice to see one more corpse around here. One that looks like me, but isn't me. Take my meaning? 
If you're afraid to have even a friendly little sparring match, why would I waste time training you? 
Luronk and I have both testified against the Watch Captain, Hayn. Thank you for helping us find the courage to stand up for ourselves. 
You have the hands of a healer. 
Mankar Camoran's chattels trapped the Xivilai Anaxes in a cave. He is their Lord, and thus they mock him and me. 
Helvo Atius. Sevarius says I have to stay out of sight. So I'm stuck here until things blow over. 
You can find some good deals at Things Found. Ahjazda has an interesting collection. 
I hope this is important, Associate. 
I have mastered my fears. There is no terror to compare with what Vaermina has shown me in my dreams. 
I guess even our Lord Sheogorath needs to take a vacation once in a while. Not me, though. I'm happy to keep working. 
They call me Isleif the Open-Handed. Because I'm so generous... 
It is good to see you again. 
Besides tasting incredible, the magic within the wine allows the imbiber to be gifted with Night Eye! 
He's forgotten more about picking locks than most people will ever know. 
Hit her harder! 
Without the crystals in place, the Resonator of Judgment, Xedilian's power source, cannot be restored. 
Please, my friend. I need your judgement, not your obedience. 
You have been asked to work with Herdir, I understand.  
He also posted a guard so that her tomb wouldn't be disturbed. Used to be anyone could visit her, but now it's off limits to the public. 
So many people dead. I just don't know who to trust anymore. 
Free Xivilai Anaxes, and I shall reward you with the key to the Forbidden Grotto... the Bands of the Chosen. 
I see you have served my brethren, and now you come to serve me. I am Hermaeus Mora. Past, present, and future are as one to me. 
Vampires? Hahaha! You have been speaking to Gilen. That silly old man keeps reading books about those creatures. 
And what can you offer the world, except the hot air escaping through that hole in your head? 
It belonged to an ancestor, Oreyn Bearclaw, but was lost for centuries. It was found only when Malacath wrongly believed my family line ended. 
Yes, Faelian has been killed, but you did not exercise discretion. How many witnesses were there? We may never know. 
I hope the reward will suit the risk. It's all I have. 
Orcs don't ride horses. They eat horses. And sometimes I think they're the smart ones. Wait, maybe it's Dunmer who eat horses. 
Some clown keeps tossing meat out in my backyard, and it attracts dogs from Necrom to Daggerfall. 
I do hope our paths cross again. 
Your trust is appreciated. 
You brought me the Amulet of Kings? This cannot be. Let me see it. 
They're tough to get, but I prefer fresh, and I'll pay well. And I just don't trust those Blackwood Company folks to find them. 
Good. I want to get this over with as soon as possible. 
Not good enough, I'm afraid! 
I've got a moment, but little more. What do you need? 
Have faith, Aloys. I'm sure my father will think of something. 
Clever girl, I taught her everything I knew. Too bad she's turned that knowledge against me. Come back when you have the real thing. 
Now I am running errands for the Gray Fox himself. I owe you much for your help. 
You got some hot property? 
I'm afraid I have no time for small talk, friend. I'm waiting for my father, Valus Odiil. Have you seen him in town, by any chance? 
I'd rather have someone else just repair it. I'd hate to have to take time to repair my armor when I'm doing something else. 
I've been looking into them. Heard some disturbing things. We know they're a danger to us. And we know they're good at what they do. 
Should you be confronted by this cowardly mage, do not hesitate to protect yourself with whatever means possible. 
Get the ring for me. We'll need it as proof. 
Chancellor Ocato heads the Elder Council and is the closest thing the Empire has to a leader right now. 
Go carefully. 
It is no dishonor for us to speak. 
J'mhad keeps the grounds of the Temple nice and neat. Other things, J'mhad does, when they ask. 
What are Scholarship, Love, and Mercy when compared to Fate, Night, and Destruction? The gods you worship are trifling shadows of First Causes. 
Well, Henantier's been warned that if he strays outside the Guild rules one more time, he may be up for summary dismissal. 
Please, bring Rosentia this information at once. And if you can, help her. I think she's about to crack under the pressure, poor thing. 
Get back to me when you change your mind. 
Twelve more... Twelve! I was so close! 
The Key opens all doors. 
According to my research from the tome, I'll need at least 20 more Nirnroot to make the next magnitude of Elixir. 
Speak with Irlav Jarol. He can give you the details you need. 
Okay, so you did it again. What do you want from me, a hug? Take your gold and get out of my face, Pit Dog. 
I've got a Quintat that says they can ipanate 
Few of the citizens can remember the last Greymarch. Or they choose not to. 
Yes, sister? 
Esteemed Grand Champion, you may leave the Arena now! See the Blademaster to receive your winnings, and be awarded your Raiment of Valor!             
Have you taken care of business yet? It's exhausing just waiting for you. 
You ain't gonna stop until you hit Champion, are you? Well good! The Blue Team needs as much glory as we can get! 
I have everything for the budding alchemist under one roof. 
With your help I uncovered the informant that had compromised the Thieves Guild. 
I'm sorry, but the cities of Cyrodiil will have to fend for themselves for the time being. 
Remember the pretenses under which the guests are there. They will be suspicious. You must be as effective an actor as you are a killer.  
Hidden behind a door, deep in Howling Cave, are necromancers. They rob graves for the materials to raise their undead armies. 
Is that a bit of frostbite I see? Hehehe. 
If you want to help out some poor merchants, head on over to Jensine's "Good as New" Merchandise. She'll fill you in with the details. 
If you're looking for armor, you should speak with Tertia Viducia. 
I really shouldn't be telling you this, but I know you are trustworthy. 
Hrol Ulfgar is dead! I cannot imagine who would want to harm him. The culprit will be found, though. 
Yes, he's dead. It's so sad. I've already made arrangements to get a new one, but I will miss my old friend. 
I've got nothing else for you. 
My wife... my beautiful wife. 
Thadon is dead. I wonder if he had anything interesting for the museum.... 
The Dark Brotherhood! They've actually murdered Adamus Phillida, the Imperial Legion commander! It's in the latest Black Horse Courier. Here.  
Thank you, dearie! My museum just wasn't the same without the ashes on display. 
Llevana has always been quick tempered. You must reconsider her plan. It can only lead to prison for her... and for you. 
Gone. Dragged from our house in the night. To pay the debt, I'd like to sell the sword and armor of my grandfather, or I might be next! 
Oh yeah? And where will you go? Huh? What will you do? You can't survive out there, Dreth. You're an animal. You belong in that cage.   
My mother owns this shop.  She would be glad of your business. 
An invading army sweeps the land, there's a giant battle in the palace, and yet I'm still alive. How did I not die during all that? It's not fair. 
There is an urgent matter which requires your personal attention. This task falls to you, and only you. 
Uriel was an old man... a good man, and a good emperor. Why would anyone want to kill him? And all his sons? 
Go look for yourself. The town is gone. And most of its people. 
We'll hold our position here until you get that gate open. May Sheogorath's madness guard and guide you! 
There's no place more secure in all of Cyrodiil. I just wish... I wish we could have gotten our Lord Uriel here.... 
Our Fighters Guild chapter here is big, primarily because we're a training center, which earns us each a good living. 
Don't worry, my friend. I'm going to show this slinking cutthroat how the Imperial Legion takes care of things. 
My own family doesn't even know me. I would give much to be rid of the Gray Cowl and its curse. 
Get moving! I'm right behind you... 
Would that I could exact satisfaction upon you for that insult. 
How can I explain? 
I'm off to find a dog. 
Sure, you've got your rib cage, but a sharp blade can pry ribs apart. 
Ahh! You burn with the purging Fire of Agnon, the flame of Truth, the flickering beacon of hope in the gloom of despond! 
So tiresome. 
Ah, of course. You're going to succeed where three previous family members have failed. How silly of me... 
Like the leaves of a tree, Thadon has fallen from Sheogorath's grace and no longer rules Mania. 
And I can't help feeling slightly guilty selling you the place under these circumstances. I'll meet you in Anvil at The Count's Arms. 
I'm Burz gro-Khash, and I'm in charge of this St. Jiub's Fair. All I need is clowns, monkeys, and jugglers. No. Wait... just need jugglers.... 
You have what you need to help him talk. I admit, it's not standard guild procedure, but I'd do anything for one of my girls. 
I'm bored with you. Why don't you talk to Nanette? She likes talking. I'll need to cure her of that habit soon enough. 
Don't waste your wonderful poisons on Skinned Hounds. They seem to like them. 
The Imperial Watch has imposed a curfew. We have to remain in our homes until they catch the Gray Fox. 
What a shame. I guess I have to look for another buyer. 
One leads to the lands of Mania, and one to Dementia. The Gatekeeper makes sure no one gets in who isn't supposed to. 
I sold you my only copy of Volume Three. Gwinas will be terribly disappointed when he learns it is gone. 
Well, at least they're slow, and not too bright. Their pincers are sharp, though. 
Then this conversation is over. 
You drive a hard bargain. 
The Tap and Tack is a good place to get a quick bite, and Olav is a good man. 
Enjoy the manor. 
You have done your job admirably, and I thank you for it. 
A door has opened to the Realm, and a single man steps through. Will he come to us full of lies, or will his intentions be true? 
You chose well. The Great Torch shines with the luster of Dementia and the glory of Sheogorath. 
We've lost control of Brellach. Thadon let them in... We had no idea he would turn on us. 
Indeed. 
Do you have it THIS time? Or did you decide to give it to another of my sworn enemies? 
Sorry Syndelius. I don't know who built this nightmare, but if I get my hands on them... 
Help! Guards! I have a trespasser! 
Remember, not a word to Teekeeus! 
Good. I'm hungry. 
Tamika makes some truly fine wines at her winery. I think they're every bit as good as the Surilie Brothers wines. 
There's crime everywhere! I'm always on the lookout... ehr... WE're always on the lookout. No crime shall go undetected! That's our motto. 
My poor Biene. Poor, sweet Biene. What monsters would do this? How can this have happened? 
Stop talking. 
The room's up the stairs, and it'll be the first door on your left. 
I heard that J'skar at the Mages Guild is quite good at blowing things up. 
Why should we be forced to work under someone who's only kept sane by a magical trinket? Haven't we sacrificed enough already? 
I've heard that Dagail knows a lot about Mysticism. And sheep. 
I'm glad Marz lives here in Bravil. She's an excellent healer. 
Follow me. 
I don't know which is which. Still, it's a good shop they run. 
A good bargain, that is. 
No? Well, then please excuse me. 
How can He leave? It must be a ploy of His. 
Farwil Indarys almost got himself killed in Cheydinhal. Here. Take my Black Horse Courier. It's all in there. 
I'm a bit surprised it affected you the way it did, given your heritage. Perhaps something's tainted it. I'm concerned about Water's Edge. 
I laugh at your arrows! 
Think carefully about what I told you! But I'm sure you'll be fine! 
I've heard Carahil is a powerful illusionist. No wonder she's the ranking mage here in Anvil. 
The poor man's terrified. 
There are at least three of them. I know only one by name: a wood elf called Eridor. He's rather good, from what I understand. 
I've been trying to catch Lonavo for months, but every time I approach the place, his lookout sees me and he goes running. 
Watch out for them if you're heading north. We ran into goblin war parties northwest of here, while starting to build a new settlement. 
Lord! 
There's a bed for you if you need it. A mere 10 gold for the night. 
Here? Right here? What about, say... over there? No? Right here? All right then, you're the Grand Champion! Whatever you say! 
Then begone. 
Someone has replaced the Duke. I bet he got sick and died. 
Inspect the battlefield and provide what aid you can to the troops. Speak with me when you feel that they are ready for battle. 
I don't have anything for anyone of your rank. Check with Burz gro-Khash in Cheydinhal. He might have something. 
March Gulitte is a dangerous one. He teaches mages about the Destruction school of magic. 
Greetings, child. The Mages Guild has a future for you, I believe. I have seen it. You should consider joining. 
Fribble! Just Fribble! 
He's the only one that pulls his weight. He kills the vermin and trespassers. 
It was learned that the traitor has been active for quite some time, since before you joined the Brotherhood. That absolves you of any suspicion. 
It's not like anyone determined enough couldn't get their hands on it; the key is in his desk, after all. 
I am sorry. I don't really feel comfortable talking with you about that night. I barely know you. 
Talk to the Publican, Augusta Calidia. I'm sure she can tell you more about him. 
I'm going to keep a low profile for a while. 
I will present your soul to my father as a mighty gift! 
So we have a new ruler of Dementia. How do I know this one isn't in league with Them? 
Don't just stand around here. 
I've heard that Naspia Cosma would rather be fighting in the Arena than spending time at the castle. She's excellent with a blade. 
The Gray Prince is headed up to the Arena as we speak. Go up there and meet him, one Champion to the next. May the Divines have mercy on your soul. 
You mean the priest? Last I saw him, he was leading a group towards the Chapel of Akatosh. 
The owner, Seed-Neeus, should have everything you need. 
You will sit on the throne. It has always been Sheogorath's intent for you to be the new Madgod. 
I was Rielus, loyal Blade of Emperor Tiber Septim. I do not know how long I have been dead. It feels like an eternity. 
The four of us attacking him in unison was as graceful and beautiful as a ballet! The flashing of steel, the spraying of blood!  
This was Theranis' third time. 
What do you need? 
Thank you. How kind. 
That means a lot, coming from you. You think I didn't hear about you ratting me out to Oreyn? Now get out of here before my friend and I get angry. 
I had to find someone else to bring me the Crown of the Ayleids, since you were unwilling to help me. 
6, 12... You've just made things worse! 36! 42! 
If it's steel you want, it's steel you'll get! 
You mean with the Thieves Guild? Sure, that way I'll be a member in good standing when they put my head on a pole! 
That Gruiand Garrana is really full of herself. She'll talk your ear off, if you let her. 
Welcome, Orc, to the Tournament of Ten Bloods. To your right, through each of nine gates, another Chosen awaits you. 
Stay away from the obelisks! Strange things have appeared near them. 
You must understand our need for darkness and secrecy? Speak to me only between the hours of midnight and 3:00 AM, and we will be off. 
Oh! I don't know how to thank you! You've brought my husband back to me. I shall always count you as a friend. 
The Chalice, Felldew, Elytra... it's all connected. One without the others is no good, poison. Oh, a rough road awaits you. 
Return only when you have the ingredients. You waste my time otherwise. 
So we search the lands and bring home whatever we find. This makes Gortwog happy. 
The ring belonged to my mother, and has been in the family for generations. I'm willing to give you all the money I have to get it back. 100 gold. 
If you've got calipers or tongs, he'll buy them from you. Well, assuming he likes you. 
Bye, dear. 
I like dogs. Dogs are pretty. 
What? What did you say? What did you say?! 
I understand that cold doesn't bother them much. 
Hmm, I can't remember. Deetsan would know, though. 
Strange knights in the Fringe? Well, I'll drink to that! 
You're sharp for an adventurer. If you ever decide to retire, I'm sure the Anvil City Watch would love to have you. 
Quickly now. 
Assuming that's true, who's next? You? Me? We need to keep our eyes open, friend. And we'd do well not to trust the others. 
I suppose I can trust you with this information. After all, if you can help me recover my stolen gold, you may find yourself earning some of it. 
Why have our gods forsaken us? 
Be careful. There may be more to this creature than meets the eye. 
You are the last gasp of a dying age. You breathe the stale air of false hope. 
Except it doesn't! It's gone out. Happens every time the Greymarch begins. Which it has. 
Get to him any way you can. It is your only hope for defeating him. 
Three of us were cut down in the first wave. We pressed on, at Farwil's behest. At the base of the citadel, we met a larger second wave of foes. 
I am at your mercy for now, scum. 
The match is all set, my friend! Now get up to that Arena and teach those Yellow Team maggots some manners! 
I'm sorry to hear that.  Seed-Neeus must be devastated, poor dear. 
Stop wagging that tongue at me, or I will rip it out! 
The Imperial Watch seems awfully worried about the Gray Fox. Look at all those wanted posters. 
M'aiq longs for a Colovian Fur Helm. Practical, yet stylish. M'aiq is very sad he does not have one. 
Well, well. It would seem you've been busy out on your own. 
I don't know. It's strange... I think you might actually be telling the truth. 
The Night Mother speaks to only one member of the Dark Brotherhood -- the Listener of the Black Hand. And when Our Lady speaks, death follows. 
I'll take my leave of you then, fellow magister. 
Imperial Dragon armor is normally worn only by the Emperor himself. But you deserve no less, Champion. 
Take a moment to try it on, and then we shall speak of what comes next for you. 
That's unfortunate, but I understand how difficult it must have been in that place. 
Ridiculous! You can't do this! Although... you're omnipotent. Or just tall. It's one of the two, I'm sure. And a fool! 
Indeed. For the slaying of Rufio was the signing of a covenant. The manner of execution, your signature. Rufio's blood, the ink.   
I can't believe it! The Gray Prince has been beaten! There's a new Arena Grand Champion now, someone called the Spellslinger!                         
When you can provide me with ten Welkynd Stones, I'll provide you with training. 
You've got quite a past, don't you? Left some bloody trails? You tell yourself they all deserved it, right? Ha, ha. 
I'd like to bet, but I don't want to be told that what I'm doing is sinful. 
The Great Torch shines as a beacon of Mania! 
It wasn't my fault. Cyronin Sintav started it. But I'm the one who got caught, so I'm the one who has to cool his heels. 
I wonder if people dream when they take Felldew. Hmmm. 
So here you are at last. The lackey of the Septim pretender. You still think you have a chance, don't you? 
Poor Gromm. I wonder what he'll do now that Baenlin is dead. Serving that old man was the joy of his life, or so I've heard. 
Can we get out of here? 
You fool! I am the light! Come if you dare, I will cast you into darkness for all eternity! 
He's inside, downstairs. Don't keep him waiting. 
Guards! Guards! I'm being robbed! 
By the gods, the snow's coming down! What brings you out here in the cold, citizen? 
Did you speak with Vilena? How did she react? 
What more is there to say, Inquisitor? Lady Syl has her moment of glory. Allow her to bask in it. 
I know what the next sign is. You'll see it, mark my words. All efforts to save us will fail, because that's how this will all end. 
Die, you mangy housecat! 
Beg, birthskin! 
Those notes are very important to me and represent ten years of my life. If you could recover them, I'd be sure to reward you appropriately. 
I have another mesage from the Gray Fox. You must be very important! 
Perhaps a trip back to Morrowind would do me some good. 
Please don't go! I have no one else to talk to. 
Mama always said, "You can tell a lot about a man by the sword he carries." 
Thadon is dead. I drink to his health. Or... whatever. 
Sheogorath's Duchess or not, you try my patience! Are you confused about your task? 
Just wait. He'll be here shortly. 
You are skillful, but not skillful enough. Prove your worth to me. Provide the guild fences with the bounty of your work, then return. 
Both the new Fighters Guild recruits got back alive. It's a good start. 
Madgod! I've been collecting jokes for you. I have thousands for you to listen to. Did you hear the one about the Grummite and the Heretic? 
Are you an idiot? I want you to get me out of here! I don't want a stinking guild membership. 
It is ill-advised for us to speak. 
Don't bother trying to kill a Skinned Hound with a fireball. They are invincible. 
It burns.... 
I did what needed to be done. 
I have your horse right here. 
I assume you found Springheel Jak's tomb. 
Have you done it? Have you destroyed that foul tree? 
Your credibility is suspect. You'll have to do better than that to persuade me. 
Good friend. This is an honor. 
Like most lesser Daedra, the Hunger doesn't have a weakness to shock spells.  
So let's start over, shall we? I know from now on, you and I are going to be great friends! Now, is there something you'd like to buy or sell? 
You have exceeded my fondest hopes, my friend. The Ten Ancestors are reunited at last! This is truly an historic day! 
Aldos will be mourned. I won't sit by and watch the innocent being driven to the brink like that. Something must be done, but without bloodshed. 
Shhhhhh! 
I warned you to stay out of our way. 
For this stone effigy masks the entrance into the Dark Brotherhood's most revered unholy site -- the crypt of the Night Mother herself! 
He knows to tell Adrienne that you're the one who rescued him. You should be able to tell her you've completed her little task. 
I am Ugak, owner of the Grateful Pass Stables. 
Ugly things, with their thick shells and sharp claws. I avoid them. 
I'm Bernadette Peneles. I work for Tamika. I grow grapes. For her wines. 
I don't know much. Never seen them myself. Our grandfathers first found them, I think, digging in the mines. 
You'll need to talk to Kud-Ei if you want to join the guild. Or any of the heads of the local guild halls, for that matter. 
So, three of us left -- you, Dovesi and myself. The list of suspects is certainly getting smaller. With Nels dead, my eye is on Dovesi. 
No, you don't, do you? Well, then you'll get nothing out of me. 
If you visit Highcross, don't speak with Mirili Ulven. She's doing fine with her project, all by herself. 
Wrong! I'm the one in blue! Maenlorn is the one in brown. 
Agh! They're getting the best of me! 
So. You want to become one of the Chosen of Mehrunes Dagon. 
You have, no doubt, seen some of the worst the guild has to offer. As much as we try to hold mages to a higher standard, they are only human. 
If the Felldew didn't kill you, the Elytra would. You're better off just leaving the thing in the ruins above the Burrow. 
Ah, yes. A guild brother in search of a fence? 
You have found Theranis and the Lost Histories of Tamriel? 
Very well... you are now an Associate of the Mages Guild. 
All of the local guild halls sell some amount of Alchemic ingredients, but for the best stuff, you'll need to do some exploring on your own. 
Pinnacle Rock is ours! 
Yes, little Duke? I believe I sent you to rebuild my Gatekeeper. If you're too busy, I'm sure Jyggalag will wait.... 
This is it! Just as Sorcalin described it! Follow me! 
My lord? That isn't necessary. I'm just a man. Just a citizen of the Empire, trying to do his duty. Just like you. 
The Gatekeeper stood guard over the Realm, keeping those not blessed by Sheogorath out... until you, Your Grace, slew him. 
You two are supposed to be taking care of those thieves in Anvil. What is it you need? 
Why isn't he here yet? What's taking him so long? He knew we were coming back for him... 
It's a powerful sword, no doubt about that. Jet black. Got a wicked edge on it, and they say it can steal a man's soul. 
Return when you have the Madstone. 
I make all the weapons and armor for the guard. Damn good stuff. Pop you open like a ripe melon. 
I haven't time to talk right now, I'm afraid. But I'm sure one of the other Blades can help. Try speaking with Belisarius, or Caroline. 
Shuravi runs a good inn, but she's awful with her sisters. 
The Black horses of Cheydinhal are the finest in all of Cyrodiil! None are faster and only the White horses of Anvil are stronger. 
What was my sire's must be mine, if you would have the words you seek. You must go and find his stone. 
You might check Robbers Glen Cave for the imp gall. That place has been known to contain the imps. 
Of course you can't! Nobody ever wants to help! That's the... Wait... Did you actually say you'd help me?   
Knights of Order? These aren't the valiant knights from the epic tales! 
That's better! 
So, you'll have to die. Don't worry. We'll put your body to good use, I assure you. 
I believe we have been asking her the wrong questions, taxing her too much with vague attempts to make sense of all that we know. 
What are your orders, My Lord? 
This is fortunate, as I also seek the cure. 
I suppose you did the best you could, so you should not go unrewarded. Take this gold, and leave me in peace. 
Please. I am not involved... I didn't do anything! They wanted me to get them close to Syl, but I wouldn't abide them! 
Silencer! You have returned! What news of the traitor? 
Please, I'm very busy. 
My hatchlings for you, Lord. 
Have you ever been to the King and Queen Tavern? 
Knifepoint Hollow is my prison. Hewn from the stone by Sheogorath for the sole purpose of containing my knowledge. 
After that last match, this one should feel like a vacation. One Khajiit in a Heavy Raiment, probably with a sword. Nothin' you can't handle. 
When he leaves, you break in and steal some stuff. You don't need special permission or orders to do that. 
I have to try and protect the few civilians that are left. It's all I can do now. 
Return anytime. 
I was just writing a letter to my mother. She's quite upset by the assassinations. 
By what right do you disturb me? 
It wouldn't do to just let them in if more show up. And more always show up. Still and all, I think things are going well, considering! 
Well.  Yes.  I need you to do something for me.  I'll pay you -- gold.  You like gold, don't you?  Lots of gold. 
Sorry, friend, it looks like you've wandered into a restricted area. You've got to leave. Now. 
Do we know each other? There's something familiar about you, but I just can't place it. 
As I mentioned, I have no more contracts available. You'll need to speak with Ocheeva. 
Heard they made you master. Gods help us all. 
Look. I don't like you. Why are you bothering me? Maybe I'll ask Syl to round you up for questioning. Would you like that? Go away. 
You know what? I will help you, although it is liable to get you killed. The High Fane is now known as Malada, up in the Valus Mountains. 
Did you know that fellow who was killed recently? In the Talos Plaza District? Matthias Draconis? 
I'll warn you about one thing. I understand you wanting to help Erline by checking up on Raynil. 
You've got it. I'll have the two Mountain Lions and the Spriggan brought out to the Arena. Now get up there and give the people what they paid for!   
Thank you for helping us overthrow the tyrant. But you must understand that as Queen, I'm very busy ruling over the Shivering Isles. Run along. 
Oh, but I see. You're a Champion... You want my Grand Champion title, is that it? Please, challenge me. In the Arena I can end my misery... 
It'll be in full swing soon! Excited? 
We just made it through to the Palace. The Market District was swarming with daedra. 
What do you want? I'll do anything you ask! 
Head wounds bleed profusely. 
Have you been well recently? Your skin looks a bit... off. 
For our purposes, it serves as a defensible outpost. That is, against typical enemies who can know pain, torment, and death.  
There are rats and goblins down there... but from what I've seen of you, I'm guessing you are an experienced Witchhunter. Am I right? 
Maybe you can help the others. Watch out for Them. 
The Brush allows the artist to paint from within a canvas. It opens a portal into which the artist may enter to paint things life-sized. 
Roderic is looking around for a business to invest in. I know he'll find something soon. 
If you succeed, perhaps you'll have learned something in that time. If you fail, perhaps you'll be dead, and no longer our problem. Now, go. 
Why... why would you ask? I've never heard of it. No idea what you're talking about. And Weebam-Na doesn't know, either. 
That's just what this town needs: another reckless mage. 
I think that'll be all of them. Can't imagine more in this area. You can go tell Arvena this is all taken care of. Good hunting. 
Bah. This place is beginning to bug me! 
It didn't take long for Aleron to begin losing. He resorted to borrowing money from a usurer to cover his losses and place new bets. 
No one wearing the Bands of the Chosen can leave this Grotto. The doors will not open, and there is no other way out. 
Those favored by the Master to wear the Bands may enter the Forbidden Grotto, and leave this Savage Garden forever. 
I understand the decision that you have made. And I accept my fate. Now please leave me to my thoughts. 
Be careful in here. 
Unholy Matron, we of the Black Hand beseech you! Reveal yourself now, most magnificent Night Mother, so that we may seek your guidance!  
You're a Bloodletter now, so your opponents aren't gonna hold back anymore! This is the real deal! Get into that Arena and make the Yellow Team pay! 
You look like a man who can shoot straight and long! 
You look like a shrewd businessman. 
From what I gathered, he's a retired soldier. He's been all across the Empire fighting in various campaigns. Goodness, he's handsome.... 
I know what you're talking about. I don't even try. I just keep going until I drop. 
Well? Do you want your pay or not? 
Of course, Inquisitor. I look forward to working with you. 
Hail, friend! Good to see you again. I hope the Arena has been as good to you as it's been to me. What brings you back to the Imperial City? 
Besides, you're a thief. You'd just sell the ring and let me swing. 
As I've said, the only notes I've taken, I have given to you. The rest is only of interest to me, I assure you. 
Individuality is an illusion. However, if you insist: I once served as the keeper of the great library of Jyggalag.  
Ra'kheran! You come to me with blades drawn? What is the meaning of this? 
Another gate just opened! We'll take the fight to them this time. 
As you are new to the guild, and to the area, you are less likely to be recognized on your trip from Anvil to Kvatch. 
Everyone is here. Let's begin. Each of you is seeking membership in the Thieves Guild. 
Someone killed my poor child! And my Lord cares little. So be it. Let the adventurers in. I don't care anymore. 
Have you seen Orintur and Eilonwy recently? They're always together. 
Hmm, what? Oh, hello. 
You wear the shadows well, fellow thief. 
It's a small item in the possession of a powerful court wizard. Will you do this for me? I will pay you well. 
No conspiracies here. Go pester someone else. 
The document speaks of two agents. You need to eliminate both of them. 
I'm sorry, I wasn't in that evening. I was making my rounds of Chorrol. 
The Madstone is finally mine. It's the pinnacle of my collection. Many thanks to you again. 
That's pretty far-fetched. 
I fear Lady Leyawiin and Hlidara Mothril plan to push the minorities aside and establish a bland, Imperial-dominated culture here in Leyawiin. 
I fear she is not safe from the minions of the King of Worms. She is at Fort Ontus; please, go there and return with the Amulet. 
Hadn't you heard? He went crazy and killed Bernadette Peneles, poor girl. 
I'm Gin-Wulm. I just work here. You want to buy, talk to Varnado or Maro Rufus. 
Can't wait to see you later. Don't keep us waiting. 
Transfer that scroll to the archives. 
Don't make me laugh. 
We're all still here. It's a miracle! Someone really needs to write a book about this. Perhaps I should.... 
I accept. I have no choice. 
But I am honor-bound to guard the doors of Cylarne, and so I will stay my hand. For now. 
There you are! 
After the first time Theranis was taken by the Pale Lady, he knew he was going to die. 
Once we figured out the pillar reacted to spells, we tried out a few. I think I was only unconscious for an hour or so, but that was enough for me. 
You should not be in this place. What is your business here? Do you believe yourself worthy to speak to Nocturnal? 
I'm sorry, Kithlan, but I don't believe you. I think you're lying. And you know what happens to people who lie to me. 
A pleasure doing business with you. 
I'll be there. 
The shores near Bravil are no longer haunted. Seems the ghost hasn't been sighted there any longer. 
I am Gemellus Axius, his servant. Master Imbel has his home facing the central plaza of the Talos Plaza district. 
Do you think he followed us? How could he? 
Oh, I might know where he is, I suppose. 
I'm only asking for a single coin. 
He just threatened to... hurt me if I got in his way. I think the gold changed him. I really do. He wasn't the man I met seven years ago. 
All of my attention is devoted to the Council. We must discern the reason for this sudden attack, and stop Mannimarco before he destroys us all. 
I agree, but someone will be foolish enough to buy it. 
All that work gone to waste. 
Count Hassildor of Skingrad has contacted the Council. He claims to have information that is vital to us. 
There is no need for any formality at this time. I am not Emperor yet. And I am quite new to this notion of being heir to the throne. 
Hail, citizen! It's not often I see another rider out here on the roads. Times being what they are. 
Ah, you came. You're sure you weren't followed? Good, I thought I could trust you. Nobody else in town. They're all in on it ... all watching me. 
Come see me anytime, friend. I'm here day or night. 
I might know that, for a price. 
What a fool I was. 
Then, just as suddenly as we kill him, we revive the adventurer.There are few minds that can stand this type of torture. 
For me? You shouldn't have! 
Because we refused to convert, they lay siege to Vitharn. If they had agreed to let me rule, I would have helped them. But now they're on the list. 
That's very good! 
Great fortunes to you. 
You may have run across lesser Welkynd Stones; they are fairly common in Ayleid ruins. But a Great Welkynd Stone will not be easy to come by. 
I'm not saying I like the idea of these Knights and all, but the Shivering Isles could really use a dose of Order. 
More fighting for the Nords? This is sad news. 
The Torch burns again. This can't bode well. 
Caroline, a good day to you. Or is it evening? 
That's not quite good enough. 
Oh... yeah... his house is in the... um... Elven Gardens District. So yeah... maybe I'll see you there... my new friend! He he. Goodbye... my friend! 
The painting is all I have left that reminds me of the Count. 
... and we take the whole patriotic 'Imperial Mission' attitude with a dose of salt. 
Dro'Nahrah. I'm Count Bravil's steward. I'm sorry, but please, I have too much on my mind to talk. 
Roderick is a mercenary leader, and his people are fanatically loyal. They will cut you to ribbons if they see you. And they will see you. 
Looking for more work, eh? Good. I've got a contract for you. I'd like you to go talk to Norbert Lelles, here in Anvil. 
What do you want, mortal? 
Perhaps Akatosh heard my prayers. Even here. Even after everything I've done ... 
I alone have survived. Sheogorath cannot bring Himself to destroy the knowledge that I possess. 
You won't regret that decision. 
Sing for Big Head. 
Welcome, friend, to the Tiber Septim Hotel. I am Augusta Calidia, your hostess. 
As you can imagine, it didn't pay off. He ended up owing around 500 gold. We could never have that kind of money to pay back the usurer. 
Oh please, I beg you! Take this staff to Darkfathom Cave and get rid of it and the scamps forever! 
You sure didn't mess things up. No. Not at all. Didn't make things much worse. Not at all. 
I'm looking for the Gray Fox. What can you tell me? 
I am sorry, fellow magister, but I don't have time to talk right now. My studies keep me very busy, as you can well imagine! 
The city guard hasn't done very much about it, because frankly, the men who are robbed are so embarrassed, they don't want to report it. 
I'm Cingor. I'm the Captain of the Leyawiin Neighborhood Watch. 
Don't worry, my friend, this time we are on the same side! Umbacano wants us both to guide him through Nenalata. 
That will do. Look for a man known only as the Stranger. He lives here in Anvil, near the Mages Guild. 
Now I'll tell you what I didn't tell everyone else. We have the same Mother, you and I. And she wants you to have this. It's the key to the house. 
Oh, allow me to introduce myself. I am Seridur. 
He did? Excellent. I wonder if he got "The Lusty Argonian Maid" in. I've been dying to read that. 
I'm Irene Metrick. If you needed to know more, you'd already know. 
You have been told what must be done. 
A change is coming. Everything changes. Even Daedric Princes. Especially Daedric Princes.  
You have purchased a fine piece of horseflesh. 
And I could always use the money. 
When I heard the Great Torch atop the Sacellum was ignited, I literally jumped for joy. It's nice to feel safe for a change. 
Now, though, you have ended the cycle. You now hold the mantle of madness, and Jyggalag is free to roam the voids of Oblivion once more. 
Ahh... you've found it! I can't thank you enough. Your work is greatly appreciated. Here, take these. I wish I could give you more. 
We've done it! I can't believe it -- I didn't really think this would work. Maybe we do have a fighting chance. 
Order will rule this realm. It is foreordained. 
I think he's wrong. I KNOW Khajiit can kick Argonian butt. Any time. Any where. And you can tell everyone I said so. 
Trust me, I know. I was stationed at Fort Frostmoth for a few years, on the isle of Solstheim. Those Nords are a bunch of animal-worshipping savages. 
They were a bitterly divided people, with many warlords vying against each other for power. 
Isn't he a wizard at the Arcane University? I think he lives somewhere in the Talos Plaza district. 
You're right. We must try to recover the Amulet before the enemy takes it out of our reach. 
Thadon dead, and Syl gone. This isn't good. 
Savlian's not really the captain, you know. We're just following him because he's the highest ranking officer left alive. 
Then perhaps my sword can find the words that your mouth cannot! 
You've returned! But where is Rythe? 
We are led by Farwil Indarys. Yes, the Count's son himself. 
I'm saddened by the loss of those brave souls. May Arkay guide all of them to their final rest. 
The guild teaches only blade and heavy armor in Leyawiin, but there's freelance athletic and armorer training in town, too, I think. 
It's happening! The livestock are dead! The K'Sharra has come to pass! Look to the skies! Look to the skies! 
The poor bugger was arrested. Seems he tried to swindle the Countess. He's rotting in a cell in the castle dungeon now. 
Come now, must we start with hostilities? This situation is not of my creation. 
Sugar and sands, friend. 
I tried the chapels. They're a waste of time. 
He told you where it is? 
Hello, father. 
Let's go see my father, and let him know of our victory! 
Victory is yours. 
But it seems that you have been given the freedom to attack the enemy that we all crave! Good luck. We will keep the Emperor safe here, don't worry. 
I wouldn't be caught dead with a necrophiliac.  Ahaha! 
Our Lord's armies are at full strength. A toast to Our Lord! 
But I'll be here. This is my town. Nothing is driving me out of here. 
Take this key. It should unlock any door in her wing of the palace. You still need to be wary of her Seducer guards, but it should help. 
She and I have had our differences over the years, I admit. Now she is taking this opportunity to get her revenge. 
We serve the retired Moth priests from the Imperial City. The work they do leads to progressive blindess. 
What's it like out there? We were beginning to fear we were the only survivors. 
Please hurry, I fear Rythe is in danger. 
When an Emperor is crowned, he uses the Amulet to light the Dragonfires at the Temple of the One in the Imperial City. 
Raise your voices in cheer as we lower the gates and these two brave combatants face their destinies! 
I've had attacks on my small flock of sheep lately. I was hoping that building a fence would solve the problem, but it hasn't helped at all. 
But I'll also need the blood of an Argonian, and the ashes of a powerful vampire. Those may be... more difficult for you to acquire. 
I'll just take the money from you then... what, you don't have it? 
Well done. Those creatures were an affront to all life, and they have paid the price for their actions. Take this ring and go with my blessing. 
Caranya insisted on removing it from the University. She said it posed a threat to the safety of the Imperial City. 
Please, I wish to be alone with my thoughts. 
Well done. Summoned again. I applaud you. 
Do you enjoy spending time at Olav's Tap and Tack? 
Well, I guess if he's not afraid of the walls falling on him, he won't care when they do. Can't save everyone, can we? 
I, alone, know the ancient art of forging Amber. I can even craft you magical items. 
Dar-Ma is the daugher of Seed-Neeus, the owner of Northern Goods and Trade.  You'll often find her out taking the air near the Great Oak. 
I love walking by Salmo's place. The smell of her bread baking is amazing. 
Get to hunting, meat. 
The Fringe has been attacked. I'm more than willing to help find out who's responsible. 
Come. As an equal, I shall grace your name and corpse with honor. 
Continue down the corridor if you wish to meditate there upon the fate of all things mortal. 
Come back when you're ready. Don't delay. 
Jensine is the lady you want to speak with about Thoronir. 
Well... 
We need your help desperately! 
Very good! Now begins your true journey! We will soon become very intimate, you and I! Ha ha ha ha ha! 
The obelisks are home to strange goings on; stay clear of them unless you wish to be gone.  
Welcome! 
Just keep walking. 
Vitharn is doomed! 
There is only one place that is rumored to still contain one: the ruins of the Ayleid city of Miscarcand. 
I'm Bittneld the Curse-Bringer, captain of the Chorrol Guard. What can I do for you? 
Go and prepare yourself. The Master will have need of all of us soon. 
Ah, it's coming back to me now. Yeah, seems I saw someone looking out the window at Jearl's house the other day. 
You ready to go? 
Someone's been murdered! By Ysmir's beard, I need a drink!   
You mean you're too poor. That's a fair price for this horse. 
It sounds like the Council of Mages has been holding extra meetings recently. I'm not sure what that means. 
If you succeed, I will bestow on both you and Mazoga the titles of Knights-Errant of the White Stallion for your service to Leyawiin. 
I will order the deed drawn up. Take this key. The house is just inside the gate, by the bridge to the chapel. 
The guilds are near the north wall, Fighters Guild west of the north gate, and Mages Guild to the east. 
I lay upon you now the Night Mother's Blessing. May she walk with you always, and guide your hand as you act in accordance with the Five Tenets. 
Believe me, Mehrunes Dagon will know he was in a fight if he tries to take this city from me. 
Varnado and Maro Rufus? They don't get along. I don't understand it. I just make the armor, and keep it in good shape. 
Such a kind and noble man. In times like these, it's good to have a leader who still enjoys all the modern pleasures Mania has to offer. 
Pay attention, and you can learn a lot. 
All I need is a roof, some bread, and blessings of the Nine. Bruma is Gods' country, and the Gods are good to me. 
Opening the door seems to have stopped the ghost attacks. Perhaps I'll leave you to the rest of this mission since my part is done. 
Worth a try. Let's go! 
I don't know how to close this Gate, but it must be possible, because the enemy closed the ones they opened during the initial attack. 
All three of them are nice folks. 
I'll need you to have a little chat with Varon Vamori, and you can learn something about the power of Illusion in the process. 
Yes. You did. I can't force you to do anything. I understand that. And I thank you. 
I heard that the Kvatch Guard is driving back the daedra! Maybe there's hope after all. 
Hello, my Brother. 
Enlightening, as always. 
Good that you've finally seen the light. The cause will benefit from your assistance. 
He said any Khajiit can kick any Argonian's butt to breakfast any day of the week. You believe that? 
Clean of vermin. Clean of the things and people who would take our crops and eat them with their nasty nasty teeth. 
In a moment, we will begin. I will recite an incantation, and we can proceed down into the crypt and seek an audience with the Night Mother. 
With that door sealed, there's no way we're getting inside, so we'll have to wait for them to come out. 
Please, I don't know where to turn. 
Ocheeva and I have known Lucien since we were hatchlings. He is the one who trained us in the way of the Shadowscale, and is like a father to us. 
You saw my last show, and came to mock me, right? Don't worry, I already know. I disgust myself. 
Talk to her, she seems to have all the answers. 
You've got Jeanne's book, I see. All right, then. I'll just take that from you.... Meet me here in the living quarters just after 10 PM. 
Eh? You again? You ready to hear about an old man's troubles? 
Please, don't be mad. We were just having some fun. 
I can't believe him! I knew he would try and pin this on me! If only I could get my hands on him... 
How can I serve you, sister? 
However, there are rumors that the Gray Fox himself may call on you soon. Wait for contact from him. Keep the guild fences busy. 
You must slay the sacrifice to bind yourself fully to Lord Dagon's service. Lord Dagon thirsts for blood. 
Talk to my Kishashi. If she will trust you, I will trust you. 
Back off! I'm warning you! 
The Paint horses of Leyawiin are the least expensive in all of Cyrodiil! You can't get a better bargain. 
Brother Holger, we need to prepare for the ritual of purity by the next full moon. 
I need to stay with the guards. They won't do well without a strong leader. And I can't trust any of them to make it through the city on their own. 
I'm afraid we cannot go with you to this remote location. Fighting is not our specialty. Watch yourself... vampires are known to be crafty. 
You've got my ear. Let's hear it. 
Oh, dear. I'd say more, but... well, Falcar is the ranking member here, and I don't feel comfortable talking about him. I'm sorry. 
Must I hold your hand? I begin to wonder what Umbacano sees in you. It is an Ayleid ruin in the far west of this province, up in the Valus Mountains. 
It wasn't the goblins. It had to have been bandits. But, why? We have nothing! Please go. I must bury our dead. 
Dro'shanji greets you. His work is the castle grounds, grand gardens green. Dro'shanji also is Advanced Trainer in Security. 
Good food helps keep you healthy. For most people, anyway. Doesn't seem to work for me. 
Well, well, if it isn't Sir Slaughter! How's our new Grand Champion, huh? You ready to make me some money? Ha ha ha ha ha!  Ahem... 
The Knights have returned with a vengeance, their blades stained with blood. Who will be able to stop them, to stem this deadly flood? 
Yes. I am the Shepherd, Uuras. And it is my sheep, and my deft hand and sharp nose, which produce the glorious cheeses of Skingrad. 
I don't believe we'll escape here even if Dagon's invasion succeeds. We'll be the Master's playthings forever. 
My Lord, You seem to have lost Your way. 
Never! I would rather die! I will tell you nothing! 
I just assumed Seridur had a relative that died and is buried there. Not many people go out there anymore, as the route is dangerous. 
We've tried to find him, but had no luck. If he's still living in the fort, he's hiding from us, and no wonder. 
It is clear to me what must be done. The Hist tree must be destroyed. 
She's quite a warrior. It's amazing how well she moves in heavy armor. 
Nine of the evening watch, and all's well. Good to see you, sir.  
They say there's a gate opened outside the city! Let's go! 
Good going. 
They round up people like animals in New Sheoth. I should hunt those nobles. That's what I should do. 
Lord Sheogorath would do well to stop bothering with the Resonator, and just send everyone away. 
I was at Olav's earlier and I ran into this Dunmer named Raynil Dralas. After a round or two, he told me he was an honest-to-goodness vampire hunter! 
Be sure to speak to Jauffre about the Armor of Tiber Septim. I'll continue my study of the Mysterium Xarxes. 
Important arteries flow through the legs. 
Please, you must avenge Bradon. 
Six of the day's dawn, and all's well. Good morning, ma'am.  
Namira.... 
What a mess! I would prefer to speak in the palace. Shall we? 
Sheogorath had fled! Left us all to die! I hid as the doors to the throne room burst open. 
We'll do it like this. You can fight one, two, or three creatures. The more creatures you fight, the more you win. If you survive, that is! Ha ha ha! 
You could learn a lot from Pinarus. 
You're talking to me. You should be talking to the Priests. You can't be doing both, can you? Neat trick if you could. 
I'm so happy to see you, I could burst! 
Excellent! 
The head of the Elder Council and a trusted servant of the Empire. No one is better suited to guide us through these troubled times. 
Well, what have we here? 
There's so much I could tell you... so many secrets... but then you'd be in danger, too. It's best if we're not seen talking. 
That's pretty good. 
It is my home. I... I feel so strange. There's this cold feeling inside of me when I think about what's been done. So cold. 
Not now! 
If my father is not at home, he should be in the Grey Mare. He is supposed to come with us. 
People are subdued. Troubled. A crisis like this tests the people's faith. 
Thadon has his Chalice back. In the stories, men are always off in search of some sword or a cup of some kind. 
Oh. Hello. 
I need to find some real spirits. I think I saw some mead down in the basement. I don't care if it's not safe! It's my nerves! I need to calm down. 
I think you may be just the kind of person we're looking for. Perhaps you can assist us with a problem we're having here in the Market District. 
Good work closing the Oblivion Gate, you've made my job much easier and safer. Thanks! 
I think Nels drinks to forget, maybe about some tragedy in his life. He plays the buffoon, but I sense a deep sadness in him. 
And miss the opportunity to take advantage of your help? I think not. I assure you, the information I have will be worth your time. 
Back again, are you? Do you have the book THIS time? 
I can handle some types of stolen property. Whatchya got? 
Doesn't that have something to do with the Ayleids, and magical control over the weather? I think that's the rumor I heard. 
Let's continue on to the Elder Council Chambers. 
He appears to have ruled for centuries past the fall of all the other Ayleid kingdoms, if the ancient chronicles are to be believed. 
Show me that you can raise at least ten thousand gold for a business venture, and I'll help you learn how to put it to good use. 
Got called in on a murder. There's been some talk. Some of the men think it was... You know... the Dark Brotherhood! 
The Great Lady has spoken... to you alone. The moon and star shall be your guide. 
I saw who my true enemies were for the first time. 
Sweetroll good. Fimmion give pants. Got pie? Apples? Fimmion hungry. 
Do you really need to get so close? 
Syl let them in. More than I could count. It was all we could do to fall back and regroup out here. 
Remember me? 
I suppose you must decide what to do. Are you going to kill me? 
As I've told you friend, the Duke's drug-tainted blood must be brought to the Altar of Arden-Sul. 
I do not know. In her weakened state, it may well end her life. Even that would be a relief for her, after these many years of torture. 
The plane of Oblivion. We know so little about it. What if the Daedra we've seen are only the beginning? I think we should prepare for the worst. 
We can talk, so long as Falcar is out of earshot. If I didn't know any better, I'd say he's trying to get you killed! 
It is an ancient rite, this Black Sacrament. All across the Empire, every day, people beseech the Night Mother to take the lives of others.  
S...  Sithis? Well... I am just a lowly Murderer, but... But I know Sithis is our Dread Father. When we kill, we send him souls! Is that right? 
No, no! I haven't been plotting anything! I swear it! 
Rindir's Staffs is the best place in the city to buy a magical staff. Or is it Rindir's Staves.... 
The Brethren won't like it. 
Malacath likes you. You don't look very foul or ugly... but just keep doing ugly stuff, and you'll be fine. 
If you find yourself in Skingrad, drop in on the alchemist Sinderion. His specialty is plants, and I bet he could tell you more. 
I can help. The Earl of Imbel has a home in the Talos Plaza, on the inner wall. 
Let's just hurry this up... please? 
Our mutual employer rarely tells us the whole story, but he pays very well! Not that I should be giving advice to one of my rivals, ha ha ha! 
I'll go nowhere with you, fetcher! Nowhere! 
There's no way for me to cross. But the Master's immortality does have its uses. I will distract the dremora for as long as I can. 
My task is to know and love the people of Bravil as if they were my own children. If you have ever been a parent, you know what a challenge that is. 
The Marillins say that they treat everyone like royalty at the King and Queen. 
Can I help you Citizen? 
She was right about that. I can feel it. In My bones. The little ones. 
The Oak and Crosier is a nice place, but that Talasma seems rather stuck-up to me. 
All the bards are busy composing songs about the battle! "The Fall of Dagon" is my favorite so far. 
The armies are back in order? I've got no use for armies. Killing is personal, not political. 
I can't believe I've been reunited with my brother! 
Runestones found in forts like Sancre Tor support a First Era date, though the stones could have been moved to the forts from earlier sites. 
A smelly lot, if you ask me, but their gold is as good as anyone else's. We can wipe down the rooms afterwards. 
Trolls, huh? And drawn in by will-o-the-wisps? There's some lousy luck for you. Well, here's your payment. 
In the meantime, the Bruma Guard need your help to close an Oblivion Gate. Didn't you already speak to Jauffre about that? 
As you wish, Arch-Mage. 
As every hand has fingers, does not every finger have a nail? A claw? A talon? Every finger of the hand, every Speaker, has such a nail.   
Now, I must ensure this book is kept safe. Excuse me. 
When I saw the grave look on your face, I knew something had happened to him. And what of that fetcher, Kurdan? 
Prove to me he's gone, and the reward is as good as yours. Now please, get a move on... I feel my bones getting more brittle as we speak. 
Ahh yes, THERE you are! You couldn't imagine how long I've been waiting for you. So little to do, and so much time. 
You have saved us. We are forever grateful, your Grace. 
I think he's wrong. I KNOW Argonians can kick Khajiit butt. Any time. Any where. And you can tell everyone I said so. 
You've chosen a side, little one. You'll get what's coming to you eventually. 
A guest has been murdered. So it begins. You mark my words. This entire party is a trap. Someone wants us all dead, and now they have their chance. 
You're pissing me off, what next? 
Watch out for Anaxes. Some meddling fool must have let him loose. 
To learn more about the Gray Fox, go to the Garden of Dareloth at midnight. Look in the Waterfront District of the Imperial City. I can say no more. 
So, you saw them? The altars must be infused with some kind of power to change over the soul gems. 
Alright! It's about time. Give it to me already! 
You should not keep my father waiting any longer. He expected you hours ago. Come, you came here to see him, did you not? 
I ain't got nothin' to say to you, fancy pants. So why don't you mind your own business, huh? 
I'm set. As soon as they're close enough, they're dead. 
Lips as red as a sun-drenched dawn, skin as soft as a newborn fawn. 
You're a cute little bunny! Not like that other Urul here in Split. A sweet thing like you might be able to help. 
Stick with the plan, and everything should go smoothly. 
Good to see you again, sir. Shall I escort you upstairs to see my master? 
Since you've left us vulnerable to attack, you must restore our second line of defense... Xedilian. 
What can I get for you, my good friend? 
You may kill Fathis if necessary, but not in the castle. My spy network will tell me when you have it. Return here with the arrow when you do. 
Well, it's no problem traveling from the Imperial City to Leyawiin... if you're a wizard and can walk on water. I'd stay off the roads, though. 
Then hear me, and hear me well. 
They have been plundered one by one over the years, due to their great value to mages and occultists. 
Okay, based on your abilities, here are your choices. Do you want to fight one Goblin Berserker, two Trolls, or two Goblin Berserkers and one Troll? 
Sometimes I just go look at the Great Oak. Magnificent, don't you think? 
Once you're rested and equipped, you should have Martin open the portal to Camoran's Paradise immediately. 
Bittneld -- captain of the castle guard? -- he seems like such a nice fellow. Too bad I don't see him in here very much. 
We had to pay the "fine" or he was going to march us off to jail. 
I told you not to speak to me in public! We'll meet tonight, at the place we discussed. 
While you will remain here in the Eternal Garden... forever. 
Excuse me. I need to take these people to the encampment. 
The winner of this match will advance to the rank of Bloodletter! Who wants it more, the Yellow Team or the Blue Team? Let's find out! 
Hey, you look just like your statue! What can I do for you? 
Good to hear. 
Have you had the pleasure of staying at the Tiber Septim? 
Countess Valga is up in arms about the painting being stolen. We're supposed to keep an eye on things until it's found. 
These scamps are making my home smell like a barn. 
We are from Bravil. 
In the Company, we use the term to mean 'leader' -- but it carries the sense of wise father, concerned for the welfare of the whole family. 
What? Either I'm far too drunk, or I'm misunderstanding you. I have a brother? How can that be? 
Uh, but we shouldn't be seen talking until the mission is accomplished! 
Only those of the Septim blood can wear the Amulet of Kings. 
The Council is investigating what happened at Wellspring Cave. Many of our resources are devoted to the task, leaving our ranks spread thin. 
Get going, and don't keep me waiting. 
Well, well. Who might you be? 
Go now and rest, and may the Night Mother haunt your dreams. 
The magic masks the true identity of the item. All it takes is a simple command word, and the amulet would be restored to its true state. 
Things could always be worse. And probably will be. I'm Kurz gro-Baroth. What can I do for you? 
Have you ever spoken to Varon Vamori? 
Loosen those fastenings any night between 8:00pm and 11:00pm, and the head will surely fall on Baenlin as he relaxes in his chair, as is his custom. 
Roderick has recently taken ill. He now lies in eternal slumber, kept alive only by the daily administration of a powerful medicine. 
The Wellspring is restored!  
The Nibenay Basin grades from rolling farmlands by the river east to the rugged uplands of the Valus Mountains. 
Adrienne, I'm back! I was rescued! 
As the adventurers make their way through Xedilian's chambers, they will encounter choices that you make in these control platforms. 
We won't let those daedra take Bruma. 
Yes, most revered Listener! My bow is yours! 
Did you know that Bumph gra-Gash will train you to use heavy armor, but only if you're a Fighters Guild member? 
He must've told them we were coming! We've got to get our hands on him, before he tells them anything else! 
I won't go back! You can't make me go back! 
I'm not surprised. Nobody wants that job. Let me know if you change your mind. It will probably still be available. 
While Skingrad is threatened by an Oblivion Gate, I cannot spare any soldiers for Bruma. 
I consider this to be more than a worthy reward for your help; I believe you'll agree... assuming you're careful. 
Oh. Nothing. I was just wondering. 
I don't get paid until tomorrow. I guess I'll just have to wait to eat 'til then. 
I know what people say about me. I'm not completely stupid, you know. 
Go away, fool! 
Be careful around here. 
We are from Skingrad. 
Nothin' can open it except for this key right here. And there ain't no way anyone is gettin' this key while I'm still breathing. 
Yeah? I don't care who you are. I ain't talking to you. You ain't from around here. So push off. 
Well, my child, how are you this evening? 
The force became known as the Army of Reman. The two armies clashed in what's now northern Cyrodiil. The Akaviri were strong and well supplied. 
He served Emperor Uriel for many years, and so far he has done well in an impossible situation. 
At least your gullibility served some useful purpose. I knew about Mercator, but not his friends. Now none of them are a threat any longer. 
I don't usually give out that kind of information. Especially to people I don't know. 
Get that staff back, Associate. 
Thank you. Gilen always tends to exaggerate, but in this case he sounded earnest which worries me a bit... 
Your reputation precedes you, Gate-Closer, Scourge of Oblivion, Hero of Kvatch! 
With no legitimate claimant for the Dragon Throne... troubled times lie ahead. 
You, of all people, should realize this is an inopportune time to be in Cyrodiil. Perhaps I've misjudged you. 
Back so soon? 
Please! I must find my betrothed! 
My friend, please stay safe! Three of us have been murdered! Besides you and me, there's only one guest left, if you know what I'm saying. 
Thadon's dead? So what? He annoyed me as much as you do. 
If you want to learn to use a mace, you should speak to Vigdis. Of course, to speak to Vigdis, you'll have to join the Fighters Guild. 
I can't even imagine what it's like for you. No more sunshine, no more open seas. Just a box and a dirty beam of light for the rest of your life. 
It's hard to believe she's dead. Why would someone want to murder an old woman? 
I heard that one of the Skingrad mages was assaulted, but I don't know the details. 
He won't be hard to find, just follow the smell of stale mead. 
Dig up any more information? 
I have a proposition for you. Best not to talk about it here. Meet me at the sewer grate northeast of the Sheogorath statue. 
I'm new here in Bruma myself. I'm from down Heartland way. Nords up here... no offense... don't work as hard as us Imperial Heartlanders. 
Could be that. But you said the corpse was intact. Nothing had dined on the gem-hunter. Something doesn't sit right with me about this. 
Can't sleep. 
Stop talking! Enough! 
I'm not saying Colovians are dumb. They're just hard-headed. 
Amazing that someone finally got to Syl. 
Farewell, and may Arkay guide you. 
We must free Dylora as soon as possible. She will know what to do. 
Count Indarys has ordered us to hold our positions until Farwil returns from inside that accursed Oblivion Gate. 
You'll need to speak to one of the local guild heads to get into the guild. Talk to Kud-Ei if you just can't wait. 
Passwall attacked by Order. In all the destruction, no sign of the Fork. 
Lynch sent you up here? Why? Did he send you to talk to Selene? 
I'm in charge here. Adrienne Berene. Do you have Mages Guild business? 
You're still around? I've told you why I defaulted on the contract. Not too much else to be said about it. Do what you must. 
Farewell then. 
They didn't count on Lord Vivec forming an alliance with the Trident-Kings of the Dreugh. From Morrowind, he struck at their rear flank. 
As you complete contracts and fulfill your duties, you'll be promoted to the next station, accepting the associated duties and responsibilities. 
Beyond this gate is my Argonian challenger. She is a clever thing, and eager for your blood. 
Just be sure and keep this quiet. If the other mages even knew that I was involved with Rosentia's new guests... 
Uhh, hello. 
Oh, but I do. You have been selected by the Black Hand to perform the ancient rite known as Purification. Everyone inside the Sanctuary must die! 
Hello, I'm Dovesi. I'm very pleased to meet you. Now that you're here, we can really start looking for that chest of gold. 
All right, that sounds like a fine idea! Oh, I just know you and I are going to find that gold! I have a sense about these things, you know. 
Unlike some frivolous tasks you may be given at other guild halls, this is a serious matter, and has consequences. Are you prepared? 
Imperials hate Dark Elves; Dark Elves hate Imperials. Imperials hate that a no-name Hlaalu trader got made into a count. 
Go and live. 
Can't sleep at home so I just walk around. Can't sleep. 
I just learned that a family heirloom, the Axe of Dragol, which one of my stupid relatives lost, is located on Fort Grief Island in Niben Bay. 
So be it. Bruma's fate is in the hands of the gods now ... and yours. 
You. What do you want? 
Cease your prattling. 
He's that Imperial Watch Captain that's always chasing after the Gray Fox and the Thieves Guild. 
Nah. 
Hurry. The bones are calling out to me! 
She has a very successful shop in the Market District of the Imperial City. 
You're making a mistake. There is no other way to light the Flame. 
The Resonator of Judgment sings again! Singing, singing! 
Cindanwe think she tough lady. Not as mean as Relan. She okay. She let Relan kill things that need to be dead. Relan like biting off heads. 
Please, I... I don't mean to get emotional but... I feel I can trust you. I just don't know what to do about Faelian! 
My job is to make sure the Emperor gets out of here alive, and I intend to do it. 
They're everywhere! Get them! Get them! 
A bargain at any price. 
I've half a mind to go down to Green Emperor Way myself and see what's there ... Well, good luck! I hope you find what you're looking for. 
For someone who drinks so much, Hauls-Ropes-Faster is in peak physical condition. You could learn a lot from him. 
Six of the day's dusk, and all's well. Good evening, ma'am.  
Whoever killed the Gatekeeper must have been dedicated and hard working. That reminds me... it's time I get back to work. 
Let us never speak of that abomination again. 
I know who you are, of course, and it's easy to guess why you're here. You wish to challenge me for my title of Grand Champion, is that it? 
We're not allowed to take care of it either. There are rules. And I don't want to end up on the Hill of Suicides. You, on the other hand.... 
I picked up "Frontier, Conquest." Haven't read much, though. 
Even though you are the Gray Fox, I'm going to look the other way this time. 
Your Speaker should look for this person in the mead hall known as Thirsk, on the Nord isle of Solstheim. 
So he settled down in Bleak Flats cave. Did all of his work there, and came back to town twice a week to check in. Hasn't been around lately, though. 
Aha! There you are. Took you long enough to get here. 
Your first duty is to attend to the needs of your subjects. You will find that there are constant threats to the residents of the Isles. 
Didn't you have some things to give me? 
Wonderful! Time for a celebration... Cheese for everyone! 
Find him, and close shut the jaws of Oblivion. 
Our warriors will scour the halls of Pinnacle Rock, removing any last elements of opposition. Then, we will immediately return to our duties. 
No? Have you seen my torture chamber?  Because that's where you'll wind up if you don't agree to assist me. Think on it. 
Now? You run an errand for me. An important one. Of course, anything I tell you to do is important. My Realm, my rules. 
Deetsan must be the happiest Mages Guild member in all of Tamriel. I think it was always his dream to join. 
Recruitment is down. Way down. That's a problem. 
I'm no fool. I know she'd never be interested in an old man like me. It's enough just to be around her, to be in her company. 
You also should talk to Prior Maborel and Brother Piner. I'm sure they will help you in whatever way they can. 
What? No! 
Xedilian would normally have sent you back to the entrance when you stepped on the pad in the Resonator Chamber. 
Each crystal has a matching receptacle called a Judgment Nexus. Even you can't miss them. 
I can tell the murder is weighing heavily on her heart. She seems such a paradox to me. So gentle and beautiful, yet so strong... 
Oh. Really? Look. I'm in desperate need of a champion, a hero. Are you brave and fearless? 
It's a sad thing, to think that a mage would kill helpless merchants for the wares they carry.  
I don't have a copy myself, but there was one in First Edition last time I was browsing there. At least some people take an interest in history. 
Edgar Vautrine. You don't want the very best. You want cheap. And I got cheap. 
Where can you find some fun? That depends on your idea of fun. You can bet, fight, or both at the Arena. 
Although ... lately he's been weirder than usual.  Always looking over his shoulder, writing in his little notebook.  I wonder what he's up to now. 
Know anything about the stranger? 
Calindil runs a nice place at the Mystic Emporium. 
Bruma has been saved! It's true! Let's see how the Daedra do without their big Siege Machine, or their so-called "Great Gate"! Ha ha ha ha ha! 
Hello! It's always a pleasure to speak with you. 
Bring back the vampire dust from their remains. That should be proof enough. 
He doesn't leave Castle Skingrad often. At ten he heads over to the West Weald Inn. Then at noon he goes to the Colovian Trader. 
The Messenger of Death, huh? I like it! Yeah, that'll do nicely. All right, it's time to see if you're crazy good or just plain crazy.  
You thought I was weak, didn't you? 
If Thadon helps Order sever that link... my kind will be annihilated. The realm will be lost to us. We must get to the Wellspring and stop them! 
We appreciate your interest, but I understand you've got a bounty on your head. Take care of that, and we'll consider your application. 
Oleta was the most gifted healer I've ever known. If anyone can teach you more, she can. 
My nerves are on edge, I guess. This land could do with the peace of Order. 
I have seen them all fall, and still Umbra hungers for more. 
Hello, Your Grace. 
We shouldn't keep this news a secret. Feel free to tell the others, but let them know the complications we face. We'll continue our talk later. 
Well, I'm just glad that it's all over and Rockshatter is back where it belongs; in my family. 
Hello. I'm Atrabhi! People think I'm not friendly because I'm always reading. I enjoy a good conversation, though. 
You helped our city fight off those damned daedra. Now it's our turn to help Bruma. 
Hard to complain about living in Chorrol. We've got everything you need. 
Dog? You greet me as a fellow, then, you tusk-faced brute. 
Another theft! This is your final chance. Go back into the field, and return to me with the horns of twenty minotaurs. 
Welcome. You're now in the sanctuary of the Order of the Virtuous Blood. Few outside our circle have ever set foot in our hallowed hall. 
I'm Caranya, master wizard, and far too important to be talking to you. So go about your business, please? 
The Chapel has made enemies here in the past. The Nords prefer their dragon Ysmir to our Father Akatosh. 
Well, here we are. If you wish to learn what I know about Alteration, then you must stay here with me for a full three hours. 
Greetings, magister! How can I be of service? 
I've heard she'll pay well for certain items she's been looking for. 
Heh, I'd better cut down on the ale. Starting to see things, I am... 
I hope there are more reinforcements on the way. We can't hold Bruma by ourselves! 
I hope you're pleased with your earnings. 
I'm going to stay here and help rebuild this place. These fools need me. 
So, the Torch is lit. Can a flame be captured in time? Would it still burn? 
That must have been what all the shouting was about a few weeks ago. I'm afraid I was engrossed in an experiment that required my full attention. 
My goodness, two of us are now dead! What's going on in this place?   
Welcome. Please, don't be shy. I'm listening. 
This doesn't look good. Not good at all. 
The caves around here are infested with goblins. Normally goblins stay close to their lairs, and wouldn't be a huge problem. 
Good day, milady. 
He thinks his house will collapse on him. Can't even sleep because of it. 
Our own Duchess, aligned with the forces of Order? An infuriating thought! 
Grundy obelisks! Always tetterating knights and festars. Use the dookas to fix them. 
She's dead? What have you done? Of all the irresponsible.... I'm very disappointed in you. You've let me down and your Guild. 
Ardaline makes excellent potions. I imagine she would, since she teaches Alchemy at the Mages Guild. 
This is no place I ever wanted to find myself. I don't see how we can ... 
Each guest, at some point in the past, wronged their mysterious host. Now he's hired us to exact his revenge. 
I'm sorry; I can't help you with the curse. You bought the house; you'll have to deal with it. 
The reigning Grand Champion is Agronak Gro-Malog. His fighting name is "The Gray Prince." He's an Orc... well, Half-Orc, actually, or so they say. 
It would seem that the Fringe has come under attack. The longer you wait to investigate, the harder it will be for you to do as you are told. 
Yes? I am Bejeen. 
He's always trying to stir things up. I don't think he means any real harm, though. 
What monster managed to kill the Gatekeeper? Amazing! 
Well, look at you. Two people have been horribly murdered, and you're right as rain. Strikes me as odd, that does. 
I was wondering when you'd get to me. I have to give you some credit. You had me fooled. You made me trust you, which is not an easy thing. 
The Eternal Garden is the testing ground for the new rulers of Tamriel. I intend to pass the Master's test. 
I'm Anya Herrick. I serve Lady Syl, and she allows me to remain protected within the House of Dementia. I'm so grateful to her. 
We... we were too late? 
I'm afraid you've exhausted Xedilian's resources. This was the final chamber. 
I know you. You freed me. Free my brothers, if they are still enslaved. Together we will cleanse the Shrine of the Underking's foul magic. 
What? I... I don't know anything about him. I'm sorry. Excuse me. 
This way. 
Sounds like the coast is clear, so I'll make my way up to the ship's wheel. But I'm not moving this hulk an inch until Ormil is safe. 
He's dead, you peasant! There's nothing more to tell!   
Welcome to the Flowing Bowl. I'm Maenlorn. My twin's name is Caenlorn. How to tell us apart? I'm in brown. He's in blue. Simple, really. 
Been to Fire and Steel recently? Rasheda has some nice new swords in there. And she's a friendly one, she is. 
If you run into trouble, come find me. 
Nothing pokes a hole in an argument like the pointy end of your sword. 
The light is knowledge, she says. "Forsake all ignorance and morality in favor of the light," she teaches. 
The first Arena Blademaster. Best damned warrior that ever lived, served the Order of Diagna. Got killed fighting the Orcs, Azura rest his soul. 
Capital! I knew you could not stand for a stain on your honor, or that of the guild. 
The world will be better off with this foul thing gone from it. 
Psssst. Over here. I need to talk to you. It's important. 
I'm Bronsila Kvinchal. And I'm so sick of that Vlanarus, I could scream. 
Friend no dorpidity? Communce to Uungor. Uungor communces he no deliriotic, that he mented fine. But Uungor is very deliriotic. Oversit me?  
You and the other Blades have extended me every courtesy. But please, don't forget, I'm just a man. I need the company of friends, like any other. 
I'm always looking for new Oddities to add to my collection. Anything unusual, bizarre, strange, or disturbing -- bring it to me! 
I'll know it when I see it! Yes... it must be here! 
Leave an offering at this shrine. Meridia demands tribute in the form of the remains of her enemies, the undead. 
You make me so happy, Pyke. I will stop my other portraits and paint a picture of this moment to capture it in time. 
The beggars and the wicked Thieves Guild still trouble me. I wish the Nine Divines offered charity and comfort to the poor like the Temple did. 
It seems to be the source of their power. Grakendo Udico may know more. 
Not really. 
You must get to the top of the large tower. The Sigil Keep, they call it. That's what keeps the Oblivion Gate open! 
My Lord. I'm glad to see you. We have a developing situation that requires your attention. 
And last, the light of Flesh, the illumination of Soul -- perception, thought, memory, imagination.... 
Do you have the Count's ring? 
So, thank you. You've been good to me. And I won't ever forget it. 
Oh, my dear. I'm afraid you're in over your head. 
I'm in this to make money, not lose it. 
I've had many a good night in the place. 
Then Lord Dagon shall drink your blood instead. 
I'm not much for small talk. Just leave me out of it. 
There's a small matter with which you may be able to assist. It's nothing worth involving your guild in, I assure you. 
I've heard that someone has it out for Toutius Sextius. Who'd want to hurt him? 
He won't bother those blessed by Lord Sheogorath. You, however, will die trying to get the keys from my child. 
Everybody's talking about how you and Captain Burd closed that Oblivion Gate outside town. You're a real hero around here! 
Hrota Cave? I believe it's a bit north of here. Shouldn't be too hard to find. 
So thieves steal the Stone of Alessia, and ogres turn around, steal it from them, and tear them apart. Don't you love it? 
I hear the war is going badly. There are some new arrivals here that were caught in the fall of the Great Gate. 
Who knows when Roland may strike again? You must hurry. 
Maybe he was bored, or maybe he just wanted to do some slumming. Or maybe he's a trained assassin hired to kill us all, one by one. 
You know of them? One of the most secretive of all the daedric cults. Not much is known about them. 
Glarthir?  Total nutcase, if you ask me.  But he's never done anything -- yet -- that we could arrest him for. 
There's something about him I don't trust. He's quite a brawler though. I wouldn't want to tangle with him. 
Go tell Weebam-Na I want to see him. I'll wait right here. 
Hey! Wood Elf! You're a little far from the forest, huh? Looks like your days of woodland frolicking have come to a tragic end. 
I've seen death like this before. Many years ago, my daughter was murdered by bandits who came to our village. I'm sorry... I... I need a drink. 
I'd steer clear of her if I were you. She has it in for Teekeeus, and wouldn't hesitate to take any of us down with him. 
I dunno. Never seen that sort of root before. Head over to the West Weald Inn and talk to Sinderion. He could identify it for you I'm sure. 
I'll not have anything to do with you. Begone. 
All day, every day, I work them. And for what? For Cindanwe? You think I am her servant, yes? If it weren't for her magic, things would change. 
Well, just keep looking and I'm sure something Odd will turn up! 
Traffic through Anvil harbor comes mostly in exotic, high-profit goods easy to transport by road or Mages Guild couriers to eastern markets. 
With Regulus Terentius for a father, what do you expect from Gellius? The acorn never falls too far from the tree. 
I'm here to show Bruma's errant Nords the path to the true faith. They must put aside their heathen gods and worship the Nine. 
I knew it! That s'wit! Oh, I'll get her. You just wait! Must have taken some fast talking to get her to confess! 
I expect that this is the beginning of the final assault. The cursed usurper Jyggalag himself may even take the field before the end. 
This one is... difficult. It may be quite a trial for you. But if you are successful, it will make the cure all the more worth it. 
You haven't used it yet, have you? Don't be hesitant. This is the only way. 
That root seems to have strange properties the likes of which I've yet to see duplicated in other flora of its ilk. Hmmmm... 
The only one who can teach you anything more about Heavy Armor is Pranal. A master gladiator back in his day, he was. 
Go. 
I wouldn't make that deal with just anybody. 
You are not to speak to me, worm. 
Shockingly awful, if you really want to know. Worst I've ever seen. 
I'm beyond fear. 
What took you so long? 
Are you sure? That's awful. 
Oh, my. This is from Pranal, isn't it? He's such a sweet man. I do enjoy his company, but I'm afraid I just don't have romantic feelings for him. 
You've been to Stonewall Shields in the Imperial City? Not cheap, but top quality. 
Get over to Lord Drad's estate. Let my ogres loose, and get them out! Okay? Get going! 
Anya claims to have been approached by Ma'zaddha. Perhaps there's something to this after all. 
It's from Biene Amelion at the Water's Edge settlement. She needs something retrieved from her ancestral tomb. Try not to muck it up. 
Ah, excellent. I hope getting it wasn't too much trouble for you. 
Something's come up. It can't wait. 
You are a welcome sight in these troubling times. 
I'm sorry for running away like that, but fear got the best of me. 
I believe that his writings contain hidden clues to the location of the Mythic Dawn's secret shrine to Mehrunes Dagon. 
Ready? Ready for what? You're Grand Champion! You've already won it all! The whole damn thing! Ha ha ha ha ha! 
Someone's been murdered! 
She will. She must. 
My double is out to get me. And eat me. You wouldn't do that, would you? Something has to be done. 
I'm Uravasa Othrelas, priest of Mara. I'm also a Speechcraft trainer. I can help you make... different mistakes, at least. 
You know, I need to get me a habit like Thadon. Might take the edge off. Life can be so hard. Makes me want to cry all the time. 
You wish to join the Blackwood Company, do you? Hmm...I think I've heard of you, though. 
Hey there. I'm really busy. Got lots to do. So if you don't mind, make it quick. 
Prove to me that you deserve my favor. In Anga, my Forgotten have lived in peace for many years.  
I just can't wait. This is going to be the greatest fight ever! 
You! You make me vomit! 
Secure those artifacts before it's too late. 
As the newest member of the Knights of the Thorn, I bid you welcome! 
Most of the cities have sent aid. You've done an excellent job. 
I don't see any of them around right now. 
The Wellspring is an essential link between the Dark Seducers and the Shivering Isles. Syl knows this, and is likely trying to break it. 
In return for your service, I will give you the key to the Forbidden Grotto, if you still wish it. 
Greetings. What exactly do you require of me? 
I am at your service, Arch-Mage. 
I ask myself... Do I like you enough to tell you about this? 
Only Sheogorath's immortal servants can kindle the Altars, and I am at my Lord's command. But I only hold Despair... for the moment. 
The Xarxes mentions four items needed for the ritual, but so far I have only deciphered one of them: the 'blood of a Daedra Lord'. 
It hasn't been fatal for anyone yet, but we stopped trying after the first few attempts. I can tell you, it really hurts. 
What a pathetic contract. Play acting and running, but no actual killing? I can see why Vicenti gave it to you... coward. 
I don't like it. It's too quiet. 
Fool? Visionary! Change is in the air, Syl. Breathe it deep! Bathe in its scent! Bottle it up. Save some for later. 
Crucible has a new ruler. Perhaps I can continue to find shelter in the House of Dementia, else what will I do? 
Falcar always has been pretty harsh, even when it comes to basic lessons. He seems to have gotten worse lately, though. 
Thank you kind lady! 
I hope your expedition has been more successful than mine. 
Remember, the portal will close behind you, so you will need to take everything you need. 
Bah! You mark my words, boy. That Dark Elf trollop is bad luck. The captain'll end up dead with her around. You'll see. 
Beneath the mountain lies the Forbidden Grotto, the only way out of the Savage Garden. 
Now we should get out of Malintus' house before we wear out our welcome. 
Times are hard when a robber can't even make an honest living. 
[Gasp!] Guards, guards! This filthy cutpurse has purloined my valuables! 
I don't mean to gossip, but he is more than a bit strange.  However, he's always been tolerated as the town eccentric. 
Wait, you're serious, aren't you? What is with you people? You walk in, want to be combatants, and your entrails end up decorating my Red Room.      
Never seen anything like it, but perhaps his journal can give you some useful information. 
The 415 vintages were particularly good. The 399... well... a once-in-a-lifetime experience... IF you can find a bottle. 
I could never leave Skingrad. All my good friends here would die without my sweetrolls. The rest of the world must suffer as best it can without me. 
Any new adventurer trying to get into the Isles will have a tough time going up against the Gatekeeper. 
Everything in that document is true. My identity cannot be known. In fact I just told you my true name twice, but I bet you don't remember it. 
I don't have time to deal with Syl and her paranoid ways. 
A few nights ago, I was roaming the city as I often do, looking for any signs of a vampire. As I headed passed Roland's house I heard a cry. 
I am your servant, Lord Sheogorath. 
Break and fall! 
Get away from me! 
A wise choice, perhaps, but you earned no respect for your cowardice. 
My Lord Sheogorath! 
Now? You'll need the respect of My citizens. They'll need a leader, someone to look up to when I'm gone. They're the backbone of any great land. 
I deserve it... all of it... 
I am deeply disappointed that a Master Thief had to resort to murder. I hearby revoke your Thieves Guild membership until the blood price is paid. 
There's nothing better than watching two eager Bloodletters fighting to the death for fame and glory! But enough talk! Let the battle begin! 
I've been waiting for you. Have a seat. 
The lands of Dementia reflect the darker side of its residents. It is easy to get lost among the tangle of roots growing out of the ground. 
In their eternal quest to please me, they're constantly fighting over Cylarne. It can be tiresome. But, really, it's divine. Divinely tiresome. 
He might offer you the same deal. But that guy is crazy. Trust me. 
I need your help. An Orc named Mazoga here claims to be a knight, but will not reveal her business. 
Jauffre should know how to find the heir that the Emperor spoke of. The Amulet must reach Emperor Uriel's heir so a new emperor can be crowned! 
It is underway, but my Lord does not wish for you to confront it directly yet. First, the Realm and its citizens must be attended to. 
I'm here to help, if you need me. 
Religion is definitely not a topic to bring up around Else. Swords, on the other hand, she'll talk about. 
He's the person to talk to about an audience with the Count. You'll find him in the County Hall. 
You shouldn't be in here, stranger.  You better leave before somebody gets hurt. 
Tread lightly in the Isles. It is not a place suited to all mortals. But, I'm sure you'll do fine. 
The Countess rarely leaves the castle. Good luck getting it back. 
Mannimarco has been defeated? I can hardly believe it! The King of Worms is no more! 
Please, don't go. You may be my only hope. 
If anyone can help you get more information about these crystals, she can. 
He was a thief, not a farmer. The only reason to establish such a place would be to stay out of the Chorrol Guard's sight. 
Are you able to join us now? I can wait, but not for long. We've got to move quickly, before they have a chance to barricade the city gate. 
Please come find me as soon as you've located J'skar. 
Herdir has a great affinity for his work, and can be a very useful ally to you. Do not hesitate to make use of his talents. 
Ah yes, Dovesi Dran. She's a Dark Elf, originally from Morrowind, or so I hear. I get the sense she doesn't like me very much.  
I hope your witnesses are willing to come forward. 
There is the current situation at the Gates of Madness, Lord. Near Passwall? Surely, you hadn't forgotten.... 
Deceit. Hate. Subterfuge. Malice. Vengeance. 
My name is Lurio Maenius. I share a house with Matthias Draconis. I'm between jobs as a private guard. 
Greetings, stranger. Are you here to help us drive the Mazken out of Cylarne? 
Speak quickly. Cindanwe watches us. She watches us always... 
Countess Umbranox of Anvil, is hunting for a new captain of her guard. The Legion Commander of the Imperial Watch sent her a list of candidates. 
Oh! Sorry, I... I just assumed. Well, if there's anything else I can do for you, please just ask. 
The Great Torch shines brightly above New Sheoth, a beacon of hope for all the citizens. 
It's known as the Ring of the Vipereye. I hope it serves you well in your future journeys. 
But I've been loyal to you! I've reported everything that Armand has done. You can't just toss me aside like a soiled cloth! 
Well... I've never shown it to anyone else before, but I feel I can trust you. Here. Look it over, but bring it right back. Okay? 
You will find it! Bring the Fork! Hear the music. Music of toads. Music of roads! Sing to yourself, so all can hear! 
Going to g-get us... kill us all... 
Now that Xedilian is up and running, I'll endevour to keep it as clean and tidy as the day it was created. 
Ugh, spellcasters. That's what this next one is, a High Elf sorceress or something. Just get in close and stab her a few times, that'll teach her. 
Look, I know you could just kill me where I stand, but what if I gave you the amulet and you bring it to him. Then he'd say where the gold's stashed. 
Have you learned why the Orc is here? 
I've never run into her there, but I can't blame her for enjoying the matches. Almost everyone likes them. 
I understand he specifically asked that you be the one to see him. Rather unlike him... 
I've got a bad feeling about this... 
Honored Daedra, fear not thy abasement! Thou shalt be the Holy in this Temple.  
So that's it. It's down to you and me. I know I'm no killer, so that means... 
Any old Argonian will do, and you needn't kill it, but do be careful. Stabbing strangers often doesn't sit well with townspeople or the town guards. 
Vicente wants YOU to infiltrate the Imperial Prison? I didn't realize you had such a good sense of humor. 
A mortal wandering the halls of holy Cylarne... and a male no less. Explain yourself. 
Aggh! I hate these disgusting Arena matches! I'm here looking for my husband, Roderick! If he loses any more of our money he's a dead man...      
Then I'll do the rest. 
Thank you. Talk to Steffan. He can tell you where he has seen them. 
Is there any news? 
I would ask that you not bother me, especially in this place. 
My Lord! You are here! 
Well, it was fun while it lasted. I'll have to start thinking up something new to try. 
He showed me an inscription on the inside, 'To Alessia.' That had to be the Countess of Leyawiin. The damn ring was stolen property! 
First I'll kill you. Then I'll get Ruslan and Luronk. You'll all pay for what you did to me. 
You are the one from my dreams... 
Apologies, citizen, but I must return to my post. 
My master has partaken of the Greenmote and passed his post onto another. Now a new rule begins in the House of Mania. 
I wonder if you are a fast bleeder, or a slow bleeder. 
Finally killed him, huh? Thanks. It would have been a lot of effort to find someone else to do it. You've got more to get rid of, though. 
Is it me, or is it quieter around here with Erthor missing? 
Any progress to report? 
Goodbye, dearie. 
Whadda you need? 
Countess Caro is so relieved to have the ring back. It's been missing for many years. She wears it constantly. 
Be patient. Lord Dagon's victory is only a matter of time now, and then we will return to Tamriel in triumph. 
Your stars are not mine. Today the Atronach shall aid you with your appointed burden. 
It takes an average of three attempts to inflict pain before someone will give up useful information, you know. 
You must get the Amulet to Jauffre. Take no chances, but proceed to Weynon Priory immediately. Got it? 
I've never seen such a huge bird. Don't peck out my eyes! I mean it. Stay back, you! 
I don't like you, but I hate that other J'zidzo more. Those Manics are crazy. Crazy! 
Three of the night watch, and all's well. Good night, sir.  
Even though I have served with these Mazken for decades, as the Duke of Dementia, it is your right to command the troops. 
You've done well. The Gold Road should be a little safer for now. 
They met me at eleven as well. And believe me, I arrived right on time. 
In particular, a unique Black Soul Gem has been crafted in the south of Cyrodiil, in the ruins of Silorn. 
Fetid Grove is a dangerous place... please be cautious. 
Ah! How deliciously odd! I've never seen a Blind Watcher's Eye before. It will have a place of honor in the Museum. 
Your Grace must assist us, or we could be lost to this Realm. 
Blackwood Company takes any and all contracts, and always completes them. Hard to beat that. 
Well, well, look at the high and mighty Altmer. Where's your dignity now, huh? Where's that famous High Elf poise and bearing? 
You're no fun. I bet you don't like dogs. 
My scouts reported no signs of the Mazken in the Underdeep. It's our best chance to take them unawares. 
Please pay a visit to Count Hassildor in Skingrad. If his information is as vital as he claims, we need it as soon as possible. 
This guy, Mogens Wind-Shifter, he camps at Fisherman's Rock. So you take me there, and I talk to him, and then we see what happens. 
But no matter! This is clearly authentic Ayleid workmanship. Later ages have never seen the like. 
But where is Rallus? I don't see him...  oh, please tell me I haven't lost one of my sons. 
Follow the Yellow Road northwest from here. You'll see the supplies they had to abandon when the goblins attacked. 
My enemies think I'm weak. That I'll never act. 
You! You're... No, you're not one of them. Still, you've no business being here. And if you see them, tell them Erver is ready and waiting. 
Always keep your magical equipment charged. 
She seems very upset by the murder. I do hope she'll be all right.   
I only serve higher ranking Thieves Guild members. Go see Ongar in Bruma. 
This can't be right... I got a bad feeling about this place. 
1, 6, 1. I was the first to spot the invaders. 8, 0, 3. I was on patrol when I saw their skirmishers marching toward Vitharn.  
Behold, the Tamriel Terror! 
She's dead? Very good. She was controlling our minds with evil magic. She's a vampire you know. Yep, sucked my blood when I was asleep, every night.  
Every girl needs a good pair of shoes. 
This ends as it always does. Order shall reign! 
What? You're here to take it back to Traven? 
Well, they're all taken care of now. Good work, there, soldier. Get back to gro-Khash and get your payment. 
Slave of WHAT? Oh, all right, then! You're some kind of crazy, is that it? Come here then! Show me what you've got! 
Heard any news lately? 
I've learned some more information. Vampires are immune to paralysis spells and common diseases. I hope that helps in some way. 
One down! 
You did it? I'll be talking to Maglir soon. I don't need one wet-ear covering for another. Still, the job got done. Here's the reward. 
By the light! 
I'm in hiding from the Imperial Watch. Go find Methredhel. She has your instructions. 
Our only hope is to defeat the Painted Trolls. 
She's impressive, and she'll train others. 
That's right, I think Neville is the murderer. I can't prove it yet, but he'll slip up, just you wait. Whatever you do, don't turn your back on him. 
I heard. Stupid outsiders. 
Amminus can answer any questions you may have. He should be resting in the Knights of the Thorn Lodge over yonder. 
Tidings and welcome! 
That you, Agarmir? 
What's your story? 
[Knock knock knock!] Captain! Captain Tussaud! Are you all right sir? We... We heard a clamor. Captain? We're coming in! 
It is there she experimented with her "sixth element," in order to create the original Gatekeeper. 
Take my amulet to him. Get the gold and bring half of it back here to me. If you don't come back, I'll let the guards in on our plan. 
It is unfortunate that we should meet under these circumstances, Associate. 
We will speak when your task is complete. 
Sadly I don't have any horses to sell. You bought our last Paint horse. 
Nobody who hasn't trained with the Blades will know these moves, so you should find them useful. 
Here, this is the key to Sancre Tor's outer door. I fear I am sending you to your death, but we have no other choice. You must succeed. 
I don't know who you are, and I'm not all that sure about you. But, you're dressed for it. Can't imagine dressing up for any other reason. Go on in. 
Right. Well, we'll all have to remain extra vigilant. But enough chatter. Back to our duties, eh?  
The Countess has a secret passage somewhere in the basement that leads to her private quarters. That's where the torture chamber is. 
Black Brugo, chief of the Black Bow Bandits, is dead. And the Count made his killers Knights of the White Stallion. 
I can't be seen talking to you. I've done what I can. Now it's up to you. 
The runes for which the stones are named glow in the dark; however, there is no evidence that the stones are magical. 
Then, with a mighty blow, I struck the very ground itself. My true strike sundered the magic of Oblivion and destroyed the gate. 
Retreat! 
You may as well make yourself useful. Carry that torch and stick close. 
You'll have to do better than that, you mud-crawling sap-licking jumped-up reptile. Crawl back to your hole. 
I'm impressed with how she handles dogs. She handles people pretty well, too. 
You must make sure the gem does not reach Mannimarco. We are doomed if it does. 
You certainly earned this. Take it with my thanks. I believe it must have been fate that brought the two of us together. Goodbye. 
Jakben, Earl of Imbel. We do not know one another. And, given your modest social standing, I doubt we ever shall. 
Dead? It can't be!  What happened? You didn't think to find some evidence? Get back there. Find out what went wrong, dammit! 
What is it you require, my lord? 
Andel Indarys may or may not have killed his wife, and it may or may not have been an accident. And I doubt we'll ever know for sure. 
Mogens is dead, the bastard! 
Ummm... yes. That's right. He said that he wouldn't be able to do anything else, as he had something important to do. 
It is Tamriel, the realm of Change, brother to Madness, sister to Deceit. 
Have you heard about Delphine Jend, and her skills in spellcasting? 
I don't know him too well, but I have heard he's a smooth talker. 
Now's not the time, little one. The Count has been waiting for you. 
There's a new Gatekeeper. That calls for a toast. Pass the Skooma! 
I stand at the ready, sire. 
Can I help you, Associate? 
Weatherleah was our family's home for generations. Our parents fled it when ogres attacked; they became separated. 
Sure, friend. Go right ahead. I have plenty of time to talk to you. Really, I do. 
Hey! I've been looking for you. 
Yes, this is a genuine Nirnroot sample. Very nice quality in fact. 
Commander Ja'Fazir. Your servant. I am second-in-command of the Blackwood Company. 
Truth be told, the Resonator of Judgment doesn't actually do anything. Who cares if it's been reactivated? 
Go away! You'll ruin everything! 
You must speak with Seridur first. 
I like the Two Sisters Lodge, and Mog does a good job running the place. She and her sister are both fine people. 
I'll tell you. I want Arnora dead. That's right, I said dead. She took my life away, now I want hers taken as well. 
Why'd the adventurer walk through the Gates of Madness? To get to the other side! 
That's a sad mess out at Harlun's Watch. Little satisfaction in killing those trolls, I'm afraid. Won't bring those folks back, will it? 
The room is 20 gold for the night. You want to stay or not? 
Running Bliss must take a lot of energy. I'd rather just sit here. No reason to do anything else. 
Dredhwen's been selling what they left behind. So, if you need something, talk to her. She's in the Wastrel's Purse. 
In order to accept the contract, we demanded a life. Motierre offered his mother, and we accepted. Lucien has already taken care of that... detail. 
I understand Tadrose Helas has more jobs than she knows what to do with. She's very eager to help out her guild. 
What concerns one of us, concerns all of us. We are Blades, after all.  
Go to the Dark Fissure the next time this "shade" occurs. Search for any connection to what we've learned, and report back. 
Careful. Beasts all around. You might taste good to them, no? 
Vigge the Cautious is responsible for enchanted item recharge at the Mages Guild. Good thing he's cautious. I'd hate to have something go wrong.  
Go up to that Arena and make sure the people of Cyrodiil never forget that it was you who brought the Yellow Team to its knees! 
Then go on and do your approaching. But Malacath wants a present. He likes Troll fat. And he likes only Troll fat. 
If you need to improve your skill with a Blade, I'll happily teach you what I know. Imagine how many people will talk if we're seen together? 
I don't see any scamps, or the staff! 
Hmm-hmm. Exactly. But now what? Do I continue with that line of study, or shall I delve into something more archaic? Say... ancient Ayleid curses? 
I guess I've been expecting you, assassin. Don't try to deny it. I can see it in your eyes. You're Dark Brotherhood through and through. 
This arrowhead advances my plan... nevermind. 
The ruins of Knifepoint Hollow once served as a great library. There, you will find a door. Behind that door, you will find the answer you seek. 
He purchased the Eight Islands... the site of White Gold Tower and the Imperial City... from the beastfolk natives for the secret of literacy. 
I'm sure there is somebody who is really interested in what you have to say. Too bad for you that somebody ain't me. Buzz off. 
You need to strike a balance with how often you ingest Felldew, and how willing you are to live with the side-effects. 
More scared than usual. I think something's going on with her. Now please, leave me alone! 
Why aren't you working? 
Still here? You've got nerve, I'll give you that. 
She is a powerful sorceress. She believes she has found a "sixth element," the element of Flesh. 
Well, if you're up to it, I think we can solve that little problem. You see, me and Faustina here are lonely too, and we've been looking for someone. 
Ooh! That's gotta hurt! 
You've prayed for it, and these combatants have bled for it -- a high stakes advancement match! Let's see who has what it takes to be your new Hero!  
I can't help but wonder what the percentage chance of the Resonator attracting a particular individual is. Riveting stuff, really. 
You want to help? You're kidding, right? 
Do you recall the name Adamus Phillida? The Imperial Legion pest? It's time he joined Sithis in the Void. Think you're up to the task? 
Check with me monthly to give orders for the month.  I'll make it happen. If I don't hear from you, I'll follow the previous month's orders. 
I have no regrets. 
You've made a mess of all that. You're a terrible worker. 
Perhaps they sent you to kill me? Are they worried I might come in the night and burn their village down around them? 
The Blades are closely linked to the Order of Talos. We both serve Talos, of course, and many of our brothers are former Blades. 
Do you have any shoes? No? Mirili offered me some shoes if I ran an errand for her research. I just ran instead. Say, do you have any shoes? 
You can hear them better that way, too. 
Blessed are the Forgotten Ones, Chosen of Namira. In squalor they thrive, wallowing in filth, low and repulsive, darlings of Namira. 
Mankar Camoran must be destroyed! 
I'm glad you're back in one piece. 
He was kind and noble, which is difficult to convey on canvas. I am afraid other than that, I cannot offer much more information. 
I look forward to fighting by your side again. 
So I was right all along! You're doing excellent work, my friend. 
Are this month's silks ready? 
Soldiers of Cyrodiil! The Empire will stand or fall by what we do here today! 
You know, of course, the Imperial Palace is Ayleid. White Gold Tower, they called it, back in the Middle Merethic, when the Aldmeri ruled Tamriel. 
Knowledge is power. 
Greetings, Orc. 
I must go and tell the guard. Please, meet me at Olav's in one hour. 
The Great Torch flares with the light of Dementia! All of Crucible will be celebrating tonight! 
You return to me, yet you bear no news? Go, Silencer, uncover the identity of the traitor! The fate of the Dark Brotherhood rests in your hands! 
Let me give you some advice, stranger.  Leave.  Now.  You ain't welcome here. 
I'll be honest, friend. I don't know what to think about Matilde. Yeah, she seems frightened, but she's also still alive. Why wasn't she killed?   
This is impossible! Nothing killed me! I didn't even get a chance to fight! 
Welcome to the Imperial Orrery. 
It's not safe to be alone. I certainly don't want to be the third victim. 
What? Brother? You misunderstand. I don't have a brother. Maybe I misunderstand ... another bottle of wine will help. 
Do hurry, I miss my love so much. 
She is our commander. She leads us. Without her, we are at a loss. I have done what I can to take her place, but I know I am insufficient. 
My hero! 
Meet me tonight after dark in my house. I'll leave the door unlocked. Don't be late. 
I... I don't know, not for sure. Ma'zaddha came to me, said that Syl needed to be removed, and that I was supposed to help them, or else. 
Thanks for the help. You're okay. 
To the void we will send you. And without you, we will gain the light! 
They made a new Gatekeeper. I'd go see him, but that would take effort. 
Yeah, Ursanne's husband, Aleron is missing. Poor thing, I've seen her crying at the chapel. I hope someone can help her. 
His mother's been holding him back, protecting him. You'll go to Nonwyll Cavern with him. Galtus Previa was lost there, and you're to find him. 
I see you're a follower of the Gray Fox, too. 
Great... nice work. Now that he's dead, we'll never find the treasure. Just get away from me. 
You showed admirable prudence. I was not half so sensible at your age, ha ha ha! Not to worry, I'm sure you will get the drop on me one day! 
Well then. It seems you still have a job to do. 
If the newly restored armies need conscripts, I could be persuaded to enlist a few of my exhibits.  
You'll need to convince Gin-Wulm you're worth his time if you want further training. 
I think Bernadette Peneles seems like a nice woman. I know she works tirelessly over at the Tamika Vineyards. 
Don't you have something better to do than bother perfectly innocent people with your idiotic rambling? But if you insist, go right on ahead. 
Haven't you heard? Baenlin's been killed! The Black Horse Courier has a special edition with the story. Here, take my copy. 
These creatures kidnapped me from my room in the inn while I was sleeping.  I don't know why ... but I'd rather not find out! 
Our goal is to root out the vampires that live in our fair city. So far, we've been unsuccessful finding one until now. 
You haven't? Why not? Is this just a game to you? 
Maenlorn and his brother run a nice establishment at the Flowing Bowl. 
How may I persist you? Please, I need you to find my daughter. 
What do you want? Get away from me! 
I was just here reading the Black Horse Courier about the assassination, and looking through 'A Short Life'. 
Your blood will satisfy Lord Dagon just as well as the prisoner's. It will be our honor to spill your blood for Him, if you choose that path. 
Not now. My spell will wear off my new pet any minute now. 
He gave poor Vidkun the same task, and we never saw him again. I'm reasonably sure there's a connection, but I can't prove it. 
It's my private journal. I write in it everyday. Sometimes more than once. It's something I have to do. It keeps my thoughts from unraveling. 
What are you doing here? 
Skooma! Skooma! 
What was I thinking? 
Speak with Herdir. He will help you. Do you understand what is required of you? If no one is found, you will be held responsible. 
Methredhel, you have earned the right to join the Thieves Guild. 
The price of failure? A final fanfare for the High Elf. Farewell. 
As a new member, you now owe your loyalty to our guildmaster, the Gray Fox. He has three rules you must follow. 
Sounds like we'll find the bandits in Hrota Cave. 
You must know your craft, and its history, before I will teach you anything. 
Martina Floria, Master Enchanter for the Mages Guild. Welcome to the Chironasium. Enchanting, isn't it? 
Let me go paint us a way out of here. 
Varon Vamori can be really charming. Of course, there's something a bit odd about him as well. 
Get moving! Kill the goblins! All of them! 
If anyone can help you identify this root, he can. 
I made my way here and began exploring this strange place. As I was passing Fetid Grove, I was waylaid. 
I hear that in light of recent events at the palace, Anya Herrick is more loyal to Syl than ever. In fact, she rarely leaves her side! 
Viranus wasn't alone at Nonwyll Cavern, you know. Would he have done that well without help? 
Gaiden Shinji was the first Arena Blademaster. It was he who oversaw construction of the Arena, back in the First Era. The Arena was... his dream. 
S'rathad learns the city by walking, talking, seeing it all. S'rathad thinks this is the best way for you, too. 
I've still got some fight left in me. 
Ah! No, I've got it. You're going to find the fellow trading on my name. Good show - carry on. *hic* 
You understand nothing, mortal. I go now to claim the highest honor attainable to my people. Stand aside. 
Is there anyone in Bravil more at peace than Nahsi? And he's such an impressive fighter, as well. 
But all the scholars agree that the mortal world is protected from the daedra of Oblivion by magical barriers. 
The young folk just don't appreciate a good stick anymore. 
I know you're in here. You can't hide forever! 
Blessings of the Madgod. 
Oh, it wouldn't do to speak of it. Thadon's plan for you, I mean. I like you, little one, but I would never interfere with what Thadon wants. 
It's been a great bounty being in Your Presence. Where'd all those trumpets come from? 
Oh, I'll be there! How could I miss a chance to see you cower before that big Orc bouncer? Ha ha ha ha ha ha ha! 
Okay, so you can fight. Your new title is Bloodletter. You're gettin' into the real game now, kid. More gold for more blood. Don't disappoint me. 
Have you ever been interested in joining the Mages Guild? 
People are beginning to have second thoughts about the Blackwood Company after the Azani Blackheart hoax. 
Kastav says he works. Ha! Flies land on him, he's too lazy to brush them off. I'm sick of taking abuse for him, even if he is my brother. 
Yes? The Mages Guild, you say? 
But, she's the Guildmaster. Certainly, she'd.... No. You're right. If the order came from Oreyn, it's a valid one. We should be off immediately. 
I want you to bring to me as many of Garridan's Tears as you can find. If you do, I will pay you a fair bounty in gold for each one. 
I guess you told that Wood Elf what you thought of his magic dagger, huh? He he he he. Here's your gold. Nice going. 
You have the evidence you need. It's time to bring in Muurine. 
She's upset, you bufoon, just like the rest of us! Two people have been murdered! I hope you're not suggesting she could be the killer! 
There's no place like it in Cyrodiil; it's truly one-of-a-kind. You should think about joining. Dagail can make you a member, if you like. 
The Brethren are restless. 
Well, as you can see, Henantier's right here and he's trapped in his Dreamworld. 
Dovyn Aren. Yeah, I still do training. I'm not what I used to be, but I can still teach Alteration just fine. 
The castle is to the east. Inns are near the gate and fountain. Guilds are north, by the Great Oak. 
Yes! Yes! We must kill that foul Nord before he slits our throats! Aaaaaiiiieee! 
Winson. I just work for Luther. I don't want no trouble. 
As a token of our gratitude, I bestow upon you a symbol of honor and heroism, the Escutcheon of Chorrol. 
For the Emperor! 
The best fences are only available to the higher rank Thieves Guild members. Here's a list of who you can use. 
We are a monastic order devoted to divine Talos, who was the mortal Tiber Septim, the founder of the empire. 
They're just doing their duty. 
Aren't you supposed to be on your way to the Imperial City? 
Remind me to ask you about my bestiary. In the meantime, what have you found for me? 
You have broken my heart for a second time. I cannot let the infamous criminal mastermind, the Gray Fox become the Count of Anvil. 
Order. An obelisk has activated just outside the Palace. I've ordered my Aureals to engage the enemy. 
The book is in safe hands for now; that is all you need to know. 
You've got it. I'll have the Goblin Berserker brought out to the Arena. Now get up there and give the people what they paid for!  
It was an honor to speak with you, Champion. 
What... what are you doing here? There's nothing going on. Leave me alone! 
For you? I do not know. My Lord seeks a mortal to act as His Champion. As for His intent... to attempt to fathom it is a foolish endeavor. 
And you've always got our man Haskill to call on for help. Faithful like a good hound, that one. And he looks better in a suit. 
Sheogorath is our Lord, ruler of the Shivering Isles. It is by his whim that the Mazken walk, and we serve our Master to the death. 
Akatosh, the Supreme God of Time, gave the Amulet of Kings to St. Alessia, the first emperor, as a god-certain test of the true heir. 
Prisoner! Into the cage, now! 
Well, then. I trust my servants didn't give you too hard a time getting here. Haha! Perhaps the Duke would like to explain his business? 
We did it! We showed those damned daedra a thing or two! 
I do not wish to fight on horseback. It is a good way to ruin a perfectly good horse... which is, to say, a perfectly good dinner. 
I don't wish to get underway until Selene is safely locked in a room on the inn deck. 
Really, sir, you'll need to start thinking for yourself. It is one of the basic requirements of godhood. 
He is a very private man and does not leave his home often. He has a rare skin condition that forces him to sleep during the day. 
That guy is going to run me out of business soon. His prices are so low, I don't know how he does it. I think he's up to something. 
I hear Azzan plans to send both new recruits out on the next contract. You know what it's about? 
If you're here to help, you'd better talk to Thalfin. 
Are you... threatening me? You can't scare me! I'll call the guards if you don't leave at once! 
Huh? You're not Gromm. Get out of my home! I don't want you here! 
May you walk always in the shadow of Sithis, dear Sister. 
Be careful, there is no telling what this "Agarmir" is up to. 
I've heard that she's troubled by a particular piece that continues to elude her. However, I'm unsure of what it is, as she keeps it a secret. 
I'm sure our mother is very proud of him. 
Be quick about this or find someone else to talk to. 
I'm Beran. Kastus, Vontan, and me, we take care of gardens and trees and grass. Hard work, but it pays. 
Come... here! 
You what? You want to be a combatant? Ha ha ha ha ha ha! Look at you! My granny could beat you, and she's dead!  
Really? They're really dead?! Thank you, thank you, thank you! I'm free, I'm finally FREE! 
What brings you into this goblin-infested wilderness, stranger? 
This is no place for a mortal. We are about to join battle against the Mazken. You'd best stand aside. 
Did you hear what happened to Ruslan and Luronk? One of the Watchmen fleeced them for all their coin! 
Killed the other one, huh? You're annoying, but you do good work. 
Yes, let your mind worry at the problem. Let fear and dismay over making the wrong choice sink their talons deep into your brain... 
I believe you and I were fated to meet today. 
Not a bad worker -- once he gets his mind on something -- but usually he's doing something unproductive. 
There is nothing here. Stop wasting my time. 
It is just there, at the top of these steps. You would pray for the blinding ecstasy which is the ultimate reward for those in Sheogorath's service? 
Ahh... help at last. 
We saw the Temple dome explode, the avatar of Akatosh appear... that was Martin? 
Colovia is dotted with isolated farms and settlements, with most of the population in the coastal margin. 
Very well. Simple task for you. I just dropped a favorite coin of mine into my pocket. If you can steal it from me, I'll train you. 
The enemy is upon us! 
You are the only remaining Duchess, which is a situation quite unprecedented. Normally you would never be permitted to pass within Pinnacle Rock. 
What does this mean? What do you want from me? 
The prettiest town in Cyrodiil? Don't know, but the ugliest is Bravil. Shabby, tumbledown shacks. They're big shacks, though. 
It's terrible. I just can't walk past a bookstore. The First Edition, in the Market District, is the worst. 
Delmar handles all staff enchantments. You'll need to speak to him about it. 
You won! Congratulations! Here are your winnings, my friend -- 200 gold pieces. Come back and bet on the matches as often as you like! 
But everyone expects me to suddenly know what to do. How to behave. 
You mind your business, and we'll mind ours. 
Some resent her, and wish she'd disappear. I do not. I am proud to help her with her daily tasks. 
The field hands love Cindanwe. She keeps them motivated and extremely happy. 
Can't you see I wish to be left alone! 
At least you've got that brutish strength, huh? Who needs pretty when you can just rip someone apart like some kind of monster. 
Lady Syl, you mean. And you know I have her full authority to do what is necessary. Your innocence must be proven. 
We've got to make it to the castle! 
I see you found some. Frankly, I could use all of them. Are you willing to sell them? Five gold each, just like I told you next week. 
Bah. Get out of my sight. 
Were you successful? Do you have the Black Soul Gem? 
Each chamber presents two options. When you push the appropriate button, an event will unfold for the adventurers to experience.  
The Fringe is outside Lord Sheogorath's mercy... but not his justice. 
I hate when the Countess gets angry. No liquor rations for us. 
Keep walking. 
But fine. If he wants it, he can have it. It's just one more thing I'll get blamed for in the end. 
Yes? How should I act? 
This spell might do for a Baliwog or an Elytra Hatchling. Don't try it on anything tougher, though. 
Are you ready to ride? 
Death to the Mazken! For the glory of Sheogorath! 
My good friend! Let me drink to your health! For saving my brother ... no, for finding him ... or was it for finding me? Anyway, bottoms up! 
Make your move when you wish. But, please, do it soon. 
I'm sorry, but I'm really not one for engaging in conversation. Please, leave me. 
I see you still possess the Blade of Woe, the weapon given to you by Lucien Lachance when you first met. Allow me now to unlock its true power! 
Keep moving, scum. 
Ruslan and Luronk are going around saying that some of the Imperial Watch are corrupt. 
I address my offer to you and your friend. Would you like to become knights-errant? 
That the best you can do? 
Have you prepared the Aureals? 
I have no idea why Valandrus Abor even serves at the chapel. He's not very good, though you'd hear differently from him. 
My Red Room got its paint job from fighters like you! After you disembowel the next idiot, I want you to smear his blood all over the walls! Ha ha! 
Andel Indarys doesn't help his case by having a prat for a son, and a wife that dies in very suspicious circumstances. 
I suppose you think you have something important to say? Hurry up! 
That's great! How's it go again? 
It's all rumor, sure. I haven't seen it. But I haven't heard anyone say otherwise. 
You will retrieve this ring for me. Should you manage to do so, I shall consider sending a recommendation to the University. 
For pity's sake, just let us die! 
Is this pleasure or business? 
You're a brave soul to attempt entry to Oblivion. Hopefully, your skill matches your fortitude. 
Spit it out or hit the road. 
As you wish. Do come back and see me some time. 
Someone killed the man, but who? And for what reason? We may never know. 
Weebam-Na won't take me to Fisherman's Rock. You know where it is? 
Can you think of a more appropriate name for a store than Slash 'N Smash? 
What's done is done. 
That's so strange. I got one of those just the other day. Sorry. Maybe you can start your own collection of oddities, hmm? 
You again. Fine. I imagine you're looking for work from me. 
Then you must persuade him. 
Martin is dead. But he died an emperor, and a hero to rival Tiber Septim. 
What little we know makes no sense in a larger context. 
The Mythic Dawn will never take Cloud Ruler Temple. Not while any Blade still draws breath. 
I can only hope that the rat poison I have put down will take care of them all. It is a powerful poison, though, so it should do the trick. 
There's something about that place that's just a bit off. 
Well now, a pretty little Wood Elf. You're a little far from the forest, huh? Looks like your days of woodland frolicking have come to a tragic end. 
It looks like the Yellow Team has pulled a fast one by replacing their combatant with three Argonian prisoners! This should be interesting!      
We must carry out her wishes, however. And I, for one, am looking forward to, ahh... interacting with the citizens of Crucible. 
... And heavens forfend that my husband, Eitar, devote a few minutes from his all-consuming hobby... 
Ah, I sense a gambling man! 
Dovesi is young and weak, yet the killer left her alive. Why? She couldn't possibly have anything to do with the murders... could she? 
Soon the guards will arrest you for trespassing! I warned you! 
Ohtesse is the most dedicated person I know. She really needs to take better care of herself, though. 
The room is upstairs, first door to the left. Sleep well. 
He he. Remember, Dear Sister, I can't always be there to get you out of trouble!   
You know, that's what I like about you. You're such a good listener. Thanks. I feel so much better now. 
Don't tell me Maglir is acting up again. Has he screwed up another contract? 
Birthstone Doomstones bear red runes, appear with stone circles, and are associated with the classic birthsigns like the Apprentice and the Atronach. 
My goodness! 
Now, I'll ask again. Who are you? 
Lady Umbranox has hired a new Captain of the guard. 
Of Fellmoor I can say only this; you should keep far away. Any other place but that dismal town I'd recommend you stay. 
In the Elven Gardens, Luther Broad's Boarding House may suit less discriminating customers. 
Well, you take care of yourself. I'd hate to hear about another senseless death. Good luck to you! 
Suffice to say, they are quite reliable and low cost. That way, you walk out with a full coinpurse! 
Looked around the corner to see who it was. They looked like travellers, ordinary.  
I don't know. I hear that those Oblivion Gates are opening everywhere. They say the Legion is stretched to the limit across the Empire. 
You will find your own path. Take care... there will be blood and death before the end. 
Welcome aboard, sir. It will be an honor to serve with you. 
If she asks, just tell her a stranger wanted her to have it. Then report back to me on her reaction. 
Why does Valen Dreth still live? Breaking into the Imperial Prison is difficult, I know, but the contract must be fulfilled. 
You'd better speak to Deetsan about it. 
Good to see you again. Do you have the Soul Gems I requested? 
How could the Nine let this happen? Are they angry with us? 
So, Falcar expressed interest in this Revenant as well, and left this note behind, did he? Perhaps we should look into it for more clues. 
Riches... countless riches! All mine! 
Good to know. 
Just leave us alone. We have enough troubles here in the Savage Garden without you adding to them. 
I saw Rufrius Vinicius knock a man down with one punch. I wish he'd teach me a bit about hand-to-hand combat. 
Aren't you forgetting to tell me something? 
He's an ass. There's no excuse for his behavior. 
Yes, it's what everyone calls me. I guess I'm partly to blame. I've never made it a secret that I'm actually only half Orc.  
Why don't you just walk around and look for yourself? You need someone to explain everything to you? 
I think he even scared away the last Associate who came here for training. What was his name again? 
These are troubled times in Bleaker's Way. What do you want? 
No time to talk. Let's go home. 
Since you're up here, I can only surmise that adventurers are already entering the dungeon as we speak. 
Ah, you are the new thief. I am your new Doyen. 
Nothing escapes your vigilance, kynreeve. Kathutet wondered as well. This is why he sent him for questioning. 
Why are you talking to me? Shouldn't you be finding Maglir? 
The only thing we haven't figured out is the markings. See them on the walls? They must relate to the pillar, but I don't know how. 
I can offer you money, of course, but given my condition, I am in a position to offer you something relatively unique. 
You've fulfilled your end of the bargain, so now I'll fulfill mine. Raminus will have my recommendation. 
Felldew is a poison. It kills. And yet Thadon uses the Chalice he created to twist Felldew into a drug he takes for his own amusement. How sick. 
Yes, you'll find that some jobs require you to terminate a mark in a specific way. It's well worth the trouble, considering how good the bonuses are. 
Nice to meet you. 
This next opponent is a Redguard. I've seen him fight with both a mace and a sword, so be ready for either one. 
If there's a complaint about a merchant, speak to Vinicia Melissaeia. 
Hello! You'll need to speak up. 
I'm sorry... I'm rambling and you look confused. Let me explain. 
Chalice... Mine! Get away! 
We should speak in your room, where it is private. Not here. 
Don't tease me. It's serious. I could die. We all could die! Please, help find a safe spot outside to sleep where the walls won't come crashing down. 
Welcome, welcome! 
I've never heard the Countess mention her husband. I believe it is something of a sore point with Lady Millona. 
It's my job to help people learn the proper, constructive use of Destruction magic. And let's face it... blowing things up can be ever so much fun. 
The master is not at home. He is out in the city tonight, searching for his supper. If you value your life intruder, leave before he returns. 
Come into the High Hall of Judgment. Let us test ourselves against one another once and for all. 
I'm still working up the nerve to paint his portrait, but I'd rather do it when he's back to his happier self. 
There's someone new in the Realm. One more interloper to watch out for. 
That Gray Cowl he wears was stolen from Nocturnal herself. Can you imagine having the nerve to steal from a Daedric Lord? 
I hope you've returned victorious. 
Farewell, my friend! 
On Cyrodiil's northern border is the sparsely populated mountain wilderness called the Valus Mountains. 
If you actually manage to win a fight, don't get any ideas about looting your opponent's corpse! That's strictly forbidden! 
Witseidutsei takes great pains to keep that place clean. She doesn't tolerate people messing it up. 
Just making conversation, buddy. 
So I wanted somebody murdered! So I prayed to the Night Mother! What, is that a crime now? They even took my house, those bastards! Agghhh!     
Come to bother me with a war story, Redguard? 
Then last month, one of the bastards got ahold of my leg. Took me right out of the business. But this alchemist, he needs the scales right away. 
How does Olfand manage to be a smith, trainer, and babysitter? 
Come after dark. Come alone. 
I don't know where the Count found him, but I sure wish he'd send him back. He's a menace to this town. 
Danger, you say? You came here to tell me this? 
You have broken a Tenet, and have been exiled from the Dark Brotherhood! You must defeat the Wrath of Sithis to regain any status you once had!  
Leave me alone. 
I see you decided to take us up on our offer. Good. We could use another gal in the gang. 
Arch-Mage Traven has closed the doors of the University to all who are not qualified to enter. A wise decision, in my opinion. 
All honor to the Ebony Blade. 
The counterpart to the Altar of Despair. Rapture is currently held by the Aureals, in their complacency, but that will soon change. 
Two of the night watch, and all's well. Rest easy, ma'am.  
I have another contract, when you're ready. One that will rely on your ability to remain fully undetected. 
Passwall is in ruins. I should see what they left behind. 
Yes, my husband is the Rythe Lythandas. Have you heard of him? 
I guarantee generous rewards to those adventurers who serve County Leyawiin. 
Horrible creatures, and they've made this mine too dangerous for the workers. We're going to have to get rid of them. 
Okay. 
You're back! What happened? 
You have the next batch of Nirnroot yet? 
There is more to Thadon and Syl than they let on. Let's just say... well. You know. 
So, the bottom line is, you show a little skin... just a tease. No one touches you. What do you say? 
You should probably try to be inconspicuous. Or they might kill you. Oh, and the party is by invitation only. You'll have to find a way in. Have fun! 
Good seeing you, Lord Sheogorath. Could have bought a round, though.... 
Have you thought of joining? There's a free place to rest in every town for you. That's got to be worth something. 
Looks like you're handy with a blade. 
Your words border on treason, Nord, and I will not tolerate them! You will respect the Empire! You will respect the memory of our dear Emperor! 
What can this peaceful monk do for you, stranger? 
...now keep your weapons ready and watch your backs. Do what I say, and we might just get outta' here alive. 
Every time I walk past the Temple, I'll remember that terrible day and how you and Martin delivered us from destruction. 
Let's clear this mine of those goblins. 
Thadon may be in a constant state of euphoria, but I wouldn't underestimate his intelligence. Oh, this is so much fun! 
Decentius Opsius, Captain of the Coast Guard. Pleased to meet you. 
Thief in the castle! Thief! 
The gate was closed behind us. I heard the townsfolk pounding on the gate. But not for long, because then the screaming began. 
Not that it matters, really. I'm sure I'll lose my inspiration halfway through. 
Do run along. 
That's all I'll be needing you for. Stay and watch, but don't interfere. 
A great man, and a true believer, deep in faith and wisdom. 
I have waited a long time for you, Champion of Old Tamriel. 
Indeed. Another mysterious visitor. 
Try not to kill it! 
The first Yellow Team Hero you'll face is an Imperial in Heavy Raiment. He fights with an Akaviri longsword. 
What? Is this some kind of a trick? 
Good day, ma'am, and welcome to Chorrol. You're under the watchful eye of the Chorrol Guard, so don't you worry. We keep the peace, and keep it nice. 
Turns out that Bradon Lirrian is a vampire. Or was. If it wasn't for Raynil Dralas, we may never have uncovered the truth. Let me explain. 
The whole West Weald is pretty good goblin hunting country. They're thick here in Colovia, along the Valenwood and Elsweyr borders. 
I thought I heard something. 
my current disp is big fat zero. 
Pickpocket! Pickpocket! Guard your purses! 
I am Kithlan, Steward of Lady Syl. Unless you have reason to be here, your presence is unwelcome. 
You'll want to pass through the Gates of Madness. Oh, and mind the Gatekeeper. He dislikes strangers to the Realm. 
You'll have to find Pranal if you want to learn more. That's all there is to it. 
Good evening. 
Now is not the time for discussion. Give me a day's time to set her affairs in order. Speak with Hai-Liurz tomorrow. 
Roliand, all's well, I trust. 
She lives on the Waterfront. She's a late sleeper though, in bed from sunrise 'til noon. She hangs out in the Bloated Float after sunset. 
Malacath must think you're okay. Congratulations. You must be as ugly and disgusting as the rest of us. 
Hello, I'm Shelden. I've been here the longest. That's why I'm mayor of Passwall. That, and because I'm the best at being in charge. 
I appreciate the gesture. 
I shall meet you in the Fringe, near the bust of Sheogorath. Now go! Make haste. 
Thamriel says she hears voices. All the men and women who lived and died here for thousands of years... maybe they left ghosts behind. 
There's just no use to it. 
Light from darkness, hope from hopelessness. In Arkay's name, I pray. 
Do you really think we can close that thing? 
Bor, Soren, you're with me. The rest of you, stay outside and kill anything that comes out of that Gate. 
He was carrying a precious family heirloom with him when he was lured out to their lair. It was a small ring given to him on our wedding day. 
Okay, it's your gold. 
Your task now is to listen in on Ma'zaddha's conversation with Nelrene without being noticed. 
Now Miss Herrick, can we be frank with one another? I find you delightful. I'd so enjoy the pleasure of your company for a long time to come. 
We believe it's somewhere south of Chorrol, but north of Fort Carmala. It may be difficult to find. 
It is how Sheogorath has made their world. They are very happy about it. 
But in the water, we are the masters, and whiteskins pay well for our skills. 
But now, I can't get out there to the lake -- not with this leg. I only needed twelve more scales! Can you believe it? I was so close! 
I understand that Vigdis at the Fighters Guild has some skill with blunt weapons. He's been training other Fighters Guild members. 
Hello. I'm Brother Jauffre. Can I help you? 
There are rats and goblins down there... but from what I've seen of you, I'm guessing you're an experienced Knight. Am I right? 
Primo is young and rich. I can sense a good, decent person in there somewhere. He just has to get his priorities straight. 
Cloud Ruler Temple, I think. The hidden fortress of the Blades, in the mountains near Bruma. A few men can hold it against an army. 
So, you've actually challenged the Gray Prince? Do you really know what you've gotten yourself into?  
If it's books you're looking for, it's the only place to go. 
Leave me now, dear Listener. Deliver this information to your Speaker so that the will of Sithis may be fulfilled. All hail our Dread Father!  
You hold the staff, but you are no Daedric Prince! 
Farewell, serjo. 
I understand you have spoken with her. As you are new to the guild, I will not hold this against you, but I warn you to be wary of her. 
I can't stand someone who's so full of himself. Someone needs to teach him a lesson. 
You're a persistent one. 
The Countess is in attendance. Please observe proper etiquette. 
I don't talk to inmates. Now shut up, and don't bother me. 
Any news? 
I can't let people know I have scamps in here, or they'll think I've taken to Daedra worship. Try explaining that to the town guard. 
Ah, it's times like this I enjoy what I do. 
You've got what 10 gold will buy you. I never said it'd be a palace. 
Oh. Yes. He'll be in the Priory House somewhere. 
Irene Metrick moves with such grace. I wonder what it is she does. 
You do not have the money for me, so I do not have a room for you. 
The Mythic Dawn. What do we really know about them? How far into the Empire have they infiltrated? They could have sympathizers... and spies. 
Splendid. Watch your step. 
A fellow Argonian. How good to see. Were you anyone else, I would require a test before offering you training, but it's one I'm sure you could pass. 
What? Can no one in this gang keep things secret? 
There are no more options left. Ulrich must be dealt with, and actions speak louder than words. You must do something for me. 
Are you here about joining the Mages Guild? 
It's not safe here. The walls are about to collapse. You'd best get moving, friend! 
Come on. Join the Fighters Guild. See the world, and get paid for it. 
One of the youngest Blades ever to serve in the Emperor's personal guard. 
First, all rune-marked ancient stones are called runestones, though there are, in fact, two very different classes of runestones. 
Burst, bloodsack! 
Perhaps you had better reconsider. 
True, but this is different. When you enter your dreams with the amulet, you're in full command of a dream-like replica of yourself. 
Please, consider my proposal. The reward will be worth the risk. 
The Chalice is once again in its rightful place. And places are rightfully mine. And Chalices. Right? 
Nice work getting rid of them. If you ever need a job as a bouncer, I am sure I could put in a good word at some of the tougher taverns in town. 
Look, these aren't your average Arena matches. They're shows! You fighting some savage beasts! People come to see you kill things. It's simple. 
I commend you on your diligence, magister. I'll be sure to bring this matter to the Arch-Mage. Now please, continue the excellent work.  
I've got no interest in talking about some snooty mage. 
The money the city would collect would barely cover the cost of collecting. 
Lord Drad put my little brothers in chains, working in the mines. I don't like that. 
Tonight's duel should be good. Stay and watch. 
What are you waiting for? Kill me! 
Trouble? Trouble? You're damn right! But it's not us, friend. The real trouble's with the Blackwood Company. They're what's causing trouble. 
I guess I can spare you a minute. But not more than that. I've got to get back to work. Always more work to do than time to do it. 
Brother, if I may have a word. 
This is where the Emperor lives, when there is one. The council meets on the first floor. 
Work, work, work. Keeps my hands busy. 
Certainly not. I'm surprised Carius didn't send the entire city watch up here. But then I would have seen that coming I suppose. 
Sounds like food on the table. Lex has a small office in the South Watchtower. Most of the tower is open to the public, but not his quarters. 
I understand. Why would you trust me? But you have no choice. I am the only one who can help you escape this place. 
You have seen the beggars. You have, I hope, used your powers of speech to raise their spirits. 
I couldn't believe my eyes. I think the only reason I'm alive is because I was invisible... but even so, I think he saw me. 
As I've said, all choices have consequences, but don't trouble yourself too much with your decision. 
I would like you to speak with Modryn Oreyn. He will assign you any duties that are currently pending. Good luck to you. 
Wait just a moment... what's that sound? 
Ever since that wretched Gatekeeper was made, Xedilian became redundant. It fell into disrepair and was eventually all but forgotten. 
He should be around somewhere. If he's not in the lodge, I'd try looking for him in Cheydinhal. 
Where are you? 
Guests are dropping like flies around here, but not Neville, he's still in one piece. That tells me he's either very lucky, or a cold-blooded killer. 
Perhaps we're all to blame. But that's not important right now. We must complete our journey and get that stone. Please help us. 
Now is not the time for talk. I have work to attend to. 
The Madgod Himself! Come to get some advice from me! 
Go on now, get out of my inn! I don't need your kind hanging about! 
Oh, and the chest of gold was a nice touch. I knew it was all too good to be true, but I guess my greed got the best of me. 
I can tell you haven't been successful yet. But keep trying! 
Of course, sire. I just wanted to let you know you're safe here, sir. Cloud Ruler is secure, and the Blades stand ready. 
Just act like a prisoner, and do as I say. Once Orthe leaves, we can find a quiet spot to remove those Bands. 
I can't hold off my attack much longer. If you're going to help us take control of the Altar of Despair, you need to decide now. 
Ahh! 
A little closer... 
I don't care if you are Lord Sheogorath, I hate being interrupted in my work. I assume this is important? 
Not bad. Not bad at all. 
I'm pleased we were able to get that secret door open, but I fear I can no longer assist you here. I'll wait for you at The Count's Arms. 
Sanguine has set you to a task. Do what you must, so we may drink to your success. 
Greetings to you. 
I am Elante of Alinor. 
Sheogorath be praised! More Mazken have joined the fight! 
Words fail me at this point. There must be no stone unturned in all Cyrodiil. I don't know what else to say but to thank you. 
Thadon's new mood after recovering his Chalice is quite nice. 
Yeah! I'm Bazur gro-Gharz. I got protection from the Orum Gang. So don't mess with me. Or they'll fillet you real good. 
The flesh is weak. The light is all. 
An excellent deal. 
Whatever shall we do? 
Trespassing in the Imperial Palace is punishable by death or prison. Your choice. 
This just keeps getting better and better. What do you want me to do? 
Poor Rosentia, she's been trapped in her house for days. 
Then you will die! 
I need your help. I need you to send my soul away from this world! 
You insolent... do you know who I am? I'll see that Countess Umbranox knows what kind of a fetcher you are! 
Keep your eyes on City-Swimmer. I don't know where she goes when she's not in the canals. 
The Flame is only lit at the command of Sheogorath, from the Altars of Rapture and Despair within the Shrine itself. 
Why has the Cheydinhal Sanctuary not yet been Purified? Everyone based out of that location must die. Only then will the Black Hand be satisfied. 
You'd be smart to stay with the rest of the group. It's just not safe to go wandering off alone with a killer on the loose. 
Torturing a sickly old woman? Are you trying to kill me? 
Most excellent! Here is what you must do. Simply go to sleep here in the Sanctuary, at any time, and I will visit you as you slumber. 
I had a very pleasant visit with Arriana Valga recently. The castle was very comfortable, and her new guard captain seems to be working out well. 
Something I can do for you? 
Perhaps I'll steer clear of her, then. 
Do you think he could have done it? He comes across as something of a drunk, but you never can tell what someone is capable of.  
You closed the gate. That's the first good news in a long time. 
Took my flagon, they did! Passed down to me from my father Rulf, and from his father Torbalt. It's a wondrous cup. Keeps ale cold and sweet. 
Ciirta has fallen into darkness. Ra'kheran will lead the Apostles to the light! 
You can do it. 
Stay where you are, thief! 
Well... I just wanted to say how honored I am... How honored we all are... by your presence, I mean. 
The Fighters Guild hasn't actually defaulted on any contracts. But still, all the confusion and delays are going to hurt them. 
So what's hot today? 
The only strange part was that the command post and Pale Pass were never found. It was dismissed as rumor and the Army of Reman celebrated. 
You must be the new slop drudge. 
When we are better friends, ask again. 
I will follow your lead. The Wellspring is at the heart of Brellach; follow the waters to reach it. I am yours to command, Your Grace. 
Ha ha, I knew you'd be up to it! 
We shall look forward instead of back, however. You still have work to do. 
Don't know anyone by that name. Now go away. 
I'm afraid you're not going to find him easily. I think a, uh, spell backfired. That's probably it. 
The circle has completed, the Ritual has been done. A new leader sits upon the throne, the royal post is won.  
I thought you might need a break, after the things you've been exposed to lately. You can find Irlav in the Arch Mage's Tower. 
I don't trust Kurdan. Even if the hunters are beaten, make sure you watch your back. 
I'm Krognak gro-Brok, landsman, and I don't much care who you are. 
Preparation is the key to success. Come back to me when you are better prepared. 
Listen. I may not survive this. But if I don't, you must. You must recover the book and find the Amulet of Kings. 
I feel much better now knowing she's locked up. 
Have you found a new Oddity that you'd like to contribute to the Museum? 
I've come to value your judgement, and your experience. Your wisdom does us all a great service. 
So, here's the plan. I'll meet with the Sponsor, while you cover me from the upper gallery. What do you think? 
No. I'm afraid this Imperial was not the one. 
My vision shall be realized. Weakness will be purged from the world, and mortal and immortal alike purified in the refiner's fire. 
Anything you require, you're welcome to it. 
Maybe fate will be kind and deliver him to me in Anvil. 
I can imagine he's a good teacher. The Fighters Guild should be proud of him. 
And some are more unwanted than others. 
Don't tarry... get Ulrich here soon before he changes his mind. 
The West Weald is a good place. Erina Jeranus isn't the friendliest person in the world, but not a bad sort when you get to know her. 
Syl is a paranoid fool. She could torture me as much as she'd like, though. Cut intricate patterns into my skin. I shiver just thinking about it. 
Listen well, child. No longer will you receive orders directly. Instead, you will visit dead drop locations scattered throughout Cyrodiil. 
The Gray Fox and I are closer than brothers. We share a desire to remain unknown. 
Abhor the ugly Baliwog and its entire kin alike. The best place for this horrid thing is upon a pointed pike. 
You'll need a recommendation from each local guild hall in order to advance further. Until then, the Arcane University will be closed to you. 
I don't own it. One of the rare book dealers in the Market District may have a copy. Read it. Educate yourself. 
It seems our Lord believes you are the key to stopping it. Perhaps He's right. He's had worse ideas. Did he tell you about the clowns? What a mess. 
I've got some news for you. Vilena wasn't happy when she heard about Viranus. No shock there. She expelled Oreyn from the guild. It's a damn shame. 
With a gentle moan, this bow will yield to your pull. With a scream of delight, it will launch pain into your enemies. 
Never heard of the thing. And neither has Bejeen. You ask too many questions. 
Like most lesser Daedra, the Hunger has a weakness to shock spells. 
Hurry! 
You are a person of your word. You must hasten to Rosentia and tell her at once! 
After a mission in Black Marsh, they set up shop in Leyawiin. More ruthless than ever. It needs investigating. First, though, you need advancement. 
Excellent. Here's your money. I should have paid you last week. I'm dreadfully sorry about the delay. 
A Great Sigil Stone, then, is what we require. 
That is, unless someone like yourself could help me find the cure. But no one has taken me up on my offer, even with the promise of a reward. 
I hope you'll keep us in mind for all your specialty book needs! 
Antus, calm down. We'll be leaving soon enough. 
Her knowledge of armor is really impressive. 
This place was built by Reman Cyrodiil's Akaviri Dragonguard, at the founding of the Second Empire. 
You are to find a way to make the first two parts of the prophecy come true. I'll take care of the rest, because it's the most fun. Now, run along.  
I heard that he was on his way to one of the Southern provinces, seeking fame and fortune. Maybe try an inn along the way, like Faregyl. 
Lord Dagon is the Enemy. He is the Prince of Destruction, and the Daedra are his servants. 
I've never counted a Knight of Order corpse. I wonder what they look like. 
I saw Agnete out drinking late again last night. It's no wonder they call her "the Pickled." She sure can repair armor, though. 
I heard Passwall has been destroyed. Damn shame. Used to drink with some of those folks. 
I'll keep that in mind the next time I need something recharged. Not that it's something that happens every day, of course.  
We're peas in a pod, you and I. I'd be happy to offer whatever help I can. 
You have been told the way to reach Molag Bal. Do what you will. 
Yes. What is it? 
The Ulfgars are all dead. Whatever possessed them to attack us like that? 
He is the Prince of Madness. The ruler of the Shivering Isles. It is by His will that we exist in this place. He is our Lord and Master. 
She's a Dark Elf. What, you blind as well as dumb? 
Your Grace, Adeo has been waiting for you. Please, speak with her at once. 
Syl... the snake. She showed up, asked for a contingent of guards. Said there was trouble at the palace, and that we were needed. 
Beautiful. Exquisite. You have proven yourself to be quite resourceful. I have another task which should interest someone of your particular talents. 
For our purposes, it serves as a defensible outpost. That is, against typical enemies who can know fear, intimidation, and hopelessness.  
Filthy cur! I told you I was going to get out of here! My time's almost up, and there's nothing you can do about it. 
Mazoga's key and shield shall be delivered to her directly. And I promise you a bounty of 100 gold for each Black Bow you bring me. 
Please, meet me in the reception chamber. 
You're not one of Malacath's favorite people. He likes Orcs. Too bad for you.  So you approach His shrine at your own risk. 
What can I do for you now, my friend? 
Roland was always a quiet man. It was only recently he'd met that young lady. Poor girl. We must avenge her death. 
You have a rare gift, to know when desperation is the path of wisdom. I will do everything in my power to defend your city, my Lady. 
A whole city, just.... lost. How did we let this happen? 
The Colovian Highlands? Near the Hammerfell border? No one lives there. That's barren wastelands. 
Have you brought me any Amber? 
A string of thefts should do the trick. 
Yes, the strange Wood Elf who haunts the Low Gate every morning, you said he was Glarthir.  I'm afraid I know nothing else about the fellow. 
None of my business, but since you asked ... 
I have a special request from the widow of a former fence in Leyawiin. As your new Doyen, I am asking you to help her. 
I have nothing to say to you. 
Are you familiar with the history of Pale Pass? 
There are, of course, some other mitigating factors, but I'll need to investigate a bit further. The overall impact on Alchemy is a complete unknown. 
Thank you again. I shall rest easier now, knowing that Rona no longer suffers. 
To be a Maniac is to love and be loved. Spread the compassion and the warmth throughout New Sheoth and beyond. 
Don't be the last to read today's Black Horse Courier! 
Captain. No news is good news, I hope. 
They attacked without warning. I was praying in the Chapel when I heard Prior Maborel shout. I had just time to arm myself. 
A smart girl always keeps herself well out of harm's way. 
Nobody goes into the mountains but hunters and thieves on the lam. Food and shelter is hard to come by. 
No matter. I am what I have become, and I know my fate. But what of you? What is it you seek? My death? My blade? 
You should return to Anvil and let Carahil know the work is complete. We'll remain here and clean things up. 
This is wonderful news! The words of the Lord Lovidicus himself! Perfect! 
We are now the stewards of the Empire. We can hold the Empire together in the short term. 
Travel to Leyawiin. Track Phillida. Learn his schedule. Observe when he removes that blasted Legion armor! And then, let fly the Rose of Sithis! 
The Gray Fox has been spotted! Some of the men gave chase, but he eluded them. Don't worry, we'll bring that scoundrel in, no matter what it takes! 
So, you're going to get Xedilian up and running. Here's a little book to tell you how, and the Attenuator of Judgement. You'll need that, too. 
The Aureal do not waste time chatting with mortals. 
Try combining aloe vera leaves with some venison. It's said to have some restorative properties. 
Take this crystal. It contains the power to open the sealed door. Inside, you will find the final remnants of the library. 
But, for all intents and purposes, you'll be Me. A Me to fight the Him. Since I won't be around. It's simple, really. If you don't think about it. 
There's a new adventurer in the Isles. I've only counted three dead adventurers before. Maybe this one will make one more. 
Break! Bleed! 
It appears to be inevitable, though your victory in the Fringe is a new twist. I fear Sheogorath will be gone soon, however. 
They've taken it! The Amulet of Kings is gone! The enemy has defeated us at every turn! 
Stop whining, Methredhel. You'll get another chance soon enough. Why should the Thieves Guild turn down a recruit for stealing? 
Here is your reward. And this other Black Bow? Would you like to turn it in as well? 
I sure am glad I don't live in Leyawiin. Too many foreigners. 
It sounds like those books may be an important lead. Get back to me as soon as you turn up anything new. 
I can't wait until I gaze upon the Tears with my own eyes. 
I'd get more work done if it weren't for my layabout double living in town. 
You will travel to the Gardens of Flesh and Bone and collect for me these things: 
Well, to help around the house I mean. 
I think if you'd had the chance to speak to any of the knights, they were happy to follow Farwil into battle. 
The Jerall View is on the terraces, near the castle gate and facing the chapel. Olav's is next to the east gate. 
I have everything in place for the ritual. I'll open the portal whenever you're ready. 
What did you require? 
Hello there, Associate. You're here for a recommendation, I presume. Are you prepared to earn it? 
Marvellous, marvellous! Self-immolation is a wonderful thing, isn't it? But now that we've had our fun, off to the Sacellum with you. 
Hello! 
I can't help but feel someone is watching us. 
I love happy endings! 
I serve Roland now. Please, accept my apologies for my error in judgement. 
What's this? My child, they are coming. Destroy them! Show them your true power! 
No. Go away. I'm not here. 
An entire city destroyed to get at me? Why? 
That's cute. You think I'm afraid of you? 
I've traveled by prison ship. It was cramped and dark. There was little room to move around, but plenty of shadowy nooks to hide in. Remember that.   
Die, Fanatic! 
Your reward will be whatever plunder you wish to carry off from Nenalata. 
I'll wait here until you're ready. 
You'll make a fine pair of boots, lizard! 
Find the Sigil Stone. Remove it, and the Gate will close! Hurry! The Keeper has the key-- you must get the key! 
I fear it won't survive this day! The K'Sharra has come! 
Showing your face was the last mistake you'll ever make! 
Note that three classes of runestones are named, respectively, Hestra Stones, Reman Stones, and Sidri-Ashak Stones. 
That looks just like one I used to have. Or maybe I saw it in a book... in any case, I wish I could afford to buy it from you, but.... 
Me? I'm Falanu. House Hlaalu. As if that matters here. 
The Gray Fox is watching your career carefully. He may contact you soon with a special job. 
Don't be upset. I knew what I was doing the moment I asked you to lead Ulrich to me. I was fully aware of the consequences. 
Behold, Shadowstep! 
I've told you what I know. There's nothing more! 
You. Of course. Sheogorath's assassin. 
Hello? Who's there?   
Primo is a young man of refinement. This murder must be quite a shock for him. 
Protect yourself... 
Goodbye. And watch yourself. 
I hope you sleep well. 
I'm Davide, of Surilie Brothers Vineyard. Gaston is my brother. From our vineyards come the finest wines in Tamriel. 
Oblivion take you! 
I will never allow the Crown to fall into Umbacano's hands. He is far more dangerous than you realize. 
Don't be discouraged! Some people just have better luck than others in finding Oddities. 
Maybe he's incredibly greedy, but I don't think so. My guess is that Primo is so bored he simply has nothing better to do. 
A mortal to stand before Jyggalag? Fool! 
You'll find a lot of orcs serving as private guards. Watch work is too dull. Lots of folks say, 'Oooh, there's an orc, she's scary'. Makes it easy. 
Hmph. That just goes to show you how little we really know about the arts magicka. Fireballs and frost bolts are one thing, but this? Incredible... 
But do you have the wit and strength to use the key that you have been given? If so, I will see you next at Dagon's Shrine. 
Then, one day when I was just about to step outside, I saw the culprits. A group of West Weald Bears was dragging away a sheep carcass. 
Oh. Well, I guess I can do that. I'll see you there, then... I hope. 
Congratulations. I had a feeling you would catch on sooner or later. Leaving that journal behind was a stupid mistake on my part. 
Welcome back to the Wawnet Inn. Looking for a room? Or did you have any more Shadowbanish Wine for me perhaps? 
Why die for a false god? 
You know what I know. There is no more. 
Welcome to the Orrery. I'm Bothiel, and the Orrery is my baby. 
After overhearing Ma'zaddha and Nelrene, I'd say you have quite a card to play the next time you speak with him. 
You see now what happens when those who oppose me fail, which they always do. 
You've got a point. 
I've heard the Fighters Guild has managed to recruit a few new members. Good thing. 
Oh. If that's the way you feel. 
Northern Goods and Trade is an excellent place to buy supplies. 
Two of the afternoon watch, and all's well. All's well with you, sir? 
An unfortunate end to a profitable relationship. Where will we find another like him? 
Perhaps in the future, when I feel you have earned the right, I will offer you a chance to become a hunter of the night.  
Oh! You've returned! I do hope you have good news. 
The rest is up to you. My scouts reported bitter cold and dangerous creatures in the area, so they couldn't proceed. 
Some dastardly Grummites stole my most prized possession... my Medallion that signified my membership in the Knights. 
I'm sorry. You're not yet ready for a promotion. Keep completing contracts, and take care of any assigned duties. 
Yes. I realize that some people can't see beyond the burns when they stick their hand in the fire. But a wise man can learn from his pains. 
Or, perhaps you're ready for advancement. 
But, I wonder, was he really trying to be a fool? Or was something wrong? 
He lives in the large house between the Low Gate and the East Bridge. Alone -- suspicious, don't you think? 
It would be a good idea to talk to each guest and appeal to their good disposition. Remember, if they really like you, they may open up to you. 
Good journey to you. 
We made Sheogorath by planting little seeds in the ground and watering them with our tears and blood. 
We have only once chance at this! Use the portal to Camoran's Paradise before it closes again! 
Knights-Errant? That's just a poor knight without a castle. But I hear they got a nice lodge right on the banks of the Niben. 
Really? You astonish me! May I see it? 
Hmmm... I don't think so. You're a wanted criminal. Don't know what you did, but I know the rules. Come back if you clear that up. 
You know truth when you hear it, Herdir. I have spoken truth. You cannot intimidate me, so I suggest you release me at once. 
Yes, Your Grace? 
He reminds me of you. Uncultured, unwashed and generally uninteresting. 
Come on! For Kvatch! 
Goblins and rats. Seems like they're everywhere. I'm just waiting for the giant spiders to show up. 
No offense to your friend, of course. Last I heard, they were holed up in Hrota Cave, not too far from here. 
It seems there's a lot of turmoil in the Court of Madness. 
Don't wait too long. We really need the help. 
If you go to the Fighting Chance, make sure to speak with Rohssan about repairing armor. 
That offer's not good enough. 
I'm busy. You got business to discuss, you talk to Eridor. 
If you want to learn a bit about hand-to-hand fighting, talk to Nahsi at the Fighters Guild. 
Whoa ho! This is gonna be good! 
This better be good. 
I don't think you should be here. 
I abhor killing, but you did the right thing. 
Undoubtedly. There's hardly a cloud in the sky. 
The Goblins must have been watching me, as they knew right when to strike. I could hear Kayleen's screams from far away. 
But first I guess you have to find him, right? The Elven races of the Imperial City are a community unto themselves. Ask them about Faelian. 
Hey, I don't like to tell stories, but Telaendril and me... you know. Don't believe me? I've got her undergarments to prove it! Ha ha ha ha ha! 
I don't know what happened. I didn't do anything to Syl, so why was I punished? 
Go to his shrine. See what lies ahead. 
Viranus is a good kid. It's his mom who's getting in the way. 
Here is your reward, minus any bonus. It would seem you and Gogron share a similar... style. Now go, and do be more careful in the future. 
Okay, I'm going to pretend everything is normal. Make your move as soon as you can. But, let me get away first so I don't know it's coming. 
We should continue for Farwil's sake. 
Are they gone? Is it safe to come back? 
I was with the Countess all evening. Didn't see a thing. 
I'm done talking to you. You ain't listening. I got better things to do. 
In addition, we'd like to reward you with this enchanted ring. Use it well in the fight. 
Not long after the gate opened, Farwil decided an assault was in order. We charged inside, and promptly met resistance. 
The Darkness is a frightening place, even to us, and so our Lord has given us this beacon, a light to guide us back to Him. 
Amazing, you've found 20 more samples of Nirnroot! Well done! 
That's a real shame. 
Indeed, I allowed Mathieu Bellamont to proceed on his destructive course. Just as I allowed you to intercept him. 
Our Order works to spread the teachings and worship of the divine Talos. 
I thank you with all my heart. Farewell. 
Audens Avidius, you are under arrest for extortion and petty theft. Surrender peacefully and keep what little dignity you have left. 
Something has changed to make these stable portals to Oblivion possible. 
City Watch? I doubt it. But since you have aligned yourself with them, I think it's time to put an end to this conversation. 
I like Leyawiin. That Count got you to help me. Damn nice. Both of you. Think I'll stick around. Maybe do some good deeds here. 
I know about Seridur and his "secret order." What better way for a vampire to hide than to pretend he hunts them? 
Clavicus has always been a little blind to that. And it'll end badly this time, too. So, just leave things be. Walk away. It's your best bet, really. 
I don't think I can render any assistance until you hear Lord Sheogorath out. Do pay close attention. 
This is a hold up. Hand it over or die. 
He's calmed down a lot. Can still teach you how to pick a lock, though. 
Oh, thank you so much! 
I told you to keep out of our way. 
I'm sure you have many pressing affairs. I won't keep you. 
I think I'll do just fine. I'm a natural. Finder's keepers, right? And I'm a pretty good finder. 
I overheard that the vampire hunter who was in town was a fake. It was apparently a ruse to get his hands on Bradon's key to a treasure chest. 
There was some kind of fight at the Mages Guild. I heard that Falcar disappeared, as well. 
The Great Forest was cleared for agriculture around Lake Rumare, but it's mostly wilderness outside of that. 
Yes. Rythe likes to work in his studio with the door locked, so no one can disturb him. 
Huurwen was sparring with some other Fighters Guild members recently. I don't think any of them could get a hit through her shield. 
So, like I said, thanks. I'm glad I was able to come here and do my bit for our side, you know? 
Something smooth and sharp? Leave your foes sticky with blood. 
We can't talk now! Just follow my lead. 
Are you ready to begin your test now? 
I hear the owner doesn't even remember what she's got in the place. 
You annoy even me. 
I served as a Legion Marksman for twenty years. I retired here to Skingrad, work in the vineyards, and supplement my income as an advanced trainer. 
Leave me be. 
Her condition remains unchanged. I appreciate you inquiring about her. 
I came out here to get some privacy for my research. Instead, I was constantly bothered by the local peasantry! 
To earn gold, Argonians must come to the city. It is a strange life, shaped stones and whiteskins everywhere. 
'Bye. 
I still need the Amulet of Disintegration, the Ring of Desiccation, and, of course, the Calming Pants. Must have the Calming Pants. 
Millona Umbranox is better off without that irresponsible husband of hers. The most honorable thing he ever did was to disappear and leave her alone. 
More hunters will come in time, I am sure. For now, Skingrad is quiet again, and you have my thanks. 
I'm certain that's what I want, and I'm certain that's what Bradon would want. 
You will go there and gather the components needed to bring my new child into this world. 
Thief! You stole that diary from me. Now I have to wait to get into the guild. 
I'm quite pleased with the results. The batch came out larger than I'd expected; there is enough for two doses of the potion. 
Here, this book might be of use to you. 
If I could kill myself, I would. 
Thieves everywhere will curse us both for the loss of this ring, my friend. So be it. 
Yeah, we got him here. Argonians aren't allowed visitors though. Countess Alessia's orders. She has a thing about the lizard folk. 
That's right. It's a Breton name. I'll have you know the Petits are one of High Rock's oldest and most respected noble families. 
What? A dead man? You got some kind of death wish, is that it?   
What about that side passage back there? 
We are so very sooth. 
She certainly can handle a blade. A bit of a show-off, if you ask me. 
Kill the stranger! 
Now, we must speak about what you've done, and how it will affect any further advancement in the Guild. 
So good of you to drop by again. 
Allow me to check with the Count. 
When I heard Raynil killed him, I didn't know what to think. But after your visit here, I'm beginning to wonder. 
I am pleased with your work, Inquisitor. As a token of my appreciation, I shall spare your life, and make you a Courtier of Dementia. 
Something tells me the murder of one of the guests isn't going to stop Matilde from searching for the money. She strikes me as the greedy type.   
Good to be home. 
Istirus and I used to be adventurers, but we've retired here. Bruma is far from civilization, but we're ready for a little peace and quiet. 
Excellent. It's just down the stairs there. The door is impossible to miss. I'm sure you'll sleep very well. 
Why are you bothering me? It isn't done yet. Now get out of here and let me finish. 
I'm Regner. You want anything? Talk to Edla. She's in charge. 
Like I told you, there are only two ways to stop a goblin war. 
I don't mind talking down to your level. 
She's silver-tongued, but I don't want to listen to her. 
Your actions for the guild more than merit a recommendation. I shall send it to the University promptly. 
I'll stay away from the topic with her. 
A new adventurer in the Isles. Perhaps it's a sign? 
Stay away from me. You've already spent too much time... over there. 
Well, what did you find at Water's Edge? 
I've committed most of the book to memory, but I took the time to write down a passage you might find useful. 
Did you hear a noise? 
Oh! Oh, well... All right then. I was hoping you'd complete your journey to Crowhaven first, but it is your right to challenge me. 
Come with you? Not likely. I know some of my men are still alive. Guards! Attack! 
You don't want to get involved with him. I don't care how much he's paying you, it isn't worth it. Like I said, he's crazy. 
Oh! Sorry, I didn't mean to ramble. Go to Crowhaven, to the west. Take this key. It unlocks... something that holds proof of my birth.         
Have you heard that Samuel Bantien has a bit of a checkered past? 
Is it true that Mandil can open almost any lock? 
If you're looking to create your own enchantments, you've come to the right place. 
Take me to Fisherman's Rock. Now. 
I can make just about anything look good-as-new. 
Let me tell you something. If anyone thinks they're going to hurt that poor Dark Elf girl, they're going to have to get through me first. 
What in Oblivion is that thing? Hahahaha! 
Why did you come here? Why do you still do the bidding of that prattling madman? 
The Blades built a shrine in the catacombs of Sancre Tor, on the spot where Tiber Septim received the blessing of Akatosh. 
Must we talk about the Fighters Guild now? 
Show me some respect, worm! Unless you want to end up in the cages with them. 
Protect the ancestors! 
I tried to tidy up for Mirili, but she just shooed me away. Then she had the nerve to ask for my help fetching things for her research.  
Where was I? Oh, yes. You have embarrassed the Thieves Guild and me with your crude murders to recover the arrowhead. 
You'll find it in the Waterfront District. It's not much to look at. 
OK, let's test the random text. You should get this about half the time. 
Seek out Arch-Mage Traven. He has personally requested that you see him for your next assignment. 
Hurargh! 
But imagine, as the emperors grew weak, and as the power and glory of the Empire waned, and as the people fell away from their service to the gods... 
Go bother someone else. 
You won't regret it. Humilis will have your new Paint horse saddled and ready for you outside. 
What do you want, Inquisitor? 
I accept the challenge, of course. Speak with Ysabel, tell her you're ready. Then we'll meet in the Arena and prove our mettle as warriors. 
Come on. Fight harder! 
Quite. Then you know he has dedicated his life to eradicating the Dark Brotherhood, and doesn't appreciate when we operate within the Imperial City. 
You still here? 
Deposit this finger in the desk of Phillida's successor, in his office in the Prison Barracks, in the Imperial City! Do this, and the bonus is yours! 
The merchants in Crucible are getting tired of Brithaur stealing from them. 
Be wary the shadows, friend. 
I'm still putting the pieces together. Was Primo murdered for his money? Was it something about the chest of gold? I'm not sure yet, but I'm close. 
South of the White Rose river, nearly halfway to the border of Elsweyr. 
You haven't yet been given recommendations by all the necessary individuals, Associate. Keep working at it. 
Lady Luck, huh? I like it! Yeah, that'll do nicely. All right, it's time to see if you're crazy good or just plain crazy.  
If you don't know much about Mysticism, Druja is a good person to talk to. She's at the Mages Guild. 
I don't have much here at hand, but you're welcome to anything you need from my chest in the reading room. 
I assure you, the gold is well worth the risk. 
The ogres certainly made a mess of this place. Hopefully, by the time you visit us again, we'll have it cleaned up! 
It's the Madgod Himself! My Lord! I've been keeping track of all the dead things for you. There's lots of dead things. I've counted them all! 
Okay Brawler, you know the drill. Head up to that Arena and show 'em who's boss! 
Did you like that? Pain can be pleasure. You enjoy being in pain, do you? Here, I'm sure you'll enjoy these then. 
Tivela! 
Ah, you have been asked to choose the pieces with which to construct the new Gatekeeper. Quite an honor. 
I've been told that she really wants to return to Argonia, but her services are so useful here, she feels compelled to stay. 
Confused already? How very disappointing. 
Do be careful. 
A fine bargain for you. 
If you're interested, see Vilena Donton in Chorrol, or Azzan in Anvil, or Burz gro-Khash in Cheydinhal. 
Find the last of my blood, and close shut the marble jaws of Oblivion. 
What? Here? Are you kidding? I'm not staying here! If you don't want to help me, fine. I'll get out of here on my own. 
I just can't sleep. I lie down and close my eyes, but I can't stop thinking about it. 
Have you dealt with Brithaur? I'm not getting any younger here waiting for you. You must hurry and get rid of him! 
I've heard there are good trainers there. Costs a bit of coin, though. I'd rather go out and practice on my own. 
Lift yourself above these follies and meet your foes head-on. Twist a blade in their stomach instead of filling their ears with useless words. 
Really? Interesting. 
How did a Dark Elf become Count Cheydinhal? King Helseth and Barenziah have considerable influence, and Helseth and Indarys are cronies. Get it? 
Oh, who am I kidding? More likely you came to scoff at the worst juggler in the world. 
This staff will allow you to nullify magic protecting your enemies. If you'd prefer another enchantment, we can start over. 
Oh, what's the matter? Is the baby gonna cry? 
Finally signed on with some mercenaries, but I hear that ended, too. We haven't seen her in years. 
I'm not much of a rider. I've heard others swear by his animals, though. 
... You're going to tell him I am quite capable of besmirching my good name on my own. He should cease and desist immediately. 
The amulet is safe, however, and that must be enough for now. Thank you for returning it. 
I guess I was wrong about you. 
They're behind us! Wait here, sire. 
Many of Anvil's folk are directly or indirectly associated with ships and sailing...  
He is an odd one. Keeps to himself mostly. Only goes out after dark. A real night owl. 
Nothing more for you, Imperial! Get out! 
Roliand, thank you. 
You have one Pool yet to cleanse, and the traitor is still at large. These would seem to me to be your highest priorities. 
Where should I wait? Up close, or farther back? I'll try to help whomever I'm near. 
Behold, Lady Luck! 
Shh! Someone is nearby! We shouldn't speak now. Go, before we're spotted. 
Talk to Haskill if you need more information. He's got more brains than a brain pie. Oh... Brain pie! Perfect! 
The Count has dispatched soldiers to Bruma, as he promised. 
A mighty feat of arms! The bards of Cyrodiil will be singing of the Fall of the Great Gate for years to come! 
It's all that Raynil character. I don't trust him. The thing that bothers me the most is that I swear I've seen him before. 
I wasn't aware he had a cabin outside of the city. Perhaps that's where he lures his victims. Be careful, he may have others with him. 
Go on. I think you'll find what you're looking for upstairs. 
May you always wear soft silks. 
I signed on for the Raven Rock colony. Went there as a builder. Hung around afterwards, but the money ran out. 
All right, then. You're now an Associate of the Mages Guild. 
We shall be stealthy. 
Excuse me, my lord. 
What? I was told there are only two others on board. I locked the bouncer in the Storage Room and she has the owner. So that leaves you. 
Vilena coddles the boy too much. Doesn't want him in the line of fire. Suppose it's no surprise after Vitellus. 
Salmo's baking is fantastic. And her sweetrolls are unbeatable. 
A pleasure to speak with you. 
Here you have your Chapel-going Imperials, and your Chapel-dodging Dark Elves, and never shall the twain meet. 
The battle is upon us, this is no time for talk. 
This here's a respectable establishment! Come back when you've got the money. 
As I feared. The sickness is spreading through the Fountainhead. 
The whole city is burned right down to the ground. There's no point in even being here. We ought to just get away to someplace safe. 
No, please no.... 
You are fortunate indeed, to have heard the Master preach at your initiation! 
Let me know when you're done with that little task. 
This area's clear. We've got to get inside and find the Count before it's too late. Move out! 
Have you ever seen Irene Metrick move? Amazing. 
Bah! You have neither the skill nor the daring to fulfill this contract. I hope the moneylender cuts out your heart. 
Quick! He may need our help! 
I'm not impressed. 
[Gasp!] Oh my goodness. Excuse me, are you all right? I... By the Divines, this person's dead! 
We should get moving. I won't rest easy until Martin is safe at Cloud Ruler Temple. 
They'd boast about it just as if they won it in a war, and pretty soon the Cracked Wood tribe would launch a war against THEM. 
Hold perfectly still! You're about to step on... 
Great. Whatever suits you and gets me Henantier back suits me just fine. 
The forces of Order are no more. What horror will replace them? 
But, alas, the times are not normal, and Sheogorath has given you this task, without the authority to command it. 
Dead, you say? Well, then... you may as well finish what you started. [Scribbles something on a piece of paper.] Here. This is your last task. 
You're a good man. We could use more like you, that's for damned sure. You ask me, you'll be getting that promotion in no time. 
You would mock our beliefs? Fool! When the three signs are upon us, you will learn! 
Lord Sheogorath. Your Aureal stand true. 
Hearing that the Resonator works again almost makes up for losing the Gatekeeper. We're still not safe, though. 
Who are you, who dares to walk in the House of Shadow? What business do you have with the Lord Vaermina? 
Those Goblins in Exhausted Mine you got this from killed my poor wife while I was away from home. Now I have my vengeance. 
We are all that are left. The others were struck down by Order. How did this happen? 
There's nowhere better than the Missing Pauldron. 
Hello milady. 
Intruder in the castle! Protect the Countess! 
If there is indeed an altar there, as the note suggests, I believe this cave is directly related to the contents of the book. 
Did Cindanwe send you to steal this? How did you get this from Kishashi? 
Sheogorath is missing. A drink in his order is in honor. Honor is in order. Whatever. 
You bought that for a song. 
Gogan and I are really members of the Anvil City Watch. I suppose you could say we work undercover. 
The death of any helpless individual is tragic, and reprehensible when it could have been prevented. I hold you responsible. 
I don't trust you enough to talk about that. 
Eat well, while you have your health. I'm sure I have something that would interest you. 
Scar-Tail now lies with the worms of Bogwater, thanks to you. I am forever indebted to you, Brother. 
I can't believe you could be so stupid... 
Hrol Ulfgar has been murdered. We will find the assassin, and he will pay dearly. 
The King of Worms stood over him, right before he died, and he... well, it looked like he sucked out Volanaro's soul! 
Let's start with the school. Which appeals most to you - Destruction, Illusion, or Mysticism? 
You're a Champion now. I've got no more fights for you. If you think you can beat the Gray Prince, challenge him! If anyone can beat him, you can! 
Press the attack, and don't give him a chance to let off a spell! I don't want to have to sweep your ashes out of the Arena! 
You already have the cure. Shouldn't you be delivering that somewhere? 
Made up your mind yet? There's work to be done. 
Gods protect us! 
The Eternal Garden... I used to dream about coming here. The Master made it sound so wonderful. 
Bless you! There's none in this town, but you could try Leyawiin. 
Ohtimbar, Fighters Guild Guardian. Maybe you saw me in the Arena, couple years ago? I was a contender. 
Lead on. I hope we're almost there. 
You must be stupid to accuse me of corruption to my face. 
You were more resourceful than I had hoped. I esteem you greatly for your success in bringing the Ten Ancestors together again after all these years. 
May the Night Mother guide you. 
I have much to do. This better be good. 
The few times I tried to say something, he'd strike me or push me away. I began to become frightened of him. 
Glad to see you! 
Sometimes a woman needs to make a quick exit. No shame in that. But it won't be very graceful if your legs are broken. 
With the Gatekeeper restored and Xedilian in operation, we won't have to worry about anything getting in. Things already here are another matter. 
If you want to help, and we can use all the help we can get, head over to the gate and lend a hand to the guards. 
I pulled duty outside the Imperial Libray tonight. Curse my luck. Being that close to the Elder Scrolls gives me the creeps. 
I'm Tamika. We grow our own grapes, and make fine wines. 
Night among strangers. Secrets in the dark. Nocturnal is here. 
Around 8 p.m., we are served dinner. Gundlar is quite a chef and prepares Thadon's meals personally, adding just a hint of Greenmote. 
Okay... 
With all due respect, the hour grows late and the situation grows darker. If we are to complete this plan, you must go now. 
You now have the power to summon Golden Saints. They've always served the Duke of Mania. I think it's the bright colors. They just love 'em. 
You need someplace to rest? I can rent you a room for the night for 10 gold. 
I'm Shamada, hostess of the Three Sister Inn. Speak to Shuravi if you need beds or meals. 
I hear all of Skyrim is under siege. The daedra lay waste to the Old Holds, and there is little to do to stop it. 
You need to see Ugak if you want to buy a horse. She's inside. 
I've been reading "Overview of Gods and Worship." I'm not sure if I like it yet. 
She's definitely not trying to catalogue all the living things in the Shivering Isles. 
You should take this book to Thoronir. Confronted with this, he may just see things differently. 
Aghh! Noooooo.... 
I understand Mandil has some rather nimble fingers. 
Is that slimy Argonian dead? Did he suffer long? I hope so. 
So he has finally snapped! I knew we should have warned the guards back when I noticed him trying to break into my house ... 
Hand over your stolen property, lawbreaker! If only you could afford to pay reparations... too bad, it's the dungeon for you. 
Another conspiracy in Crucible. That's fine. Just stay away from my things. 
Too bad none of those keys fit the lock... hahahaha! 
Good to see you! 
I can't imagine how anyone can get anything done in Crucible, if they keep getting dragged off for questioning by Syl. 
Well, that's it, my friend. We're the last. And that damned assassin is still hiding out in this house somewhere. 
The Crown of the Ayleids which Umbacano wants is not simply an ancient work of art. 
In the process, Arnora killed a guard. I told her to be careful, and just knock them out but she didn't listen. We then buried the gold in the woods. 
Good. Let's go. 
He's getting older, but he can still teach a bit about Alteration. He's been teaching it since before the Levitation Act of 421. 
Let me see. Yes! This is it! 
Gods blood! They came out of nowhere. Have you seen Grandmaster Jauffre? 
As we're just starting out, we need to find a place to start. Someone who knows something. 
I conduct business here. No offense, but I haven't got time for small talk. 
Welcome to the Horse Whisperer. 
One less Dark Elf in the world. And now there's one less person to find the gold, as well. It's a good day, don't you think?         
I suggest you rest in your room until we arrive back at the Imperial City. Graman should have us underway soon. 
Things are falling apart here. Someone needs to do something about the Blackwood Company situation. 
Sounds good.  I'm right behind you. 
You have proven yourself more than a simple grave robber. I believe you can handle a more complicated assignment. Are you interested? 
I'm sure I have something here you can use. 
She will reveal all her plans to you, Sheogorath's emissary! Beautifully devious. It embarrasses me not to have thought of it first. 
Stand back! They're going to breach the gate any minute now! 
I'm Eitar. Say. Did you hear what that Khajiit said? What's-his-name? You know who I'm talking about... 
That manservant is going to squash you like a bug! I can't wait to see what's left of you. 
The lot of us got jumped by a bunch of ogres. Partial to pretty gems, it seems. I'm the only one that survived. If you want the stone, head to Sedor. 
Yeah, what a laugh, huh? Just who are we keeping secure? Dreth? Since that other one got away, he's the only one rotting down here. 
This hardly seems the time to summon me. Not when Order is busy invading My Realm. Your mortals are just a hoot. I hate hoots. 
We don't welcome visitors, but we don't murder them either. 
The armies are restored? That calls for a celebration! 
Ahhh.... 
I'm speaking with someone. We'll talk later. Or not. When is later, exactly? Not now, I'm sure of that. 
Marz is an excellent healer, but I understand she longs to return to the swamps of Black Marsh. 
We'll just have to trust Oreyn, and keep our mouths shut. 
I shall need to consult the Council as to how to proceed with this situation. Thank you for the information. It may save many lives. 
You'r horse has been saddled. 
I am done with you for now. Go to the Dark Brotherhood sanctuary in Cheydinhal and speak with Ocheeva. She will provide further instruction. 
The Torch lights the city once again. Fat lot of good it does those of use working out here. 
Well what are you waiting for? Go get some! I'm not tellin' you a thing until I've got one in my hand. 
The Dark Brotherhood must seek out a High Elf named Aranath. He has need of our services, and we are only too happy to oblige. 
No one wearing the Bands of the Chosen can leave the Grotto. You'll discover that for yourself soon enough. 
You'd best get back to the encampment. There's no telling when more of them will come out of that infernal Oblivion Gate. 
I can't believe it! The Gray Prince has been beaten! There's a new Arena Grand Champion now, someone called Man o' War! 
I have everything necessary for the ritual to use the Xarxes to open a portal to Camoran's Paradise. 
Dervera Romalen is sure proud of the Newlands lodge. I think she's especially happy that the Red Queen drinks there. 
Stantus Varrid. I'm not a priest any more... just a private seeker in search of white light. 
The... the journal... my father's journal.... It says I'm... I'm part vampire! I thought my father was a nobleman, not some blood-sucking monster! 
Viator Accius has a good shield selection at Stonewall Shields. 
Ha ha ha ha ha! Well, no one could ever accuse you Blades of being lax, I'll give you that. No, there's no need for alarm. I just wanted to talk.  
I must admit, I'm disappointed. This was an important contract, and you stumbled through it like a drunk. Leave me now, and think upon your failure. 
I fear grave tidings. 
People who buy tend to want to spend their money there. That leaves none for us. It's getting so bad, a few of us may have to close up shop. 
You've found this place. Now you must find your way within. 
Or, you could make her life so miserable that she leaves us alone. She needs everything "just so."  So, sneak into her house and wreck the place! 
I'm leaving now. 
If these armies are through the Gates, the city could be next! 
Treasure holes near Cheydinhal?  Not close by. 
All hail the victor of Cylarne! All hail the Great Torch of Mania! 
You have been told the proposition: your donation for a possible audience with Clavicus Vile. The choice is yours. 
I eagerly bought it, knowing the value of Daedric relics. In fact, I was a bit suspicious when he sold it so cheap. His loss, my gain I figured. 
Guess what? I found another dead rat. Here, take this. 
If you insist, Your Grace, but there's not much time. 
Hello, Associate. To earn a recommendation from me, you need simply prove you are able-bodied and prepared to learn something in the process. 
Greed is unbecoming. 
Well, this saves me a bit of trouble. Aleron's dead even though I planned to kill him anyway. So, that just leaves you. Let the game continue! 
Go ahead, boot. 
Well now, you are an ambitious one, aren't you? I'm afraid I have no more contracts for you. Our time working together has come to an end. 
Ah, you're the one who lit the Great Torch for us. Well done! 
Go see Hieronymus Lex. He's a pompous fool, just like you. He might listen to your complaint. 
I understand he's good, but you have to be a member of the Fighters Guild for him to train you. 
That's a private thing. Besides, someone stole it. Relan needs to step up security around here. 
Inside the walls, the chapel is in the east, the residences in the west, and the guilds in between. 
I saw Erthor earlier. Guess someone rescued him again. Hide your scrolls while you can. 
Well, the best I can offer is help with the guards. I can distract at least two of them and get them to leave her wing of the palace. 
Lucien Lachance's word is law. Whatever contract he has given you must be carried out, without question. 
There are some folks causing trouble, that's for sure. Head over to the Five Claws Lodge. You'll see. 
Hello. I'm Rasheda -- the smith -- and this is Fire and Steel. Quality armor and weapons, repairs, too. What can I do for you? 
The situation is this. An Obelisk of Order has activated in the Palace courtyard. My Mazken are engaging the Knights as we speak. 
I'm no murderer, so that means it's either you or Neville. Just stay away from me! I don't trust either one of you! 
You might also look at Quickwater Cave to the north. I cleared it out, but I haven't been there in years. It might have new tenants. 
Have you considered joining the guild? Falcar can admit you, if you'd like. So can the leader of any of the other local guild halls. 
We don't want more worshippers. We just want to be left alone. 
Those obelisks are harmless. Certainly, nothing hostile appears near them. 
Their ultimate demise was wrought by their own civil strife at least as much as by the rebellion of their human slaves. 
It's a wonderful room, isn't it? 
You know it as White Gold Tower -- the center of the ancient Ayleid capital of Nibenay.  
I have seen everything. After you've seen through Vaermina's eyes, nothing can frighten you. 
Swift hunting, friend. 
The others are dust! You alone, Nord, remain, First and Last! Go now! Beyond the next gate, your portal waits. 
You should not be here, Inquisitor. Perhaps you are lost? I have business to attend to. Excuse me. 
They entered this Realm, and were ill prepared. Their minds are now the property of my Lord. 
You have a few options, I believe. Either wait for Ma'zaddha to return with more information, or have a chat with Nelrene in the meantime. 
Arkay! 
Want some help putting these on? 
The Inquisitor is now required to be secretive? Consider that Herdir's presence may be a detriment to you. 
Brave deeds, friend. Taking the fight to Oblivion itself! I salute you. 
If only we'd gotten here sooner! 
Who has time for this sort of thing? I mean, at this rate, I'll grow old and die before he's out of our hair! 
I'm J'zin-Dar. I tell you, so you can tell everyone who kicked the crap out of you. J'zin-Dar. Get it right. 
You have decided you have time to listen to my tale after all? It is a good one. I promise you won't be disappointed. 
The Golden Saints will protect us. 
Five of the night watch, and all's well. You're out late, ma'am.  
Oh, well... I, I understand. The danger is too great. You're right, you should stay out of this. I'll just have to solve this myself. 
I poured myself some wine and studied the charts I had made until it was time to sleep. 
Enchanting staves can be a tricky business. Only certain spells will be truly useful to you, so I'll narrow it down some. 
Very well. Make no mistake: this task is simple, but has a purpose. 
Oh, yes... of course. It seems a most unusual weapon was recovered from the Orc warrior, Grommok. 
I can hardly believe you're standing here in front of me! The Listener himself! This is such an honor! 
It isn't for sale. You'll have to find a copy somewhere else. 
What's the latest? 
Well... I'll tell you a secret. I took some of the money I saved and paid a mage to lock the rest of it away in a box inside my house. 
Cured? You speak as if they are diseased. They live now in another state of being. Perhaps it is you who needs a cure. 
Langley, captain of the Anvil guard. 
Why do you bother me, stranger? You make far too much noise.  
It's been three days, and he's been stuck in his dreams. I've watched him all that time, and he hasn't been up at all. 
I bid you a most gracious welcome, my lady. 
Did you see the fight that Ra'qanar got into the other night? 
You have served me well, and I choose now to extend that gift to you. Shall I use my dark powers and turn you into a vampire? 
I'll snap you in half, little man. 
I've heard that. It's best to steer clear of them, though. 
If you see a Shambles dying, get real close. They'll heal you. 
Just leave me. Please. 
May I help with any last minute preparations? 
Nope. 
You have saved my life, again. You are a true friend. I will not forget this. I've decided to join the Thieves Guild. No more jails for me! 
All right, all right. I'm tempted to let you out right now if you'll just shut up... 
I must hasten to the Count and deliver this immediately. Please, meet me back at the Cheydinhal Bridge Inn in about two hours. 
Watch out! There may be more of them! 
Please, hurry. The division in the Council will be difficult, if not impossible, to reconcile. 
Some folks are saying that the Blackwood Company is taking over all of the Fighters Guild contracts. There's rumor they'll lose their charter. 
This Resonator thing-a-ma-jig. I don't get it. What's it for, anyway? 
Good evening, ma'am. 
I have nothing to teach the likes of you. 
I own the Black Waterside Stables. 
You've done it! Well done, Lord Sheogorath. I never doubted you for a moment. 
I don't ask too many questions of Thadon. It's precious to him, and that's all that matters. It's his own business. 
I understand. I don't want anyone taking on this job unless they feel up to it. Return to me when you are more confident. 
We're all going to die! 
Lord Sheogorath! I apologize for the intrusion, but you must help us! Order has attacked Brellach and routed us! 
We are expecting the Aureals to attack any moment. They'll come down the main passage from the Altar of Rapture. They always do. 
As long as the arrow hits Phillida, he will die. But it cannot pierce armor! Shoot while Phillida is armored, and the Rose will be wasted.   
I'll make Captain for this! 
I see you've returned. Wonderful. Do you wish to return to your location at the time of the unfortunate...incident? 
You picked a bad time to visit Kvatch. 
Invaders? You don't... you don't suppose that they've come for ME do you? 
Again we cross paths. 
Well, then. It's no small matter; membership in the guild is quite an honor, but also a responsibility. Do you wish to join the guild? 
You better stay away from Diram. He's not very happy with you. 
Arkay, Light of Lights, cleanse this place of darkness. 
Hail, daedra-slayer! 
I've heard that Feren Relas knows quite a bit about alchemy. 
He told me of his intentions to donate all of the money and inventory to the local temple. He also agreed to buy and sell merchandise at fair prices. 
Aye, comrade, we'd best stay sharp. Who knows what tomorrow brings. As for the present, we'd best get back to our duties. 
Who? Who among us is vile enough to take the life of such a beautiful, precious creature? If I find out who did this, they will pay with their life! 
We are Knights sworn to uphold the laws of Cheydinhal. We fear no being, and we strike fast and true as lightning. 
I must surely be dead, and in the halls of Azura to look upon such a vision. You are so beautiful, my dear Dunmer maiden... 
Gilgondrin inherited Silverhome from his parents. I understand he only runs it out of a sense of duty. 
A recommendation, from me? 
Join my trophies, nithing! 
I'm sorry, I shouldn't berate what you've done for Cheydinhal. Everyone appreciates what you did, as do I. 
What do you need... Master?  
Now that we have a free moment, I thought you might be able to use some tricks I've picked up fighting with the Blades over the years. 
He's out and about in the morning, so I would wait until afternoon or evening to go visit him. 
The Order welcomes him. 
So, how about it? Are you ready to fight now? 
Here is what I believe we should do next. I will stay here and attempt to reestablish this Sanctuary. I will begin recruiting new members. 
I wish I'd been able to help construct the new Gatekeeper. 
We'll be ready if the daedra decide to attack, don't worry. 
My my my, look at the Myrmidon. Who are you fighting against up there, cripples and skooma addicts? Maybe some day they'll give you a real challenge. 
You and I are the only ones left, but we're not alone in this house. That killer is in here with us, hiding. But where? 
What, I'm not good enough for you? You think Fathis is going to give you the time of day? 
Excellent. Here's your payment. Come back if you find more. 
The Dark Brotherhood? Okay! Okay! Here! Here's the key! Just don't hurt me! I won't say a word, I swear! 
How I look forward to our goodbyes. 
Oh. Him. He's been around. Mostly at the West Weald staring at the bottom of a flagon of ale. 
If Passwall has fallen, which of us will be next? 
Armies, war? Bah! When it comes to a man's heart, a basket of sweetrolls can be as effective as a sword. 
Hurry up. 
Marie Palielle is quite a hard worker. She's in the chapel day and night, tending to the sick and injured. 
Then allow me to explain the task. The Council of Mages has entrusted me with resolving a situation along the Gold Road. 
Instead, she is dead, at your hand. And Sheogorath's command! 
Always fight a Grummite in the water. Or in the rain. They hate water. 
Martina Floria at the Arcane University has truly mastered Illusion spells. You should speak with her about training further. 
Take care. Wish I could. 
May Talos guide you. 
Did we get them all?... Are there more? 
You did it! You beat them, every last one! Do you know how long it will take for the Yellow Team to recover from this? Ha ha ha ha ha!  
Sometimes, when it's quiet, I walk the battlements and breathe in the cold mountain air. It's the only peace I allow myself. 
Behold, the Crimson Blade! 
I'm afraid some things have happened while you've been gone, Associate. It may affect your recommendation. 
Finally, all this mess is sorted out. I can get back to my work. Oh, I've lost so much time. 
Cyrus, my friend. Don't let me keep you. 
My master is a collector of Ayleid antiquities. It has come to his attention that you recently sold an item that interests him. 
I suppose an introduction is in order. I'm Sheogorath, Prince of Madness. And other things. I'm not talking about them. 
I told you. I'm not hiding anything. 
I don't have anything for you right now. Speak with Azzan or gro-Khash. Get some more seasoning, and maybe I'll have something. 
Ha ha! Now that's the spirit! You give the people of Cyrodiil a good show, and I'll make sure you get a decent burial! Ha ha ha ha ha! 
We don't look kindly on strangers asking questions.  If you need a room, try Moslin's Inn.  Otherwise, you'd best be moving on. 
So you see, I already know what's in that book. But Ranarr-Jo doesn't. Go bring it to him. 
Sweet! The hunter is restored. The pride welcomes the hunter once again. 
It's almost worth staying invisible forever, just to see how much it annoys Diram. But that doesn't make me like you any better. 
Necromancers have attacked our very homes. What could be next? 
Mania has a new ruler! Perhaps Big Head will hear songs of good fortune as well. 
Okay, but that puts me farther away from the group. 
What do you want now? 
I couldn't possibly leave my house. It gets so dirty so quickly. In fact, I have to go wipe down the walls again. It's been over an hour. 
Enilroth, Morvayn's apprentice. 
Seen any dead things laying around? 
In that capacity, I am pleased to offer Advanced Training in Speechcraft, that the faithful might better spread the word of Gods' graces. 
Form up! By the Staff, we will not allow this town to fall! 
I don't have any interest in learning about Conjuration, but I hear he's very good. 
Ha ha! We wiped the bastards out! 
I aim to keep an eye on things here in the city. Take it slow, get to know the people. Try not to get off on the wrong foot. 
Either you're lying to me, or your feeble little mind has forgotten that you put it down someplace. I'm not amused. Go get the book. 
I am Januarius Aurunceia, the Count's footman and boot-puller. 
Do you know why Hil the Tall became a priest? 
If you seek her out, take care. She's a powerful one. Or at least that sword is. I'd steer clear if I was you. 
You're bothering me. 
Damn these interruptions! Can't you see I'm busy? Do you think just anyone gets into the Arcane University? Now leave me alone! 
She'll actually get something done. The problem with her is getting her motivated. You have to play mind games, with that one. 
Now that I think about it, I do have a small problem concerning Erthor. He's one of the guild mages here. Think you can do something about it? 
All right, I'll help you hone your technique. 
There must be an exit around here somewhere. I'd explore this place, but I'm afraid I just don't have the courage to do so. 
I do have an idea how we might be able to stop them, but for now our primary concern must be our survival. 
Behold the new hero of the people of Cyrodiil! Behold, your Arena Grand Champion, the Tamriel Terror! 
An impressive victory. After all, you handicapped yourself by making it as difficult as possible for yourself, and yet you still won. Congratulations. 
What do you care? He seems like a very respectable person. That's more than I can say for you. 
Here you go, bounty hunter. I can't wait to begin playing with my living tree. 
Good luck. You will save her won't you? I gotta go now. 
We're ready when you are. 
Only a fool would doubt the valor of the Blades, but I must ask the same of you. Do not doubt my valor, do not doubt my resolve. I will not fail you. 
Where'd you get that? That's good! 
Oh... okay. Well... You get me some skooma, and then we'll... be good friends. Okay? Okay... Nordinor.. In Bravil... He sells it... Late at night...  
No-one steals from Fathis Aren! 
Welcome, sister. The hour is late, but the Master still has need for willing hands.  
Yes, yes. You're quite the sleuth, finding him all by yourself. Jeanne will be so proud, I'm sure. 
You look like you can handle yourself in a fight. And I'm sure you wouldn't mind making a little extra money. Hmmmm... 
I think I'll study this shrine a bit longer. You can make your way out here. I thank you again for your help. Please, take this token of my thanks. 
Just have to take matters into my own hands. The only way now. 
We'll meet here again tomorrow night.  Oh, and NEVER contact me in public.  They're watching.  They can't know you're helping me. 
Let me know when you've found what I need. 
I think all Bogrum gro-Galash cares about is the Lonely Suitor Lodge. He really puts everything into it. 
I've been better. 
I had the diary, but one of them stole it from me. 
What are you doing? 
Die you scum! 
Well go get it! 
They get the weapon for Argoth, collect the payment, and tell Azani where the mage is. Easy for Blackheart to retrieve the weapon and collect on it. 
Can't have you walking around without working equipment. 
You risked life and limb for a cause that wasn't your own. For that, I'm grateful. Please, accept these gems as a token of my gratitude. 
Tsk. Such terrible times we live in. Is no place safe anymore? 
Did you think I would be your puppet?! 
Norbert Lelles runs a fine store, but he's not the brightest fellow. 
This is good. Go to Leyawiin. Speak with Ahdarji and help her find her ring. 
Got all that? Good! Hides-His-Heart will be here any moment. Get ready! Oh, I do hope this works...                             
Word certainly gets around fast, doesn't it? Don't tell me -- Antoinetta has been running her mouth off again. Anyway, nothing I couldn't handle.     
Enjoy the manor. It suits you well. 
If you came to me for help, you're more of a fool than you look. 
Farewell. 
Trust me when I say we'll give you a night to remember. 
For the love of Azura, can't a man have a bit of privacy? Get out of here! 
I'm finally getting around to reading "Five Songs of King Wulfharth." I just wish I had more time to read it. 
No mere shopkeeper knows their true worth. If you bring them to me when you find them, I will pay you double for each one. 
We don't have any horses for sale right now. You bought our last Bay horse. 
Do you think she followed us? How could she? 
As you wish. Just remember, had I issued a direct order, you would not have been able to refuse. So say the Tenets. Consider what I have said.  
You have proven to be quite the hunter. Take your bounty. You've earned it. 
Waiting just outside is a magnificent steed named Shadowmere. She has served me well. I present her now to you, as a token of my trust and love. 
So it's Gladiator now. Oh, I do long for the day when you can prove your true worth to me... in the Arena! Until that day comes, you are nothing! 
Lum gro-Baroth in Chorrol can train me in shield work, right? 
We will not lose this land. 
How could I have been so naive, so stupid? We must stick together my friend, for Dovesi is surely the murderer! We must strike before she does!  
Please... I implore you, help me avenge my wife's death! 
I'm sure we'll speak again. 
There are rumors that there is a new Gray Fox. Nobody knows what happened to the old one. 
Stick your foe with one of these pretty arrows. 
He's certainly become more like a Nord over the years. Quite a competent healer, too. 
Please avenge my family's death... slay the ogres. 
I see my wife couldn't keep her big mouth shut. 
The first one to bring back Rohssan's sword will become a member. But, this is the last chance. The loser gets nothing. Do you accept? 
Blood ran blue, and dragons flew high. Under broken towers and broken bodies it now lies, waiting to be found. 
Just in time, Mage. We've been waiting for you. 
You came to watch a fight, and a fight you shall have! It's the Blue Team versus the Yellow Team in a battle to the death! Lower the gates! 
She's the one. She's never liked me or my sweet little pets. I know it's her. I've even seen her sneaking around in back of my house at night. 
Fine. One less thing for me to clean up afterwards. 
Neville was strong, a soldier. If he was murdered, this does not bode well for the rest of us!   
You don't seem to have the bottle with you. Shame on you for lying to a sick woman. 
Hey! What did I tell you about weapons! That's it; we're done. 
Fadus Calidus at the Fighters Guild also teaches Block, but he'd be the first to admit I'm his superior in every way. 
Because, when they come for me, I'm not going to let them have my stuff. No way. 
Ah! My favorite! You're a good friend, you know that? 
If you care that much, you go find it. The contract's yours. It's not worth it for what the Guild is paying. I've got a family to think about. 
Right then. Up the stairs in the back, and it's the last door at the end of the hall, straight ahead of you after turning that corner. 
I'll get the lock. Don't be touchin' any of them. I'll be keeping a close eye on you. 
You should speak to Martin. I believe he has made some progress with the Mysterium Xarxes. 
When your blade bites into your foe and he screams in pain, think of me. 
Let's go watch! 
Greet the war-hardened Redguard! Fight for my glory, Chosen One! 
The greatest objection to First Era dating is that the stones are completely unlike any other examples of First Era architecture. 
We've sworn to protect Cheydinhal from any threat, and we've entered this Oblivion gate to do just that. 
Have you noticed a change in the well water recently? It tastes strange to me. 
You've got it. I'll have the two Minotaur Lords brought out to the Arena. Now get up there and give the people what they paid for!  
The West Weald Inn is across from the guilds inside the north walls. Two Sisters' Lodge is inside the south walls, in the west, near the gate. 
The plans you found make it clear that the Mythic Dawn will soon move against us here. You must eliminate their agents in Bruma. 
The Waters of Oblivion lead us to the Wellspring, where Lord Sheogorath has given us a place to return to His service. 
The Gatekeeper's dead. Must have had some curse or weakness. There always is. Heroes kill monsters by exploiting a weakness. 
The Dark Brotherhood must seek out an Orc named Buramog. He has need of our services, and we are only too happy to oblige. 
The Nords have always been protective of their territory. It's no wonder they get involved in these disputes. 
It was I that painted that portrait. When the Count was lost, the Countess spent so much time with it that I became jealous. 
You? Hah! No. You have a "conventional" type of soul. But, I don't make that decision. The Shivering Isles belong to Lord Sheogorath. 
Get the gem! The leader probably had it - that High Elf. 
Av Sunna Tam Riel arctavoy an Arpen Aran malaburo! 
The adventurers will be subject to horrors beyond their imagination... visions of repugnance, death, and malevolence reside in this room. 
Same assortment of things? I mean, I have enough clothing for now. 
If you're done shopping, you'd best be moving along. 
Speak with the castle steward when you arrive. 
You'll taste my steel, Reman dog! 
Have you heard any word about the other provinces? 
Oh. Sorry to bother you. 
What news from Skingrad? I assume you've spoken to Count Hassildor. 
You're back! And Rallus is with you.... but where is Antus? I don't see him. 
Get away! You will die here! 
For the last few days, we've suffered attacks from these creatures at our farm not far from Chorrol. 
No one's going out to Harlun's Watch after what the Fighters Guild found there. 
Good. Remember, wait for him to follow me. I want to see what he'll do. 
This will be a glorious day! Cylarne will finally be free of the Aureals. Follow me. We're expecting the attack at any moment. 
Well... You'll recall my hypothesis? The one I mentioned the other day? I'll have you know, I was right! And to think, you actually doubted me! 
You are the only remaining Duke, which is a situation quite unprecedented. Normally, you would never be permitted to pass within Brellach. 
He asked me to deliver this note. I believe it is an invitation to visit him at his manor in the Imperial City. 
The Gatekeeper has returned to its former glory... Arden-Sul blesses us once more. 
Sheogorath may be gone, but I will still serve the House of Mania until my death. 
Ready for action! 
Arch-Mage! You have returned! 
Please, I have done all I can. There is nothing more to say. Just be cautious. 
They doubted my power. Now they'll see! 
Fool! You've just exposed me to the Thieves Guild. That "citizen" is actually the guild member that was hired to do the theft! 
Ah, our newest pickpocket. 
I understand Mania has a new leader. Not my area of interest, honestly. 
Hides-His-Heart will be here any moment! 
Stick close and let us do our job, and you'll be all right. 
Please don't harm me! What is it you want? 
The poor lad is handling all of this better than I expected. It's a testament to his noble bearing, I'm sure.   
You do not have the cure. Please do not attempt to deceive me. 
Sorry, can't help you with that. 
Borissean. Master Spellmaker for the Mages Guild. Guildsmen, only, of course. 
I was told that my mother and brother never survived! This is amazing! 
Just go away! 
Not now, not later, not ever. 
The Gray Fox is inside. 
No jobs? Ha! There is much work to be done here in Cyrodiil! The Blackwood Company is more than willing to do it. 
Then you are a coward, as well as a bigot, and we will speak no more of this. 
I was orphaned when I was young, and don't even remember who my parents were. I'm not really sad about it; it was so long ago. 
It's good to be home. 
Place the Osseous Marrow into the cistern. 
I feel something different...the curse feels lighter somehow. 
Don't take all day making your choices. 
Perhaps you can help me. 
I told you to stay back and keep an eye on the guy who was watching me. 
But you have courage, at least. To slay a bold animal like you is not without glory. 
Poor Arnora. Seems her boyfriend, Jorundr, has stolen some gold from her and left her penniless. Now he's in jail, and she's destitute. 
Ah, the Prowler approaches. 
Oh, yes. Don't bother trying to kill one of them. As soon as you do, another will take its place. It's endless. Quite the curse, eh? 
I don't believe I know you. And I don't need any new friends, thank you very much. 
I'm Maglir. What do you want? 
3, 9, 8. I rode back as fast as I could to tell Count Cirion of the danger. 8, 7, 4. He went and hid. 9, 8, 9. 
What?! This is ... unbelievable! Of all the strange fates, to become the target of a stranger's madness ... 
It's where you end up if you don't die according to His plan. They will drive you to it. Like They did poor Gadeneri. 
I ain't tellin' the likes of you! 
Interesting. Not many wish to hear about such things, but I would be glad to oblige. 
Now, light the Great Torch as a beacon for those who fear and those who inspire fear. 
It doesn't seem you have a hammer, or any of the weapons for us. Please, get those weapons as soon as possible. 
It's nice to see you again. 
Forgive me for saying so, Your Grace, but I find taking orders from the Duke of Mania to be... unsettling. 
Maybe he can help with these strange Knights. 
May you never darken. 
I've seen Ma'zaddha, yes. Talkin' to that Seducer, Nelrene. All secretive-like, out in the street late at night. 
Hmmmm. I don't remember seeing Chanel or Orgnolf that entire evening. 
There's only one way to remove that gate. Venture inside, find the gate's sigil stone and take it. Once you have it, the gate should be closed. 
You made it. I didn't think you'd have any trouble. Let's get these Bands off you ... 
Do I really have to spell it out for you? You're a man, and I'm a woman with a certain desire. You figure out the rest. 
I did. When the Knights came, I fled to the city. As they marched and burned everything to ash, I found a way into the palace. 
It's a shame that you had all the fun before I could get here. Now, there's nothing left to do but rebuild. 
Damn it! Lewin deserved better than this and I'm responsible. Someone will pay dearly, I assure you. 
Likewise!  I'm always glad to meet someone new.  Welcome!  I'm sure my mother would be glad to meet you as well. 
I guessed you would say these terrible things to me. That is why I brought my friend along. 
Perhaps you have been summoned. Perhaps Nocturnal desires your service, and has guided you here. Approach. 
I have not heard from him, and I fear for his safety. 
Orcs are always welcome. But Malacath wants a present. Like Troll fat. And only Troll fat. 
She's expelled Oreyn from the guild. Stripped him of all rank and privileges. And you, she's demoted you. You've been busted down to Protector. 
Plus, members often find items in their travels they can't use, and they leave them here for other members to use. Sometimes there's nice stuff. 
There's something about Nels I can't quite place. He's not from money, that's obvious. But I don't think he's quite the buffoon he seems, either. 
They have tricked you for Ages. 
With pleasure, My Lord! My Mazken will gladly die in Your service! 
He's Relmyna's crowning achievement. The Gatekeeper keeps out people who don't belong in the Shivering Isles. 
Hmm... not bad! Better than my old pair. Thanks, friend! 
I want you to get back to Water's Edge. Make sure the Blackwood Company hasn't forced those residents out. 
Be mindful of what you find there. The library is a thing of Order, and it will still serve that end. 
We shall find a way to the light. 
Please hurry, Raynil may make a break for the open road at any moment. 
Have you seen Othrelos moving around? It's like he sometimes just disappears. 
You should be ashamed. 
Since you're an honorary member of the Order, if you bring back proof you've slain a vampire, we'd be glad to compensate you. 
Yes, dearest Brother? Is there something I can help you with? 
Well, of course. Raminus would naturally want my opinion, wouldn't he? 
