I got an Uber driver yesterday to go pick up my car from the auto garage. We got to talking and I mentioned that I had been in school in the area, and she asked if I graduated, and I said no, I dropped out after a few years. And then expounded that it was because of a substance abuse issue. 

This woman, who was like a 60 year old white woman that looked like an average sweet grandma, started telling me about how she was addicted to crack in the 70s and fucked around a bit with meth too. She said she was spending about $75 a week (in 1970s money so about $350 today) on it back then. But that she finally got her shit together after she got pregnant. She told me a lot about how even years later certain smells or other things will hit her deep and it’s not something that’s very easily gone away. 

I told her about how I spent the last 3 years addicted to meth mainly but also heroin. How whenever I smell vinegar, I still get that craving for dope. About how at my max I was spending $1000 a month on drugs. I told her about how my psychiatrist got me a prescription for suboxone and that’s why I’m off heroin, and that he undoubtedly saved my life in that respect. And I told her that I was 3 and a half months off meth, and she gave me a high five. 

Then we got to my destination, and as we’re pulling up, she says “Do you mind if I pray over you real quick?”  Now I’m not a religious person at all, but I said “Of course not” and so she pulled into a parking spot, took my hand, and said a short prayer asking God to watch over me and keep me on my current path and I nearly fucking cried. It was one of the sweetest things a stranger has ever done for me. I very sincerely thanked her and then picked up my car and drove home.

Edit: corrected some spellingIt's gonna be so hard to find another Morphine dealer.. but I couldn't just sit around. Not sure if it was right to just turn him in, but the idea he could've killed someone if I didn't would haunt me forever...  

Edit: He's selling Fentanyl, and calling it Morphine. If that isn't clear.

Edit2: This thread has 92% approval rating, most people arent idiots. The morons calling me a snitch, go look in the mirror and figure out how you sunk so low.Hello redditors of r/drugs. 

As the title stated, I'm a cop. Before anyone gets too heated, please hear me out.

My goal as a police officer is not to make the most busts, or arrest the most perps. My job is to serve the community, and at all times I strive to be as open-minded, compassionate, and fair as possible. That cop who treated you like garbage because you're a user? That ain't me.

Other than my time smoking a little weed at school, drugs and drug culture are a bit foreign to me. This is particularly true of harder drugs - meth, heroin, crack, etc.

I'm here because I'd like to start a dialogue, to learn about your perspectives. Culture. Experiences. Concerns. Attitudes towards police. Anything you think a cop should know to be more effective in the community.

In particular I'd like to know how I can best serve and help addicts, and what I need to know before doing so.

What do you say redditors? Can we have a proverbial coffee and chat?

UPDATE: Back again. Went out for food with the family. Now reading through all the comments. Thanks for having me as your guest, and for taking the time to chat to someone you would probably ordinarily try to avoid. It is appreciated.

UPDATE 2: Seriously humbled at this community for taking the time to engage. Thank you. Shout out to u/fuckthislifeee - appreciate the PM offering to have sex with my eye socket, I must however decline, and no I won't send you my address.

UPDATE 3: Cool front page. Would account for my exploding inbox. I've been on Reddit for far too long and will endeavour to come back on later to chat more.

To those who participated in a positive way, thank you. It's been great to have this dialogue. I have been endeavouring to read every post.

UPDATE 4: Just finished breakfast and a hot cup of society's most beloved drug. Reading through the mountain of replies. Thanks all. Never expected this post to get so big. Will attempt to reply to as many of you as possible today.

UPDATE 5: Loving this discussion. Thanks all.I am so tired of hearing various people from various substance circles brag about their superior ability to operate a motor vehicle while inebriated. 

I literally don't care what substance it is or how many times you've done it or how experienced you've become. You're fucking stunted, it will end in disaster one day, and to be honest, I hope it's a cop pulling you over rather than you hurting someone else on the road. It isn't respectable or cool; it's reprehensible. 

A small amount of beer is one thing. A puff or two is one thing. But outside of that, grow the fuck up. You aren't just endangering yourself; you're endangering every innocent car that has to share a road with your dumbass, along with your passengers. 

We all want a more positive view of drugs in our society, right? Well that starts with people that do drugs NOT MAKING STUPID ASS DECISIONS THAT HAVE SEVERE IMPACTS ON OTHER MEMBERS OF SOCIETY.

Rant over.Specifically you /u/oniroin. You've lied about your age on here several times, lied about being a meth addict for eight years (your post history shows you're still in highschool). There are so many posts on here romanticizing things like meth and heroin addiction, many of them fictional. This is not a fucking game people, this isn't a place to write fictional bullshit so you can have your fill of karma. Many people here are *actual* drug users, with real stories that you're undermining and trivializing. I swear to god I'm going to call out each and every one of you fake poser cunts until you stop this horseshit. This subreddit does not need your fake as fuck sob story, you're decreasing the legitimacy of real experiences that are posted on here and it's **not fucking appreciated**. 

guys, I want to start off by saying that Mr. Dyer was my 6th grade science teacher. he was my favorite guy at my school. he was always nice to me and i adored him. when i found out about this, it sickened and horrified me. i was crying. i immediately called the school and asked for them to leave my contact info to Mr. Dyer, as i want to support him. he is a musician, as am I and I want to play with him. Anyways the gist of the story is that graham dyer (his son) took some LSD and had a bad trip. police were called (by his friends assumedly) and they apparently got pissed off by how he was acting, so they put this kid in hell. they tasered him in his genital area, kept on tasering him repeatedly and didnt stop. he was banging his head all around the vehicle because of the severe pain he was in. it was so bad that the link i am about to show you, the fbi had to cut the audio from it because he was screaming in agony. can you just imagine how much hell this kid went through??? he was having a bad trip on LSD and this happened to him. i cannot even imagine the hell he went through. guys I want you to spread this, make this public, because this is beyond fucked up. fuck those police officers. i hope they rot in prison for the rest of their life. the dyer family had no idea how their son was treated by police until recently because of an fbi investigation was opened last year. rest in peace graham dyer.

http://www.mystatesman.com/news/texas-police-withheld-records-their-son-death-now-they-know-why/MHJC1hWAbPhcN6gOtqOkyM/

edit: thank you nonameplayer13 for the names

"https://www.dallasnews.com/news/crime/2013/08/16/man-18-is-brain-dead-after-banging-head-against-mesquite-school-door-scuffling-with-officers-who-arrested-him-tuesday

"A struggle ensued and Dyer bit one of the officers, Jack Fyall, on the hand, Hedgpeth said. At least some of the fight is believed to have been recorded on a police squad car camera, police said.

The other officers at the scene were identified as Sgt. Richard Houston and officers Alan Gafford, Zackary Scott and William Heidelberg."


Not saying there should be any self justice but some of you wanted to know their names so badly... "*disclaimer: this is not typical acid use. There are many concretely 'beneficial' effects from lower, more infrequent doses*

In 2014, I did on average 250ug of acid once a week for ten months, from January to October, or approximately 40 times. Doses typically ranged from 150ug-600ug (I assume; I never knew for sure how much I actually took). Subjective experiences ranged from slightly glowing colors to complete loss of any sense contact with the physical world around me (and a 10 minute orgasm at one point).

I had the ability to. I had savings. I lived in a house of accepting camgirls. Real life wasn't getting in the way.

The first thing people usually want to know is why? Nobody gets addicted to acid. It's unheard of. When people trip, they stay generally keep the fuck away from it for several months. It can be a very overwhelming experience, noncommunicable, and utterly alien.

I did it because I felt like I was *learning.* Every time I tripped I had the overwhelming sensation that the doors had opened and I was mainlining information from a direct source of truth. Every time I stopped tripping, it felt like those doors closed, and I forgot most of what I'd learned. But I wanted to remember.

So I kept doing it. Again and again, higher and higher doses. I needed to know. [I produced art.](https://aellagirl.com/artwork/) I played music. 

When we imagine frequent drug use, we imagine it as a form of escapism - that real life is too difficult, that we want to shut down for a time. 

Acid was exactly the opposite. It heightened senses, heightened what I was aware of in my own mind, let me explore the way my own thoughts formed. It took what I was and shoved my own face in it. [I couldn't look away.](https://www.reddit.com/r/LSD/comments/3wbb3o/drew_this_coming_down_from_400ug/) There were times of deliberately induced and absolutely excruciating emotional pain, to which nothing in my regular life has ever come close. I did it on purpose. I needed to know.

It is very difficult to talk about the "things you learn" while tripping, because it occurs while in such a deeply altered state that language ceases to apply. It really is more about a *way of looking* - a very specific type of engaging in experience. "Thinking about the experience" defeats the point, because thinking about it is not the same thing as "having it". Applying words to the experience is misleading by nature. It is the concept in math where defining a thing gives it an outside and an inside, and thus you can never define the thing that is "always outside" - in giving it a term, in identifying it with boundaries, it is no longer what you are trying to say. The Tao that can be named is not the Tao. It is the unspoken, the Mu.

As time went on, I stopped viewing myself as a being separate from the universe. Sensations became interesting to watch, not motivating. I entered such a permanent state of utter peace and contentment that I stopped wanting anything at all. And by the end of it, I barely got out of bed, barely ate. I had stopped working almost entirely and was living off slowly depleting savings. Why would I work? Why would I do anything? I was.... not happy, not sad, I simply *was.* I was free of desire. I did not fear death. 

And, ten months in, I realized that's what I was looking at - *death.* I would compulsively whisper "I am dead" under my breath throughout the day. I was an empty vessel. And I realized, that if I kept doing acid, I probably *would* die, out of sheer apathy.

I wasn't terribly worried - but I had to make a decision. Did I want to continue down this path, knowing the end was oblivion? Or did I want to close the doors and return to the world of the living?

I chose the latter - not due to any compulsion or survival instinct (at least not subjectively) - but because I casually figured living would be more interesting. 

The journey back was almost as strange and beautiful as the journey in. As my motivations slowly began returning, I found all I wanted was to forget. Whereas before I was trying to immerse myself in the knowing, now I was constantly attempting to shut eyes that were permanently pried open. No matter where I turned, the knowledge had been seared into my brain. It was like that feeling you get when you watch a movie and are suddenly aware that, just out of the frame, there are camera crews standing around the actors, and you stop buying into the story because all you see is the movie set. 

I just wanted to pretend this was all real. I wanted to feel invested in myself. I wanted to feel upset, insecure, proud, happy, anxiety, anything. I wanted to stop knowing. [Here is a poem I wrote during that time period](https://aellagirl.tumblr.com/post/148554414581/11515) *lots of people have been making fun of this poem. I am feeling insecure and want to take it down, but instead am alleviating my worry about what you think of me with a disclaimer that it was personal and came from my journal, so don't have high expectations.*

Before I chose life, I didn't mind the deep nothingness I had sunk into - but after the choice was made, it became... not uncomfortable, but strange. I felt like I had abandoned an old lover, like this constant twinge of pain, like a splinter in my throat I couldn't dislodge. I thought constantly about tripping again and being reunited. I did acid in my dreams. 

Over time, almost without me realizing it, the eye slowly eased shut, like going to sleep. I started to find myself caught up in moments of investment. I started to feel insecure again, annoyed. And it was shitty and *amazing.*

It took about another ten months for me to return to roughly where I'd been when I started. 

I'm mostly normal now, with only a few remnants. Sometimes certain types of conversations will trigger it, where I'm sitting there and suddenly the eye of the universe has turned on me and I am melting away. It is very intense. I don't mind, though. That's a fundamental part of the feeling, really - that I don't mind when it's happening. 

I feel like I've pulled the wool over my own eyes. I've bought into this world. It is profoundly comforting in a way so subconscious it's difficult to identify. It's as though at all times, behind my ears, there is a powerful belief whispering *it's okay*. When I get locked out of my apartment, when debt collectors call, when my mom tells me she found a lump in her breast - *it's okay.* I chose this. I am full, I am held. I am not afraid anymore, and when I am, it's because fear is interesting, because I have the *privilege* of feeling it.

My underlying motivation now is to convey this awareness to others (or feel as though I have). It seems like the most important thing, the only important thing. And so here I am.

(**edit:** if you want to read more details and analysis of my experience, go [here](https://aellagirl.com/2017/02/11/experiences-on-acid/) )

__________

> An elderly man was sitting alone on a dark path. He wasn't sure of which direction to go, and he'd forgotten both where he was traveling to...and who he was. He remembered absolutely nothing. He suddenly looked up to see an elderly woman before him. She grinned toothlessly and with a cackle, spoke: "Now your third wish. What will it be?" 

>"Third wish?" The man was baffled. "How can it be a third wish if I haven’t had a first and second wish?" 

>"You’ve had two wishes already," the hag said, "but your second wish was for you to forget everything you know." She cackled at the poor man. "So it is that you have one wish left." 

>"All right," he said hesitantly, "I don't believe this, but there's no harm in trying. I wish to know who I truly am." 

>"Funny," said the old woman as she granted his wish and disappeared forever. "That was your first wish..."

unknown author; if you know who, let me know so I can give credit

**edit**: various rephrasings, formatting, and an embarrassing failure of month calculation.

_____________________________

**another edit** 

A lot of comments are saying "it made you feel like you understood, but it was just tricking your brain."

This is not implausible - a lot of people do acid and get utterly convinced of silly things. But I want to make two points.

One, that information gained from the use of drugs is not automatically invalid. If you have two brains, one which was structured for a lot of reflection and one that wasn't, and you fed the second brain a chemical that made it similar to the first brain, would the reflection it undergoes be invalid?

Two, that the "feeling of knowledge" is something we get every day, anyway. From school, from authority figures, from our own minds piecing things together. What separates "acid knowledge" from "regular knowledge" is that acid knowledge tends to be about things you can't prove or easily communicate. This puts it more in the same category as 'god' - maybe it's real, maybe it's not, but we have no way of accessing it. 

Really it's a few levels above 'god.' People frequently report psychedelics as one of the most meaningful events in their lives. It has been shown instrumental in treating anxiety, depression, and end-of-life fear. There *are* measurable benefits from the outside, it's just very hard to talk about subjective sensations.

For example - how would I describe a new color to you if you'd never seen it? I couldn't, no matter how hard I tried to talk about it. I might sound absolutely insane. You might call me delusional. But if you had seen it, you would know exactly what I was talking about.I (M24) was at a family function this halloween. I don't drink like the rest of my family so I was sipping on an infused lemonade and hitting my dab pen all night. My older sister says to me at one point, "why do you always have to get stoned at family functions". My mom heard and said to her "You have had a drink in your hand the whole night so how's it any different? Your brother doesn't like to drink so why can't he enjoy himself in his own way?" 

Idk if my mom indefinitely has my back or just understands me and my relationship with weed but im very thankful for her. And I hope someday weed will be more normalized in society like alcohol isNothing. Nothing happens, I was resuscitated and I just woke up confused, religion is a sham, keep doing drugs, nothing matters. I'm writing this so my love ones know what truly happened.

Today started like any Saturday. I wake up, shake off my imposing existential dread, make a pot of coffee, and rip a couple of dabs with my housemates. 

My friend, we will call him Michael (his name is really Michael)
hands me the silicon rig. 

"Yo Jahbriel, wanna rip this dab?"

Before i could answer, the rig is in my hands and I'm ripping said dab.

I exhale, instantly thinking to myself that I could've held this dab a little longer than I did. God I'm a THC fiend.

in approximately 7.9 seconds I realize that I'm stoned out of my gourd. Naturally I dart to my kitchen and start cooking some beans and making filling for some tacos. This is where I make the most fatal of flaws. This was the first of wrong choices in what is presumptively the last day of my life. 

So I chop away at some veggies. I'm thinking some white onion (hell yeah), cherry tomatoes (please get in my mouth), minced garlic (you already know), black beans (please fuck my wife), and finally the x factor in this filling and the new bane of my existence: Habanero

Fast forward to me eating this taco and I'm just loving it. God, it was such a good taco. I finish, wash my plate, and head downstairs and hop on my laptop. While browsing the interwebs it doesn't take very much time to stumble onto this sub. I'm catching up on my daily dose of you all and find some story about a guy who fucked someones mom on prozac and some brew *note to self, is this the secret way of seducing milfs that I've been missing all along?

Anyway everyone in the comments was saying wow I'm jealous. I too was very jealous. I wanna fuck a milf.......

A light goes off in my head. 

NSFW 

So I head over to pornhub, I needed some me time.

I click on categories. Naturally, I swiftly click MILFS.

I procede to J O 

After several minutes of making some sweet love to myself I begin to notice that something was different and not in a pleasant way. I tried to brush it off but over time the feeling began to intensify. it was coming from my dick. oh no.

Suddenly I was transported to a different place. I was back in my kitchen watching myself cook those beans from earlier. I again could smell the liquid smoke I tossed in, and hear the sizzling of the oil. My past self was deveining and deseeding the habanero. I rewatched my technique. After handling the habaneros I realized the dire mistake that I had made. Past Jahbriel never washed his damn hands. 

Instantly I am sucked back into my own body, some light tears are rolling down my face, and I'm still beating my meat in my bed. Only now I know the severity of my situation and how I was brought here. 

I stop, and close my laptop and just lay down with my eyes closed.

My dick. Is fucking on fire right now. Every passing second is a never ending pain crescendo. I feel as though my dick is literally burning at the fucking stake and no matter what I do I cannot stop it. I took a shower, I rubbed it with lotion, I even dunked it in a glass of fucking milk, that's how desperate I am. I'm thinking about really chopping my dick off this is becoming less of a hyperbole as time goes on. This is one of the most painful sensations I have EVER felt.

Mom and Dad, I deserved this pain. Natural Selection has waved it's hands and done its course and clearly I am not fit for survival. 

If you are reading this. Please don't make the same mistakes I did. So back in my coke days, which I have since quit for obvious reasons, I occasionally liked to mess around with hookers. Mostly for the “hookers and coke” experience that I wanted under my belt for some reason. 

I hit up the ad which I hadn’t tried before, and got the address. It’s always exciting to see what you’re working with for the first time. 

So I go to the room, and to my dismay this lady is about 70 years old. I think to my self, “ you know what, I came here to fuck, so I’m getting this done one way or another.” I hand her the money and  take off my pants. I then proceed to bang the shit out of her. She finished me off with a blow job that she has perfected over 100 years of being in the sex worker industry. TOP Notch. 

As I get back to my car, I see a text directing me to a different room number from around the time I was paying. Then it hits me. I WASNT SUPPOSED TO BANG THE OLD LADY, I was  just supposed to pay her. I was supposed to bang her daughter or some shit. God damn

Edit: thanks for the gold. Glad my experience is at least doing some good in the worldHonestly what the fuck? I don’t even usually get the regular skittle pack anymore because of this but I was high as fuck last night and craved something sweet. Woke up with half the bag filled with only green fucking apple skittles sitting next to me. So bad not even high me wants to eat themIt’s been over a full day since I used heroin. I didn’t do any yesterday, so it’s actually been 32.5 hours :) 

Edit. I’ve been temporarily banned from r/drugs - but I still haven’t used and am up to 40 hours without using :) 

Edit 2. Still only at 40 hours - but I just wanted to tell everyone wishing me well and congratulating me that I really appreciate what you say and wish I could respond to each of you individually :) I’ve PMd about a dozen of you! Thanks again, I’ll check in again tonight or tomorrow morning!

Edit 3. Hey everyone! I’m at 51.3 hours (but who’s counting?). I cannot express enough gratitude to all of you guys! I am in to my 3rd day without touching H and although I’m a sweaty pile a bones I’m alive and kicking (wait, maybe that’s just restless legs syndrome?) 

Edit 4.  Alright, I’m at 56.5 hours and just drove to work. I’m not sure how long I’ll stay today, right now I have a killer headache and a runny nose - but otherwise feel pretty good! I sang songs on the way to work, and felt normal for a few minutes :)

Edit 5. 63 hours off H. I only worked for 5 hours, but I’m going to try to stay for all 8 tomorrow. Tonight is just going to be about smoking weed, eating as much food as possible. And REST! Check in again later!

Edit 6.  (This isn’t really an update - but I just wanted to share how creepy Facebook is! I just opened the app for the first time since quitting (and hearing of Kratom) and first thing I see is a suggestion that I like a page advertising Kratom)

Edit 7. Now I’m at 69 hours - can’t wait to have my sex drive back ;)

Edit 8. I’m at 80 hours. My tummy hurts and I feel weak. But I also know that I never need to use again - this may be my last update, because I don’t think I’ll have much to add except how much more awesome my life is everyday that I’m CLEAN!

Edit 9. I just noticed it’s exactly 100 hours! :)My Mum is very laid back, letting me smoke bud and she even drove me to pick up sometimes. This is an attitude I was incredibly thankful for, but once she found my stash of miscellaneous white powders (baggies of coke and ketamine) and acid. I thought my life was over, but in-fact she saved it.

She calmly expressed her concerns and was unexpectedly rational and understanding of my drug use. Knowing that fighting with me probably wouldn't accomplish much, we came to an agreement that I would test any drugs I take, something that would not have happened otherwise. I don't know why but she was especially worried about Fentanyl, so bought some test strips for me in addition to the kit I bought.

Cut to a week later and I'm buying an ecstasy pill from my trusted dealer. As I got home to prepare for the night ahead I remembered our little agreement. I would not have usually used one because why would Fentanyl be in an E? but in honour of our agreement I tried it anyway. The test came back positive.

Had she not caught me the week before I would have taken that E without testing it and God only knows what could have happened. She was so incredibly calm and understanding when she found my stash that I was happy to cooperate, opting to encourage harm reduction instead of arguing. Words cannot convey how thankful I am for her understanding, if she wasn't that day things would be a lot different.



Edit: Thank you for the Silver, Gold, and heart-warming appreciation of my Mum's actions. She'd love to hear it, so I'm going to tell her about the lovely things everyone has said and give her a big bear hug. Quick note as I've seen a few comments about it, this was a little while ago and I told the dealer immediately. Stay safe xListen up druggies I’ve got something to tell you and you may not want to hear it: Use FUCKING paragraphs in your text posts.

Yes, I’m talking to you. You addied up college students whose minds are working too fast to separate thoughts into paragraphs. You stoners who just took the whole brownie that was meant for 4 people and now can’t remember what a paragraph is. You blacked out bartards that won’t remember reading this tomorrow.

I don’t care. Use fucking paragraphs. I swear every time I open a text post here it’s just a giant goddamn block of text. It’s practically unreadable sober. Now try reading that on 3 tabs.

You degenerate druggies have some of the best stories on the internet, but are squandering them by not taking the time to separate your posts into paragraphs.

Seriously, it’s so easy a methhead could do it. Just fucking hit enter twice you high mother fucker. Just do it so I can enjoy the stories about you almost getting arrested LSD or accidentally fucking a dude while barred out or trying to fuck a shadow person on meth.

Just do it.

TLDR: USE PARAGRAPHS
Drug combinations like "hippy flipping", "candy flipping", and "Nexus flipping", rather any psychedelic + MDMA are called "flipping" because if you were to roll and trip at the same time it would look like a flip. I remember coming home from school one night , and when I walked in the house , about 10 syringes and a bag of meth were on the kitchen table with a note from my mom saying “Found this in your pants pocket in the bathroom :(“...I remember walking to my room and when I passed hers I heard her crying . 

I remember waking up to 50 missed called from my mom , and see her pull in the driveway and run as fast as she could through our yard , into the house , only to see me alive, and not dead from an overdose and let out a sigh of relief. 

I remember every time I would use the bathroom if I wasn’t out in 5 minutes she would come knock on the door and ask if I was okay...just to make sure I hadn’t overdosed yet.

I remember nights I would be dope sick , and in pain when I would wake up the next morning she would leave a 20 dollar bill on the table , because she didn’t like to see me in pain .

I remember sometimes when I would give her a hug , when she would turn away , I would see her eyes water up, because she hated to see me looking so rough .

I remember sometimes if I hadn’t been home in days she would message me and ask if I had ate anything that day , and would send me money for food. It was always 18 dollars . It was always 18 because she knew If she sent 20 I would withdraw it and spend it on dope .

I remember the first time she found out I was injecting heroin , and she held me and cried , saying “My baby is using needles.” 

I remember seeing her come home from work , with dark circles under her eyes from not sleeping the night before , worrying if I was okay all night 

I remember many times when I would come home , I would see the living room light turn off and her room light turn on when I was pulling in the driveway because she didn’t want to see how skinny I had gotten . 

I remember sometimes we would talk on the phone and after she hung up she would call right back because she forgot to say “I love you” ...just in case it was the last time she ever got to say it . 

I remember my brother told me every time the phone rang she would almost be in a panic, running to get it  , because she was wondering if that was the call saying I overdosed again .

I love my mama so much , and I’m so glad I get to call her Tomorow and tell her I’m 5 months clean off heroin and meth . I’m so glad I don’t keep her up at nights , wondering if I’m okay . I’m so grateful I have a mama who cares and loves me so much . 

Edit: these are the [messages ](https://imgur.com/gallery/0Qdq2) she sent me on the very last night I used heroin 

UPDATE: I texted my mom today and told her the news , here is her [response.](https://imgur.com/gallery/aridp) Every year or so, I like to post this again and again. Just read it.

You're falling into a cycle of complacency and accepting boredom where your only hope is that weed will create a good time for you. Quit that boring ass shit right now before you waste years of your grey life expecting fun to pop out at you and go learn how to have fun sober. You have endless opportunities to create fun for yourself. Don't rely on outside stimulus to make you feel something. You'll find it to be soul sucking and pathetic, and it will be challenging to relearn once you go in too deep. Projecting here because I'm speaking from my own, and many of my friend's experiences. It's more common than we realize, and it shouldn't be that way. Weed is best enjoyed as a treat; something we earn. What you're doing is building a reliance and convincing yourself this is what you need to feel just ok. My tone isn't hateful, but it is worrisome as it's all too familiar. I look back wishing I'd done it different. No one should be doing that. I wish I had purpose those years, and set myself a goal to reach. I wish I hadn't been such a nervous bitch calling to re-up before my last hit ran out. I seemed so nervous of what might happen if I had to go days without a stash. Alone with my thoughts?! Oh my, the horror.

EDIT: Thank you so much for feedback in the comments & awards. Appreciated. I've read alot of you guys comments and there were many positive, many negative - it's all OK. We all have our opinions but Im glad so many of you felt what was this post about. Stay safe guys!Alright so this just happened a few days ago, I will try to keep it mostly PG but it was one of the strangest tripping experience I have ever had.

About 6 weeks ago I purchased a $2k high end sex doll. I've been single for along time since my Fiance and I split, long enough that the thought of having sex giving me anxiety,  I really don't want to perform poorly. I felt having something to actually practice on again would be good for me before going back into the wild. These things take a long time to produce, I was expecting about 8 weeks and did not notice the shipping notification since it ended up in my spam folder.

My roommate was at work for the day so I made plans to take some lsd when he left, trip, play VR and probably wank it, the usual. I dropped it at about 8 in the morning and was coming up around 10. I'm just about to hop into VR when I hear a knock at the door, I ignore it and the doorbell rings. Feeling paranoid I go down and look through the peep hole to see a big ass box. I open the door and the Fedex driver is there. She asks what it is out of curiosity since it weighs a ton, I panic and say "I don't know" . She looks at my like how the heck do you not know what an 80lbs box with your name on it is. She asks if I need help carrying it in and I stupidly say" Nah, I can manage her myself"...I called the box a "her" and started panicking more. I doubt she noticed but the look she was giving me made me panic more so I just broke down and said it's a sex doll. That made things more awkward then they ever should have been, I signed for the package and dragged the body into the house still thinking about the whole encounter and how I can never have a packaged shipped from Fedex again.

This bitch was heavy, like way more than I thought. 80lbs in a 5ft long box  and I had to drag it up the stairs to my room. I pop the box open for an inspection and everything looks good.(I'm going to refer to the doll as a her since it is easier). Just getting her out of the box was a task itself. 80lbs floppy dead weight is worse than I ever imagined. I got her on top the bed and starting to assemble. I already purchased some outfits and accessories a month earlier. I'm starting to trip hard and literally feeling like God in my own personal build a bitch workshop. Trying on outfits, eye colors wigs etc. Found a configuration that I really liked and stuck with that.

I'm now feeling pretty horny. I set some mood lighting, put on some music and some porn in the background for the moaning. I started getting nervous, just all of a sudden sticking your dong into a girl felt wrong but also worrying about that was wrong since it is only a doll, some really conflicting thoughts. Am I really having second thoughts about banging a doll I paid for? I just decided to go for it, tripping was intense now at some points it legit seemed extremely real to the point I forgot it was a doll. With the sound effects and everything waving around I would get consumed into the moment, my mind was literally creating an entire background story, name and everything for this fake woman. I started having thoughts of meeting her parents and all kinds of weird shit.

I flipped her over from the doggy position for missionary and looked into her face. OMG I banged her so hard one of her eyes went out of position looking way up to the right. This was horrifying. I start trying to fix the eye and notice something sticking to the bed, it was a finger nail that came off. I look at her hands and notice all the wires were bent leaving the hands a contorted mess. I stop all activity and start trying to repair her. At this point I feel like I'm a doctor and we are about to lose her if I can't get things together. I'm wondering if I killed her and what I should do if I can't fix her. I'm honestly starting to verge onto a bad trip after seeing this, it was horrifying. I going downstairs and drink a glass of wine to calm my nerves and head back up stairs.

Arriving back up stairs I noticed a smell. The new doll had a really strong odor from the manufacturing. I don't have a window in my room and it was building up.  I never finished and just starting cleaning her up. Bent the fingers back fixed the eyes etc. and started giving her a sponge bath(as recommended after some googling). I felt like I was caring for quadriplegic and was feeling extremely empathetic for this poor soul and then I remembered that I banged her and now thought I took advantage of a quadriplegic. After that the only spot I had to hide the body was in my closet but there was not enough space with the head on. I removed the head and tucked her away.

I starting having strange thoughts about my life. I'm doing well enough to afford a $2k sex doll, but am also doing poorly with women to need a doll. At this point I hear someone come home. My roommate apparently got home really early. I light a candle and open my door just to look like I'm chilling on the computer. He comes in to chat and asked me "Um what hell is that". I left the head sitting on my bookshelf since I was not certain where to store it without it getting ruined and forgot I had it there. I had like 50 excuses come to my head but literally none of them would be realistic so I say it's a sex doll head. He just starts laughing is ass off which honestly was a relief so I start laughing too. I tell him the body just came in trying to act casual but am also trying really hard to see how he reacts to the situation. He said it looks really pretty and asks the cost. He was thrown back  a little which made me feel a little pathetic for buying it but mentioned he was looking at them a year or so back and is amazed how realistic they have gotten. Problem is now anytime my door is closed he's going to think I'm banging the doll which is not the case. I just starting playing VR like normal but was getting weirded out knowing there is a full size headless body in my closet 6 feet away.

Anyways was a really strange trip, lots of strange thoughts and experiences. Will probably use the doll for a bit too build some confidence and start dating again.

&#x200B;

**Edit-** Thanks for the support and feedback, made my day! I was only expecting a couple people to actually read this and now seeing everyone reactions to my awkward situation I'm actually kinda glad that it happened the way it did.

To try and clear up a couple common questions.

&#x200B;

1. The trip report was between 10am and  3pm so about 5 hour before my roommate came home. The whole trip was about 7-8 hours but I just ended up playing VR when my roommate was back home. I know it sounds quicker in the report, I left a lot of stuff out and things like the sponge bath took 45 minutes in itself.
2. My room doesn't have a window because it was a converted office. I don't want to be too specific because other people I know do come on here. I was overthinking my life at the time. I'm doing well enough, moved out, good job, own a car, have lots of extra income for VR and stuff. Not rich enough to pass on saving 15k a year living with a buddy.
3. I've  been single mostly out of choice. I had a screw woman mentality for a bit after a bad breakup and decided to stay single and work on myself. Then it became a little longer and a little longer. Now I'm ready to date again but wanted to get some real practice in, hand doesn't cut it. People pay thousands on devices like treadmills, bikes, PC's all kinds of stuff to get better at what they are doing. I just wanted to bang a big better.

**EDIT-2**

Here is a couple photos I just took for the less imaginative. They should be SFW I covered the body parts. This is not exactly the same when I was experiencing it but it gives you an idea. The uncanny valley is real when things start going in places they normally shouldn't.

Eye going to the right-  [https://imgur.com/a/6Nm5zbb](https://imgur.com/a/6Nm5zbb)

Twisted Fingers-  [https://imgur.com/a/V7s6tx4](https://imgur.com/a/V7s6tx4)

&#x200B;

**NSFW** this is the exact doll(I got lighter skin)  [https://sexyrealsexdolls.com/products/166cm-5ft5-c-cup-fascinating-sex-doll-jelly](https://sexyrealsexdolls.com/products/166cm-5ft5-c-cup-fascinating-sex-doll-jelly)I took a tab and a little mdma for New Years. A girl wanted to come home with me and the mdma was wearing off. My mind, sexy time. Got home went to the bathroom, weird amount of ball sweat. Smelled weird after wiping it away, que paranoia. Went through my drawers looking for something to use (water would have worked). Found a jolly rancher, blueberry. I ran it under some hot water and rubbed around my balls. 

We started foreplay. Things were going good. Suddenly, why does your dick taste like blueberries? First thing to come to my mind “I’m papa smurf”. Totally distracts her, she goes into the bathroom to pee or whatever. 

Finds jolly ranchers, asks if I rubbed them on my dick. She asked why anyone would do that. I started laughing so hard it physically hurt me. She was laughing at me. We never had sex, I blueballed myself by rubbing blue jolly ranchers on myself. 

I still think this is fucking hilarious. When you overdosed on a drug and have to tell people, you are made to feel shameful and disgraced. People will automatically imprint the stereotype of “druggie” onto their perception of you.

When you say you had alcohol poisoning the main reaction is either sympathy or you’re praised for it. It is seen as a status symbol that you love to party because you drink so much. 

Even though they are both technically overdoses. 

I completely agree that sometimes it’s the other way around but this is what I most commonly see. 

We need to remove the stigma around drug overdoses. Especially since many are caused by laced drugs or high potency pills that people aren’t accustomed to. Instead of shaming these people we need to help them and support them in their recovery.I've been brushing and flossing every damn day since. Just wanted to remind you all how important oral health is.So like 2 weeks ago my roommate and I were back from uni in our hometown just chillin smoking some weed and our friend B calls us and asks to check on his little bro because he took some xans and wasn’t answering his phone. His little bro, A, started taking a lot of xans over the past couple months and started doing dumb shit like stealing from everyone.

Anyway we go to his house and he was passed out so we woke him up and asked him if he wanted to smoke and he said yeah but he was fuuuuuuucked up. He could barely form a sentence but we decided to get more weed then get food and he just kept doin dumb shit at the restaurant like getting up to go steal cornbread from the buffet and filling out an application before we left lol. 

We got back to A’s house smoked a little more then it was getting late so I left. My roommate lived kinda far away so he decided to stay the night at A’s who is still very barred out. Around 4 am, A stole my roommates keys, took his car out and crashed it and did like $3000 in damage. My roommate woke up to the sight of his crashed car and the police but STILL decided not press charges against A because he promised to pay for it. A is a bartard and has no way to get that much money, so my roomie submitted the case to judge Judy and they are gonna put us on the show. I get to go because I’m a witness so that means a free trip to Hollywood for me!!!! Bout to blow down on  some Cali kush

I’ll post a link to the episode when it airs.All the places me and my mates used to park up and blaze are now swarming with people catching fucking pokemon.

One of my friends said fuck it and we smoked anyway, resulting in an angry dad walk up to our car and complain that his son is here and threatened to call the cops. This was at 1AM. Seriously how did they make weed so strong. I haven’t smoked since 1993 and the last thing I smoked looked nothing like the weed my grandson gave me. 

I smoked about half a gram in a small joint because he said it would be strong and boy was he right. He said it was a cookie flavour but it didn’t taste like that to me. I coughed so hard my glasses came off. My wife heard me coughing in the basement and ran down worried which totally blew my cover. She rumbled me and told me off for smoking. 

I’m just eating some turkey sandwiches now [link](https://www.sltrib.com/news/politics/2018/08/16/utahs-medical-marijuana/)

They are trying to say that passing a medical marijuana initiative would violate religious freedom because Mormon landlords wouldn't be able to discriminate against medical marijuana users in regard to housing. 

In other words, they think that landlords should be able to dictate what medications their tenants can use under the guise of "muh religious freedom."

FUCK THATI got kicked out of the club for being in possession of drugs whilst pretty much peaking on my mdma pill. I decided to get the Uber home so I could crank up my speakers and blast some techno till my mates came back home. However my Uber driver was Polish and into some weird polish hard techno stuff that just hit the spot. I demanded him to drive around the city whilst blasting out this fucking sick music. I had the window open and was shouting random shit to the drunk citizens of the city which I felt like I owned. 

We did a laps of the city then I told him to take me back to my flat. He gave me his number and I'm gonna call him next time and have him and all my friends in that fucking car wired as fuck whilst he plays his polish techno. He said he will do it cheaper next time as he loved being in my company. And, in his 7 years of being a taxi driver, had never met anyone as fucking mad as myself.

I LOVE U MARTIN.
I matched with a girl on tinder who was easy to talk to, liked the same music and was also into the rave scene. We made plans to see a DJ we both liked on a first date; i figured if the date sucked and we had no chemistry, at least I'll be at a show that I know I would enjoy. Coming off a busy week of work on a business trip to another city, I was pretty damn sleep deprived. I took 20 mg of Vyvanse that my ex gave around 5pm, 3 hours before I would meet my date for drinks. 

&#x200B;

I did my typical pre-date routine: cleaned my place, lifted for an hour, picked my outfit, etc. I started to feel a little bit of anxiety from the Vyvanse, so I took a 0.25 mg dose of xanax (i have virtually no benzo tolerance). I was still feeling the effects of sleep deprivation, so I pocket 10mg of adderall and headed out to meet my date for drinks. 

&#x200B;

The girl looked stunning. Way hotter than in her pictures; had a very petite and curvy body with a perfect smile, black hair and blue eyes. Our conversation went great, we laughed a lot and overall had great chemistry. After 2 hours we hopped in an uber and headed to the show venue.  

&#x200B;

When we get there, I ran into 2 of my friends who immediately recognized me and came over to say hi. I had to pee really badly, so I left my date with my 2 friends and ran to the bathroom quickly. While peeing, i took the adderall to try and feel a little bit more energetic. I got back and one of my friends told us how they're planning on rolling tonight and asked me if we wanted to also. My date looked at me and said the magic words, "I'll roll if you roll." My friend goes to the bathroom, comes back and hands me a bag with 2 capsuls (0.125 each), I venmo'd him money and we went our separate ways. About a second after we took the MDMA, we found out the main DJ wouldn't be playing. It would just be basically the opening DJ doing a double long set. I asked my date if she wanted to go back to my place instead or ride out our roll on this not-so-great DJ that neither of really cared for. She chose my place and I ordered the uber. 

&#x200B;

When we got back to my place, we are both coming up hard on the MDMA and she thinks giving each other massages will be a great idea. Realizing that this will probably lead to sex and I've never had sex on molly, I went to my bathroom and pop 100mg of viagra. Typically 25 mg of viagra is enough to get me to full mast regardless of whatever concoction of substances are in my body, but i figured with all of the stims, i'd better play it safe. I came out of my bathroom and shes laying on my bed in just her underwear and bra. I started to give her a massage and about 15 minutes in, I already felt the warm body feeling and headache of the viagra even through the body high of MDMA. I tap her out and had her get on my back and give me a massage. After what felt like only a few minutes, i'm so hard that I actually had to lift my hips up just to be semi comfortable. This isn't normal hard, this is my dick ripping out of my skin hard. My dick is so stiff that I actually start feeling a great deal of anxiety about my situation. I'm laying on my stomach with a girl I barely know, and i'm in a pretty great deal of pain because of my viagra boner being smashed into my bed, so I take deep breath, roll over on my back and present the steel rod to my rave princess. Without saying a word, she pulled off my boxers and started sucking my dick. I've felt good things before in life, but this was on a whole different level. The sensation spread throughout my entire body, everything was warm and wonderful. After a few minutes she took off her bra and underwear and started riding me on top. 

&#x200B;

After a little bit, she asked me if I was okay. I looked over to a closet mirror that overlooks my bed and to my horror I saw that I was beet red and drenched in sweat. I'm not just talking about a little bit of sweat, i'm talking droplets running down my face, and already there was a soaked sweat mark on my bed from where I was laying. I told her to get on her knees, and I turned my ceiling fan on and get to work doggy style. My mind was racing at this point and I kept looking at the horror show of a reflection in the mirror. I've taken way too much viagra and too many stimulants; my heart is racing, my eyes are 90% pupil, my dick is trying to rip out of my body and i'm sweating so badly that i have to keep wiping my eyes. At this point I'm worried that ill never finish and sweat is literally splattering onto this poor girls back with each thrust. To make things better, she keeps asking me if everything is okay. If I had been sober, I would have chalked it up as a loss and called it quits, but the stimulants had other ideas in mind. I NEEDED to finish. After about 10 minutes of concentrated thrusting, I pulled out and shot a load unlike any other load. It was as if all of my life force was burning as bright as possible and exiting through my dick with power unlike anything I've experienced before. The cum shot all the way to the back of her head and was all over her hair. My ears started ringing like a bomb went off and I laid down in my puddle of sweat, she put her head on my chest and i told her that I was certain I loved her. 

&#x200B;

The next thing I know, I woke up with the worst headache of my life, my bed was still soaked, i'm shivering, dehydrated, nauseous, and there's a strange girl in my bed with crusted hair stuck to my chest. I stepped out into my kitchen to get some water and i started crying in the fetal position on my couch. I realized I'm not over my ex, I didn't use a condom , and i'm in some of the worst pain of my life. 

&#x200B;

Don't recklessly use stims. Also please always wear a condom. I found out I had chlamydia 2 weeks later. 

&#x200B;

TL;DR Met tinder date, did bunch of drugs, raved, viagra boner, chlamydia.Gave a “friend” a ride cause he needed to pick up some “weed” he was 17 I was 18 at the time. Pull up to this house he goes in and all seems normal. So I expect a little hit for the ride ya know, we get almost back to his place. “Can I take a quick hit before you dip I’m dry rn.” He says na man it’s all I got for the day sorry. I tell him I’ll smoke him out in a few hours when I get off work.. I see it in his face he feels bad he didn’t have no weed for me or money... He felt bad enough that he wanted to tell me the truth, which was that he didn’t pick up any weed at all he picked up H.

I’ve tried perks but I’ve never even seen H so I say bullshit let me see. Expecting to see that black gooey tar heroin, but no he pulls out a bun. 10 wax baggies wrapped in a rubber band and he pulls one off the top and gives it to me to look at. “This ain’t heroin wtf is this shit.”

It’s heroin bro I usually give my ride a bag for taking me to pick up... “I’m sick as fuck” he says, “I got to go get right.” He jumps out the car and runs inside like a hobbit to go get his fix. Leaving me with the weird wax baggie... so I take this bag home and seal it up in a ziplock bag like it was fragile or something lol. idk what to fucking do with it and I know for a fact I’m not shooting anything into my veins, i don’t want to flush it.. I’m curious. 

Next day I show another “friend” of mine the bag and he looks at me and says WTF are you doing why TF do you have that shit. John gave it to me for a ride and idk what to do with it. He takes it out my hand and opens it, after opening it he flicks the bag and in the morning light I see a little cloud float above the top of the bag then he takes a big whiff, I guess to inspect the contents? ... “yeah bro it’s dope” I’ve tried it and I didn’t like it. “How?” Did you really shoot up.... “NO dumbass” I snorted it. WAIT YOU CAN SNORT IT! Yeah look, takes out a bill and dumps the clumpy white powder out. Takes another bill and rolls it up and tells me to try it. Just like that I try it. 

Snorted it all and said “this taste like shit.” He laughs.. I don’t even think much of it after that, he rips the bag open and licks it? Wtf was that...  he said idk I seen someone else do it before, this shit sucks whatever so I start my car an go to pull out of the park and all a sudden i get a drip down the back of my throat, Then I get this HUGE smile on my face. WOAHHH I think I feel it, he starts laughing hahahaha yeah I bet you do. 

I start rambling and driving around aimlessly laughing and having the time of my life... suddenly I say wtf dude I think it’s gone already.. how much was that bag worth? 5$ (US)... so you only get high for a couple minutes for 5 dollars? Then he says naaa you can do 2 or 3 bags and get real high.. 

ohhhhhhhhh INSTANTLY call my boy who gave it to me to try and get more. He laughs maniacally over the phone after I literally said “I want more” he says “ I need a ride anyways come scoop me.” I tell my friend who just showed me how to use the dope that I’m going to give john a ride to get more. He says he doesn’t want to go and to let him out at his house.. “whatever bro I’ll hit you up later” So now me and joe take a ride to see his boy, I ask how much does it cost.. 50 (US) for a bun.. damn that’s expensive but whatever it will probably last me a month so I say alright let’s go. “Okay but don’t do it everyday or you will get hooked he says..” I know I know I’m not stupid bro I’m only going to do It every once in a while. This kid gets a grin on his face like the devil and says “Ight, hurry up though cuz I’m getting sick” so I do.. And from then on I was in a hurry too, I was also sick and I played that game for 5 long long years. Oh how I wish I could go back and flush that one little baggie down the toilet fuck how I wish. Please be careful, it will win and it will hurt.1. If something feels wrong when you're too high to really understand what it might be, a glass of water is normally a good place to start. Lots of times the hydration+a little break is what your body needs to feel better.

2. Own a scale, and make a habit of weighing out your doses. You can buy fairly accurate milligram scales on Amazon for only like $30. 

3. Need something to weigh on? Something that's always the same weight, low-stick, flat bottomed, and cheap to replace? Try cupcake liners.

4. Snorting? Don't use a bill, they're kind of disgusting. In your house you have a clean, easily replaceable and cheap replacement. Sticky notes. They even have built in adhesive, possibly for this exact reason.

5. When you snort, don't snort too hard. There's a reason why it's going in your nose in the first place, instead of just eating it. Snorting gently will ensure most of it is absorbed by your nose for maximum effects with little drip. You can always go back for the bits that fall down.

6. Do you sometimes get thought loops while tripping? Sometimes it helps to have a few notes to yourself on hand that state some basic truths that will prevent your tripping mind from making up impossible theories. Some examples are: "You took a drug that nobody has ever overdosed on before". "The trip is not going to last forever". "Jeffrey Epstein did not kill himself". Etc.

Hopefully some of these tips were new/helpful to some of you guys.Last night I sat at my desk, faced with two options. In front of me I had a handful of lethal amounts of benzos and opioids, and a little baggie of 5-Meo-DMT.

I figured that, since I was going to end it anyway, I might as well try the 5-meo before I go. It makes sense when you think about it. A 5-meo breakthrough experience is as close you can get to experiencing death without actually dying, and what did I have to lose? Maybe it will have something important to show me, and if not then oh well, whatever, I'll just die anyway.

So I proceeded to heat up the dab rig, you know the drill, and dump 13mg in and rip that shit fat and hold it in.

Within split seconds my entire reality and ego shattered. I was sent flying into orbit and my identity completely dissolved until there was no longer any time or space or any concepts or anything to hold on to. I was just one with God and everything. It felt like I beat the game of life. All I felt was just complete rapture and peace and oneness with all. That's really all I can say about it because the whole experience is really impossible to convey and very personal.

When I came back all I could do was laugh like a maniac. Like I had just got the punchline to the greatest joke of all time. All my problems felt insignificant compared to what I had just experienced. I just had this confirmation that in the end everything is okay. There is way more beyond this life.

I decided that dying once was enough for one day. I packed up my drugs and went to bed

Edit: thanks for the positive energy guys. I'm not going to kill myself I choose to continue to fight

Edit 2: I appreciate the guilding very much but this is a throwaway so don't give too much. Go donate to a depression or addiction organization or MAPS.org ❤️I was picking up a gram from this chick who ive known for a while and when i got to her house i knock on the door and shes like come on in. I really didn’t want to go in I just want my bag so i can leave because her house smells like cat shit/piss. So i sit down pushing cat piss soaked clothes out of the way. She asked me how much i wanted and i said a gram. She then pulls weed directly out of her pocket. No sandwich baggie or anything just loose weed in her piss soaked pocket. Fine whatever its this or be sober. She then puts in on the scale spilling half of it on to the piss soaked floor. Shes like “oh the cats will eat it dont worry. I was like “ok”. So i hand her $10 she weighs my weed out and im ready to leave but she asks if i want to smoke some of her weed before i go. Im like ok free weed lets do this. So she goes into her room and comes back out with the worst looking blunt i have ever seen in my life. Still tho free bud you won’t hear me complaining. So we smoke and we’re talking and she told me she had to get fake teeth. Im like why? She said it was because she never brushed them and she used to smoke meth daily. She then, without me asking, pulled out two of her teeth out revealing this black goop that was lodged in her gums. I literally said “ooohhh cooool” you know pretending she didn’t just ruin my day. she then put her teeth in this little container that was from the same pocket she pulled my weed out from. At this point i just tell her i have to leave and I do. I didn’t even turn music on the ride home i just wanted to sit and think about how i can help myself never experience that again.Bro this is actually sad af I had to turn it off because I was so sad for those Bees. 
The bees spend their whole life making honey their life revolves around it and we say fuck them bees and eat it and they don't know what's going on. When the bee took the human race to court that shit fucked me up I do not recommend watching this movie while tripping unless you want to get incredibly invested in feeling sorry for the Bees

I love you BeesWhenever I get stoned, movies and tv shows seem so much faker in the sense that I find it easier to tell that it’s acting and that it’s been edited heavily. I’m not sure how to explain it. When I watch movies sober I can immerse myself in the plot and view it as if it’s real life, however when I’m high it just seems like fake personality’s and it just seems more scripted. Can anyone relateJust found out that my job had to temporarily let me go due to this whole COVID thing and have been advised to quarintine for the next 2 weeks as a precaution as I come in contact with a lot of people at my job (no symtoms). 

Realizing I was going to have the next 2 weeks off but with little to no income I hit up my dealer last night to stock up on some bud for when times get hard. I told him what was going down and he hooked a couple extra grams... Awesome!

But then today I'm chilling at home, day 1 of isolation, and he shows up again. We don't really chill unless it's small talk while sampling the products so it was a little odd.  But he came back with a whole care package for me, lsd, shrooms, shatter and dmt... The man knows what I like... Tells me he knows that times are tough, that being stuck at home sucks and he hopes this helps and didnt ask for a penny.

My next two weeks just got a whole lot better. 

Much love to my dealer. 

Edit: didnt realize this was going to blow up this much... really wishing I hadn't used my fap account to post this but didnt want lurking coworkers know of my drug use, just random reddit strangers. 

ALSO If this has taught me anything... be kind during these strange time and help each other out where you can, a small gesture can be huge to a person in need.I'm only 18 years of age and I started smoking when I was just about to turn 14. I love the herb and I'm completely fascinated by it and it's natural healing and psychoactive properties and the properties of all substances found in the plant we all love so well. 
But, smoking every day for nearly 2 years has cooked my head a wee bit, I can't go off it without being an angry shit  (I've always had bad anger problems, 1 of the reasons I smoke now) but it's just shite now. Every day I wake up with no grass I'm already experiencing stress and anger. My stomach is always fucked from all the smoking and the lack of normal eating, and then binge eating munchies late at night is really shit for your gut bacteria (I feel like I'm digesting myself while I type). Not to mention I smoke spliffs because weed is dear, so I mix. Tobacco with roach is great until you've got a golf ball sized lump in your throat for a year and a half.

All I want to say is that, yes, it's an amazing plant. But don't start smoking until you're at very least 16 and do not smoke everyday, the money you will save is unbelievable too

Edit: Fuck me, cheers for the upvotes lads. And safe smoking

And my first 3 awards, god bless you baisI took 120mg of adderall throughout the day and was just having fun doing my schoolwork and shit then at night everything changed. I popped another 30mg and began to fap. Throughout the fappening I popped around another 40mg and it lasted 12 hours. I spent the entire time fapping at shemale porn which is not a usual thing I do. After I was done 12 hours later I went up to piss and fainted and slammed my head against the wall and my dad came in and I had no pants on and was covered in sweat.

this happened 2 days ago


edit: my post blew up and i can’t brag to my friends about it ;(So i'm chillin in my room right? It's like 10 at night and I'm on my shitty laptop playing runescape trying to just figure out what the fuck I'm even doing with my life.

I was talkin to this girl on tinder and things were going pretty fast. As a pre-face to this: I had just moved to this city because my dumb-ass was trying to go back to school after being unwillingly cucked by my gf. She fucked my friends, I lost my mind, dumped her ass and moved. So I didn't know anyone except my roommate. Which never showered :( He smelled like cheetoes.

Well I match with some hunnies on tinder and none of them were really going anywhere except for this one girl. We'll call her Bri. So Bri and I talked for maybe 45 minutes, she was this 20 yr old who was doing some internship for an amusement park. Right off the bat she was wanting to hang out. This to me was pretty sketch because every girl on tinder ever is usually very skeptical about meeting up. You could match with 1000 girls but maybe only 4 would actually be down to meet up and most of the time it was in public.

I sent her a dick pic & my address - just like that her ass was in her car driving over to come see me. Bird up.

About 20 minutes go by and she texts me asking me if I wanna go sledding. I'm like bitch it's fucking 11 at night and it's the middle of summer what are you talking about? She's like LOL ok nevermind. I'm ???ing in my mind because now I'm thinkin this bitch might be crazy. Whatever though as long as I'm getting some version of laid we'll be aight.

Bri shows up. But with a friend...I'm like nigga you didn't mention anything about some ugly ass friend. Whatever though. I go outside to meet them. Now her car matched the description but when both of these hoes got out the car I verbally said "oh sorry I thought my friend was here! I guess y'all drive the same car my bad"

They both started laughing and she was like...u/trustmeimdonaldtrump it's me Bri. I'm looking at her and i'm like...no you aren't. She's like yes I am! She reaches into her purse and pulls out her shitty iphone4s with our tinder conversation. I'm like oh...I guess it's dark out here my bad. At this point it's fucking awkward as shit. We're standing out in the parking lot not saying anything, she brought a friend when she never mentioned it in the first place, I didn't even tell my roommate what was going on & this girl looked like a completely different person. I'm not a noob at tinder - I know the runaround when it comes to checking to see if someone is legit or not so I was very surprised.

I'm like whatever dood come on lets go back to my crib. We start walking back and she's like are you okay?? You look super uncomfortable. I'm like nah nah I'm just shy around new people or whatever just trying to bullshit something so I could at least get these two lying sacks of shit back to my room to see what the deal is.

We get back to my room and I realize that she IS the same girl, she just gained like a hunnid pounds and dyed her hair.

Y I K E S

I offer the hoes some beer and I REALLY start contemplating what the fuck I'm even doing with my life. I was praying that whoever built the apartment's foundation did a good job because we are seriously putting it to the test tonight.

We get into my room and not even 5 minutes in both of these girls are asking to see "that fat dick in person".

????

First off - My dick is whatever but it's definitely not going to be shit in comparison to your pear shaped bodies. I mean if you're a normal sized human being it'll do the job. TBH my dick doesn't really get hard to sociopathic liars who couldn't even post a pic from this fucking century so I knew that wasn't happening.

Also do you realize how fucking crazy you have to be to walk into someone's home at 11 at night on a wednesday with an unmentioned, uninvited friend asking to see some dudes dick you've only known for 5 minutes?? Ok yeah you can judge me I sent a pic of my dick but whatever dude, it's snapchat, there's no face & and even if they screenshotted it I can deny till the cows come home (literally) that it's mine.

At this point i'm visibly uncomfortable. I'm thinking these girls are going to rob me at dick point or something because of how odd this situation is.

So after awkwardly trying to change the subject Bri basically spills the beans and says that they wanna do coke off my dick. "Remember when I asked you if you wanted to go sledding?"

Oh shit. Damn..I mean these girls aren't hot by any means but they wanna do coke of my dick. You realize how much street cred this could possibly give me? I'm kinda cool but damn i'm not THAT cool you know?? Was I ever going to have this opportunity again?

"Shit ok if y'all want"

They were all excited and shit. I was fucking terrified. But I HAD to get my street cred. I could win every game of never have I ever with this shit.

I pull down my pants and her friend just grabs it and starts jerking me off. She was fucking eager. Bri is just sitting in the corner watching while she was grabbing the bag of coke out of her purse.

I'm having trouble getting hard at first but then Bri comes over and puts it in her mouth. Well as long as I don't make eye contact and pretend it's someone else this should work just fine. They start passing my dick back and forth to each other and I can't decide if this is the most awesome or worst thing that's ever happened to me.

I then lay back in the bed (her friend dries my dick off ) and they start putting this line on my dick. I don't know how much coke they had with them but I'd guess it was an 8-ball because I'd never seen a sack that fat before.

They took turns making the line, snorting it, and licking up the parts they couldn't get and repeating. Not gonna lie it was kinda tight and I swear I was getting a little coked out too but maybe it was like contact high? Not sure.

So you're probably wondering...how did that end?

Well. Bri went into the bathroom for like 15 minutes while I got my dick sucked by her friend. I came and they left. Bri felt bad because I didn't get any coke since they did it all... so she left me like 8 xanax pills. I'm like uh yeah that's a way better deal imo. She puts the pills on my desk and I walk them back out to their car.

-hugs me- we should do this again sometime!

uh yeah sure

A couple weeks later Bri called me in the middle of the night saying she was coming over. I was like uhh yeah please don't I have school tomorrow. I fall back asleep. 6 in the morning I get a knock on the door and it's Bri completely fucked up out of her mind screaming at me for not answering my phone. I slam the door on her and go back to sleep. My roommate was fucking pissed.

I never saw bri or her ugly friend again.

I ended up failing out and moving back home.

We still snapchat sometimes - she even lost weight.

So yeah. Basically... beware with tinder and maybe meet at a starbucks or something before giving out your private address.

edit: so scumbag...we gotcha. hehe.

in all seriousness thank you to everyone who's sent me positive messages (for those telling me to kill myself, cmonBruh). it really means a lot in these tough times. I'm trying to eventually release the stories I post on r/drugs onto a physical print. I'll have more info on that as time goes on. Thanks everyone again <3.  took an edible and some opioids and somehow I became a princess? idk I used to be a boy but I feel like a princess now very elegant gentle

need some slippersThey put up with you living there. The least you can do is take the fucking trash out. Hell, get stoned as shit and vacuum the basement. Get high and tell your parents you love them. They probably deserve it.When I was younger, I enjoyed occasionally tripping on LSD. I loved the state of mind it put me in. I loved the introspective thoughts, the deep realizations about life, the mind-blowing amount of detail that could be heard in music and the effect sound has on the mind, the insane visuals, etc. You guys know what I'm talking about.

For several years I never had a bad trip. I had some rough moments here and there but nothing I couldn't snap out of before the end of a trip. I was even in several scenarios that *could* have been trip ruining but always managed to get through those just fine somehow.

Then I had a really bad trip that's stuck with me ever since. I am someone who suffers from anxiety and I felt the worst fear imaginable during this trip. I saw things in people I had never seen before and it freaked me the hell out. I became hyper aware of people's nervous mannerisms and the behaviors people use to push that feeling away. Moments of social awkwardness lasted what felt like an eternity. Eye contact became physically painful. There's really so much more I can say but I think you get the point by now. 

It's been 4 years and I still get "flashbacks" as they are commonly described. I don't literally have a flashback but I will see something that reminds me of the extreme anxiety I felt while tripping and my mind will recall and reenter that state. It is something I deal with every day of my life and it makes my life feel like it's not worth living. There is no point to life if you are in a constant state of fear. Life is meant to be enjoyed with others but all I want is to be alone. I tried getting every type of help imaginable and nothing has ever worked. I believe I have done permanent damage to my consciousness. Unless there is a way for me to forget what happened that day, it will always be in my mind. As much as I love all the incredible moments I had on LSD, I'd take them all back if it meant I could feel the way I used to feel.

If you made it this far, thanks for taking the time to read.

**Edit**: And of course I'm getting downvotes. A guy kills himself and everyone says "why didn't he reach out? I wish I could have helped him!" But here I am crying out for help and it gets downvoted. Thanks for the support everyone.

**Edit 2**: Thanks to everyone who revived this thread from the dead. I am reading through every single comment and even if I don't want to respond, know that I am thankful!

**Edit 3**: I am totally stunned by the number of people who can relate to the experience I had. I thought I was one of the very few unlucky ones who felt this way. I want to thank everyone so much who has shared their story. I can't fully respond to everyone but I am reading and taking it all in!I woke up, rolled me a nice J and went for a shit. Scrolling reddit with my left, a j in my mouth and my right arm resting on my knees then suddenly, out of nowhere I had a big sneeze, my whole body jumped, my joint went flying out of my mouth and dropping my phone. My ninja instinct kicked in, left hand went under the phone and caught it before touching the floor whilst simultaneously shooting my right hand forward and caught the joint mid air. 
Catching the phone wasn’t that impressive but caught the joint was fucking awesome, it felt really good and I don’t really know where else I could share this storyLast night I did a few lines and was rolling too, and went out to a local bar with a buddy.  He knew some girls there and introduced me. There was this one really cute blond girl, we really hit it off, were totally grooving. I could tell she was totally into me. Unfortunately her group of girlfriends had their own plans to head elsewhere so I wasn't able to take it farther last night, but from the awesome vibes I was getting, I just knew that I'd see her again soon and things were gonna happen.

But then after the girls go, my buddy pulls me aside and is like, wtf is wrong with you man? I'm confused, but then he explains it to me. Turns out I was feeling so awesome about our chemistry and shit that I never. said. a. word. Just sat there for 30 minutes grinning like a maniac and staring at the girl.

I guess the whole destiny I saw mapped out for the 2 of us probably isn't gonna happen now.So, some weeks ago my friend and I decided to do LSD, and so we did. During the night around 4am my friend and I went outside to let the dog out and to look at the thunderstorm and it started pouring rain so we got into my friends car. We sat in there and watched the rain, smoked a cigarette, and we saw some random ass dude come out of nowhere and it freaked us out. Anyways. His mom came out and yelled at us to get inside and we got out and it was so damn awkward because she knew we were on something but we denied it.

The other day I went and stayed at my friends again and he told me his mom thinks him and I are gay together and thought we were having sex in the car. Keep in mind, i'm a guy, my friends a guy, are we are straight asf. And i'm just sitting there in his room watching a movie and his fucking mom comes by his door, looks at me, and says "I better not hear no cheeks clapping tonight" and proceeded to make fun of my friend and I.

Just thought I would share.

&#x200B;

Did not expect all the upvotes.... thanks everyone, haha! 

&#x200B;For real, just tonight there was a 14yo and a fuckin 12yo asking advice on where to hide weed, Adderall, hydrocodone, etc and it sickening

It's one thing to smoke a joint with your friends, which I thing y'all are still Abit young for, but hydrocodone at 14????  Are y'all serious?  

I understand harm Reduction and I personally believe *adults* can make there own decisions, but Literal children should not be taking hydrocodone or Adderall unless prescribed

It's not healthy for them and makes this sub look absolutely awful for being involved at all

And don't comment about how they can make there own decisions or drugs should be legal or whatever pro drug whatever, because I agree in most cases, but these children are using opioids and stims and shit before there even 16, let alone 18 or 21.

So that's what I gotta say

Disagree with me, say whatever you want, but this is ridiculous.

- from ex opioid addict, prescribed stimulant receiver, psycedelic veteran, nicotine addict, benzo enjoyer, and daily weed smoker.

To any potential kids (or teens) who might be reading this, stay away from drugs, especially pills, it's a long, cold road and honestly, a waste of time and money.  You might think it's cool or feels good, and they do feel good, but they will steal a piece of your soul and never let it go, you might think "it hasn't happened to me", but sooner or later it will.

And Where are the mods?  Isn't this sub 18+?  They're saying there age in the title or first sentence, it's not hard to figure out, do something.&#x200B;

So I was talking to my girlfriend and she mentioned that she hates it when guys use a condom because she gets this "warm glow" in her belly after they cum. Intrigued I went looking for a mechanism for this salty surprise and low and behold [semen is chock full of psychoactive molecules](https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/bering-in-mind/an-ode-to-the-many-evolved-virtues-of-human-semen/).

It conations high levels of Norepinephrine (similar to Ephedrine or caffeine), Endorphins (natural opioids), Oxytocin (released by MDMA), Testosterone and DOPA (a precursor to dopamine). All of these compounds are [readily absorbed by the vaginal wall](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15236978) which is teaming with blood vessels. This load of neurotransmitters is strong enough that woman who fail to use protection are [significantly less likely to be depressed](https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/all-about-sex/201101/attention-ladies-semen-is-antidepressant).

&#x200B;

I theorize that these compounds might be extracted from semen and used intranasally, vaginally, sublingually or rectally.

&#x200B;

[The psychobiology of human semen](https://preview.redd.it/xnarzcmb6mz21.png?width=1346&format=png&auto=webp&s=94b0563c8c1f5cd32a41b9b3e09715ecfad1c47e)

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

[The psychobiology of human semen](https://preview.redd.it/zhywlss86mz21.png?width=1420&format=png&auto=webp&s=022992342a9f2d12ec27f903afa47ba33df22c60)

[The psychobiology of human semen](https://preview.redd.it/0ipto2vywnz21.png?width=1380&format=png&auto=webp&s=a7784a20c9bad3b0922a4822f17e76a995037cea)

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

Gallup, G.G.J., Burch, R.L. & Platek, S.M. Arch Sex Behav (2002) 31: 289. [https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1015257004839](https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1015257004839)

[Burch, REBECCA L., and G. G. Gallup. "The psychobiology of human semen." Female infidelity and paternal uncertainty (2006): 141-172.](ftp://nozdr.ru/biblio/kolxoz/B/BH/Platek%20S.M.,%20Shackelford%20T.K.%20(eds.)%20Female%20infidelity%20and%20paternal%20uncertainty%20(CUP,%202006)(ISBN%200521845386)(O)(258s)_BH_.pdf#page=151)Just as the title states, my moms always been a stoner and completely cool with my substance use, but never personally partook in psychedelics because she was anxious. Well yesterday she told me she felt she was ready and I gave her a 150ug tab and just kinda chilled in the house trip sitting in case anything happened. Well after about 8-9 hours while coming down she was telling me how amazing the experience was and just how eye opening it was. 

Initially I was super stoked, but I could tell there was something she was rather hesitant to discuss so I asked prodded further. Wel she ended up disclosing that during the trip she realized she no longer loved my father, and most her recent discomforts stem from her inability to move on with her life with him. 

So today she called her lawyer and had him draft their divorce papers. Man… I just ruined my parents marriage 😬You've called in sick. You're high. You can put off your responsibilities for the day and just coast. Good times. You know from experience that in what will feel like five minutes the day will be over and your responsibilities will be back but not right now. It's still early.

The next day: shit sucks, right? Back to the grind, but a little further behind. Or get this: do it again. Bam. Back to the good place. Responsibilities can wait. That's quite a reward for doing the wrong thing. Of course, tomorrow you're back and further behind yet.

But that's tomorrow. Today, I can put off my responsibilities. And it's still early.Last weekend I really overdid it with drugs and everything. I had off of work from Thursday to sunday, so obviously it's time to get fucked up. Thursday morning I dropped two tabs of acid and started smoking weed all day. That was fun as shit, but the acid lasted insanely long, like until noon on friday. This is where I make a very very bad decision. I wanted to party all weekend, so instead of sleeping like a normal person, I bought a fuckload of stimulants. Specifically 50 mg of meth, 80 mg of Adderall and 200mg of molly. I took the meth Friday at around 3.

Right after I took the meth I realized I had made a mistake, so to balance out the meth I chose to go to a party and drink a fucking lot. So I drank all night Friday night. Saturday rolls around and I am fucking gone, just about ready to drop, when I realize I have my cousin's *catholic school* grad party. Fuck. I decide to make a quick prayer to my lord and savior Addy Christ, then mouth breathe my way through this grad party. I wound up in a conversation with a nun. To give you guys an image of how I look, I was wearing the same clothes from Thursday morning, unshowered, unshaven, the only hygiene thing I had done was brushing my teeth, which I did out back by the dumpsters behind a CVS with a bottle of water and toothpaste that I had purchased inside, because no matter how fucked up I am, if I brush my teeth I'm succeeding at life. 

Anyways I'm chatting with this nun when my friend texts me that we're going to a concert tonight. OK. The grad party ends at six, and my friend picks me up and takes me to the venue, which I don't get a very good look at, but appears to be an abandoned warehouse. I'm waking around in a haze and drinks keep appearing in my hand, and my reflexes are great so I keep drinking them. I quickly lose my friend, then realize I'm gonna pass out, so to save myself I take AL 200mg of molly. The molly carries me through the concert, but afterwards I'm still in a haze and still can't find my friend. I run outside, see a van with the sliding door open and decide that I should get into it before I pass out, so I run and dive into this van, getting a huge gash on my forehead in the process. This finally knocks me out.

I come to Sunday night at 10:30 in an apartment that I do not recognized, with a splitting headache. I manage to stand up, very dizzy and stumble out into an unfamiliar kitchen. The owner of said kitchen sees me stumble, catches me and sits me down on his couch, then gets me a fuckload of gatorade. I touch my forehead and feel stitches. Confused, I ask my new friend where I got stitches, and he says he lives with a nursing student at a nearby university. I don't live in a college town. I ask this dude where I am and he says Madison Wisconsin. I live 3+ hours away from Madison. When I tell him this he says I'm welcome to crash at his place tonight, and as much as I hate to mooch of this guy, I pretty much have to. I thank him, then go back to sleep.

Monday morning I wake up at 8:30, my new buddy Scott hands me my freshly washed clothes, my phone, and my wallet. I call in sick to work, then I called my friend who left me at the concert and he comes to pick me up. I noted down Scott's address and immediately upon arriving home I mailed him a thank you note and a check for $200 because he basically saved my life, then I go to the hospital to discover that I have a concussion, which is great because I love testing my health insurance.

TL;DR Fuck you go read it I worked hard on that shit.Back in the day if i had a dinner date i would go to the bathroom upon getting our table so i could rail a line of coke for the confidence boost and speech improvement. 

So this one time my buddy fucked me over because i tricked him into taking heroin this one time, i know, i know, but the morals of that are not the point of this story so i don't wanna see any comments about the heroin, but the point is he deserved to get me back. 

I asked him for some coke because he was a huge coke head at the time and i knew he had goood shit. But what he gave me was ketamine instead of coke. And for those of you that have done ketamine, know how mind altering it can be. 

So we get to the restaurant and i go to the bathroom and take out about a 100mg line and rail it. Now, ketamine takes a few minutes to have its full effect so at first after snorting it, i thought it was coke that was taking a bit to kick in. 

Then i went down and sat at the table. The chick i was on the date with started talking about her background and what she does currently and all that jazz. And after a few minutes i realized i just railed 100mg of ketamine. And that made me panic. But then the panic broke apart like a bunch of lego pieces and my mind was becoming extremely altered. 

She went on this long rant and when she was finished talking she asked me a question. She said, "Are you okay?" And i said, "Well, it depends. What does okay mean really?" And i went on a 3 minute rant about the word 'okay' and what it meant for society as a whole. 

Then the conversation got so weird that looking back at it it was absolutely hilarious. I went on a whole rant that sort of went like this, "What if 1 + 1 actually wasn't 2?" "What if blue to you, is green to me?" "What if, what if isn't actually what if?" I was mentally fucked at this point. 

The best part about it is this girl thought i was just joking so she laughed at every fucked up thing that came out of my mouth. I had digressed to ape intelligence and she thought it was all a joke. Luckily after about an hour i returned to normal and she seemed like she had a great time and i got a second date out of the ordeal. 

I couldn't believe it. 
Just went to Starbucks high as fuck. Eyes redder than the sun, was way to obvious. Got a coffee and wanted a cookie. They ran out and my heart dropped. I just needed something sweet. Being way to high to ask for anything else I just ask for the coffee. The dude on the cashier goes "hold up a second" puts a brownie in the tiny oven, "I gotchu". Free of charge. Just want some recognition for the real ones out there who know the struggle <3Whether you're a loner who has no family or you know that your family won't get you what you really want this year, I have found a way to shop for yourself AND keep the gifts a surprise!

I have tested this out over the last couple of weekends and my method has not failed me yet. You're gonna wanna start off by consuming some memory-inhibiting intoxicants. Xanax, booze, weed, etc. The substance matters less than how you consume. My choice has been to smoke joints with Jack Daniel's and coke. 

After a solid 4-6 hours of being a degenerate, you're most likely going to be in a blackout or brownout. This is perfect. This is what we want. After you've confirmed you wont remember most or any of these events, you're ready to shop. Personally, online shopping is my favorite. The gifts come in boxes already so you don't spoil the surprise. When they arrive just wrap up the boxes, stuff em under the tree, and boom you've got yourself some Christmas surprises. Straight from #1: yourself. 

So far I have 4 boxes under my tree from myself. I haven't the slightest clue what's in them, but if I know myself they're probably gonna be awesome.

**CHRISTMAS UPDATE**

Alright, for those of you who care, I opened 4 gifts from myself this morning plus a lil surprise stocking stuffer. I recieved a huge box of nag champa incense, a new laptop battery, a box of soft white LED light bulbs, and a Ryobi cordless drill! My stocking stuffer surprise was 3 oversized Hershey's with almonds. I'm pretty damn happy and impressed with my inebriated self! Merry Christmas everyone!!!when i was 18 (so like 15 years ago) i was at a gas station buying cigarettes for my friends who were underage on like an eigth of shrooms. they had not told me in advance that i was responsible for buying the cigarettes. i thought i was just going for an awesome hyperspace car ride.

so i go in the store with no shoes, eyes like saucers, visibly nervous, and i walk up to the counter.

i summon all my courage and confidently tell the clerk, "one pack of cigarettes please" and the guys like...

"...uh... did you have a brand in mind?"

tensions rose.

so im grasping at straws for cigarette brands. finally i land on "camel reds" 

he looks me up and down suspiciously and cards me. everything is in order so he tells me the price, 

"thatll be 5.85" and it was at this moment that i realize im carrying all $1 bills and...

i no longer remember how to count... so im basically fucked. im going to prison. my family's going to disown me. and im definitely going to hell.

then it hits me. 

like a lightning bolt... 

perhaps the most brilliant idea ive ever had...

it doesnt matter if i dont know how to count because the clerk does know how to count, and i can use his sober brain instead of my tripper brain to do the counting if i simply put the bills down one at a time, and watch his eyes. 

when he knows its enough, itll register on his face, and ill know when to stop putting down bills. pretty great right? i effectively outsourced pattern recognition to the clerk. einstein would have been proud.

just one problem. the clerks not looking at the counter, and hes not lookin at the money. hes looking right at me. like dead in the eyes.

so essentially i made it rain on this guys counter, making full eye contact, for like 11 bills before he puts his hand on my wrist and goes...

"dude are u ok?"

this was the closest ive ever come to having a bad trip... so stressful. it only gets worse from there, but eventually i got out of that gas station, shook, but psychologically intact... somehow... it was a close call. lol.I tried meth for the first time at my one of my buds parties. I drank 2 beers, 2 shots, and hitting my thc cart “white widow”. I also took a 50mg anti depressant. I was going to do some cociane but the dealer gave us meth instead... Good thing I didn’t pay for it. Anyway later that night I’m having a good time and ended up doing a line. The first reaction is the explosive euphoria that hits the front of your head when you hit it, it was like an orgasm times x10 all at once. Lasted for about 12 second, and the my skin started to feel chilled. I wasn’t feeling anything else but the meth at that point. I felt like I was floating in air. Like I was super man or some shit. No pain, no feelings, but calm collected. Within 2 hours I was already craving more, which is fucking crazy. I had withdrawals for 2 days after that. It’s been about a 2 weeks now, and I feel like the little things in life are not as enjoyable anymore. Getting out of bed in the morning grabbing a cuppa Joe and a cig and eating early morning breakfast seemed dull and boring. The things like hygiene didn’t seem important either. I do not recommend meth at all to anybody.
EDIT: ( I take anti-depressants daily as a prescription. And no I did not mean withdraw I meant comedown which feels like withdraw)I have gone through two “periods” of drug abuse in my life throughout my time as a user in these 5 years. My first period (which lasted until about November of last year) involved me taking whatever drug I could see, not eating healthy at all (overeating, lots of junk food, etc) and not taking care of my body/life. The results? Drugs were enjoyable, but I got a lot of nasty side effects, crashes were horrible, and life when I wasn’t high was miserable, to say the least. Nowadays, I’m vegetarian, I do intermittent fasting a lot, take supplements daily, sleep early, quit taking stimulants/drinking alcohol all the time, workout, etc and my highs are significantly smoother, crashes are negligible, and my life when sober is just as dope as when I’m high, I even managed to graduate from college and get my girlfriend back. Lesson from all this? Handle life responsibilities first and then follow it up with drugs, not the other way around :)I'm an avid chess player when sober, but playing on different substances is one of my favorite things to do. I don't know if anyone on r/drugs plays chess or even cares about this, but here I'm posting my experience playing while drunk, tripping, tweaking, or high.

*****

**Sober (Baseline)**

I play 10 | 0, classical, on lichess.org... Normal stuff. I usually try to close the position and break the opponent through positional play.

*Sober game:* https://en.lichess.org/VD3ZBkyw (I'm white)

**Alchohol (tipsy)**

Moves feel more natural, I can move without thinking too much but I still play accurately. I blast trance on the headphones and play 3 | 0 blitz, winning most games! In some respects, I feel that I play better when buzzed. *Drunk game:* https://en.lichess.org/g0pbpeCQ (I'm black)

**Alchohol (smashed)**

I do not give a single fuck when I move. I am wayyy too aggressive. I just do a tidal wave of pawns and exchange material whenever theres a chance. I pretty much lose 90% of my games when I'm super drunk.

**Adderall**

Hole. Eee. Shit. I turn in to a motherfucking chess computer on adderall. I can deeply analyze positions without sacrificing too much time. 10 | 0 on adderall and I win almost every game, playing at an 1800 level on chess.com. This is seriously a performance enhancing drug for chess.

**LSD (150 μg)**

*Did I change my board theme to rainbow hexagons? Why does my music sound like its coming out of my head, not my headphones? Oh, I'm playing chess! Yes, what a lovely game. A battle between two minds, there's truly nothing like it.* 

I notice that I am *very* good at spotting tactics playing on LSD. This is when you temporarily sacrifice material for a lethal attack, or a long term advantage in the game. Looking back on my games from LSD trips, I'm amazed at how innovatively I play. I make moves that sober me wouldn't never even consider... Overall, acid makes me a much more creative player. I play with aggression and vigor, creating threats with every move. LSD + Chess = amazing!

**Salvia**

No

**Shrooms (Golden teachers, 3g)**

*A human. There is a human I am playing against across the internet. It feels that our minds are linked over such a vast expanse of space and time. Oh, right, I need to move.*

I'm sorry, but I play like a retard on shrooms. Maybe it's the way psylocibin effects the brain, but I blunder every 5 moves. An interesting thing I noticed, however, is that I'm much more compassionate when playing on mushrooms. I congratulate my opponent on their win, and am impressed by their cleverness. But overall, LSD is the superior psychedelic for chess.

EDIT: *u/rory_spencer gave an amazing account of his experience with chess on shrooms in a reply to this thread. I've included an excerpt, but you can see the whole post by clicking [here](https://www.reddit.com/r/Drugs/comments/65lybk/chess_on_drugs/dgbvpxh/)!*

> Staring down at the tan and black coloured board I observed a desert, the dwindling number of pieces looked as dramatic as a standoff between great mountains, with cactuses and lizards squatting on boulders. The games that followed were suitably hallucinatory, I felt I was witnessing every possible permutation of warfare and conflict all on that board, clashing lines of muddy footsoldiers brawling in the dirt, tense Mexican standoffs, mages teasing one another from afar. All in glorious technicolour imax 3d. 

**Marijuana**

On weed, I play as I do when I'm sober, but I calculate positions much more slowly. I notice that I play a lot more conservatively, making sure that my defense is solid before making any attacking maneuvers. Overall, I play quite well when high.

**DXM**

I'm trying this tonight, it's my first time tripping on DXM and I'll be doing 300mg! Leave a comment to predict how you think I will play. I'll be sure to post links to my games tomorrow.

Hi r/drugs, I am on drug right now, I am on DXM. My legs feel switched and I can't walk and everything FUCKED. But holy fuck can I play chess, I think this game is buried inside my bones. I can play because I am chess. 

https://en.lichess.org/vaLvDtGZ/

https://en.lichess.org/0IiE4jrk/white <-- Computer chess engine says im almost perfect?



*****

Unfortunately I didn't save all the links to my games under the influence of these different substances, but I'll be sure to update the thread with links later if anyone is interested. I hope that this thread was an enjoyable read. Thanks for taking a look :-)

**EDIT:** I did not expect to wake up to this post blowing up. Thank you, each and every one of you, for taking an interest in my weird hobby and taking the time to read my personal accounts. I am flattered by the community's interest and even more so by your kind, amazing comments. Thank you r/drugs. You guys are beautiful. Have an awesome Easter!>Cannabis

The ancient Buddhist monk. This dude dgaf. He goes where the wind takes him and plans nothing. His voice is so calming it can put you to sleep, but he also likes to debate philosophy and other spiritual matters with you if you can stay awake. You might get so engaged in the conversation that you forget you were supposed to be somewhere an hour ago, but that's whatever, man. You can see why he's a monk and not a laborer. He might even convert you to his carefree ways. Some would say that he's best engaged with in moderation.

>Adderall

The drill sergeant. This absolute unit will not give you a break, he keeps you on task and doesn't let you slack for even a minute. Sometimes it's annoying or even uncomfortable how much he rides your ass, but when he's gone, you realize that it can be pretty hard to get shit done without him shouting commands at you.

>LSD

The homeless guy who's way more intelligent than he appears. Will share some decent, sometimes genuinely profound wisdom with you if you show him respect and give him some change. If you try to fuck with him, he'll pull out a knife and go after you with a vengeance. He's also reeealllly into conspiracy theories. He will stab you if you try to hang out with him all the time so beware. There are rumors that Mr. Benzos once saved a couple of terrified kids from being shanked by this guy, by body slamming him into the pavement.

>Etizolam (+a couple different benzos)

The most outrageous kind of frat boy. This mofo just wants to get fucked up and NO ONE is gonna stop him. He's actually sort of well put together on his "chill" days, but when he decides it's time to party, everyone better watch out. This man will hit on your gf, steal, pick fights, and commit various other war crimes when he's at his worst. To top it all off, the next day, he'll claim that he doesn't remember shit. He thinks everyone loves him, but a lot of people are getting kind of sick of his behavior. His complete lack of fucks does draw some admiration, though, and he possesses the unique gift of being able to calm any worrisome person down, anytime, anywhere. Befriend with caution.

>Alcohol

The self-help coach. He's great at convincing you that you're awesome, attractive and funny, he'll be your wingman, and he's always down to have some fun. He even teaches you how to dance. Spend too much time with him, and you might find him to be a giant toxic asshole. Despite this, some people just can't get enough of him, and almost everyone seems to be his friend or at least is acquainted with him. Easily the most popular person on this list.

>Mushrooms

That one hippy girl. You know the one. She's very in tune with her "spirit", and knows how to make people happy without needing to get faded to do so. She's really smart, with a wide range of knowledge on various subjects, and quite artistic too. She's so dreamy that tons of guys fall for her, but are perfectly happy with just being friends. If you hit her up too frequently or catch her at the wrong time, she can turn into a total bitch, picking apart every flaw of your personality and throwing them all in your face. The things she says are usually pretty accurate, though, and you can actually learn a thing or two from her outbursts. She doesn't hold grudges, so it's chill.

>Nicotine

That weird guy in your class that you don't vibe with at all, but you notice that he has a really good grasp on the material, so you try to cheat off him. He catches you but the professor doesn't, so he essentially blackmails you into being his friend because no sane person would voluntarily want to be around him regularly. He thinks he's your best friend and is nearly IMPOSSIBLE to get rid of. He sends you bullshit texts asking if you want to chill every hour of every fucking day, unwavering even if you explicitly tell him to fuck off. After you block him, his obnoxious voice and mannerisms still haunt your thoughts. Some people are so desperate to get rid of him that they'll solicit the homeless knife guy to shank him.

>2C-B

A mime. That's it. Hilarious dude. Face paint n shit. Doesn't have anything to say, but he's always fun to watch. The man's a goddamn professional who knows how to give a fantastic performance. Pretty much never causes drama. He do be chillin tho. He's really hard to find, and you never know where he might show up.

>MDMA

That one girl who's just so positive and joyous that her good vibes rub off on everyone she's around. One of the best people to go to for relationship advice, but spending too much time with her can make you wonder why you can't be as happy as her. That jealousy can end up being a major downer for the rest of your life if you're always hanging out with her. A lot of people underestimate this lady's power to make you feel... lacking, after she leaves.

>DXM

This guy is fried and everyone knows it. The way he walks, talks, and gawks all screams TOO MUCH SAUCE.  He actually can be pretty fun to be around, and a lot of people like him, but some folks are really judgemental and rude to him because of how fried he is. Listening to him talk with his slurred and somewhat retarded speech pattern has this hypnotic effect where you forget about all the bullshit and troubles that're happening in your life. When he leaves, you snap out of it and think to yourself, *what the fuck did I just listen to?*

_______

Thanks for reading my dumbass post. Keep in mind that I'm no drug expert, and this was all written for the purpose of entertainment. This post was brought to you by the I took too much adderall and can't sleep so I need to do some creative writing to clear my head, Jesus Christ it's almost 7am I can hear the birds singing gang.TL;DR What if news articles about coffee were written just like we do about other drugs...  

Genelle Chaconas can’t go a day without caffeine. They consume the powerful stimulant in the form of coffee—a psychoactive drink derived from cooking the beans of an [exotic shrub](https://filtermag.org/2019/03/12/dietary-supplement-or-drug-the-kratom-regulation-debate/) native to Latin America and Africa. They consume a cup each morning, and then repeat the ritual several times throughout the day.


Without it, says Chaconas, they become grumpy and unfocused. “Those who get between me and coffee don’t live long enough to tell about it,” admits Chaconas. Violent statements like these are commonly associated with [caffeineheads](https://filtermag.org/2019/04/23/crackhead-is-an-anti-black-pejorative-period/)—though more research may be needed to confirm a causal relationship with homicidal behavior.


It’s likely Chaconas, a California-based experimental writer and poet, became exposed to caffeine through the arts world. It is common for poets and writers to gather together and read works in progress aloud. These gatherings, called “open mics,” might sound benign, but they typically take place within coffee shops—establishments devoted to peddling highly-caffeinated coffees and teas.


What’s more, these shops often lace coffee with sugar or flavors that make their wares [appealing to young people](https://filtermag.org/2019/02/21/nyc-poised-for-key-decision-on-banning-sales-of-flavored-vapes/). Some caffeine pushers—known as baristas—even add eye-catching designs to coffee foam, such as hearts and flowers, to entice users to share images of the product on social media.

Chaconas has their first novel slated for publication later this year by the Journal for Experimental Fiction. They won’t say how much of the manuscript was influenced by caffeine, but given Chaconas’s enthusiastic self-reports of daily use, the book will likely be classified as “caffeinehead fiction.”


##Something is broken in our society when millions feel the need to self-medicate in this way.


It’s not just bohemians who are impacted by this drug. Caffeine is being abused by people in every field and every walk of life. It is even thought to be a staple among medical professionals, who use it to stay alert during long shifts.


[Skyrocketing](https://www.foodandwine.com/news/americans-drinking-more-coffee-ever) rates of coffee addiction across America mean that this can rightly be termed an epidemic. Something is broken in our society when millions feel the need to self-medicate in this way.


Stephanie, who asked that her last name not be used, is a Canadian peer engagement coordinator for the AIDS committee of Windsor. She says that coffee is her “life elixir.” Without it, she suffers from headaches, drowsiness and mood swings.


The symptoms of dependence described by Stephanie and Chaconas are typical. Caffeine is mood-altering and habit-forming, and frequently leads to obsessive, daily use that requires higher and higher doses to achieve the same effects. Both Stephanie and Chaconas say they attempted to cut down, but have been unable to break what has become for both a chronic, relapsing addiction.

In the case of Chaconas—in a cautionary tale for all who think they can recover from caffeine addiction [without total abstinence](https://filtermag.org/2019/04/22/shades-of-sobriety-life-shows-that-recovery-neednt-mean-abstinence/)—their attempts to drink less coffee simply led them to espresso.


[Espresso](https://filtermag.org/2019/02/06/crack-era-first-step-act-not-enough/), a highly potent, concentrated form of coffee, has been showing up with increasing frequency around the nation. Users accustomed to less potent forms of coffee, who have not developed sufficient tolerance, might find themselves experiencing unpleasant side-effects.


Symptoms [caffeine overdose](https://www.vox.com/science-and-health/2017/5/17/15649722/caffeine-overdose-health-risks-coffee-energy-drinks) can include heart palpitations, anxiety, tremors and a general feeling of being “jittery.” One study on caffeine use [during pregnancy](https://filtermag.org/2019/04/13/our-irrational-cruelty-to-pregnant-or-parenting-people-who-use-drugs/) discovered an [elevated risk of miscarriage](https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/abs/10.1146/annurev-nutr-071816-064941). Surging use of espresso, which comes in a finely ground brown powder in its unbrewed state, has some experts fearing accidental exposure.


##Childhood caffeine exposure can lead to habitual abuse later in life.


Caffeine can also be ingested in a number of forms besides coffee—many of which are [disturbingly marketed](https://filtermag.org/2018/10/02/in-defense-of-juul-after-the-latest-media-hit-piece/) to young people, whose developing brains are easily [hijacked](https://filtermag.org/2018/10/02/in-defense-of-juul-after-the-latest-media-hit-piece/) by the drug. It is present in a variety of sodas, “energy drinks,” pills and even some candies. It has also been showing up in chocolate—a popular treat among children. Some kids will pass caffeine-laced cakes or candies to their entire class as a means of commemorating special occasions, like birthdays.


Teachers and parents might view occasional caffeine consumption during childhood as “normal,” but childhood caffeine exposure can lead to habitual abuse later in life.


Both Chaconas and Stephanie, for example, report taking their first hit of caffeine during childhood. Stephanie says that her own grandmother used to dose her with coffee during visits as a young teenager. She began self-brewing while in high school.


Because of its legal status—though some [are calling](https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/206310.php) for tighter regulation—caffeine use is often downplayed and normalized. But the reality is far more sinister. Many caffeineheads find themselves organizing their day around their drug use, even pre-setting elaborate machines in their homes so that coffee is available for consumption immediately upon waking.


Chaconas admits to storing coffee in enclosed, portable containers which they bring into their workplace and consume throughout the day. They also admit to regularly pushing coffee onto houseguests—typical of the way that distinctions between user and dealer may blur.


Chaconas’s addiction has now consumed their life to the point that they largely only socialize with other caffeineheads.


“*They’re the only people I know anymore*,” Chaconas says, bleakly. “*It’s crazy when I meet someone who doesn’t drink coffee. How do you keep all your energy?*”



---

From [this article on FilterMag](https://filtermag.org/2019/06/10/if-we-wrote-about-caffeine-like-we-do-other-drugs/)I mean... sure... weed is fun, but have you actually drank a whole glass when you thirsty as fuck? That shit is bananas! 

When you start coming down from an amphetamine binge and you get this ravaging thirst that swallows your body, I swear to fuck, a glass full of water is a blessing coming straight from the sky. It's a direct link between you and god. You get possessed by this alien entity whose sole purpose is to absorb every goddamn water molecule in sight.

Picture this: You get your ass to the kitchen counter, take a glass, fill it with water and raise it to your almost-dead-chapped-lips... And what happens next? Fucking magic, I tell you. During those 2-3 seconds while you're drinking it... while you're gulping that goddamn water like a dying animal, nothing else matters in this life. It's only you and that glass of water, you love it and it loves you back in perfect harmony.

People say you get religious experiences while on DMT? Fuck them. They never had a good glass of water in their life. That shit will satisfy the "inner beast" you didn't know you had, and warm your heart like a thousand blankets on a cozy christmas night. 

💧 Drink some goddamn water. Stay hydrated. Peace. 💧They are improving [schools](http://www.coloradoan.com/story/news/2017/04/12/5-things-know-marijuana-money-and-schools/100367800/) with weed tax money. 

They are helping the homeless with it, [too!](http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/colorado-city-to-use-15-million-from-pot-tax-to-help-homeless_us_57337d8ce4b0365741117859)

They've even started [college scholarships](http://www.businessinsider.com/colorado-marijuana-tax-college-scholarship-2017-2) with marijuana tax revenue. 

They are even using some of the revenue to [fight opioid addiction.](https://news.vice.com/story/colorados-weed-boom-will-fund-schools-and-fight-opioid-addiction)


**The experiment is over, folks. Colorado legalized weed 5 years ago. Hell did not freeze over, and the anti-Christ did not arise. In fact, they're doing some damn good shit with their revenue.**I don't care what your drug of choice is. LSD, meth, Heroin, crack, alcohol, molly. Do it all day, every day for all I care. But for fuck sakes stop driving under the influence. I can understand being in the mind state of not caring whether you live or die so if you aren't going to do it for your safety, do it for others. I lost my dad due to drinking and driving in 2017. He didn't hurt anyone but himself, but in most cases your life isn't the only life that is on the line. 

Enjoy your drugs, but don't put other lives in jeopardy for your good time.I heard getting some acid up in the booty might make for a short, really intense trip... Lies. Earlier today I put a 100 ug tab in a gelcap with some water, rubbed a little chapstick on that doggie and pushed it up the shoot. Still took about an hour to really come up, and 6 hours later I'm still wired. Literally the exact same experience as putting it under your tongue. Myth busted :/ Upvote this so less people stick acid up their bum.

Update: I have my first hemorrhoid. Probably not related, but... Idk dudesHere is the  [LEAK](https://www.scribd.com/document/380562519/2017-12-31-Thirteen-LLC-Investment-Summary) that I based this reporting off of. Also,  [here](http://kutv.com/news/local/mormonleaks-says-new-documents-link-lds-church-to-companies-worth-over-32-billion) is an article about the leak.

[CELG](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Celgene)  - 347 million in shares, 

[JNJ](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johnson_%26_Johnson) - 490 million in shares.

[ABT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abbott_Laboratories) - 242 million in shares 

[GILD](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gilead_Sciences) - 101 million in shares 

[PFE](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pfizer) - 73 million in shares 

[ABBV](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AbbVie_Inc.) - 39 million in shares 

[MRK](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Merck_%26_Co.) - 19 million in shares


The church owns over a billion in big pharma stock, and failed to mention that when they came out HARD against the medical marijuana initiative. 

They make money off of sick people. And try to control what treatment those sick people can access. Did some lines and played some basket ball. a guy came out and said leave this private property so we leftHey r/Drugs. I wish I was trolling right now, I really do.

Don't know if he was really known in this community as someone who would be recognized by username, but anywho. 

I know that he was an active drug user, into cocaine among other things, but I believe coke was his go-to. He was also an alcoholic. Now I don't want this to be an anti-drug spiel but I believe he passed away from overdose or a lethal mix of substances. I still have 1.5 months left to hear back from toxicology. 

Please, just PLEASE be careful and knowledgeable with the things that you do. I lost my big brother and I am so devastated and heartbroken. He was a huge support system in my life and he was so depressed leading up to this, quarantine made this dangerous. I just wanted to share a poem he tried to post in r/cocaine 2 months ago but mods removed it. 

Please take care of yourselves, and for the love of god don't do stupid shit and don't mix stupid shit. Even my brother did his research and still this happened to him. Anything can happen, your drugs could be dirty, whatever it is. Just be fucking smart yall. 

Much love, 
- u/senortal 's sister💔

>I am tired

I am tired of the sore nose

I am tired of bloody tissues in the morning

I am tired of waiting in pharmacy parking lots for strangers who do not care for me

I am tired of my depleted bank account

I am tired of pretending to be ok

The surreal mornings after sleepless nights

Pretending that I'm something I'd promised I'd never become

I lack the instinct of self preservation

Does this make me less than human?

Perhaps

Or maybe this is the very definition of the human condition

I am tired, I think I'll go to sleep.I injected meth on the daily for 6 years of my life.  As of December 1st I've been clean for 2 years. One of the dudes at the place I'm staying at offered me a prepped syringe.  There would be no ramifications for doing it, and no one would ever know. 

I said no.My girlfriend and I both met because of drugs. She sold me opiates and I sold her weed. We did coke a few times together and x. We eventually started dating. 

I moved out the house at 18 and she moved in with me. We are in our 20s now. 

We got on coke pretty bad and started taking ecstasy enough to likely damage our brains. We recognized that this was a problem and we wanted better for ourselves so we sobered up. It hasn’t been easy but it’s worth it. I was under the impression that only we knew. This is because we both learned how to hide it well. What I didn’t know is that her sister knew about our drug use and also knew we were sober.

Despite the fact she knew we were sober her sister told her parents. The reason is a mystery to me but I think it was out of anger or pettiness. 

The same day she told on us my girlfriend’s whole family walked in our house unannounced. Uncle’s, grandparents, mom, etc... 

The men in the room started threatening me. Saying they want to fuck me up and stuff like that. Blaming me for what went on. I told them we can step outside and handle it one on one but the women de escalated the situation. 

They didn’t believe us when we said we were sober so I offered to take a piss test and they declined. They said they can tell by my eyes I was high which pissed me off because I wasn’t high and the situation got intense again. 

Basically I was just threatened more. Her mom cried a lot. They said they are gonna tell my family and my job. And said they won’t support me marrying her. 

This whole experience was pretty intense and basically ruined my relationship with her family. 

If you know someone with addiction problems this is the wrong way to try to get them clean.So I made a \[post in this reddit yesterday about my girlfriend with no tolerance accidentally taking an insane amount of edibles a few hours before a Nursing midterm worth 35% of her final mark.

[https://www.reddit.com/r/Drugs/comments/9qhajb/help\_my\_girlfriend\_ate\_a\_lot\_of\_edibles\_before/](https://www.reddit.com/r/Drugs/comments/9qhajb/help_my_girlfriend_ate_a_lot_of_edibles_before/)

&#x200B;

So the "good" news of this story is she had originally told me she took two, 260mg THC bars, but she had misread the packaging as the CALORIE count was 260, while the THC count was still 60mg. So this still meant that my \~100lb girlfriend who has smoked 3 times in the past 2 months ingested 120mg of THC \~3 hours before a midterm. She is a very persistent person and decided that she would "power through it" and still write the midterm. I had to go with my buddy to pick her and her car up after the exam, and this girl walked out of the building looking like an absolute barhead, cooked more than a godamn well-done steak. She insists that she thought she did really well on the written part of the test, while not knowing what the fuck was going on in the multiple choice area of the test. She passed out about 5 minutes into the hour ride home.

If you all want, when she gets her marks back, I can update with her overall mark on the midterm.Okay so this happened yesterday evening and I have to tell this to someone since I'm still a bit freaked out. So lets get into it. I am the only guy from my friends group that uses other drugs than weed and I have not really talked about my drug use with my friends because of the social stigma. Of course I've mentioned about trying shrooms for example to a few of my closest friends, but none of them know the full scale of my drug use.

This particular event happened with one of my best friends who mainly just drinks and smokes cigarettes. He has smoked weed with me a couple of times but I still wouldn't call him a drug user. Little background: he is really into vapes (the nicotine/e-cigarette kind) and knows a lot about them, and for example every time I go hang out in his apartment or he comes to mine we just take puffs out of each others vapes, its just a thing we do. We don't ask each other "can I try out your vape" etc, we just grab them and take a few puffs while talking with each other/playing something etc.

You can probably see where all of this is heading. I have 2 vapes, the socially acceptable kind more expensive vape that my friends know I own, and what I take with me to parties etc to vape nicotine. Then I have a #2 vape, the less socially acceptable and cheaper one, that is used to vape just one thing, DMT.

On last thursday night I decided to vape some DMT for the first time in a few months since I didn't have work yesterday (friday). I put on the dmt cartridge (is this correctly spelled), went to lay down on my bed and had a very nice and average DMT breakthrough. After it I smoked some weed, watched a movie and went to bed and put it on a table next to my bed.

The next evening my friend who I talked about earlier comes to visit me since he was doing something (probably visited his brother that lives nearby) near my address. Well I open the door, we chit chat a bit and I go back to my living room where my PC is. My friend came to my door just as I was in the middle of raids in old school runescape (basically it is a 30 minute long boss fight in an MMORPG). I told my friend I'll finish that raid and get back to cathing up with each others lives after that, and he just sits on my bed and watches me play.

Im on discord with my runescape friends talking and starting the most hardest part of the raid [(the final boss called OLM, here's a picture of him)](https://i.redd.it/xm0w7g0h4j8y.png) which requires you to concentrate a lot and just stare at the screen and click things for 10 minutes. I hear my friend asking about something and since I'm so concentrated on the game I just say "yeah" without really thinking anything. Around 10 seconds after it strucks me and I start having a panic attack as I spin 180 degrees on my chair. I see my friend exhaling vapor while holding my DMT vape in his hands. I get up from my chair and run to my bed.

*"what is this taste?".* Im fucked, fucking fuck. I cant say anything since im experiencing now a full scale panic attack as I slowly see my friend having similar symptoms. "Cody (name changed), what is happening?". Even if I would've known how to speak it was too late, my friend whose most intense drug related experience is throwing up in a bar bathroom is now lying down on my bed, moving around his hands while experiencing the most powerful psychedelic experience known to man.

I start asking him "hey are you ok" while experiencing a mental nightmare, how will he react to that experience? He doesn't answer as I assumed, it's like he had passed out on alcohol apart from the weird hand dance shit. I hear my friends shouting on discord at me while I'm trying to comprehend the fact my friend just broke through on dmt.  I shitposted on 4chan asking advice and looking at my friend every 5 seconds while 10 minutes pass. Quite a weird concidence that those 10 minutes felt like years even tho I wasn't the one who smoked DMT.

&#x200B;

I look at my friend who opens his eyes, starts crying and asks me something along these lines "Cody (name changed) what the fucking shitting assfucking cunt ass fucking was that" while he hugs me. I'm not quite sure if that's a negative or a positive reaction so I try to answer as neutrally as possible, "its a drug" as normally as I possibly can. He tells me it was the most beautiful thing he has ever experienced, asked me all kinds of questions about it (what is its name, where did you get it, how did you find out about it) etc and I just answer 100% honestly since I thought I might aswell. He proceeds to tell me about his trip in awe for about 30 minutes in total. He tells about how he met god, how he lived a different life, how it felt realer than reality, then just tells me "I fucking love you", says he wants to meet me again on monday when he's back in town and just leaves while smiling the widest smile ive ever seen.

&#x200B;

It seems like I'm the one who is more scared, I thank god his experience was positive, I can't even imagine what kind of a shock it is to end up in 18 dimensional hyperspace with aliens for a million years if you don't even know what the word psychedelic means.

DONT LEAVE YOUR DMT VAPES ON YOUR TABLES

&#x200B;

Thanks for the gold and silver you mysterious redditors!

&#x200B;For those who are curious. 

I always used to wonder what it felt like long before touching it, but now that im deep in it for the 3rd time its all too familiar and even just annoying at times. 

Fucking heroin is awesome when the ball starts rolling. Its so damn relaxing that its on your mind all the time. So the hell with it, you just start smoking black everyday ( or whatever youre doing). For days and weeks nothing unusual happens. Its almost like weed, you just comedown, sorta bummed that its over and thats that, do some more tomorrow. After a while the tone of it changes so slightly its like you cant quite put your finger on it. Am i just a little depressed today? Am i coming down with a cold? Did i sleep funny? This might go on a few more days and it creeps up so slowly you almost forget that youre starting to feel shitty when youre sober. You start feeling like you have a little flu now and the high of the heroin feels so good that it might not even dawn on you right away that you feel better when you get high. It just feels good anyways right?
Youve been sick with the cold or flu before but now you know somethings up. This isnt the flu. This is something youve never felt before and its getting unnerving now. "Ah fuck, i got hooked on it". Theres a whole way to it, theres rules to this shit. When the dope wears off youre not so much bummed that youre sober anymore, youre nervous of whats coming if you dont get some more. At first youre overall good if you have at one good dose in a given day. The day after you start getting butterflies in your stomach like something bad is about to happen but for the most part youre not sick yet. That following night the insomnia sets in and makes trying to sleep on stimulants sound easy. Its this fucking goddamn annoying thing in your back, like you need to stretch or pop your back but you cant if you try. Youre half asleep and tired as hell but you just cant slip into sleep. Now its the next day, your queasy, you feel like youre gonna have diarhea, your stomach feels empty and hollow but you dont have the slightest appetite. Sleep deprivation is setting in and you have this odd dizzy out of it sensation. Cognition is going out the window. You keep the process going and get your fix when you can but everything is starting to fall apart. The window of time between your last dose and the dopesickness is getting smaller and smaller. Eventually your feeling sick 12 hours after the last fix. And then its less than 10 hours, and thats when heroins character really comes out to play. You only get a full sleep if you get fixed up before you lay down. Youre waking up, your sweaty, but cold. Your nose runs, motivation hasnt come around in forever and you wanna make an excuse to get out of anything. Jobs start going down the tubes, "sick" days are piling up. Youre in a bathroom every 30 minutes with the most relentless diarhea until your asshole is raw flesh. Youre always tryna puke something up from your cold empty stomach. You are consumed with the most overwhelming anxiety, and you fidget and twitch cause you cant relax at all. You bounce your leg, your back fucking hurts like wtf is this? Theres some ache that comes from out of your bones it seems. All your muscles feel like you did an extreme workout yesterday. Moving around too much makes you dizzy. Depression is just always hanging out with you. This is an expensive habit and all your financial wisdom goes out the window if you even had any that is. Youll take out loans, fronts, skip bills, fall behind, pull fraud, tell lies, maybe even steal. Whatever it takes to get better. 
Its a long dark tunnel, could last 4 days or more before you start seeing light at the end, and thats a long time to be in there. Could be weeks before you start going back to normal, maybe longer. Watch where you step in candyland. So, a few years back it was that blissful time right when the last semester of college was finally over and it was time for summer. For us, summer meant getting fucked up and making memories, preferably at the same time. 


My four friends (Liz, Patrick, Jamie, Sophie) and I decided we should definitely all go camping one night. We live in California and agreed that there is no better way to kick off the start of summer time than to drive up to Lake Tahoe to go camping and trip balls. All of us are at least a little into drugs, so you have five college stoners, some of us being psychedelic enthusiasts as well. All of us had tried acid before, except Sophie, who had before had only partaken in the sticky icky green, but was really interested in LSD.

It was early June and it was fucking beautiful out. The drive there was amazing, it was a clear and sunny day with a slight breeze. Once we finally arrived at our camp site, we spent a good half hour not even talking to each other and just admiring the view. It was around 3 P.M when we had set everything up. We had our tents, blankets, pillows, snacks, and other random shit we wanted to bring with us, and of course, some real good LSD that Jamie and I had saved over from a few months before. 

After sitting around talking about past acid experiences while smoking a few joints, we all agreed we were ready to drop. Sophie was a bit apprehensive at first, but then curiosity got the best of her and she was in. I don't remember exactly how much everyone took, but I know I had 300 mics. and everyone else had *at least* 180.  

We're all having an amazing time. There's just this big great synergy between all of us. We were euphoric, running around through the woods, exploring, yelling and laughing until our sides hurt, it was like being a little kid again. Everything is warping and wavy, the clouds are swirling and morphing and the trees are swaying back and forth in a beautiful psychedelic dance. It had started getting dark and we wandered off pretty far from our camp site, so we started heading back. Liz and I lit a fire and gathered a bunch of blankets near it so we could all sit around and just chill out.

Then Patrick says something pretty unexpected, "Hey, this may sound odd, but my friend was telling me about having an orgy on LSD and---" Liz cuts him off, "Yes. I'm in." These two are now grinning from ear to ear, their faces shifting around and looking just like oil painting. They stare at Jamie, Sophie, and I apprehensively waiting for our response. "Why not," Jamie pipes in. I'm fucking hoping to God that Sophie agrees, because I had such a big crush on this girl. She laughs and kind of shrugs and agrees to join. I'm just staring at a flower growing in the ground, thinking *OhMyFuckingSweetJesusIsThisReallyHappening*. 

"/u/PsychedelicOrgy, you're the deciding vote. Are you down?" Liz asks. I grin and say "Fuck it, sure." My friends cheer, I can feel the LSD fueled excitement coursing through my veins and in the atmosphere, but it was probably just my boner. We carelessly throw a bunch of blankets and pillows over the ground and honestly, I can't remember what happened after that. One minute we were sitting around the fire talking, then the next minute we're all naked and on top of each other.

You guys, you have no idea how fucking amazing this was. Think about the best sex you ever had and now multiply that by 100. There were fractals all around me. There were little outlines of fractals and crazy geometric patterns painted over my friends' skin. The euphoria was so intense, a few times we had to just stop and lie back for a few moments to catch our breath and calm down because we were laughing so hard. It felt like I was being tickled all over, but I never wanted it to end. It was like all our energy and emotions came together as one and I could just *feel* everyone's energy and it was just so magical. Everything was magnified and my heart was beating so fast I thought it was going to bounce out of my chest. Jamie later told me he started getting into weird thought loops the middle of it, so then without thinking he just yelled, "this is not the time for an existential crisis, this is the time to FUCK."

 I came so fucking much. I have NEVER cum that much as I had that night. It is just so indescribable. Everyone was morphing and their faces were almost swirling, the colors were just like a Van Gogh painting. The English language is so limited for me to put this experience into words. It was like a never ending climax of just absolute ecstasy. At one point, the jizz on Sophie back started changing into quickly shifting rainbow colors and I couldn't stop fucking laughing because it was so funny. I remember in my head I was like, "Haha, it's like radioactive jizz," which only made me laugh way harder and like a maniac. Patrick asked me what the fuck was up and I just said "this dick" and then everyone started laughing uncontrollably again. 

It was beautiful. Just absolutely beautiful. My friends and I still refer to it as *that* night and when we trip together we always laugh about that experience. That night also made me realize I was in love with Sophie and believe it or not, we're now engaged! :)

Happy Bicycle Day!I hate I have to edit this in here, but this is not an ANTI POT post. The people that can relate ARE NOT LAZY. Just because YOU work a job everyday and smoke does not mean you can’t fall into a pattern of getting comfortable being bored smoking pot.  This is just advice to keep searching for new experiences, smoking or not. Calm down you defensive fucks 



Pot, in the beginning, is an event, and it’s extremely fun for many people.  

You do shit you don’t normally do like go for a walk with the bros or eat a lot of food and play video games, and just generally do shit you feel would be fun to do while stoned.

All this is great, and I wish everyone could experience it.

The problem is when it stops being an event, and just becomes something you do. For me and many people I know, smoking pot became something we did before school, after school, and whenever we were bored, which was all the time because we didn’t look for new things to do because we could just smoke pot and do nothing. 

Smoking just to do something, quickly robs you of the really fun times pot can bring you.

I mean, sure, it was fun hanging with my boys watching tv and smoking dope in the same apartment every day for a year.  But then you look down and you realize you’ve done very little apart from that.

New smokers tend to go to parks, or to movies, or to do some cliche stoner stuff, which is great! Everyday hardcore smokers rob themselves of some of the simpler joys that create lasting memories.

I don’t know if this will be relatable to anyone, but I was just thinking about it and wanted to share


Edit: Also, during my extended stay on that couch, me and all my friends thought new smokers who would smoke and then chill at the park were corny. In reality we were just hating!

Note to first Edit: Someone thought this meant we were bullying kids at the park lol. No we were just talking about hypothetical stoners doing cliche shit.

Edit 2:  I’m glad so many people can relate.  Some advice, smoke up and hit a movie. AN ACTUAL THEATRE, not just Netflix. If it’s been a while and the movies good, it’ll blow your mind how much you’ve missed it without even knowing it

Edit 3: 420

Edit 4:  Many people are bringing up how I’ve only smoked for a year.  That is not the case. I smoked 5 years with a few long breaks! 



PSA: Everyone’s body is different, if you get stoned all day this is not me insulting you or saying you’re doing anything wrong. Do whatever you like brother just make sure you’re having a good time


PSA 2: getting out of your comfort zone and trying to do more fun stuff is never a bad idea stoner or not!  You don’t have to get high to go to the park but it’s cool if you doTo the young ones on here:

Your parents aren’t there to ruin your fun. They may be ignorant on drugs, thinking things like LSD will fry your brain or weed will lead to heroin use, but they only care because they love you. If you take a look around you the kids who can use any drugs they want without their parents caring will have a rough life. Smoking weed all day may seem like the best thing ever now but developing that habit during high school isn’t what you want. Your parents may be ignorant or overestimate the danger of drugs, but have some empathy.

You can sit your parents down and explain to them til you’re blue in the face that lsd isn’t dangerous, but good luck getting them to think their child should use it. You are their literal child, to your parents it seems like just the other day you were their little baby. If you are 14-17 you have a whole life to use drugs. Some drugs are amazing, safe when used correctly and even positive for mental health problems. That being said there’s a time and place for everything.

You’re going to experiment with your friends and that’s cool. When I was 16 my dad told me not to smoke again (got caught) until I was out of high school. I remember being so mad thinking I was an adult but really he was just looking out for me. I know you guys will use drugs anyway so please research and practice harm reduction, but when it comes to your ignorant parents just let it be. They are scared and love you, either lie and hide like a sociopath or hold off until you’re an adult with a more developed brain.

Tl;dr: your parents don’t want to ruin your fun they just care about your safety and want the best for their kid I miss my lonely stoner days. The cool nights, hot smoke, cozy bed feeling. Nights like this, when mid-October chill permeates the room, send me back in time to Christmas break from college, after a long shift in the gas station. 

I miss coming home at 11PM, knowing my parents would already be asleep; waiting a few minutes just in case, then locking the door. 

I miss shoving a blanket into the crack underneath, then closing the vent by the window and blanketing that as well. 

Taking the old shoebox down from the shelf in my closet, the one all my ex-girlfriend memories are packed away within, and fishing around for the glass jar & lighter. The light *tinkling* sound they made. 

Turning off my overhead light and instead bringing my desk lamp to life, because you wouldn't be able to see that shining from the outside. 

The secrecy, the sneaking; these were the preliminary highs. Finally, turning on my noisemaker and spraying some air freshener to prime the air.

Then, the window. I'd unlatch both locks, hear a slight *squeak* as it slid down, feel that first gentle breath of cold air hit my face; this was the second preliminary high, because it meant I was close to my goal.

I'd make the jar tinkle some more, extract my bowl, take out my bag of weed, and the off-white skunky smell enveloped me. 

Pick up the nug, feel it sticky between my fingers. Press it into the grinder, hear the crunch as I close it up, spinning it back and forth. When the spinning got easy, opening it up and pinching the green moon sand into my bowl. The breeze from outside giving me goosebumps. 

I'd wrap my heated blanket around my shoulders, kiss the weed with the flame, then feel their scratchy love-child in my throat, feel it buzzing in my brain.

Exhale out the window, repeat. Put in earphones to continue the process, or simply float away there at the window within my own head, as I'd done countless other nights before.

The lonely stoner nights. Cold at the window, but still so warm.

Though I was lonely, I really wish I could get them back.

[originally posted on r/trees]Almost everyday I see a post of somebody just starting the long road that is addiction. So many people, many young, try something like meth or painkillers and then come for advice for how to do it as much as possible without raising tolerance, or say they don’t wanna get addicted but can’t stop talking about how much they love a drug. 

There’s also those who say they don’t care anymore and “nothing has worked” when it comes to treating their mental state. Yes I know there are those out there who have really tried all they could and I’m sorry to all of you suffering but there are many who say they did without actually trying. I know this because I have myself and many I know have taken a defeatist attitude when it comes to mental health. 

This attitude is dangerous when it comes to drugs and there are so many posts of people with this mentality asking if they should try a hard drug and are looking for someone to say yes or who have already done it and are looking for people to validate them. I’m not shitting on hard drugs here either, I’ve tried all the big ones (crack, meth, heroin) plus many more, but there are people that you can tell just by that one post that this is gonna become a struggle in their life. I don’t know why I’m posting this, I guess it’s just unfortunate to see so many people on here make a decision that may completely derail their lives before it even really starts. I just want y’all to be careful.

Edit: Damn this post really blew up. I’m happy to see the amount of people supporting this viewpoint. I added paragraphs to make this easier to read after a couple complaints. Thank you for the gold stranger!Anybody got any funny stories of stoned teens seen in public? I just came from a Subway and I was served by an incredibly stoned 15-18 year old. His eyes were blood shot, he kept slurring his words and he laughed constantly. He dropped meat on the floor making my sandwich and replied with: "Sorry bro I'll make it up by putting in extra" and so he did! My sandwich had about 1.5x the amount of meat and salad than normally! He must've used ingredients for 3 breads just to make mine.

When the bread was in the oven he kept humming and laughing under his breath and he got startled by the oven's alarm. When I paid with cash he couldn't figure out the amount of change and I had to calculate it for him. 

He was a cool dude. I definitely hope his boss doesn't catch him but it's unlikely. I hope he's working there the next time I visit there.So i asked my dealer to really smell proof the eighth.  I was picking it up at school and had a full day of lectures.  He hands me a bottle of kratom.  With the seal still on the inner lid.  I think he is fucking with me.  But im paying bitcoin with escrow so if its not real hey i dont finish the transaction.  I got to my car and realize this guy has super glued the seal back on.  Then i look in and its capsules.  I open one.  The guy has filled the 00 size capsules with ground weed and superglue the safety seal back on.  This is next level stealth.  And each capsule basicly fills my bowl.  This is better prep then most dispensaries ive been to.Just like a car, constantly give your body the best fuel (healthy food, supplements, and healthy drinks like tea), constantly tune it up (aka EXERCISE, working out will go a long way in ensuring your body doesn’t break down), make sure it gets ample rest (sleep is one of the most important things one has to nail down if one is consuming heavy drugs, especially stims. Not sleeping lowers immune system, drugs won’t feel nowhere near as good, and it also likely one of the main reasons why so many of us druggies age rapidly), and lastly, find meaning outside of drugs because there is a lot more to life than simply getting high, even if it might not appear as such. Take it from me, keeping your car in good condition will give it longer legs. Peace ✌🏾Don't do drugs while in the military PLEASE it'll get you fucked over harder than you can imagine.
So anyways I'm in the Army and I got LSD sent from the states to the ither side if the fucking planet, by mail thanks to my girlfriend (don't do this).
It was a Friday, I was off work and schedule seemed (SEEMED) to be clear.
Again I'm IN THE ARMY shit happens like BOOM in an instant. Anyway it was 1PM I said "fuck it full send" and took THREE FUCKING TABS because imma retard.
Anyways it's 16:34 or 4:34PM I am peaking and next thing you know my platoon sarnt needed us downstairs NOW.
I was like "HoLy FuCkINg ShiT WTF?!?!?!?" as I go downstairs pretending to be sober.
My friend Tobar who's high as well on something I really don't know, laughs when he sees I'm beyond trashed and him as well.
Im like "BrUh ShUt ThE fuCk uP" as we laugh again.
So sarnt comes over and my whole squad down there. He basically tells up "wrap it before you tap it, don't impregnate anyone and don't kill anyone including yourself".
We knew what to do and what not to do it was common sense. He then said told me too STAND BY.
I think to myself it's over, I'm fucked and I'll get kicked out, they found out.
The look of my squad leader's face of fear made me almost shit myself.
As he points up the stairs I do this jog up the stairs to my room and open it up.
All it was a room inspection but my room was super clean so they had nothing to mention except for the microwave that i forgot.
As I'm standing in a sort of leaning way against my bed in a (what i assume) super chill pose he tells me a couple things about my rucksack and if I needed anything just to let him know.
And he walked off, THE RELIEF I got from the second he left was amazing.
30 seconds later i was laying on my bed in my underwear with headphones in blasting Glass Animals as I see my walls breathe.
It's a funny story now but shit could've gone downhill have i been caught tripping.
Don't do drugs in the Army.Exactly how it sounds. I was 2 bars deep, and quite literally knocked on my neighbor's door all fucked up and asked her very politely if she could give me some head. She looked at me and said "I think you have a problem" in spanish. She then proceeded to go on about how she has a husband and 2 little girls, and how she could be my mother, etc. I then went home rubbed one out, and woke up this morning and just remembered what I did. I'll never be able to look that woman in the face ever again. Fucking bars...With the bonus of making your parents feel nice that you're thinking about them anyway.

I sort of realized that I have made it sort of a habit to call my parents before getting high. Before this, I don't know how, but everytime I took MDMA or LSD or just had a huge bong hit, one of my parent's would always try to contact me then and get ~~super~~ worried when I didn't pick up.

Now, I just give them a call and eliminate the possibility of them calling me.  

Of course this doesn't apply if you're NC with your parents.. should go without saying. Just thought I'd share anycase if anyone's had a similar "problem".


*edit:* My wording threw some people off. My parents aren't crazy, I think it's within normal to get worried when you don't hear from your daughter for a whole day or two.


I hate Hong Kong. I had travelled to a lot of places and I hate Hong Kong. I will tell you why. 

First of all though, so as to make it clear, I have to tell you relevant information about me. I’m black. I have two citizenships. Meaning two passports. One from Africa and the other is from Europe. I had travelled to Hong Kong with my African passport and this is what happened. 


So I arrived in Hong Kong and I’m lining up for immigration. 
Next thing you know, immigration officers came and took all the 8 black guys from the immigration queues and told us to follow them. I’m not lying to you, there’s about 200-300 people and they took the 8 black guys out.
It wasn’t my first rodeo with this kind of treatment and I’ve long established that I should be passive when these type of stuff happens as me talking back would only make it worse. 
They took us to a room and one by one asked us why we were in HK, how long we were staying, where we were staying, how much money we had, even asked to show them the money and finally, gesturing with his hand the officer says to me “Don’t work here, go back in time!”
It was really offensive. I know there’s immigration procedures in handling someone you suspect over something, but this was different. I knew why all this was happening and why it’s was just for the black guys. 
Anyways, I went to the immigration booths, got my passport stamped and I’m going to the luggage collection area. 
It was a 10 hour flight and I was tired and also had a stomach ache from the airplane food. While I was trying to figure out where my luggage was at, I really felt the stomach ache and it was at this point that I rubbed my stomach.
I didn’t think of it much as it was just an ache. But I was too naive. The immigration officers had been following the black guys with their CCTV and one of them had just rubbed his stomach. 

Moments later, an immigration officer came and rudely tried to pull me without any explanation. I pushed his hand away and I said “WTF are you doing?” He then told me to follow him and I asked where and he said they want to talk to me. I didn’t know what this was all about and I said that his colleagues had a talk with me earlier on. And he said that this is different and I asked how this was different. He said we’ll talk more in his office. 

I was really confused and I really didn’t know what was going on and I was a bit scared. But I asked him if I at least could gather my luggage’s before I go with him. He agreed and we found my luggage and we went to some office that was in the airport.

He told me to sit and he told me to wait. I waited for about 20-30 minutes. I am seriously starting to get worried now. 
About 30 minutes later, two guys came into the room and only one spoke English, but barely. He pointed to my bags and and he asked “How many Kilo?” 
I thought he wanted to know how many kilos my bags were and I had 43 kilos, which was the allowed amount and I told him that. He then translated what I said to the other guy, and the guy said “WHOA!” and a lot more words in Cantonese. I didn’t know what was going on but I also knew that I had triggered something when I said 43 kilos. And then they left.

I had come to HK for a meeting with some company executives and they had arranged for a driver to pick me up and I was told that he’d be waiting for me holding a sign with my name written on it. I was also told that he’d take me to the hotel the company had booked for me. A hotel, I didn’t know, if the driver decided to leave after I don’t show up. Thinking of this for me angry and I started banging on the door and I started shouting “You need to let me go” 
They had left me for another 45 minutes by that time.

A few moments later, things really got interesting. A lot of people came into the room. People that had stripes on their uniforms. And then there was a camera crew. A camera crew?  That resonates that TV show “Border Partrol”

As soon as I thought “Border Patrol”, I knew what this whole thing was about. I knew why they got excited when I said 43 kilos and I knew why I was in the room. 


Then it begun. Camera crew was setup. All the stripes people left and now there’s two officers. One guy started talking and he asked me where I was coming from, what I do for business and why I was in Hong Kong. I even showed him some of the correspondence I had with the company I was to supposed to see, from my iPad.

The one guy who was quiet the whole time interrupted me and loudly says “You lie! We don’t believe you, you are a drug smuggler”. And he even went further and said “we know you black guys, you want to be rich by selling drugs, we catch a lot of Nigerians before, we know!”
It was a lot to take in. I now know anything I say won’t help my cause. And I simply just said, you say I have drugs , you check my bags , I don’t have anything”. They said they will and that they haven’t checked it yet because they to bring a dog and the litmus paper thing. 
I was fine with all this, so long as it cleared me. 
About 10 minutes later, some 3 guys came , with a dog and they started checking my bag. The dog sniffed and nothing happened. So they started manually with their hands. They checked every single part of my bag, even went as far us unscrewing the handles. 

NOTHING!!!

Hour 4- Camera is rolling the whole time and the interrogation continues. 


One of the guys says, “you don’t have the drugs on your bags but you have them inside your body”. Which i denied adamantly.
So they decided to use a different tactic on me. The old Good cop/ bad cop routine. 

Started with bad cop. He started shouting at me with threats saying I will spend the rest of my life in jail if I don’t cooperate. I replied I have nothing to say to him cuz I don’t have anything. And then this guy decides to say something that really pissed me off. He saw my African passport and says, “ You know, in Hong Kong, in jail, we have free food” he is clearly implying that I need not worry about food and that this was not Africa. That was really racist and really fucked up. I got pissed and took out a 100$ from my pocket, folded it, and threw it to his face. I said “Motherfucker, I did not come here to eat food. I’m a businessman and I’m not a fucking drug mule”. I also added that I’ve had enough and that I need to make a phone call. By this point, the guy got up and left. 

Camera is still rolling.

About 10 minutes later, the other guy comes in and we had a Coca-Cola. Such a Cliche’. He starts talking with a different tone from earlier. Softer and friendlier. He says, “My friend, you see those guys, they’re not your friends. But I’m your friend. And I think we can help each other here, my friend.” 
Wasn’t sure what he was talking about and so I asked him as bluntly as I could. “Help you how, Boss?” 
That’s when he said the most ignorant thing ever. He said , “Maybe if you help us now, we can help you by giving you a job, instead of jail and you can tell us which Africans are coming here with drugs.” 

I was literally dumbfounded by what he said. And it was so ignorant beyond belief. I just got up and angrily said “Motherfucker, do you think I know every African? Do you think you are talking to a child?” 
I lost my shit and by this time, it’s been about 6 hours of this and they’re not even letting me get a phone call. 

I wanted to piss. So I banged on the door and shouted out. 3 guys came and I told them that I wanted to piss. For which they said ‘not now, maybe later’. I wasn’t going to be holding my piss and I’m angry already. I said “You know what..” and I just took out my junk and bluffed like I was gonna pee all over the room.” They were shocked and said OK, OK,, give us 5 minutes and they left me in room again.

About 10 minutes later, one of the guys with the stripes and 5 more officers tell me that they will accompany me to the toilet. And they also added I had to drag my bag there. 
 The toilet is a good 5 minute walk and we had to pass a lot of people in the airport. 

Imagine this.. a black guy is surrounded by 5 officers, 2 random guys, 3 guys from the tv crew.. and they’re all taking to the bathroom. 
I understood they were scared that I’d flush the drugs or something but what pissed me off was when the cameraman tried to get into the toilet. I said, “Hell No! And the boss, told him to stay outside while me and two guys got into the toilet as they watched every drop of my pee.

Then we were back to the small room. I’m tired, hungry and just worn out by this point and it has been 8 hours since this all started. 


Then came the paper. The paper that was written in Cantonese. The paper they wanted me to sign without offering an English copy. And simply offering vague comments like it’s for my own good and that they were trying to help me. IDK how they’d expect me to believe them after all this. I said NO. I’m not signing any paper and in fact I want my phone call, RIGHT NOW! The guy said ok, ok and left me in the room , yet again.

They then came up with another paper that was in English and told me to sign. I read it and it was a form that stated that I agreed to a full on body check blah blah.. which I was happy to comply too, since the beginning of it all. I don’t have drugs. I have no reason to get scared.

I’m getting more and more madder. But they’re seeing this as a deflection of some sort and in fact they are getting more and more convinced that I have drugs.i found this out when we started heading to the hospital. On the way there, the guy that stopped me in the beginning of it all, said “Because if you, I’ll get a big promotion”. He said it very enthused by this all.  I just told him”Dream on, Asshole!” 

When we left the airport, outside is quiet dark and it’s about 1am. We reached the hospital, which was a good 20 minutes ride. I had counted 11 people that accompanied me to the hospital. Two cars. 

They told me to change my cloth and I was given a hospital gown for my scan. I got to the citiscan and you can see the control room from inside. And all the officers, camera crew and the doctors were in that room. 

I did my scan. The first thing I saw was the camera going down and turning off for the first time in a gazzillion hours. They have been taking turns to record the whole thing. And now it was off. 

And then I see the faces of all the people inside dropping. Everyone was so sure that I had drugs that when they found out I didn’t, they were shocked and disappointed with themselves. And then there was the sudden realization of being sued. That I can sue them.

People that have been assholes to me this whole time send one guy in to the scanning room and he tells me to change my cloth and that we will talk and they will even drop me to my hotel. 

I changed my cloth and I come out. THEY WERE GONE!!  They slipped out. No Apology, no ride , NOTHING!

I was so angry. I wanted to do something but I was too tired and I needed to sleep. I don’t know where my hotel is as it was booked for me. I haven’t changed money, I have no one to call at that time and I’m in a country I’ve never been too. I’m carrying two big bags as my trip won’t stop in HK. I get out from the hospital and I started walking, trying to find a taxi, a hotel, anything. 
It’s 4 am by now. I ended up finding an expensive hotel but I had no choice so I spent the night. 

I got in touch with the company execs the next day and they told me their driver waited for so many hours for me. I had to tell them what happened and they were so shocked.

They advised me that I should sue the airport and that they will help me. We went to the airport and I saw one of the guys with the stripes and told my friend he was one of the guys. Imagine after all that and this guy denies that he’s ever seen me before. 

That really got me angry yet again. My friend said we should talk to a lawyer and I couldn’t. I couldn’t because I only had one day in HK as I had to go to mainland China for an important contract signing I couldn’t miss. 

This was my experience in Hong Kong and I hate it. I hate Hong Kong.It's amazing how you can go from the nightclub peaking on 2CB feeling absolutely mad and tingling with excitement, colors flashing, people dancing in a primal way. Everyone high as fuck and blasted, faces flowing with Ecstasy. Music entering through your soul and bones, feeling on top of the world.

To Greg from HR asking you what you did over the weekend, and you just replying with "eh, nothing much".The impossible was finally made possible at 4:15am tonight. After pulverizing my dick with the strength of 10,000 suns, I have finally achieved what many may consider as futile and hopeless. “To spread the seed requires the need for speed.”

When theres a will, there’s a way.I will never forget him. On our first encounter he had a whole plethora of different goodies. MDMA, great weed, dabs, acid, ketamine, sass, mushrooms, blow, probably some others I’m forgetting.
Guys, this mf had a test kit for every single substance he was selling (except the nuggets of course). Anything you wanted he would pull out the test kit, test it in front of you, and *only then* he would ask how much you want. He made his money at music festivals, and not only was he a great guy and a super connection, but he was a god damn *warrior*. Anyone that was sold bad drugs from someone else knew they could come up to him and explain what happened, and he would immediately go to the source and call them out. I’ll type out a quick story as a great example.
Two buddies come up to him saying they bought  and ate some Molly, and haven’t stopped gunning for 20 hours. “Who’d you get it from? Take me to them if you don’t mind.” 
So they walk him over and point out the two guys they got it from, sitting on their car being some typical douchebags. 
“Hey guys! Heard you got the hookup on Molly! Can I get $20 worth?” 
So they proceed to bag up a little sack for him and he says “well hang on a second I wanna test it really quick” 
Puts it on the test kit, shows up as meth. Douche canoes say they didn’t know, they’ve been eating it all weekend and said it felt okay. “Oh you’ve been eating it all weekend? Eat that rock right there.” Kid gets nervous and eats it, ends up tweaking tf out and going to the med tent. Later that day he caught a kid selling research chemicals as acid, and the kid ran away so he ended up chasing and tackling him, where he got up to be greeted by a shitty security guard who took everything in his bag. He told me it was about $15,000 worth of drugs and test kits. He stopped selling that day, because he lost so much so quick and he was just trying to do the right thing. 
I miss ya every day man. Thanks for doing what you could to hook it up and keep the people safe. The world needs more dealers like this. 

Edit: didn’t expect this story to get so popular lol thanks for the upvotes and responses guys. I expected some non believers and will not try to sway anyone’s beliefs because I really don’t care, I just thought it would be interesting to some people. I know it’s true and that’s all I care about lol. I’m working twelve hours today but will try to break out the laptop tonight to respond to everyone’s questions. Much love TLDR: Broke down crying in the middle of the street because the acid made me realize how hurt and broken I really am. Customer I was delivering food too saw the whole thing and gave me a nice tip. 

I do Uber eats on my ebike and at times it gets so incredibly boring so I usually smoke weed. However I’m about to start a government job so I can’t fail a drug test. So I thought, okay I’ll just stop smoking and do psychs.

I took one tab which I was told was 90ug but it felt way stronger. The come up was intense yet beautiful and euphoric. I was zooming thru the street and I felt hyper aware of all the cars and my surroundings. Was making good time and I was so happy with life. Had my music blasting, the wind in my face, the weather was beautiful, the sky was gorgeous. Life was perfect. 

Then I asked myself “why did I do this?”. That’s when everything took a turn for the worst. I started going down the rabbit hole of my pattern of addictions and compulsive habits. Why couldn’t I just do deliveries sober? Why can’t I just BE sober. The thoughts were making me so depressed and the first thought after the depression hit was “damn I need some weed”. Then I started questioning, why was that the first thought I had when I get sad? Why did I immediately crave a substance. I came to the conclusion that my brain was broken. 

It was as if someone else came inside my brain and told me that I was a broken boy, and it broke me. 

Once I told myself that I was a broken child. I broke down crying as if my mom had just died, right on the sidewalk. Full ugly crying. Really cringy stuff. I didn’t even realize I had reached my destination, the customer had been watching me thru their window and came outside and asked if that was her food on my handle bar. I looked up, puffy eyes, snotty nose and all, and just handed her the food. She asked if I was okay and I said that I was, I told her I had a death in the family and she gave her condolences. She also gave me a really nice tip. 

Afterwards, as if it were a metaphor for life, I just had to wipe my tears and keep on going. That pain from that revelation left a permanent scar on my brain and I went the rest of day feeling that pain in my chest but I had to muscle thru it. It was a difficult emotional trip and I cried many times after that. I FaceTimed my closest friends for support and they all gave really nice motivational speeches. 

I concluded that I really have to take a break from all types of drugs and find out what it is inside myself that I am running from. I gotta heal myself man. I’m broken but I’m only 20 I have time to glue myself back together. 

If you had the attention span to make it thru all of this I love and envy you because I sure wouldn’t.Hey guys, just wanted your opinion on whats going on with my drug dealer and if he's lost it.

So I meet my dealer at his place, everything cool. This guy is a bit weird but I've gotten used to him. He has these weird posters just spread all around his room, he's also a huge germ freak, literally tells me to wash my hands as I enter. So we start talking about stuff, how I've been etc. regular chit chat. Then out of the nowhere he tells me to take my fucking pants off. I'm like "what the fuck are you on?" He says something like "What do you mean? This is what I do to everyone". Now, I've seen him a few times, he has never acted this erratically, I'm starting to freak out a bit since I don't know what the fuck is going on. I start to pack my shit up while he's trying to calm me down. I'm like aight, let's not judge a book by it's cover or the couple first chapters and hope he doesn't do any weird shit. Then he LITERALLY (and I'm not using this word to exaggerate by any means) takes his fingers and tries to shove them in my mouth, this shit has gone too far. I'm bailing on him, left my fucking backpack over there as well, glad I didn't have anything valuable in there. Never going to the doctors again.I bet it's a lot of things people take for granted but yesterday I got some enchroma glasses because I am very badly colourblind.

When I put them on everything got enlighted and things went from almost black and white to so many nyances and colours.

&#x200B;

Today I lit up a blunt and was tripping hard as fuck, when I realized that I had my glasses in my backpack. I took them on and damn dude. Never have I seen something that beautiful.

&#x200B;

I just walked around high as fuck just like I was on LSD for the first time because everything looked dramaticly different. Now that I have had them for over a day my eyes has gotten really comfortable with them.

&#x200B;

I hope that if anyone's reading this, get yourselves some enchroma glasses and light up a J. I am so amazed

&#x200B;

EDIT: WOW thanks for all the upvotes guys I really wasn't expecting this!! I'm sure there is a lot of people on here that are colourblind that know about this now because of you :DAs of yesterday I’m six months clean from meth. I’ve been addicted to heroin as well but that was a while ago. 

My former meth dealer is very aware of my sobriety and although I’ve obviously stopped buying from her, we’ve remained in contact and are friends now. I’m in my early 20s and she’s in her late 30s and she’s weirdly become kind of a mother figure. She cares about my sobriety, asks how I’m doing, and I know for a fact wouldn’t sell to me if I asked. She’s a shitty dealer but a great person, because she cares too much about people. 

But she congratulated me on six months of being clean today. She said, and I quote, “I’m super proud of you [...] I don’t have many opportunities to have people in my life to have pride for”. I teared up, for real. 

Ironically, my former dealer is one of the most important people that’s helped me maintain my sobriety.

Edit: This is the first message she sent me

“Happy happy sober anniversary toooo uuuuuuu!!! Happy soberanninversart tooooo uuiuuui happy sober anniversaryyyyyy deeerrarest [my name] haaaaaaaaapppppppppy sober anniversary tooooooooooooooo uuuuuuuuuuuuuu,!!!!!!

........ AND MAAAANNNNNYYYYYY MOOOOOIIIRRRRRRREEEEE CHACHACHA”Shit was amazing.

I hit up my guy I knew through highschool and he hooked me up with bath salts. After my long shift at work, I went home and got comfortable. Opened up the product and put it in my bath tub. The stuff smells amazing, helps detox and relieves muscle pain.

Idk why the media is against it and all. It's harmless!So this just happened, I was at 711 getting a pack of cigarettes and they guy ahead of me is buying like 5 cans of whipped cream. The woman behind the counter comments something like "that is a lot of whipped cream." and he just responds with a totally serious voice "daddy likes his cream" then pays and leaves. As he turned around I got a good look at his face and his pupils were like fucking saucers. By far the funniest and strangest thing I have seen in a convenience store. I couldn't contain my laughter.  1. I once read "there's nothing in real life that really compares to drugs" and its true. You find happiness in other things, but no, nothing is as awe inspiring as that third tab of acid or rail of good coke.

2. When it stops being fun, stop. My meth addiction started with a few amazing months where I'd use once a week. I should have left it there. 4 years later I was fucked up beyond repair.  When you start thinking its going too far, just quit.

3. Nicotine is the hardest drug to quit. And I still have not succeeded.

4. Psychedelics are the best, but you have to be in the right setting and frame of mind. A bad trip is no fun, so never do acid or shrooms if you feel unsure 

5. Weed is not harmless. 

6. Addiction is a slow creeping thing. Know the warning signs to stop it taking hold. If you like sniffing limes once a week or once a month, if you start doing it on other days to, thats the first sign its taking hold 

7. If you are going to trip, keep a benzo on hand. I once read "theres no way to stop a bad trip", yes there is.

8. Go to Amsterdam at least once in your life

9. Dont risk your job or family to get high, you will probably stop using drugs eventually, but you will always need a job and family

10. Never smoke synthetic cannabisYour mind is the pencil, and sharpening a pencil is a good idea sometimes.
But it can only be sharpened to a certain point. 

From that point on, you can still keep sharpening (and probably will), but the only thing that changes is how much pencil you're gonna have left.

... that sick analogy was brought to you by: 
Amphetamines™I don't know why I feel the need to write this, this is my new account since I've taken a pause from reddit, but have a need to share this in hope some of you youngsters won't make the same mistakes I did.

From 2010 to 2020, I used alcohol, tobacco, weed, amphetamine sulphate, MDMA, mushrooms, LSD, methamphetamine, cocaine, DOM, 25iNBOMe, bromazepam, diazepam, alprazolam, flurazepam, phenibut, modafinil, 4-AcO-DMT, N,N-DMT, codeine, oxycodone, morphine, diamorphine (heroin), tramadol, and methadone.

Of all the drugs, the one I abused the most is the one most people find least dangerous - weed. Often times, the drug you find least dangerous will get the most out of you. 

So the first advice would be, from personal experience; don't disrespect cannabis' ability to cause you psychological, emotional and financial damage. It's wonderful when you have your shit together, but if you buy into the whole sMoKe WeEd AlL dAy shit, I promise, at one point it can and will bite you in the ass. Out of all the money I spent on drugs (all of the above), more than 95% was on weed. Food for thought.

Stay clear from tobacco. If you tried it and like the nicotine high, get the patches or at least vape it.

If you're drinking alcohol, drink water after every couple of shots and you won't feel nearly as hungover tomorrow.

Regarding psychedelics, I feel most of you lurkers here know by now that set and setting is the key. Don't try to one up your buddies (or yourself) because stuff like LSD is really unforgiving if you don't respect it. Unlike some other stuff, the difference between 50ug, 100ug and 200ug doses raises the effects exponentially. If you're not an every day smoker, DON'T smoke weed until after the peak. Same goes for mushrooms and even Shulgin's novel psychedelics such as DOx type of drugs.

Stimulants. If you're using meth or speed, stay clear from compulsive redosing. Keep doses at least 2 hours in between. Don't stay up for more than two nights in a row, because psychosis starts on the 3rd night 9 out of 10 times (auditory and visual hallucinations, paranoid delusions etc.). 
Invest in antioxidants like alpha lipoic acid, vitamin C(both dirt cheap), multivitamin pills etc. and drink water (but not more than 500mL/hour!!).
And most importantly, have some landing gear (benzos e.g.).

Stuff like meth is notorious for not letting you sleep for up to 18h after the euphoria has worn off, so a few Xanax pills will always come in handy.

Opioids. Simply put; don't do them every day. For every day you use, don't use for more than a couple of days. Ideally, enjoy them every week if you are so inclined to do them (which I do not condone). Addiction is a no brainer here, but what isn't is stuff like CONSTIPATION. Get some Milk of magnesia or a couple of magnesium pills and lots od water, and some antihistamines because some opioids (like heroin) can make you REALLY itchy.

Benzos. They come in handy as landing gear for stimulants and LSD and synergize well with weed, but please, PLEASE don't use them regurarly, I've seen people fall into deep despair because of benzo addiction. You can die from benzo WD, so before you try any of them, read some stories from r/benzorecovery , and you will see what I'm talking about.

MDMA. Best high of all the drugs, and this is coming from someone who used to do IV speedballs. Space out your rolls, and please, PLEASE, don't do more than 2.5mg/kg in a session. Check out www.rollsafe.org and u/Borax , he has a great guide on how to minimize the damage and maximize the high (just type "borax guide mdma" into google and click the first link). Regardless of how much you space out the rolls, DON'T CHASE THE DRAGON, it will never be as good as your first time you hit the golden zone.

DOSAGE, DOSAGE, DOSAGE!

It makes the difference between having a good time and being a mess, or even dying.

Buy a miligram scale and 

TEST YOUR DRUGS.

If you can spend $200 for an 8ball of blow but not $20 on test kits, you are putting yourself in danger of doing something laced with potentially hazardous/deadly stuff like fentanyl.

Also, check out www.psy.is for more info on almost all drugs that have been used.

Stay safe people, and have fun. If you have any questions PM me.

Edit: added some stuff I forgotI have just about nine months of sobriety from Xanax/benzo addiction and today I found a bag of 10 clonazolams in my room. This is the first time this go round of getting clean that I’ve found or been in contact with my drug of choice. This is the longest time of sobriety I’ve had and as tempting as it was to get high I know better than to throw it all away. It felt good to give the bag to my dad telling him what happened and to flush them. Making the right choices makes me feel better than any drug could 

Edit: thank you everyone for the support it means the world!! ❤️❤️❤️Firstly, thank you all so much for your replies on my original post. I've thought a lot about our addiction. I've accepted that the blame lies with both of us, and I was wrong to dismiss the fact that I was enabling it. My girlfriend and I talked about it, both apologised to each other. Now we are 2 weeks clean today. I never thought I could enjoy life without it, but I do. I have more time to do things, I don't feel like shit from the moment I wake up, and I'm starting to enjoy non-drug activities more and more. We made a gingerbread house yesterday. I won't lie and say it's been easy, because it fucking hasn't, but it's been worth it. I feel like I'm slowly getting my life back.www.erowid.org is one of the best known resources for information on drugs, and rightly so. It has remained stable and available for 25 years, hosted on privately owned servers with a deep care about ensuring its information is always  ready for curious minds to access.

This September Erowid has been running a doubled fundraising campaign, where donations from the public are being matched by benefactors to double the impact of contributions. With just 24 hours to go, they have received 280 fewer donations than last year and are [asking friends of Erowid to make a last minute push.](https://erowid.org/sept_drive) **Even small donations will be doubled.**

I asked the erowid crew for a little blurb to detail some of their current projects (alongside running the world's biggest database of experience reports including for [obscure drugs](https://erowid.org/experiences/subs/exp_6APB.shtml) and this is what they sent over:

---

 For 25 years, millions of people have relied on Erowid: for honest
info about psychoactive plants & chemicals; for visionary archiving;
for lab drug checking (via DrugsData.org); and for an unbiased view
of the risks and benefits of these fascinating substances.

We're excited about the successful expansion of our [DrugsData](https://www.drugsdata.org/) lab
drug-checking program, the only one of its kind in the US. We test
drug samples submitted by the public and publish what's in them.
There's been a rise in opioid related overdoses and deaths in 2020,
so we're doing more testing of street heroin and opioids (in addition
to normal samples of ecstasy, LSD blotter, ketamine, etc), in order
to help those working on the front lines of this health crisis.

Archiving projects have been a challenge during the pandemic, but
we're excited to have a new crew member on board working on prepping
documents from the [Stolaroff Archives](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Myron_Stolaroff) for publication.
Contributions are down during Pandemic2020. Even small donations help!
To donate or to see drive progress:
https://erowid.org/sept_driveIf motherfucking Steve O can be as sane as he is right now, you can do it too if you just try hard enough.

&nbsp;

Edit:
I didnt mean to say: its fine, go do more drugs, but rather: 

dont tell yourself: "there's no point in trying to get clean because my brain is fucked anyway"

If you are ready and you really want it you can do it.*(Disclaimer: I haven't tried all of these drugs. This is just a joke based on what I've read, and my own experiences with some of them.)*

The party is hosted by Amphetamine, who decided to reunite everyone after being awake for 52 hours. He wants to know absolutely *everything* about everyone as they arrive. He bought and prepared enough food to feed everyone for a month, but refuses to eat anything.

MDMA is the life of the party, running round the house like a maniac making friends with everyone. She eventually gives out way too much personal information about herself. She's annoyed at Alcohol because he keeps waving a hand in her face and asking what it looks like. She also commandeers the aux cord the entire time.

Alcohol is generally sociable and tells everyone his opinions on controversial issues without them asking. As the night goes on, he showcases some horrible dance moves. He also thinks everyone is LSD and keeps waving a hand in their faces.

Weed is chilling in the corner on a beanbag chair. He reeeeeeeeeeeally wants some Doritos.

Cocaine is doing the same thing as MDMA, but he's kind of cocky about it. He disappears to the bathroom every hour. He also  insists that the party should go on for three more days.

Meth is furiously rearranging the books on the shelves, coming up with analogies for how good meth is, and attempting to tell people his entire life story without taking a breath. No one really understands anything he says.

LSD thinks she's explaining the human consciousness to Adderall, but she's actually just talking about her third eye seeing every colour at once. Adderall is pretending to be interested, but he's visibly distressed and wants to get away from the situation because he hasn't jacked off in ten minutes.

Shrooms is walking around discovering how the model of human consciousness is inherently connected to the linear flow of time. The tempo of the song changes and now his model of human consciousness is collapsing and he's ready to accept death.

25i-NBOMe is frantically asking everyone why he doesn't feel the same as LSD does. People suggest that it could be because he wasn't actually invited into the party, and that his invitation was a fake one sold by a shady looking guy who disappeared straight after.

Ketamine would like to socialise, but he can't move and he's not sure if he exists on the same plane as everyone else. PCP made a brief appearance, but he jumped out the second story window because he heard a car alarm in the distance and thinks they're coming for him. 3-MeO-PCP is still here, but he's too embarrassed to introduce himself in case people think he's PCP.

~~DXM~~ *Lean* is in the bathroom taking selfies while holding an empty bottle of cough syrup. He really wants to put some trap rap on the speaker system, but MDMA has already queued up 15 Monstercat songs. **Ninja edit:** *I confused DXM and lean, my bad.*

Xanax is upstairs, rooting through the drawers for shit to steal. People are trying to distract Alcohol so he doesn't go upstairs and see Xanax, because those two never get along.

Heroin is nodding off on the couch. Oxycodone and Hydrocodone are sat next to him, both thinking "phew, glad I'm not *that* guy".

Kratom didn't show up because she's on the run from the DEA.

----

**EDIT:** *Double gold, holy shit.*I went over to my dad's to do some yard work for him (as partial repayment because he helps me financially). Soon after I got there, he made a comment saying "You look like you need exercise." I replied "What are you trying to say?" He said "You look weak" and I responded "You don't have to be a dick."

I moved out of his place 6 months ago. Six months prior, I moved back in with him after living on my own for a while, so I lived with him for the majority of 2019. During that time, I was using meth, but he didn't know. I'm 6'3" and while I was living with him, I weighed about 170 lbs (BMI of 21). The least I ever weighed while I was using was 145 lbs (BMI of 18.1). But in November, I quit using, and in December I moved out. Since then, I've gained about solid 20 lbs (so 190 lbs, BMI of 23.5). Only one pair of pants I have fit anymore, but I'm glad I'm no longer skin and bones like I used to be. I used to look **bad**.

But my dad doesn't know about any of my drug use. So I couldn't exactly say "Hey, at least I'm not doing meth and weighing 145 lbs anymore. At least I'm at a healthy BMI."

Then he said some bullshit about whether I could still beat him at arm wrestling, and I said I probably could, and then I did so just to prove a point. But ultimately, I'm still pretty upset about the whole thing. I'm feeling more self conscious about my weight now, but I'm 3 days away from being 7 months clean, and I'd rather feel self conscious than be back on meth.

Edit: to address the comments (because there’s a lot more than I expected and it’s easier to just make an edit instead of replying to each individually) -

Overall I’m pretty comfortable with my body. I know I’m at a healthy BMI. I know that I’m healthier now than I was, even if I’ve gained a little bit around my waist. Obviously my dad doesn’t know I was so skinny because I was on meth, so in his eyes, I’ve just put on weight since being in quarantine and I should exercise and stay in shape. I understand where he’s coming from and I don’t really hold it against him. It may have been kind of a dick-ish thing to say, but I am glad that I can say it’s probably the shittiest thing he’s ever said to me, ever. Which really isn’t bad at all, compared to a lot of shit that people’s parents tell them regularly. He’s honestly a good dad, he’s just got some old-fashioned ideals sometimes. But ultimately I’m not letting it get to me, and I’m doing fine with maintaining my sobriety. I’m planning on exercising just for my own physical health, but I doubt I’ll ever get as skinny as I used to be, but that’s okay. 

Thank you everyone for the kind words and support. It’s always appreciated. And for everyone else who is working on staying clean as well, best of luck to you all as well. I have no doubt you can do it.I don't have an addictive personality, I've done plenty of drugs in my time, Opiates, psychs and stims, but from all of them the hardest to not use is Weed.

I don't know, maybe it's the ease of it. Maybe its the high, or just the mentality, but I find weed my most crippling drug. If I have it, I'm going to want to light up. Not only that, the entire weed culture has this "smoke weed every day" mentality that if it were applied to any other drug would be ridiculous. 

Maybe "Smoke Crack Every Day" doesn't have the same ring, but there is nothing healthy or sane about being baked every day. 
-
If there's something I've learned throughout my drug-ventures is that you should appreciate sobriety, learn moderation and love life entirely, not only when you're high. 
Addictive in nature, not physicality. Just my two cents.

EDIT: A lot of the criticisms of my post is that people can take breaks easily, my point is that when we have weed we tend to get high every day, no days off, and that if that were applied to most other drugs you would be condemned as an addict. There's a mentality cultivated around weed that being high every day is an okay thing. I am not Anti-Weed, I think in moderation it is a low risk and well enjoyable drug. But any drug that is habitually used daily is not something healthy, and definitely doesn't scream non-addictive.I remember when my mom found out I was smoking. I was 15. She said she told my dad and I was going to his house because it was his weekend to have us. Needless to say I was scared shitless. I got to my dads and eventually my dad said "let's go out front for a cigarette." Now I'm sure my life is over. We sit down and he says "your mother said you've been smoking weed" I say ya as there is no point in lying. He reaches in his pocket and pulls out a freshly loaded bowl and says "let's smoke." I was shocked. When mom asked how it went I said he was beyond pissed. LolHow I love that question.

You go out for dinner with a colleague on a Saturday. It's a like-minded colleague, another one of the many guys and gals who steps outside of the boundaries of society once in a while. One that, like you, likes to play with the big kids. 

This evening your colleague has a friend with him. He's a cool enough guy and you hit it off instantly. The three of you chatter over dinner about the virus, climate, science, philosophy, politics and all that shit that no-one dares talking about during their lunch breaks. 

Pleasantly tipsy you leave the restaurant to hit the bars, shrugging away the cold of a dry February night. After having walked in silence for a minute or two the newfound friend suddenly pops the question. 

"So, do you do drugs?"

And you know that this evening is gonna get even better.People on this sub are always wondering why drug users are looked at so negatively by society. Like you don’t have to look far, for every one of you worried about harm reduction there is like 100-1000 idiots who are just like “fuck me up cuz” and willing to do some fucked shit for a little drug money.  

Seriously I hate to break it to y’all but drugs don’t generally attract the brightest and most wholesome bunch. Also people on this sub are complaining about how people trash meth and heroin but hype molly and cid. Like c’mon I love opiates just as much as the next dude but Iv never been robbed at knife point by a mdma fiend or lsd addict. Not to excuse the e-tards and fried fucking “psychonauts” Even Weed can attract a pretty trashy crowd.

 Fuck... maybe I am just trashing drug users on a drug forum and I’m gonna get mad downvotes but you all know these is truth to what I am saying. 

Honestly it’s not a drug problem it’s a people problem. People just fucking suck in general and drugs are just too good to handle for the majority of people. Myself included. Like I’m not acting like I’m above anyone I actually am a shitty person and drug addict but I’m working on bettering myself and I feel like Iv gained some insight from the past 7 years of being a druggie. 

So if you are one of the people that can handle their drugs... more power to you but in my opinion most people don’t have it in them. Again it’s nothing wrong with the drugs... it’s the people. And I don’t blame them I mean, drugs might be the best feeling and most interesting thing you can do with your brain at times. You've just come back from a piss, you sit down and observe your surroundings. 

Tim is still at it, putting together a Spotify playlist and has been for the last 48 minutes. Robert keeps going on about his architecture degree and can't stop looking over at Ben every 20 seconds. Ben is struggling to cut the lines up quick enough for the boys. However, Benjamin is a man of quality and I know that the next line will go up my left nostril nice and smooth.

Marvin resumes his conversation with me and talks about his prospects with betting on horse races. I smile and agree, not having a clue how it works, but he takes the time to explain and it's quite interesting. However, his Sportsbet transactions would suggest he's not the greatest gambler to grace this earth. I ain't seen Dave in a while, which is strange because he put the most money in for the cocaine. 

My neck is sore, probably because it's been snapping back and forth trying to focus on everyone and what they're doing and trying to say.

My coked-up ego needs refuelling, I sit back and think about what I should say next, let's have another beer and line first though. It's only been 3 minutes since I've returned from a piss.My girlfriend and I have been together for about 4 years now. She's 22 and always been the introverted type so she never had lots of friends to go do stupid shit with. She decided she wanted to fight wild fires this year. She made a new group of friends there. I've always been the weekend warrior kind of guy stimulants during the work week, alcohol strictly on weekends.
Her crew go out and party almost every night. So she goes to. I'm cool with her making new friends, but seriously getting smashed every other night? Anyways last night she stayed out about 1 am. I woke up to a knock at my door I wasn't sure I imagined it but I herd it again. I went and flipped on the light and cracked the door open. It was a guy she worked with ,he said she was in the car. I walked up and she was so shit faced. Head peaked out the passenger side back door of the car with a big pile a vomit. 
I picked her vomit covered ass up and carried her inside. I put her by the toilet to keep dry heaving. I'm trying to get her clothes off but I'm struggling with her pats as she's not even able to stand on her own. Another wave of dry heaving over comes her and it starts to stink! 
I look down t see a puddle of piss on the floor. I said omg did you just shit yourself. Right then she sits up laughing and two soft served chunks plop out from her panties. She tries to stand with her pants around he ankles and they fall right onto the shit and the see proceeds to smear it all over the fucking floor as more is coming out. It looked like a fucking murder sean and the smell made me powerless to even be there without dry heaving. 
I put my shirt around my face and sprayed some fabreeze. I guided her to the tub and sprayed her off with the shower head. I got the weirdest semi chub. I'm not fucking proud of that. It was like getting a boner to two girls and a cup. I poured a bath and fucking cleaned that bathroom like my life depended on it. Surprisingly she got up and went to work this morning at 8am. I wonder if she will remember anything. I will never let her live this one down.I was taking out the trash at work when a needle poked me through the bag into my thigh. I immediately left and went to the hospital. Now as a precautionary I have to take pills for the next 28 days and get tested every so often for the next 6 months to see if I get HIV or not. Also had to get a HEP B booster shot thing. I’m 20 years old with a newborn son. I shouldn’t be subjected to some persons drug use. I don’t judge addicts. I was addicted to prescription pills and I’ve been sober for almost 2 years after doing impatient rehab but fucking please for the love of fuck. Don’t shoot up in public bathrooms where people bring their children. Dispose of your shit properly. I go to work to feed my family and provide a roof over our heads. I shouldn’t have to worry about this shit.Lately I've been splurging on crack/cocaine. I've spent nearly 1000 or more just these past two months. I don't know how, but I always end up going back to it. Especially since it's so easy to get in my neighborhood. 

Now I'm broke, jobless, no car, and just don't know what to do... so I  broke my glass pipe on purpose. And I moved out of my neighborhood to stay with my family. 

Wish me luck. I really need it.

EDIT: My dealers keep hitting me up. I have gotten a job interview at a fast food place and have kept ignoring my dealers and anyone associated with that substance. Still living with family. So my family had started renting this house that was previously lived in by my aunt. They were replacing a window AC unit when they found a little zip up bag down in the wall. Inside the bag was a little vial full of grey powder, and the vial had a little charm hanging off of it. Now the thing about my brother was that he loved drugs and was down to try pretty much anything, but my mom was very adamant when she told him “do NOT fucking touch that, we have no idea what’s in there”. Anyway my mom goes to work the next day and my bro snorts a little bit, waits a while and when nothing happens he snorts a little more. He gives up on it when once again, no effects. My mom gets home and tells us that she called our aunt and asked her what that little vial was. My aunt said “oh that was Sheri”. Sheri was my aunts dead girlfriend, and those were her ashes that my bro railed! My brother erupts in full belly laughter and my mom is horrified when she finds out why. So yeah test your stuff people, cause it might be people.

Edit: I just want to say thanks to everyone for saying kind words and making me laugh with your jokes. I love this community. 
I’ll also update this post when more info is revealed about the cause of death etc.TLDR: it can't be told in shorter version, sorry to my lazy fellas


Few weeks ago one guy, let's call him Crusader, who we used to smoke with in school in past, texted me "let's hang out". It was like 10am, I didn't have classes that day so I replied "come to our flat"

Crusader comes by, we roll a joint and he asks what's up with my flat mate, let's call him MrBucket "he was at concert last night and he is not feeling well". Crusader then comes up with little prank "dude let's give him line of caffein and tell him it's cocaine, he is still fcked up, he won't notice and maybe get placebo". After some more brainstorming how to do it, like what to say if MrBucket asks where we get it, we managed to make 2 lines on phone. Now it starts to get more complicated.

I took picture of the lines and sent it to 3rd flate mate, let's call him Italiano, who was supposed to come from school in like 30 minutes. He instantly replied "wtf why are you making lines of caffeine?". I replied "dude Crusader came by and we want to prank MrBucket with this "cocaine", when you arrive play it along and snort as well, let's see if he gets placebo". But Crusader was not aware I'm texting with Italiano.

So me and Crusader wake up MrBucket with "cocaine", after 10 mins of assuring it's really cocaine, we already had it and it's legit good, he snots it as well and even tho he doesn't fully believe us, he was hoping it's really cocaine. After 10 more minutes, he is still kinda on a fence if it was real or not becouse of light hangover. But Crusader decides to tell him the truth. MrBucket immediately gets a great idea "yo Italiano will come in just a while, leave the second line for him".

Italiano came just a few minutes later and MrBucket tells him "dude they have cocaine and it's fire, you have to try it", while Italiano knows it's caffeine but thinks MrBucket believes it so he plays along, snort it and goes "yo that's good shit". Crusader is laughing becouse he thinks he pranked both, MrBucket becouse he pranked Italiano, Italiano becouse he thinks we pranked MrBucket, and I'm sitting there trying to wrap my head around what is happening.

And that's how 4 dudes where in the end snorting caffeine, fully aware it's just caffeine, while pretending on each other it's cocaine.[These](https://i.redd.it/87yredgdnuh41.jpg) are drug advertisements in Norway. 

Imagine the world we'd live in if every country adopted such a forward, educational, harm reducing approach instead of fear mongering and paranoia.I was at a party last night and was talking to some folk about Ketamine. I'd had 200mg two nights ago so I'd had a real wonky time and I was telling them about how fun it is. 

Friend of mine overheard this conversation and started giving me the usual spiel you get from people about how all drugs are bad and they'll all kill you etc. I didn't want to argue so I just calmly explained to him that I use 5 different testing reagents and an anti-fentanyl test, know how the substance works, have done it before so I know what to expect and that I know what I'm doing.

This didn't convince him at all so I just changed the topic. The punchline here is that an hour later the exact same friend was literally out-for-the-count unconscious on the ground because he'd had far too much alcohol. Just alcohol and nothing else. I went through to the kitchen to grab some vodka and I found him on the ground, being attended to by a few people who had rolled him into the recovery position and were holding a bucket to collect his vomit. 

It blows my mind how hypocritical people can be when it comes to alcohol, they can wax lyrical until they're blue in the face about how they'll never touch drugs because of all the heinous damage it does to their bodies, but they're completely blind to the amount of damage they'll do to themselves just by having too much booze. 

I woke up yesterday morning after my k-hole trip feeling extremely grateful and happy about my life. I felt completely serene and at peace, taking time to appreciate all the little things I have in my life, feeling a deep inner tranquillity.

I woke up today with a throbbing headache, a throat like sandpaper and some unsettling nausea in my stomach. 

Hangover from alcohol versus the remnants of a k-hole? Give me the K any day of the week. I've got zero time for all these hypocritical blowhards who think they stand atop Mount Pious for never doing drugs, but will fuck themselves up just as much with alcohol.

Stay wonky everyone.

Edit: wow this blew up. Cheers to all the folk who misread the post and are calling me a weirdo for doing ket at a party, also big shout-out to all the folk giving me shit saying this is /r/drugscirclejerk material, I've just written a true account of what happened to me, not my fault it got thousands of upvotes. Might delete this soon.Hey yeah so I was peaking on a tab of acid and a dose of MDMA at the same time and decided to jerk it. I actually came pretty quickly, somehow, and it was the most intense experience of my life. I saw the future of each of my unborn sons and daughters, all  thousands of them, watched them grow up and get jobs and start families and die. I watched the generations after them grow and die as my family tree of nut grew and twisted in a fractal pattern. I was crying at this point, and the climax lasted what felt like an eternity. My entire body was replaced with pleasure. Even a DMT trip couldn’t compare to this nut.

Anyways, came to and had a brown sugar cinnamon Pop-tart afterword. I didn’t know who to tell so I’m putting this burden on you guys!Was supposed to get some reading done for class, so I pop an 20mg XR around 1pm to help me focus. Decide I want to 'warm up' a bit so I pull open some random sexy literature to enjoy... 

Suddenly I'm flying through whole chapters - nay - WHOLE BOOKS of deliciously lustful writings. Who even writes all this shit anyway? Are people being compensated for this beautifully arousing filth?

Such questions enter my head as I browse for another story, but they quickly disappate. My brain needs to commit 100% of its resources to creating a heavenly synthesis with my dick. The speed of each pump falls into perfect correspondence with the intensity of the scene currently unravelling on the screen and in my debauched mind. Speed-fueled concentrated willpower maintains an unnatural level of arousal for hours, simultaneously maximizing pleasure and longativity. Evey neuron is committed, cooperating; every nerve from brain stem to foreskin perfectly working towards the glorious carnal project without a single slip up. It may not seem like it from the outside, but a delicate balancing act is occurring as I fervantly beat my dick. 

I have lost track of time. Such a frivolous thing has no meaning in the land of sin. Same with food, which has become redundant as I am now powered by pleasure and speed. Grandma calls. Reject, phone mute, get back to coaxing the perfect amount of Cowper's fluid out of my penis.

Darkness has fell, but I push on. Erodica is still being consumed, each act of desire coagulating into the rapidly growing zygote of an orgasm. Each story, each hour, building on top of the last in a pyramid that reaches all the way to heavens: Busting the Ultimate Nut. 

I have prepared for this, yet my sense of self had dissolved. All that mattered was scaling those steps towards the promise land. The time is right. The scripture brings good omens. Its time for the final push.

The Eyes closed but that made them more open than ever. Jaw clenched, Muscles contracted, Breath held. The order arrived to The Right Hand: full speed ahead. The Body was coiled like a spring, ready to burst out.

The Penis had been worked last exhaustion, but tapped into the last power he had to complete The Ascension.

Colors flash through The Eyes, a terrible primal groan escapes The curled Lips as The Central Nervous System sends electrifying currents of pleasure to every centimeter of my corporeal form. The spring has been released, and cum flys everywhere: my pants, my shirt, my desk, my computer, my arms, the floor, everywhere.

Yet a flood of relief overcomes me. 

Relief, followed by pain. 

My brain rapidly reallocates it's resources to resume normal prioritization. My dick is bleeding. It's almost 2am. I haven't done any work. I won't get enough sleep. My dick is bleeding. I'm covered in my own cum. What the fuck was I reading. There's cum everywhere. Shame. Grandma. My dick is bleeding.

In my manic rampage I managed to tear my dick skin a little and it hurts like hell if I touch it. I'm going to have a fuckin dick scab for God's sake, AND I'm going to have to go class tired af with none of the reading done. The only upside is that I answered my questions about the authors of erodica with this after action report.  Well I admit the nutting part was pretty fun too.

TLDR: Jerking off on Adderall is too fun so you'll do it all day


Edit: Wow I see this was popular. Now my new alt account has gold. Thank you to everyone who expressed their enjoyment with my little story, it has this shameful incident into almost something I can be proud of (*almost*). Too bad I can litterally never show this to anyone I know lolBut it's harder to get your shit together when you abuse drugs. There's a fine line between using and abusing drugs. The main difference between use and abuse is that drug abuse keeps you from getting your shit together and/or keeping your shit together. There isn't an objective checklist for 'having your shit together'. It's personal to each individual. For me, having my shit together means taking care of my living space, my personal health, my finances, relationships, my job, and my overall mental health. Once drugs start to seriously fuck with these things I've crossed the line. 

These areas of my life will never be perfect. I could be totally sober, meditate, and listen to Ted Talks every day and still easily fuck my life up. I can waste an entire day on Reddit, eating tacos, and watching Nicholas Cage movies. Those days happen. Sometimes I lose the battle but still win the 'Keeping my shit together' war by not letting it really fuck up my life. Just like how somebody can drop acid occasionally and come back with their shit in tact. 

It takes brutal honesty to objectively look at your drug use and ask, 'Is this hurting me?' There's a tradeoff with everything we do. It's very easy to trade everything in to get high. Most people think of drug addicts as people that are willing to sacrifice anything and everything to get high. Fuck health, money, friends, and ambitions I just want heroin. Addiction is a spectrum and most people aren't at that extreme end of it. Most people addicted to drugs can hold a job, pay their bills, etc but the trade-off is time, emotional well-being, and relationships. If I spend a lot of time being high then I am giving up my life to drugs. My disposable income goes to the dealer. My family can be ignored. In small but significant chunks I lose my shit. 

Then I feel guilty about my drug abuse. It started out fun but I traded in my tolerance for an hour of serenity.

If my life is balanced and I have my shit together, I can still use drugs and actually feel good about it. Low tolerance means it takes less to get the desired effect. The magic and euphoria comes back. They enhance experiences and make me feel grateful. I feel pride in my ability to navigate this fucked up world. 

&#x200B;

BRB going to do the dishes ;)20m. 

As a person who had been abusing fentanyl and meth for years, I can say being 100% honest is the only way you will recover. You have already started by browsing on here looking for perspective. 
Everyone uses for different reasons, just get real with yourself. Start questioning your actions and intentions. You must understand what influences your choices. Is it your environment?  An escape from reality? Is it the need for attention?
Once you have found the variable, you can take control of it. 

 I overdosed after smoking too much fentanyl, in an alley. A fellow homeless man walking by seen my body on the pavement, pale and life less. Thankfully, he went to get help. The Man gave me back my life.

After the incident. I wanted to get off the streets.  So I started taking action. Step by step. As I progressed on, I developed a sense of direction. With that sense of direction, came purpose. 

At the end of the day you make the decisions, ONLY YOU CAN SAVE YOURSELF.

5 years later: 

 I am 1.5 years clean

 I have a part-time job

 I got accepted into university for nuclear physics

 I'm currently patching things up with my family

I CAN IMAGINE A FUTUREMore from Andrew:

> "I’ve been looking into it.  A couple other countries have taken this step and it has improved public health.  Portugal decriminalized these drugs in 2001; if caught with a small amount of opiates, you have the drugs taken away and are referred to treatment and counseling.  This had dramatic positive effects—today, the drug-related death rate in Portugal is five times lower than the E.U. average and one-fiftieth (2%) of the US.  Portugal is not the US.  But its example may be helpful.  

> **We have an addiction crisis on our hands.  More than 11 million Americans are addicted to opiates right now.  8 Americans are dying of drug overdoses every hour.**  

>For many Americans, the **progression goes from Oxycontin to heroin to fentanyl, progressively cheaper ways to get similar effects**.  This opiate crisis began when **Purdue Pharma flooded the market with enough Oxycontin** for hundreds of thousands of Americans under the pretense that it was a non-addictive painkiller.  **They were fined $635 million by the government for fraudulent marketing.  But they made $30 billion**.  That means they paid a 2% fine for unleashing a plague that is killing tens of thousands of Americans each year. That's more Americans than died in the Vietnam War.  

>To me, the Federal Government screwed up by turning a blind eye when Purdue Pharma was initiating this plague.  We should do everything in our power to give more Americans a fighting chance to free themselves from addiction and get well.  It is destroying families and communities before our eyes.  

>It is possible that criminalizing opiates decreases access and use.  But **for a public health crisis of this magnitude, the criminal justice system seems to be a terrible first resort**.  It pushes a lot of the activity underground and makes addicts more likely to hide their addiction.  **Addiction is a disease—you shouldn't criminalize people that you are trying to help.**  Especially when it may be partially your fault that they got addicted in the first place. 

>I am increasingly open to the idea that we should explore decriminalizing opiates to some extent in order to more effectively address the public health crisis.  **We have to face facts.  Millions of Americans are using these drugs right now.  The priority should be doing all we can to help, not punishing people and pushing the behavior into the dark.**  Portugal may have gotten it right."



**Note from me**: Andrew Yang is a longshot Democratic Presidential candidate, but has seen a sudden surge in support since his [Joe Rogan Podcast appearance](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cTsEzmFamZ8).  He is a champion of Universal Basic Income ($1K per month for every adult citizen of the US), to be paid for by implementing a VAT tax and making sure that corporations like [Amazon won't get away with paying $0 in taxes in 2018 while posting $11.2 billion](https://finance.yahoo.com/news/amazon-taxes-zero-180337770.html).

I hope this at least piqued some of your interest in Andrew. He's laid out his entire platform of **more than 70 policies**, in detail, on his website: https://www.yang2020.com/policies. Some of these include:

* forgiving much of the $1.5 trillion in student debt, the only debt in the nation that is not forgivable via bankruptcy due to lobbyists
* full legalization of marijuana at the federal level (and releasing all prisoners of nonviolent marijuana-related crimes)
* instituting a White House mental health group (to monitor the mental health of the executive branch, as well as destigmatize mental health issues in general)
* Illegalize robocalls
* Human-centered capitalismNight before last I snorted an eyeballed amount of 4-ACO-DMT. I was watching Mad Men when I noticed that I was moving my finger around in my mouth, the warmth and wetness felt amazing on my finger and I couldn't stop. Eventually I started drooling and decided to start spitting on my shirt because of how good the warm wetness felt. It was kinda cold in my room.

I suddenly noticed that I had to piss, and got one of the weirdest thoughts I've ever had. I stripped down and got into the shower and start pissing all over myself. I swear to God I heard police sirens in the background because what I was doing felt so wrong. But I simply cannot deny how good it felt. 

10/10 I totally reccomend.Me and my homies were all smoking and naturally we all have the munchies so we decided we were gonna treat ourselves today.  

Since were all high as balls, we also wanted to be entertained this time as well.  We decide to hit up the Shogun Japanese steakhouse, yknow one of those places where they got the chef doing the crazy tricks throwing shrimp in they hat and shit.

Anyways we’re all having a great time just waiting for the chef to come out and of course we get some random people to fill up the table, 2 different couples and some of their friends.  They’re all drinking but none of us could because we were all 18 and 19.  So now this was a table filled with stoners and drunks.  

The chef comes out and he’s doing his usual routine and then he makes a comment saying “Ay you guys are all high aren’t ya, don’t lie to me”. And we all just started busting out laughing, we probably all looked fried af just waiting for that food to get on our plates.  

After that happened he said “Let’s get a competition going for who’s better at catching shrimp, drinkers vs you smokers”. So he started off by flipping the shrimp off the spatula down the line to all the drunk people and not a single one of them were able to catch it.  Then it was the stoners turn to go down the line, one after another were kobeing them mfs in our mouths, not a single miss.  

TLDR: Weed gives you food catching skillsHe was found passed out in his bed he was a meth head. They're doing an autopsy; I cant process what happened, one of the last things he said to me was "One day youll make a better father than me" sorry if this isnt the right spot for this I just need to vent.

*edit* Just found out he was also addicted to heroin it just breaks my heart.This is great news. MAPS is entering "phase three" of its studies on MDMA as a medicine for PTSD. The early studies have been very successful, but small. Phase three is the final phase, and if the studies are successful, MDMA could become the first psychedelic, or substance with psychedelic qualities if you prefer, to be legalized as a medicine. They think they can make it happen by 2021. I really hope so, because I've personally seen MDMA positively change so many lives.

Check out their newsletter article about it. These folks have been working hard for decades to make this happen.
http://www.maps.org/news/update
So it’s a fine Monday morning. I was 19 years old and living with my girlfriend, she had work so I thought it would be a good day to solo trip. I take 3 tabs and sit waiting patiently, watching king of the hill waiting to come up. 40 minutes goes by and my boss is calling me. Now I have a good relationship with my boss, and sometimes we just talk about shit. Now you should know, I was a cook at the time and this is my chef. If you haven’t worked in a kitchen before, drug use isn’t uncommon and honestly expected.

“Hey chef what’s up?”

“Hey kid, can you come in right now? We have a buffet and Jim called out. Please come as quick as you can.”

“Chef I’m not gonna lie I just dropped acid.”

“What the fuck kid it’s 9am. So what? You can’t drive? I can pick you in 20 minutes.”

“Chef I’m about to start tripping soon. Are you sure...”

“I don’t care, I need you. Can you be ready in 20?”

“Yes chef I’ll be ready”

What the fuck did I just agree to? I jump in the shower, fill up my flask with whiskey, and get dressed. It’s been an hour at this point and the adrenaline is keeping me straight. I hear a pounding on my door. “Let’s fucking go kid!” I hop in his truck and we’re off. 

“There are gonna be 150 people coming in at 1pm. The food truck didn’t bring zucchini so we have to stop at the store really quick. The president of the company might come in so we need to be ready. I just need you to cut vegetables and meats. Can you handle this?”

“Yes chef”

We make it back to the kitchen and I’m tripping. I walk over to my station and say hello to my co worker Matty. “You’re tripping aren’t you?” He said with a laugh. My sous chef gives me a box of chicken breasts. “I need you cook these space man.” He said with a smirk. While cooking the chicken I got lost looking at the smoke turn into geometry. I spend the rest of the day in hot temperatures, yelling, cussing, and people running around. I ended up burning my finger on a hot pan, and cutting my index finger slightly. Only thing that was helping was my whiskey and cigarette breaks. 

At the end of the day everything went smoothly according to my chef. He was pretty happy and that’s rare to see. He gave me a ride home, and I was coming down at this point so we were just shooting the shit. He ended up stopping at a liquor store and buying my favorite cheap whiskey as a thanks. Over all a pretty good trip honestly. It was wild, stressful, and expecting the unexpected. All that aside had good conversations with my boss and co workers. Once the shift came to an end it felt so good to do something right and make my boss happy. Thanks for reading everyone have a good night.Already seeing tendrils of it, Internet providing harm reduction resources (including this community), multiple popular rappers referencing psychs (Kanye 2-CB, A$AP ROCKY L$D and music videos). Topping it off with the recent push from Colorado to legalize Shrooms and the studies noting psychs effects on reducing depression and PTSD.

Just like the medical legalization of Weed in California, the medical legalization of psychs will suddenly create a large supply of high quality, clean, psychedelic drugs.


Edit responding to some common sentiments in the comments:

It's 2020's as in the decade!

Rappers refrencing it in songs produces a positive image in the popular culture. Think how many people are out there sippin lean due to rappers.

Will this revival be a good thing or bad thing overall? It's up to us to decide. Stay active, keep educating the populace on SAFE use. Remember that just because Psychedelics don't harm you physically , doesn't mean they are harmless. Set and Setting everyone.So last year my dealers best friend was killed when he was hit off his bicycle at night whilst not wearing a helmet, my dealer had already stopped coming to school at this point and I was meant to be picking up off him the day it happened, I didn’t turn up out of respect and from then on pretty much no one saw anything of him for a year, until the other day when I get a text from him saying “dank 35s there g” I was immediately made so happy by the fact that he texted me and remembered me, I then arranged to meet him in a couple hours and I told him I’d be 30 mins as I’m cycling, he replied “ok g wear a helmet tho” this immediately made my heart melt, I then went out to my shed and dug out my cobweb covered helmet because I didn’t want to disappoint him. Seeing him happy and healthy was such a good feeling, he’s genuinely such a funny person and I’m glad he’s doing ok.SKIP FIRST 2 PARAGRAPHS FOR TRIP REPORT

Ive never told anyone about most of this stuff. I've tried but people have never taken it seriously and tbh I feel ashamed when I open up in general. 

To preface, I was 15ish, 5"8, and around 110 pounds. I never struggled with depression prior to this even when my life was shitty. My parents got divorced young, I moved around alot and never had friends. Basically never saw my dad again after 5. bullied at every school I attended. I was beat at home pretty much daily up until I was probably 12. piece of shit step dad came into the picture around that time. REGARDLESS, I was the happiness kid you'd ever meet. I was full of life and enthusiastic about everything. I never once thought I had it bad. Prayed to God every night and was thankful 

Anyways I don't remember why the fuck I did it (or much of anything tbh). I was left home alone for a week in the summer and I guess I was just bored and lonely. Heard online you could get high on nutmeg, didn't think much of it, saw nutmeg in my pantry and I guess I let my curiosity get the best of me. Poured the whole container (it was 30 grams) into some applesauce and downed that shit. Was disappointed when nothing happened in a few hours and forgot about it. 

I was playing Xbox later that same night about 6 hours after taking it and I was just talking to my online friend. It hit me like a fucking train. I couldn't understand a word he was saying. Sounded like he was speaking in tongues. "I gottaa ggo b4uuh" I shut my Xbox off and stumbled up the stairs. the stairs felt like quicksand and I remember feeling like I was upside down. Felt like the world was submerged in tv static. Somehow got to my room and dropped. Attempted to play some music but ended up typing something like "sjgu hhgv shyujjjjjj " and passed out on the floor.  

Woke up covered in vomit. My head was fucking pounding and my body ached. I couldn't even stand up for the next day so I just layed there. My throat felt like sandpaper I was still tripping my ass off too. I had my first full on panic attack in years. I still didn't know what a panic attack was and thought I was just insane. Repressed feelings I forgot existed flooded my mind. I felt like I had died and was living in a different world. I remember being absolutely terrified by how depressed I was. I didn't even know feelings like this could exist. I was humbled. The only word that can describe it is despair.  

another effect i experienced was an unbearable head fog that seemed like it would never leave. 
Even months after It was there and I struggled with remembering things. 

I'm not gonna go into detail but after tripping my personality changed to it's polar opposite. To this day people don't recognize me and double take when they realize they're talking to me.( for example, I, a very adamant Catholic my whole life, never prayed again or believed in God after that night. I became so outgoing too compared to my old self that couldn't even talk to people) The next few years are a blur now. They were so rough and confusing. I never understood depression before this. It was terrifying and made me feel so small and hopeless. 

I never told anyone about my experiences so I tried to just pretend they didn't happen and numb myself as much as possible. I still don't feel the same tbh, I'm still searching for what I lost. I had a few years that were rough beyond belief but I made it through and I am proud to say that I have worked very hard and am doing better now. 

Things changed for the worst and I lost so much. But things can change for the better and even though it still hurts sometimes, I can honestly say I've gained so much from what I have lost. 

If this isn't the place for this post remove it but it feels so good to get this off my chest even though I'm scared to post it and nobody gonna read it 👀👀👀👀👀👀👀👀When I was about 16 or 17 I dropped a few tabs with my friend Jeremy and we ended up on the beach. I'm standing on the beach looking up at the condominium facing us when I noticed something that disturbed my hallucinogenic mind...on every balcony there were two chairs and a table and all of them were facing the same way. Except for one chair on the third floor. This simply would not do. So, I climbed the building to go fix this misfit chair. Having accomplished my mission, I climbed back down to find a horrifying sight....my friend Jeremy talking to a cop! I was thinking of making a run for it when the cop turned to me and said in a tone you would use with a 5 year old who just broke your favorite coffee mug, "Hey son, come on over here for a minute, ok?" Being certain that I was about to get arrested, I sheepishly shuffled over to my friend and the cop. The cop says, "Now son, you know you can't go climbing on buildings like that, don't  you?" And all my drug addled mind can manage to respond with is a stuttery "uhh...yeah...sir" to which he says, "we just don't want you to get hurt, ok?" And I respond, "o..ok...". The officer places a hand on my shoulder and says, "let your cousin take care of you and stay safe, son." And the cop leaves. I have never been more confused in my life. We walk back to the car and my friend starts just laughing hysterically. I ask, "What the fuck just happened?" And my friend explains to me that the cop showed up as I was climbing down from the third floor. My friend ran up to the cop and explained that he had lost his cousin on the beach and just spotted me climbing that building. He told the cop that I was severely mentally retarded and had no sense of fear and that if his parents found out that he wasn't watching me and lost me that they would destroy him. That's why the cop was being so nice and talking to me like a child. And my confused, drugged up ass probably sounded like I was mentally retarded when I was talking to him. Lmao. That shit was genius on Jeremy's part.Met up with some friends tonight and did a metric fuckhouse ton of cocaine. It is 8:30 AM and I’m wired out to absolute shit and I have to meet up with family for Thanksgiving lunch at 11. This coke was really fucking strong. Do I sleep? Do I stay up and suffer through everything? I’m literally wide the fuck awake right now.

I’ve done so many good deeds in 2020 and I’m literally cashing them all in right now please god tell me how to navigate this situation. I do not want my parents and family to see me like this, oh god

SOS

Update: flaking is for fucking pussies I sobered up by 10:30 and ended up going and had a pretty nice time. A necessary wholesome departure from the debauchery I engaged in the night before. Yes I looked visibly hungover but I just said I drank too much last night. Got some nice family photos too and I look surprisingly good for a guy who can't feel his face or fingers. Gonna ptfo now because I deserve it. CheersI have been focusing weirdly hard on the idea of giving speeches so here are what I conclude to be some of the worst ways to start a best man's speech

* Wellll what can I say about \*groom*? (Pause for 40 seconds, looking around the room with increasing desperation)
* spout wildly on your political views
* spout wildly on the bride's political views
* behead a dolphin
* "Even at the age of 4, my brother was blessed with an *enormous* cock....." 
* **WHY AM I SO LONELY???** slide down the mic into violent, convulsing sobs and only leave the stage when you're literally dragged off
* Play a 6 minute solo using the mic's feedback

I have never been a best man nor given any type of speech at a wedding and pray i never willSo we were hanging out, drinking. Just co-workers and some of their SOs.
Nothing too heavy as it's a weekday after all, gotta be fresh tomorrow morning!

So I'm slowly but steadily starting to find my place at the place I work, been working here for 2 years now with great opportunities for development and advancement. The work culture is encouraging anf positive. Still in the industry I work in; drugs are a big no-no.

We're a still relatively small company though, albeit growing very, very fast. But I still know and sometimes go on the occasional mini pub crawl once in a while.

I got a message at 5pm to come along for some pints.

"Well, why not?" I thought.

I had rolled a spliff just before the invitation, so I decide to smoke it on my way home or something. I take it with me, but didn't find any container for the joint.

"Well I gotta buy cigs so I'll just put it in my pack"

Since I was 15. Every. single. cigarette pack I've opened; I turn the third cigarette from the left upside down into the pack and smoke it last. "the lucky cigarette" we call it in Finland.

Fastforward 3 pints, and I'm outside with my boss, who is cool, but professional and would NOT tolerate illegal drug-use from his employees.

"Hey can I bum a smoke?" he says.

- Sure man, I said as I open my pack and point it towards him

*fuck. the joint. he'll see the joint. FUCK*

I immediately put my thumb over the joint and exclaim, with nervous laughter "hehehe, not that one though!", thinking I'll have some explaining to do.

"Ah yeah, that one's for later, right?"

I thought he was a stoner for a second

- ... Yeah I guess...

"I know how seriously you take your lucky cigs man! Now can I have a smoke?"

Oh fucking lord.
I hand him a cigarette, light it up for him, and thank my lucky stars it was dark outside, and a joint looked like a cigarette, and I'm not talking to HR right now.

But now:

*sparks lucky joint*The joint or glass of wine after a sober day of work adds fulfilment and allows me to enjoy the high fully.So a friend of mine had dropped some acid alone since his parents were out of town - he's pretty experienced and has done it many times before, so I didn't really think too much of it, also there's noone in our friendgroup besides him who does acid, so mostly he just does it by himself (he does have some friends who use acid, but those were from his hometown).

Anyways, he calls me at 1 am just as I was watching my last YouTube video before going to sleep, and he's freaking out, and has trouble formulating a real sentence - luckily he lives five minutes away in walking distance, so I tell him I'll be right over. Before I leave I tried googling if there were any remedies like food or medicine to fix his trip, and the only thing I could find that would help was Xanax which is something I've never tried before, so I obv didn't have any (it's also really hard to get it unless you are dealing with some serious anxiety), so instead I decide to bring two Panodil extras, and tell him it's xanax. So I walk to his house, tell him to eat the pills and ensure him he'll be feeling better  in no time, and how it's so lucky I had them laying around. To be honest, I think just me being there already helped his trip, I'd keep talking about random shit we're both into, and every 5 min I'd say stuff like "you should be feeling them now, the trips much better now, right" and it somehow fucking worked. 

I ended up staying with him till 4 am and actually had a good time myself despite nodding off from being so exhausted. Hanging around with someone tripping is quite enjoyable, honestly. Anyways, I'm curious to know if anyone has tried anything like this before?

EDIT:

Holy wow, I went to sleep after typing this out. Did honestly not expect to see this blow up so much, absolutely speechless. Thank you all for the kind words! I am fyi even luckier to have him as my friend than the other way around, he's a blessing :) and many thanks to the person who donated, never tried that before!I've been a good kid growing up my whole life. Straight A's in school, volunteer work for the last 3 years, never got in trouble with the law etc. First class honours in all my exams so far in university, studying pharmaceutical chemistry.

Last year I was caught with £20 worth of MDMA by a policeman. Awaiting a court date which is more than a year after I was caught. In the interim I can't work my summer job which was vital to me the last few years, as it was very well paying and covered my university fees & my parents are broke. Got the job again this year, now have to tell my mum and my whole family and friend group that I can't do it because I failed background checks for having an impending drugs case, for which I won't even get convicted when I do go to court as its my first offence (so I'll be able to go back working next summer).

Policeman didn't even know what MDMA was when he found it.

Fuck my life.
Fuck the war on drugs.I was passed out from coke, just sleeping on the couch with my tray right in front of me. Lines of coke spread out with a razorblade and bill right there in the middle of the room. I get woken up by the sound of him washing the dishes in the other room. (He wasnt home when i passed out, so that means I didnt even get woken up by him coming home). As soon as I woke up i realize the situtation that im in and try to subtly hide my stash. I thought i was done for. He saw I was awake from the other room and said " thought i was gonna have to bring you to the hospital dude" followed by a small chuckle.
This was about a year ago and he never spoke a word to me about it. Im still surprised by how chill that was

EDIT: To people who are wondering why the fuck i passed out on coke, I just want to say I wasnt taking anything else and did not sleep for like 3 days at the time (coke binge). It was well reviewed on dw. Its my fault for passing out than the coke's faultNot life ruining dumb just classic high shit. Once I  got baked and went to Macca's, I ordered my food and handed the young cashier my money, but she didn't put it in the register she just kept her hand out looking at me. My high ass just stood there and stared at her for about 10 seconds before I looked down and saw my weed sitting in her open palm... poor girl had no idea what to do 😂Says the cops high-fiving at the station after ascertaining my immense loot of 2 grams, they even had to get another officer just to haul all of it back. They have cleansed the streets of degenerate scum (being me) and thus I congratulate them. Now it is time for my punishment, however I don’t imagine any penalty will be enough to equivocate to the damage I have caused society. 

Fuck New Jersey

Edit: Thanks for the silver, maybe my lawyer will accept it as payment /s 

Update: to everyone wondering, I do not hate cops, just the idea that my actions are worthy of heavy repercussions. I am aware I am at fault for breaking a law; however I also have not negatively impacted a single living being on this fine earth nor did I resist. I could not have cooperated anymore than I did and nonetheless the experience was embarrassing and highly unenjoyable. I am being charged with possession in a motor vehicle.So i just saw a post about this that really quickly devolved into the OP screaming at someone in the comments for voicing their slightly critical opinion, and i wanted to talk about what toxic weed culture actually is

If you use weed as a status symbol, you're part of toxic weed culture

If you brag about how you smoke the best weed in the world and everyone else smokes mids, you're part of toxic weed culture

If you do nothing but smoke weed 24/7 and only talk about how great it is and lack a legitimate personality, you're part of toxic weed culture

Now on the other hand, if you smoke weed as much as you personally enjoy, still remain a normal person, and can be a productive member of society, congratulations! You're a person who smokes weed, there's nothing wrong with what you're doing, and as long as your happy and not a waste of space, then everyone else should leave their opinion of your smoking habits the fuck out of it because nobody gives a shit what they think anyway, and now they themselves are part of toxic weed culture, perhaps without even smoking it

Edit: Damn, over 100 upvotes in a few hours, im glad that disapproving of douchey weed bros seems to be common sense among the sub, thanks everyone!

Edit again: Mother of god that number got a lot higher really fast, you're all legends

Last edit I swear: I never thought that this post would get any more than a few upvotes and maybe a comment or two but 750 upvotes later I'm absolutely dumbfounded, this community is great and I appreciate all of you like crazy, much love to everybody

Gotta say its a little relieving to know that the people of Reddit are just as sickened by excessively positive upvote milestone edits as I am, and if anyone wants to tell me how cringey it is I welcome you to my dms with open arms. I am, however, going to leave them here because I'm not so ashamed of my overly positive edits that I'm going to try to cowardly cover up my cringe and pretend it never happened. Let the criticism pour in :)-Wanna take a little? It’s pure shit and it’ll make the night more fun, so why not? The high isn’t too bad, feel kind of energetic. Little talkative. You’re doing good.

-Now you want more right? Well have some more!

-Ok some time passed, you should probably have more right? Do it bro, you earned it!

-Another few minutes have went by? Have at it please!

-Oh you’re out now? That’s a shame because you could definitely use more. Now it’s time to frantically look for  more and get increasingly angry as you come to terms you won’t score.


Now you have none left, you can’t find more, and it’s 5am. Your anxiety and depression is sky high. Nice going asshole. What did you gain from that?Call your senators [here.](https://www.senate.gov/senators/contact/)

Call your representatives [here.](http://www.house.gov/representatives/find/)

Article about the crackdown hint [here.](http://www.streetinsider.com/General+News/White+House+sees+greater+enforcement+on+recreational+marijuana/12585782.html)

Do not be complacent! Let your elected officials know that you will not stand for a federal crackdown in states that have legalized marijuana by ballot initiative!

Also, trump pays a lot of attention to twitter. It's actually the best way to get under his skin. Maybe tweet him and let him know how you feel! 

**After 5 pm ET, you can still email, FB or Tweet your Congresscritters and senators about this. Use EVERY possible method of communication to convey your opinion.**I've been using for the past 10 years but I finally want it out. All the problems that come with it, the money, the pain from withdrawals. I just can't do it anymore. I hope I make it this time!

Holy crap, thanks everyone. This sub is so supportive it's insane. I love and appreciate you all!

Edit 2: I just want to say I love you guys!!!!!Warning: Very long post. Still processing it and thought writing it out might help.

Yesterday I went over to my friend's house (I'll call him M) to trip. We are somewhat experienced with LSD, having tripped 8 times already. The highest dose we had done before was 300ug, but most trips were on 150-250ug. Our last trip was in November, and in between this time M had gotten a girlfriend, who I'll refer to as S. Since we were doing our highest dose yet, we thought we could use a trip sitter and S volunteered. I have met her a few times and she's really chill, we get along pretty well so it was fine by me. I arrived at his house around 6 PM and we dropped the tabs immediately.

Around 45 min in we already started giggling a bit and this eventually lead to an enormous outburst of laughter. We usually watch The Eric Andre Show on the come up and this time was no different. S was just watching us in amazement and laughed too. After half an hour the laughing died down a bit and I told M that I really started feeling it and he said that he felt the same. It was the moment I realized what I was in for and the vibe became more 'serious' if that makes sense. We had both stripped down to our underwear (we usually do this) because both our body temperatures started going crazy. I was sweating and sometimes shivering at the same time.

From 7 till 8 I gradually started ascending and around 8:30 I was having major visuals and some CEV's. It hit me very hard, and M said that he thought he was heading towards ego death. My thoughts were a mess and I was panicking. S put on some Red Hot Chilli Peppers and this put me a very good mood. After half an hour (could be an hour too) I asked M something and he didn't reply. He looked at me, closed his eyes and laid down on the couch.I was pretty worried about M but decided it would be best to just let him be. He had a smile on a face so that was a good sign. For whatever reason I started panicking again and I couldn't control myself anymore. I was overwhelmed and couldn't handle everything that was happening around me. Felt like I was going batshit insane. This is where S put her hands on my shoulders and calmly told me to relax. Positive energy filled my body and she told me to lay down in M's bedroom and take it easy. I asked if she could put Pink Floyd on my speaker and she brought me a glass of water and some grapes. I was in heaven. I saw some shit double or mirrored, I can't exactly remember, and gave in and closed my eyes on the bed. I felt so good, my CEV's were going crazy.

S went to check on M again and came back to see how I was holding up after god knows how much time. I said I was doing amazing, and she asked if I wanted a massage. I reasoned (as far as I was capable to do so) that it would be rude to say no and told her if it was no inconvenience for her I would love one. She put a towel on the bed and grabbed some massage oil and started. It felt so good I couldn't believe it. I closed my eyes and just let it happen. I have felt nothing like it in my life. I was constantly smiling and euphoria filled my body. She told me to turn around and lie down on my back to finish the massage. I actually wanted her to keep going with whatever she was doing but I complied, as she was the one giving the massage.

Apparently my guy downstairs was having a good time too as when I turned around S started laughing and I didn't know why. When I finally realized what was going on I started laughing too and kept saying sorry. She said it was okay, it happens and to just relax and enjoy the moment. I think the second part of the massage only lasted a few minutes (I had no concept of time though) until she started touching my dick through my boxer. She said something like does he need a massage too or some weird shit like that. I just looked at her in confusion but didn't respond as I truly had no idea what she meant. Well, she took this as a yes and started giving me a handjob. This felt *really* good, so good I felt like I was paralyzed.

I personally have a hard time getting to my climax on L and this time that was the case too. When I opened my eyes for the first time in idk how long I noticed that she was actually blowing me now. I had no words, I must say I didn't fully understand what was going on but it felt good. If the sensation is good everything is fine. After what must have been quite some time I was getting closer to my orgasm and everything started to become even more intense. The colors became extremely vivid and I was practically blinded by OEV's. She stopped for a bit, took off her clothes and sat down on top of me. I was in pure ecstasy. I was unable to move and talk. I closed my eyes and saw colors rushing through my mind and when I came it was like a blissfull explosion of rainbows and euphoria. I have no clue how long I was laying down before I opened my eyes, but I saw S smiling at me and my heart filled with joy.

I put my undies back on and checked my phone for the first time. It was 1 AM already and I got up to visit M. He was back to reality and started telling me about what he had went through. All I did was nod and 'hmm' because I realized what I had done and could not take my mind off it. I felt terrible, I got into a very bad thought loop and eventually snapped out of it when M put on some music. We kinda chilled and S took care of us and gave us some food and juice. I was not able to look her in the eye, I felt disgusting. Around 3:30 I said I wanted to go to sleep and M thought it was a good idea too. We both took a bar and passed out on the couch.

It was 11 AM when S woke me and M up as she had made breakfast. I still felt terrible. Instead of my usual afterglow I was (and still am) experiencing an after-depression. I feel so so bad. I went home ASAP and got a few texts from M about how positive he came out of his experience and that he was sorry for being 'gone' during the peak. I told him it was fine and said that I had a good time too. S texted me too asking how my 'trip' (yes those quotes belong there) was and I haven't replied to her yet.

I'm going to take the rest of the day to contemplate what the fuck I'm going to do now.

Edit: Y'all convinced me. I'm going to his place tonight and tell him what happened. Thanks for all the support.

Edit 2 -

Update: Didn't think this would blow up like it did. I am really trying to read every comment and once again, thanks for all the advice and kind messages. 

Went to his house about 3 hours ago. I was nervous as fuck, but I had to power through. Sat down with him and he started talking about the trip and how much he had enjoyed it. He knew something was up with me as we know each other too well to hide it when there's something bothering us. He asked if I had some issues with the trip and that he would be here to listen if that's the case. That's when he also said that S told him she had given me a massage, and that I enjoyed it so much I wouldn't mind getting a few more (???????). He asked if it was cool if she came over too and this is where I decided to tell him

I almost broke down saying it but I told him I didn't just get a massage from S. He asked what I meant and I told him what had happened. He didn't say a word and looked at me in disbelief. I said that I was sorry, but that I had no control over the situation and I had to tell him as I wouldn't be able to live with myself if I kept quiet. He got up, walked around a bit and sat down again. I was just waiting for his response and didn't dare to say another word. 'She told me she gave you a massage' were his first words. I apologized again and he asked me how it all went down and I told him. Felt like he didn't believe me for a sec because all he did was shake his head. 

To keep things relatively short: We ended up talking for some time, and he said he believed me but had to find out from S himself before 'actually' believing it. He wants to come up with a plan to catch her, we only have no idea how though. I said I would help him out anyway possible, he said that's the least thing I could do after fucking his girlfriend, lmao. 

I feel like there is a HUGE weight off my shoulders and am so glad I told him. Didn't think it would work out how it did. S telling him about the massage is honestly the best thing that could have happened to me. He seemed OK to me when I left, although he is undoubtedly mad at me and S but he didn't let it show. That fucker took it like a champ and I have nothing but respect for him. Don't know what we're going to do now and what our friendship will be like in the future, but at least he knows. Thanks to everyone who told me to do the right thing. I might post an update if something happens and people care.I was hanging outside with 2 friends and we smoked weed. It was super chill, nice weather and cool music. Suddenly, 2 strangers showed up and asked us if we have a smoke to sell. While I looked at my friend to see his facial reaction, the 2 guys started searching awkwardly for coins and this was were I realized how happy I would be if somebody I don't know gave me a bit weed when in need. So I took my bag, pulled out the weed and gave them enough for 2 or 3 smokes. I said it's alright and that they don't have to pay me anything, I'm just helping a fellow stoner out. Needless to say that they were super excited. 
It's probably a boring story compared to other stuff that is posted here but I wanted to remind you that sharing is caring :-) id like to preface this with that i did not purposely feed my dog acid. This was an accident and it freaked me out.

I usually keep my tabs hidden but this morning my buddy asked if he could come by my place and buy a tab off of me so i cut one off my sheet and set it on my counter and moved on with my day.

About 45 minutes ago I was playing Dark Souls 3 and i let my dog come into my room so when she came in i wasnt really paying attention to what she was doing. After a little i saw her licking my counter and I paused my game to go scold her bc i assume she found some food when i remembered what i had out. I tried to open her mouth and pull the tab out before she swallowed it but it was too late.

So i freaked the fuck out for a little bit but after a couple google searches and reading some reddit stories i settled down and just wanna make sure she has a good trip. I havent dropped in a while but i decided to take a tab with her so she doesnt have to trip alone.

Probably gonna go for a walk in a second. Shes getting really anxious and pacing around the room a lot. Bringing treats and a backpack full of dog toys and shit. Do you guys think dogs like pink floyd? any reccomendations to give her a good trip? 

whelp wish me luck

Update 1: Walking to the park and shes off leash. She seems like shes having a great time. sniffing the fuck out of everything and has a big ass smile on her face. 

Update 2: Shes running around a lot. Shes got a lot of energy and will sometimes just chase invisible shit or start jumping on random spots in the grass. My tab is starting to kick in so i will update later whenever i decide to get back on reddit. thanks for all the support and help!

Update 3: Great night tbh. She had a blast. chased her tail a whole lot, nomed on my arm for a while, rolled in the grass, she even swam in the lake! she didnt really care for her treats and wasnt all that interested in her toys. Overall we both had an amazing time and shes asleep now. At one point while time was playimg from dark side of the moon i swear we were on the same level bc she was chilled the fuck out just staring at the lake with me. Thanks for all the love! You guys are awesome! Dont let this happen to you and hide your drugs!! will update tomorrow with how shes acting and doing

Final Update: Sorry i fell asleep late last night and just woke up. Puppers seems to be doing just fine! She was super excited to see me when i woke up as she always is. She seems a little bit more chilled out today than usual but otherwise she is completely normal. This was honestly a good bonding experience in the end and im glad it went well. But please dont feed your dog acid. this was terrifying for me and it could have gone terribly. Thank you to everyone who supported and gave me tips you guys are awesome.

https://imgur.com/a/wsruhEZFor instance, when I became a heroin addict nobody ever told me that if you use too much heroin you will literally become full of shit. I once spent a little over two weeks without taking a shit. I had a hairy Indian doctor stick his finger up my butt, wiggle it around to try to get my shit loose over a bucket thing, and then tell me I needed to go to the ER. Nobody told me that the image of him taking his wedding ring off would stick forever in my head. Nobody told me I would have to get an industrial grade enema, or watch a goddamn brown python slip violently out of my anus.

Dying? Fuck that, I didn't want to live anyway. But fecal impaction? Please no. God no. Never again. I'm still an opioid addict but now I take it easy. Kratom most days. Fiber all days. Generous amounts of laxatives when a day goes by without shitting. 

Now what of psychedelics? The whole flashback thing was total bullshit, and anybody who bothered to look into it would know that. But HPPD was not bullshit. It isn't bullshit. I can literally hallucinate at will, which sounds awesome until you have to deal with it for five years. And I can't always control it. I don't know if it'll go away. It's just become a part of reality and I'm just lucky that I can read books again, because for a long time I couldn't. Trying to follow the words would frustrate me to no end. It led me to dropping out of school and only now am I back in the game. 

Nobody told me it was going to be THAT bad. Spine cracking? Fuck, I wish it were that easy. 

And the fucking speed. They told me about the heart damage, and I'm totally down for that. They told me about cuts, and that's a risk I'm willing to take. But they didn't tell me that my amphetamine binges would unlock my latent schizophrenia and cause me to hear voices for the rest of my life. What's that? Oh, you didn't say anything? OH, OKAY. 

Everything in DARE was all so basic. Cigarettes caused cancer, marijuana burned 4x hotter, alcohol would destroy your liver, heroin would kill you. They didn't warn my friend enough so that he could avoid his abscess from unclean shooting, or my other friend to avoid the stroke they had after speedballing, which caused the still-in-arm needle to spike into a vein and left it partially paralyzed forever. They didn't warn my friend who tried to burn the shadow people out of his house after a long bender on MDPV. They didn't warn anybody of any real risk. They didn't tell us the stuff which was actually fucking scary, the stuff that might've kept us safe. Either through abstinence or just going out the way to educate ourselves. 

DARE is a perpetrator of myths and fear without truth. So if you really want to scare somebody or keep them safe, just tell them about the time ol' DRUG_USING_HUMAN got a hairy Indian finger up his butt. So I was raiding the kitchen after smoking a handfull tonight. My roomba was running in the kitchen, you know those floor vaccums that run around randomly cleaning shit, and I was eating chips straight out of the bag, and one of the chips just falls on the ground and my brain goes like ah shit now i gotta pick that up but then the fuckin robot comes and sucks it up, and im lookin at him like
_my man_

Okay when i write it down it doesnt sound that cool but i swear it was the shit

Edit: Title typo niceI took 2 mg so I could get a little sleep after a stimulant-fuelled work session (I keep some Xanax around for emergencies, e.g. really bad anxiety or insomnia, but I haven't had to use it until now)

The sleep was great, but upon waking I found myself SURROUNDED by McDonalds wrappers.

Apparently I ate a double quarter pounder, a McChicken, ten chicken nuggets, and three cookies.

This definitely isn't the worst thing that could happen on Xanax, but I'm really pissed because I've been trying to eat healthier (lost 30 pounds so far!).

Don't take Xanax if your lizard brain is a greedy fat fuck like mine.

Edit: I used Uber Eats. I don't have a driver's license or a car.Got a g of some keen looking coke for a bargain since all the clubs and pubs are closed, so I had to conduct a test bump to make sure it was as good as it looked. Now obviously I had to have a secondary bump to see if the data from my test matched that of my second test. Being the scientific scholar that I am I followed these initial tests with a rapid succession of further tests. Now it is 4am, I have one line left and I wasted a perfectly good baggie of coke on a night of watching youtube videos about car transmissions.If you're anything like me, tripping--specifically ego-death--might have made you hyper-aware of the "game" we are in. You may observe the fact that we're living in an almost pretentious worldly setting, ruled by our subconscious desires, masked by our ego. I spent years feeling different, dissociated, and simply unlike anyone else as I spent my energy observing the game, rather than living in it. This resulted in less confidence, and more outcast-ish feelings.

Through these years, I learned even while observing the game, I'm still playing whether I liked it or not. Save yourselves some energy, and be a primal human. Live through your ego, stop differentiating yourself. You aren't woke, you are hyper-aware, yet there is nothing to be aware of. You are searching for a break-of-code that can never be found, because you are still coded like everyone else. There's no escaping the game. Peace y'all and good, happy, loving vibes!this will probably get downvoted but i really feel strongly about this.

i'm not much of a drug user, I stick to weed nowadays. In the past I would dabble with xanax, cocaine, and even opiates a handful of times (the person who i would do it with would buy them off someone who had a presciption). but never huge doses or anything that could potentially kill me or put me in a bad situation. I've also done acid once (it was a light tab so it wasn't a crazy trip). it's been years since i've done anything except smoke weed though.

recently someone posted that their husband almost DIED from opiate use. and i'm sorry yall but i was honestly shocked when I saw a bunch of comments that was like "glad he's okay" but nothing really suggesting them to get help. many people who suggested for OP and her husband to get some kind of help or rehab got downvoted.

and this is exactly fucking why so many people die. i know this is a sub full of drug users but yall acting like drugs are just fun and games and that they don't have any real life consequences. we're not talking about taking half a xanax before bed at night once in a while or doing coke once a month with your friends. we're talking about overdosing and nearly dying before your wife realizes you might have OD'd and has to inject you with narcan.

this sub is toxic as fuck, i don't know how people are encouraging further use of dangerous drugs found off of the street and just saying "oh be careful". everyone saying in the comments that all the shit on the street is fentanyl. next thing you know god forbid of course, but what if OP comes back saying their husband did pass away from continuous usage? would all yall feel proud of yourselves? someone in the comments responded to someone who suggested they get help like "oh it's not good to push anything on anyone you can't just force someone to quit". i'm sorry bruh but yall fr cracked the fuck out if you don't think the next step after someone OVERDOSES is anything but TELLING THEM THEY HAVE TO QUIT. for both of your own sake. no one wants to live with the guilt of knowing they could have done more, and losing a loved one.

all i'm saying is no one should live their lives a slave to a drug, to the point where they lose their ability to live for it. recreational use and dangerous use is not the same shit. be safe yall and hopefully this opens some peoples eyes. happy holidays&amp;lt;3

Final edit: wow thanks so much for all of the awards. Just logged back on and ppl still yelling at me talking bout THIS POST WONT HELP PPL QUIT. well no shit sherlock but at least i’m not encouraging ppl to possibly overdose again ya know just make sure u have some narcan. Yes drug addiction is a disease but it doesn’t mean you can’t cure it. If u are putting yourself in danger everyday, Im not going to advocate that. Letting yourself be defined by a label to the point where u dont even try to break free from it is sad. Look at everyone else who has quit. Why cant that be you? Anyways i’m not replying to comments anymore that was all i wanted to say:)

Also, so many people have said things that I made this post to make myself feel better about myself, I just have a different opinion from you. Pretty sure a non drug addict will say “maybe if you od you have a problem”, compared to a drug addict who will scream about no one understanding them and that they are completely unfixable(as they are in the comments). Yall really underestimating yourselves to be honest. Progress is never linear, especially for addicts, but if you never try and make the first step and get trapped in this mindset that “this is just the way I am” forever, you will never get better. Do you think any of the people who were previous addicts, but are now clean, really WANTED to stop? No, but they fucking did it because theyre badass. And my life is completely together  trust me the last thing I need validation from is REDDIT. LmaoWoke up this morning and had a text from my plug asking if I needed any oxys or bars cause he just reupped. It was my day off so I said I was just doing some shit around the house then I’ll be over.  I’ve been buddies with this guy since elementary school and he was always a good person and came through for me and gave me good deals, and where I’m living right now there’s been a drought for pills so it’s been rough so I was pretty excited to hear he had some oxys. I was getting ready to go to his spot but got called into work for a late shift. I texted him saying if he’s still up I’ll come grab after work and he replied “yeah no worries worse case just come by tomorrow”. Got off work 2 hours ago and hit him up but no response but I just got a text from his sister saying he od’d on fentanyl. I’m truly shocked and I don’t really know what the fuck to feel my friend group is just out of it right now because he was a good guy who just liked to get fucked up like the rest of us. Rip Mikey and sorry for formatting On my phone and had to rant Alcohol (8/10) - So damn good if I could get the damn hot pocket in my mouth.  I’m eating like such a sloppy fucking mess.  The roof of my mouth is burnt. 

Weed (11/10) - Good god... this is delicious, I’m pretty sure I’m on my 5th one.  Existential thoughts on whether hot pockets should merge with HP and Harry Potter’s hairy penis on a halfpipe

Meth (2/10) - Really difficult to stomach.  Forcing myself to eat is like trying to deep throat 

LSD (?/10) - What is eating?  Food is just a construct of my physical self.  My vessel requires fuel, but I have no need for it if I transcend to a higher plane

Shrooms (5/10) - My hot pocket is pulsating.  It’s activating my taste receptors of my tongue.  Feels good. I’m going to keep eating you now, stop crawling away.I love my grandfather.  I know he used to enjoy a bowl back in the day, but I haven't told him about my occasional weed use.  
He stopped by unexpectedly yesterday while I was relaxing on the patio with a blunt, and called me out on it.  He asked me how long I've been smoking for, and when I told him a couple years he was disappointed I didn't sometimes invite him; he said it would make a nice bonding experience.  
Then he asked if he could see my product.  He gently implied my weed had way too many seeds and stems, and I kind of sensed he was disappointed in the quality of my stash.  He visited with my mom a bit before leaving.  
I'm not sure what to do; he's in his late 60's.So I broke off a quarter of a pharm bar on my counter, and as you may guess from my username, I have a big fat cat that always assumes whatever is going on in the kitchen is ultimately meant for him, so he is standing by staring at me. Anyways, I break the quarter off then do my best to cut that in half with a sharp knife (to make a .25mg) dose for my girlfriend. Well, about .25mg stayed intact and the other .25mg split into like 2 or 3 pieces and flew on the floor. Before I could frantically grab them, I heard the num nums going on and sure enough, my cat was licking the bitterness off his chops. I immediately googled this and found that it's actually prescribed to cats, so I called a vet regarding the dosage. He said it's way more common than you'd think and due to my cats weight he will be just fine, and entertaining. He was wobbling into walls, just simply falling over, drooling and in the morning had some how procured multiple of my girlfriend's socks and placed them in his litter box.

So yeah, he's all good. And please don't think I'm an animal abuser, I treat my cat better than most treat their children. He turns 12 on 4/20 <3About a month ago I found the best plug, who had almost everything from weed to LSD and he even recently gave me my first MDMA trip for free, but earlier today I called him about 3-4 times because he usually responds in a timely manner and after a whole day of not responding I decided to look up his name on Facebook only to find RIP post on his page saying he was robbed and killed about last night and now I feel like a complete scumbag for calling him so much. I didn't know him too well but he was a pretty funny cool guy who always asked me how my life was going and we chop it up for a good 10 minutes before I would leave his spot. I wasn't able to comment on his page or post so I'm posting his tribute here. 

RIP my plug  JDOkay so I ate a gram of weed once cause I was high af on kpins and Loud; I always liked how weed smelt and had an urge deep down to eat it. The xans showed me my the urges I had suppressed and I acted on them. 

In the end was it worth it? No, do I regret wasting a g? Yes, should I have made this post? Probably not.Got no one to share with so i thought this will do.

Midweek and rough day at work not sure why but i decided to clean my room instead of just taking drugs to cop out of it and deal with the same problems tomorrow. Refreshing change idk i feel a little more in control.

That's all just wanted to share thanks.

Hope you all have a good night/day where ever you are.

&#x200B;
Edit: I'm blown away by the overwhelming response this has recieved. You're all amazing people and I'm surprised but extremely glad that this post has resonated with so many people. Thank you for the gold and silver and I really do hope you take some time out of today to do something genuinely positive for yourself. Thank you for making me feel so understood and supported. Thank you for being an amazing community.

Take care, test your shit and stay safe.About a month ago i hit up my plug and ask for a ball and hes says i gotta meet him at his house cause he wasn’t feeling well. So i get there its night time and i knock on the door and like a minute later walks over slow af and bent over a little bit. Hes opens the door and I immediately noticed hes really sweaty and in a bit of pain. I ask him if hes ok and he said it was just bad food he ate or something. So he weighs out my shit and i pay him and i decided to stay a little bit and watch tv. I was there for about an hour and he asked me to google his symptoms. I do and it said to go to the hospital bc a bad stomach ache with a fever could mean something serious. So i asked him how long it was going on and he said 3 weeks. I was like oh shit you gotta see a doctor dude and i drive him to the hospital and after a couple tests and a couple of bumps in the bathroom they said he needed emergency surgery for appendicitis. Dudes appendix exploded three weeks before and he didn’t even notice until it started to kill him. I left after they put him under and called him a day later and he was doped the fuck up and said thanks for taking him. Fun night, did alot of coke.So, I need to vent. A couple of months ago, I decided to stop doing favors for people. Apparently, I'm the only white person in town that knows how to go to the hood, talk to a dealer, and get good cocaine. Now I can get all kinds of drugs, but this one is the worst for what I'm talking about. I wanted to see how many people actually gave a damn about me, and who just cares about my connections. The results were less than stellar.

Now, if it was just random wooks, I'd be fine. There's always more of those to find. But since I started saying no, I've lost a couple people who I really loved and respected. Before I knew where to get coke, we would do things together and hang out a lot. But now, they won't even talk to me unless they want me to get for them. 

I know I'll probably never see them again, and that shit hurts really bad. I honestly wish I had just kept my connect to myself. Now, people just call me at 2am to keep the party going, I never get invited when the party starts. I always knew coke was a dangerous drug, but I didn't know it would be like this. People will say "they weren't your real friends, you're better off without them." I know that's true, it's what I asked for. I just wish it didn't break my heart.

Thanks for reading. Check on your friends, don't just ask them for drugs. Eat meals with them and smoke blunts and go do things. If people still did that with me, I'd get them anything their hearts desired.Started doing drugs around 17, currently 19 and I’ve decided this is the day of stopping. It’s been a hell of a ride not gonna lie, from stimulated game playing to psychedelic epiphanies. Nodding off oxycodone to melting in the couch off mdma. There’s nothing positive drugs do for me anymore, just end up stagnating my daily progress and finances. It’s time to let my Holy Spirit take the wheel, I’m gonna miss it but it’s for the best. Peace out homies and make sure to take care of yourselves❤️***EDIT: she says she broke all her crack pipes for me, I didn’t even ask her to. Well see if this lasts!


A couple weeks ago I met a really attractive girl downtown, she works at a sandwich restaurant that I work 1-2 days a month at on the side and I had never talked to her, we ended up hitting it off nicely and have been seeing eachother a bit, she’s very pretty but has a lot of problems.


Last night she came over here and after bar close she got naked and started smoking crack in my bathroom...I’ve always said I would not smoke crack. My uncles were crackheads. I was in in patient for 3 weeks when I was younger for hardcore alcoholism. I did mdma to the point where I prob have chunks of my brain missing, and i used to have a bit of a coke habit too.

Anyways she started shotgunning hits to me and it felt amazing, finally at the end she offered me the last hit and I took it.


After taking it I immediately felt so down, like I’m throwing my life to the dogs. I’m trying to start a business and get somewhere in life. Why did I smoke crack? I always told myself I wouldn’t. Now I can never say that again. I was 28 the first time I smoked crack, and I never plan on doing it again. You people are crazy, and that drug is garbage. I’ll stick to shrooms next time. I guess if you have a 9/10 blonde naked smoking crack in your bathroom, it’s okay to take 1 hit though, that’s like some fantasy shit. 


Sorry I just came here to vent, I can never tell my friends or family thisHell you can even have "bad trips". Really anything at all can happen. Think about it. 

I know it's not the same as taking a drug, but the comparison is literally right there. The only difference is that your brain does it on it own every night. We can learn so much about ourselves by thinking about our dreams differently. Or maybe that would just be reading into things, idk.Seated at the dinner table, my family members and myself each have a couple grams of magic mushrooms.

Later in the backyard there's stories by the fire, singing and dancing, laughing til we cry, literal magic.

Mom passes the joint, sister's cracking jokes, brothers up the stakes in their card game from $1 to $20.

Dad builds a second fire to keep my mom warm on both sides.

Chihuahua chases my bunny through the yard.

I bust out the hula hoop.

Who made brownies?!

Play that song again!

We love a good family trip.Even meth and heroin becomes boring after a while.  Chemical happiness it attainable, but never sustainable.  

Im done spending all my money. 

Im done watching myself go crazy. 

And I'm done telling myself nothing matters. I was first diagnosed with cancer (rhabdomyosarcoma - muscle cancer) when I was 16. I just got news of a relapse, making this my third bout with cancer. It’s basically everywhere and I’m looking at 6 months maybe. 

I’m a complete lightweight when it comes to drugs. I’ve had a few sips of alcohol here and have had opiates, obv (I don’t like them all too much). I wanna go out with a bang, I guess. With that said, I am interested in trying things that would make me really mellow but maybe a little giggly. I don’t want to be too obvious since I still live with my parents and it would make them pretty sad (please don’t shit on my parents. They’ve been through hell). I do have someone who I could go out with and get access to some of the harder stuff that’s out there - just can’t be out ALL night/day, so I’m not very interested in highs that last a long time.

EDIT: whew, I did not realize the love I’d get here - I COMPLETELY forgot about this thread. I’d like to thank everyone for their suggestions. I’m sorry for not directly replying, as 237 (as of rn) messages is a little overwhelming lmao. I’d also like to thank ‘most of you for not saying things like “Keep fighting bc my grandma survived 728162722 years when the doctors gave her 6 months!” or “You can cure cancer with weed!” I’ve heard it all. Tried a few things here and there. Nope. Science is what has allowed me to survive nearly 4 years past my original diagnosis - according to my doctors, most people with the features of my cancer (to keep it short: sometimes other genes beyond the ones that regulate cell death mutate in cancer cells. This can sometimes make the chance of death higher or lower) don’t survive past 18 months. I’m actually pretty content with my eventual death at this point :/ I’d also like that you all would donate your money to a charity that helps people in similar situations instead of giving me gold.

Once again, I really appreciate everyone’s comments!So, I get to work this morning, it's 4/21 so of course I have been blazing like a motherfucking monster truck the whole day before. Everyone's just doing their thing, there's my wife talking on the phone, we work at the same company. I get into my office and all of the sudden the boss comes up to me and hands me this drug test, tells me I'm supposed to do the test. Well I start to freak out inside since I knew that I'll fail the test for sure. 

I didn't say anything to him, because I've read that you shouldn't say anything in those situations. I do the drug test, it's a pretty small establishment so I assume that everyone else had already done it. He told me that after I do it I should deliver it to him. After a couple hours he comes back into my office and asks me if I have a moment. He walks up to my desks and says "We have your drug values back". I start to get very nervous at this point, because I don't know what he has to say. "Your amphetamine values seem a bit low" he says, showing my test results. I knew this would happen, I shouldn't have skipped on amphetamine. "You know you need to take amphetamine at least twice per week, that's the company policy." He continues. I try to say something about forgetting to take my amphetamine, promising it will not happen again. Boss says "We are really impressed on your cannabis results however, keep that up". I thank him as he leaves, giving me a "don't let this become a habit". I feel relieved as I quickly rail a fat line and get back to work. I love working for myself.Today marks my 60th day of sobriety from the most evil fucking substance ever created, heroin. 

Im only 19 and at the pace i was going with my life i had absolutely 0 chance of making it to my 30’s. I had friends/high school peers (which i have now lost over the years because of my addiction) that were telling me i was going to be dead by 25 because of an overdose. 

I had morals/values/goals growing up like, i would never use hard drugs, i would never steal from my family/friends, and that i was gonna go off to college and be a big shot, etc. Heroin threw all that shit out the window. And by the time i was 18 i had broken all those “rules” i had set for myself to get my fix. 

Two rehabs, 2 visits to jail (DUI, drug possesion charges), and an absolutely needed kick in the ass later and i finally realized i was throwing my life in the toilet and letting my family down who is my biggest support system and just wants to see me succeed. 

Anyways, i sit here today with a little help psych meds for my anxiety and depression clean from that repulsive powder and my life is magnificent. No suboxone, no methadone, just kratom for the cravings and post accute withdrawal symptoms. 

I love this community and reddit as a whole. You guys are family to me. Thank you for always being there for me, love yall ❤️ 

TL;DR: 60 days sober from heroin. 19 years old, life was in shambles. 2 rehab visits, 2 visits to county jail for DUI and drug charges. Finally got my shit together, got my job back, got a girlfriend (sex is fucking incredible sober) and most importantly i am able to be mentally and physically together with my family again. 

:)I have only told this story to a few people but I thought it would be a good one to share. A few years back I attended a music festival at Legend Valley in Thornville, Ohio. Every year in July they have a festival called the Werkout and it is mostly a jam band festival. Since there are mostly jam bands that play it draws an older crowd filled with ex deadheads and older hippies that have not yet quit the lifestyle. With that said I have always found that the old heads could get the best acid and every year I would go to this festival I would find the same guy and buy up as much as I could. Usually he would always have blotter, but this time all he had with him was liquid. He had it in a couple different vials with a dropper, and since I was not getting a single dose for myself and instead buying in bulk I had nothing to really put the acid in. I reached in my pocket and had a small bottle of eye drops and realized that I would be able to empty it out and put the acid in there. So after emptying the bottle and making sure I got all the drops out I then had him fill the little bottle with approximately 40 drops (40 doses) and I was on my way. I did this on the last day of the festival and wanted to save them for my friends and I so I put it in my center console of my car and drove home. 

Now fast forward to the following Monday and I was on my way to work. I lived about 30 min away from where I worked and that morning as always I smoked some weed right before I left. About 10 minutes before I arrived at work I looked in my rear view mirror and realized that my eyes were as red as the devils dick and that I needed to put some eye drops in. I stopped by a gas station and without even thinking I rummaged around my center console and grabbed the eye drop container, popped the cap, and proceeded to squirt at least 3 drops into my right eye. I felt a burning sensation immediately ( which I later found out was due to them diluting crystal lsd with grain alcohol) and I knew right then and there that I have made a terrible mistake. I was so burned out from the festival that I forgot I put the eye drop bottle of acid somewhere else, what a stupid idiot I was. 

I knew that I did not have very much time to get to a safe place so I immediately called my work and said that I got sick on my way there and would not be in that day. With that taken care of I started my car and got on the highway. I had never even taken lsd in liquid form before this but from what I had heard I knew that the on-set of the trip would happen very fast. Also, the fact that I put it straight into my eye worried me even more due to it going into my bloodstream faster. I was only 20 minutes away from my apartment so I thought I would have enough time, but literally 10 minutes into the drive I could already feel the lsd taking over. I was getting the same sensation I always get from the come up of lsd and I felt a strange sensation radiate from my stomach and slowly my body got warmer and I started noticing that the lights and trees started to look very bright. I knew at that point that I was going to be tripping very hard and very soon. 

Somehow I was able to make it back to my apartment, and on that Monday morning I experienced one of the most intense/enjoyable lsd trips I have ever had in my life. I was getting tracers and seeing every single thing around me move and dance. Every time I shut my eyes I would see geometric patterns and flashes of colors I can't even describe, and I listened to every record that I had with a newfound joy. I also watched the whole Planet Earth series and was just in complete amazement of every little detail and made me appreciate the world we live in that much more. Whatever dude sold me must have been some true Ohio deadhead family shit because I tripped face for at least 10 hours and was glued to my couch just taking it all in. I learned a very important lesson that day, and that is so make damn sure that if you are storing liquid L, put that shit in a clearly marked container and keep it where you will not dose yourself before work on a fucking Monday morning! 

Cheers!So about two years ago, I lived in a shared house with a few of my college friends.  When I went to bed, I’d smoke weed to go to sleep, but I got bad social anxiety from smoking it around other people.  So I’d wait until I was in my room for the night and smoke then.  The only problem: munchies.  If I didn’t go to sleep immediately, the munchies would inevitably set in.  So I kept a box of cheez-it’s by my bed for emergency scenarios.

One night, I got the munchies and decided to grab Ol’ Faithful, dem cheezy bois.  I was eating them for about 5-7 minutes, just stoned as hell.  After a bit, I noticed that they were really spicy.  I didn’t remember buying spicy cheez-it’s.  They weren’t spicy the other night.  Hm.

But I kept eating for a few more minutes, and finally my curiosity kicked in and I turned on my phone light to check the box and make sure they weren’t expired or something.   

Turns out, the box was COVERED in hundreds of tiny ants, and I had been happily munching them for about 10 minutes while they bit my tongue.  My bed was crawling with ants as well, and even though I was naked, I somehow didn’t notice them crawling all over me the entire time.  I spent the next hour cleaning my room and showering.  very traumatic experience.

So yeah.  Check Your Cheez-It’s 2020. so this was 2017. i was living in Rio de Janeiro (thats where im from) and was with my girlfriend at christmas. she had to go to her familys house and pass the christmas eve dinner with them so i left her at their place. i was feeling kinda lonely and thought: “what if i snort some coke?” - great fucking idea right?

 i went by foot to a favela near by and went inside it, there were lots of weapons everywhere and the drug dealers were kinda festive (u know what i mean), so this guy look at me and say: “hey playboy, u wanna a drink?”

 i wasnt crazy enough to refuse so he asked me what i wanted to buy and gave me some cidra (i dont know the name in english, its like a discount store champagne). then i bought some R$ 30 reais coke (prob like 10 dollars at the time, but a lot of coke here). after that a bar owner came down with some snacks and they told me to sit and that i would enjoy xmas with them. i couldnt say no and get shot or beaten up so i sit with them, we do the coke, we drink some more cidra and im desperate to go home. even promising to god to never do drugs again and shit like that in my head. 

 he turns to me and offer me a coke refill all night if i keep the capsule he gave me and then he actually started to give me lessons, saying like: “u need to stop snorting and just enjoying smoking weed” and stuff like that and im just nodding (trying to act cool while shitting my pants). 

then someome on their radio says the cops are coming, i hide into the bar and now im really promissing god to never do this shit again (i did anyways). i hear some gunshots and stuff, so the bar owner (the same that gave everyone in the “boca” snacks) tells me she has another way out from the back. i take it and leave on the other side of the favela, running as fast as i can. went home and pretend nothing happened. my family or my gf doesnt know that shit.Hi /r/drugs! 
I originally [posted](https://redd.it/6wf64o) this on /r/mdma, but a friend suggested me to share it here, that you guys might like it too!

Please share your thoughts! I will probably recreate this next year and would like to improve it if you have any advice :) 

Recently I had one of my most amazing rolls yet and I really want to share it.

A little background, I've been rolling for 4 - 5 years now. MDMA has been an amazing tool for me to grow internally and externally. I've introduced a lot of my friends to this marvelous substance, but a lot of them haven't tried since they're not comfortable taking drugs. That's good and I never insist.

Anyway, for my past birthday I organized a party. I rented a House in the woods and announced to all the friends I invited that the party was mdma themed. That if they were to go they had to take mdma. If they didn't want to, then we'd celebrate any other time. I invited most of my close friends expecting that most of them would say no, since most of them don't do drugs. Surprisingly all of them said YES. 

The house is 2 hours away from our city. I asked all of them to bring a big blanket, a big pillow, a lot of fruit and a funny outfit. We traveled in 5 cars, everyone brought nice things. When we arrived to [the house](http://imgur.com/a/kg2ts) we all were speechless, it's an AMAZING house, only surrounded by nature. Incredibly big and comfy. We arrived early, around 1pm.    Immediately after everyone was settled in I started "creating" our environment. After all my trips I've learned a couple of things that make rolling more comfortable and nice, so without telling anyone I just started crafting it. 

So, I moved all the furniture from the living room. I took everyone's blankets and pillows and created a huge floor bed. Literally I stacked 25 blankets in the center to create a huge (I think it was around 5x3 meters) comfy space. I changed all the lamps in the area to black lights (The ones that make colors shine in the dark). Then arranged Christmas lights all around the bed. I also brought neon body paint, brushes and 300 glowsticks. I brought a Home theater from home and arranged all the speakers around the big bed. A nice thing about the place is that we had absolutely no cellphone signal, so no one used their cellphones at all. I had a special playlist for the party, PM if you want it ;) it's really cool. 

After the space (Which we called PLURCAMA) was ready. We ate and went to a swimming pool which was in the garden of the house. When we were all there I made the announcement that I had a surprise. We were not only about to take mdma, Also lsd. Of course I told all of them that if they didn't want acid they wouldn't have to take it. But again, only 2 people refused, everyone took it. 

I gave half tab to everyone and the party started. I continued arranging things. Prepared a fireplace outside (Actually this was a friend's idea, whom in his trip was fascinated with fire). Made a camping tent outside (in case anyone would like to watch the stars). Also brought pois and a hula hoop. 

A lot of my friends were newbies to lsd too, so I was almost all the time checking out if they were having a good time. It was a really nice lsd trip (no one had taken the mdma yet). Half of them were around the tent watching the sunset. The other half were around the fire. It was really nice, everyone laughing, talking, some of us dancing. We took the lsd around 5.30 pm. At 8.30 I called each one of them to the fireplace. It was kind of a hard task, since everyone was really into whatever they were doing, but after 20 minutes everyone was already around the fire.

I gave everyone their mdma. I had it in parachute pills. In home i have a weighing machine so everyone had an accurate dose. I made 25 doses of 110 mg. When everyone had it on their hands, a friend of mine started shouting "Give a speech! Give a speech". And everyone followed. So I started talking. It was amazing, they were all paying really close attention. It was not easy since I was already tripping hard on lsd but still I think I did a good work. I told them something like this:

"I love all of you. This party, this experience, all of this is just a way of expressing my love. It's not easy to get together 25 people you love just to be with them. Believe me. But the fact that all of you came, despite your fears or prejudices is really valuable for me. This substance is really special, don't think I just like to get people drugged, this is a experience about connections, about learning, about sharing. Please enjoy it, take the best of it. I love you."

Of course it's not literally the words I say, but it's kind of how I recall it. Everyone took their parachute and swallowed it. Then we all stood there and waited until the fire finished. When everyone got into the house. Their reaction was just... indescribable. Everything shined with black light, there were colors everywhere and the music was really absorbent. We all sat around the big bed and waited until the mdma started working.

A lot of friends didn't know what to expect. One of them came to me and told me he felt exactly equal as before. I just told them to give it time.

Then it happened. PFFFFFFFFFFFFFF I don't know how to describe it. One of my friends, a really shy girl. She was lying on the bed just hugging pillows. I came close to her and she told me: "Why is life so beautiful? Why  is the music so perfect? Why didn't I Know i could love myself this much?" and hugged me. I stood up and started dancing, the candyflipping feeling was really overwhelming. When [this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0fOHh5Q7Q1E) song came up, I exploded. I started dancing. Closed my eyes and just enjoyed the feeling of being overwhelmed with peace. When it finished and I checked my surrounding. I swear, I thought that is definitely how heaven looks like. Basically all people who have been important to me were there, loving each other, being happy, being at peace. Everyone was either hugging, dancing, smiling, laughing. UGHHHHHHHHHHHH. Writting this is giving me goosebumps. AHHHHHHHHHHHHH.
[This](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SmnXGvXYpKg) one was really nice to roll with too.

I think I could write a book If I started describing all the experiences that happened to me that night. All the things my friends shared with me, the context of why those things ARE extremely important. It was... heaven, really.

As I was walking through the room, every 2 steps someone either called my name or came close to me. Asking me for hugs or telling me the importance I had in their life. Thanking me for the experience, asking me to dance. In a point everyone gave me a "hooray" and claimed my name. I don't want to sound selfish. I just want to share that I think I have never felt THAT much love towards me in my life. That feeling was just... God.

A lot of people didn't know each other. But everyone was connecting in really awesome ways. Shy people with geek people with "cool" people. There were no prejudice, no stereotypes. 

Of all the awesome experiences that happened to me that night. I'll share one of the most intense for me. 

One of the assistants is C. 
C has been one of my bests friends for around 8 years. He's been a milestone in my life. Without a doubt I could tell you I wouldn't be the person I am today without meeting him. A little more  context, I'm bisexual (mostly gay, I think you could say a 5 in Kinsey's scale). He is straight. You can guess the rest of the background. I had a strong crush on him. He was cool with it but nothing ever happened. (He is really straight). 

C and I were together and talking, and he started telling me the strong Impact i've had in his life. Then he started asking me, "Why are you always single?! I don't understand!? Everyone in this party tells me you're full of magic but you're almost never with someone". I explained to him that, what I expect of a relationship is progress. That most of people start to date you because you're cool or because you're good looking, but for me, my priority is to feel that that person makes me grow, makes me a better version of myself. And that's not easy to find. 

We kept talking about what we expect in a relationship and he told me "I want to make an experiment, come with me" We went out to the tent. It was... PFFFF, the stars were just.... as I told you there were no towns like in 100 km around that house. Without light pollutions the stars were just... ugh. When we were there. He was really hesitant. I told him he didn't have to do anything he didn't want to. He said, "but i want to" and kissed me. 

I just can't describe it. If you've ever been candyflipping and kissed someone you love maybe you can know how it felt. But this was, like, the peak of 8 years of relationship. A breaking point. It was like feeling the universe in a kiss. When we stopped kissing he looked up and said "I now know, there is a god, look at the stars". Pffff... as i write this I can feel my body overflowing with serotonin. 

We kissed again, and he told me he wanted to keep experimenting. We were all night holding hands, hugging and telling each other how important we were. (Just as a prologue, the experiment is over :c haha he realized he really is straight and kind of broke my heart a little bit, but I understand it).

A friend of mine cried because she said she couldn't believe it was possible to be that happy. The shy friend I wrote about in the beginning told me that she just learned how amazingly she loves herself and her life. A friend who is moving abroad forever told me he realized how to conquest the universe, through having children and sharing all your knowledge with them. Everything was perfect.

Another really nice detail, is that the house had this arch type structure with a quote. "En un día claro, se ve hasta siempre", which translate in something like: "In a clean day, you can see until eternity". Everything was mindblowing, everyone had A BLAST. 

The newbies, all of them were amazed. Most of them are still in their honeymoon with mdma, asking me when the next party is going to be. Of course I told them that next year :)

The next day we all woke up cuddling with each other, had a breakfast and no one had negative effects after it. They were playing cards and sharing their experience. Up until today, everyone is still haring how much they grew from the experience, how many internal walls they teared down, how many prejudices they broke, how much they learned to feel and love life.

I just... I expected something nice from giving mdma to 25 people in an isolated house in the woods. But I'd never expected it to be such a groundbreaking party. Everything, absolutely everything was perfect. The bonds between all of us is stronger than ever. People who had never met before are now extremely close friends. When chatting in the whatsapp group we have together, we all came to the conclusion that what that party made to us, is freed us. We all are free from so many things now. I've had at least 30 mdma experiences, but this is probably one the best. 

So yeah, I just wanted to share it. Document it somehow.
You guys (reddit community) are really awesome. I've learned a lot from you. Thanks for reading.

 
(As you can read, English is not my native language, so sorry for any mistake) 

I LOVE YOU ALL. 


Edit 28/08: Wow guys, thanks for all the nice messages and PM's! Reading other peoples experiences is always uplifting and it's what encouraged me to share mine. A lot of people has told me in this couple of hours you would like to be in an experience like this.  As I see it, these kind of experiences are possible and amazing when they happen, but they need someone with the will, motivation and knowledge to organize it. If you feel you would like to share something like this with your friends, it's up to you. If you have the possibility to have a positive impact in people's life, you really should :) 

If you want tips or help, I'll be glad to share more details of how this was organized. HUGS to all of you. 

Edit 2: Yes, I'm encouraging the experience sharing, not necessarily the drug consuming, but if you plan something with drugs involved IT IS REALLYIMPORTANT  firstly to inform yourself and share all the risks and the ways to do it correctly. You can find a lot of info about how to do things correctly here: https://rollsafe.org and https://tripsafe.org

Edit 3: You can also find really useful info [here](https://www.reddit.com/r/DrugNerds/comments/15m9sf/mdma_supplementation/) and [here](https://www.reddit.com/r/DrugNerds/comments/13lp0b/mdma_neurotoxicity_part_1_metabolites/).
 
EDIT: UPDATED!! PAGE NUMBERS INCLUDED!!! New links linked below

357 Pages. 7 Years. 100’s of Sources. Countless hours of Experience later.

I am so proud to announce, I have completed my book:

Drugs Of The Universe: Volume I

I am posting it here, for All of You now, completely FREE of charge. No strings attached. COMPLETELY FREE! 

I wanted to publish it traditionally, but with the state of the world right Now, I believe the time has come for me to share my Message

The Message: Drugs will continue to exist no matter how many laws are in place. Despite the risks of drug use, People will continue to use them. The greatest defense against this is EDUCATION and HARM REDUCTION. You will find plentiful knowledge on both of those topics in the book linked here (10mb).

UPDATED LINKS WITH PAGE NUMBERS!
Mirror 1:

https://archive.org/details/drugs-of-the-universe-v-1-2

Mirror 2:

https://we.tl/t-CVkt43jCk0

Mirror 3:

https://www..com/file/kcwjt9m9bt4xgb6/DrugsOfTheUniverseV1_1.pdf/file

To download, just but the words "media" and "fire" in between the "www." and the ".com".

The table of contents should give a general idea of some of the subject matter that Will be encountered.

PART I - Opening

Disclaimer!

The List - What drugs have I done?

Preface

About Me

Addiction

“Graphing” Addiction (My visual view of addiction)

Getting “High” Without the Drugs

PART II - Safety

Safety 1 – Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ’s)

Safety 2 – Do’s and Do nots of drug use

Safety 3 – Sample Steps to take drugs

Safety and Suggestion for Various Routes of Administration (RoA)

How to use this Book

PART III – Drug Chapters

Sugar (17pg)

Caffeine (17pg)

Nicotine (22pg)

Alcohol (23pg)

Cannabis (22pg)

Benzodiazepines (23pg)

Amphetamines (28pg)

Cocaine (22pg)

Opioids (40pg)

Ketamine (22pg)

MDMA (27pg)

LSD (24pg)

Glossary

Could making this information publicly available cause lasting consequences for me? Possibly. But, for something as important as this, I believe it is worth it. There is invaluable information contained herein. Please pay special attention to the reagent tests that were done 😉.

I cried at least 50 times while writing this (not an exaggeration).

Don’t judge this book by its cover if you can! LOL My artistry skills are not very well developed, and my options were limited!

I am posting this on multiple social media platforms, and really anywhere that I believe it can provide help and assistance (teachers, drug counselors, etc.), because I believe so strongly in my mission.

My views on the use of drugs that you may observe in the book, especially with regards to the criminalization of them and resulting consequences, may be controversial, but again, I believe in the Greater Purpose.

Many friends have been lost, and it is partly for them that this book is written. I will miss you my brothers <3

I also extend thanks and dedication to “The One No Blade Can Pierce”, as this person provided the initial inspiration to construct such a manual. Who knew that saying, “You should write a book” would actually manifest such material years later? :) 

Thanks are also due to “Yaw Chas”, as he has guided me on a spiritual journey, that allowed me to deeply reflect about my life and what I must do in it.

Thanks to “The Powers That Be” (the person, not the government!), for he opened my mind to the Reality of the world around me, causing me to question this space we live in, and what my purpose is here.

And a great big thank you to all my friends and family, who have supported me when it was needed, and guided me when I needed guidance. I love All of you so much. Spread light and love. Be kind. Share this with anyone who may benefit from it.

BY DOWNLOADING THIS BOOK, YOU AGREE THAT YOU WILL TAKE FULL RESPONSIBILITY FOR YOUR OWN ACTIONS, AND I CANNOT BE NAMED RESPONSIBLE FOR ANY CONSEQUENCES THE READER MAY FACE BY READING.

I welcome criticism! Please! Let me know what chapter or section could use improvement (or if I made grammar/spelling mistakes, which I undoubtedly did)

While the book is FREE, I humbly accept donations:

If you are familiar with the website that you can GO to so that FUNDs can be raised for ME:

immediately after the .com, put

"/f/support-free-and-honest-exchange-of-information"

without quotes. 

&#x200B;

LOVE YOU ALL!

EDIT: THANK YOU for all the awards everyone! I am honored!I live in one of those dumb gated communities where everyone is in each other’s business. Before I got my medical card I always snuck off to the public park in my neighborhood to toke up in the bathroom to avoid my parents and nosey neighbors. 

One day, i’m packing a fat bowl into my steamroller, and this 6’4” bald russian security officer barges in. The only thought going through my mind is how screwed I am. He’s blocking the only exit, and he’s 200 pounds heavier than me (I was 14 years old at the time). He then smiles and says “whatcha smokin?” in the thickest russian accent i’ve ever heard. A million lies go though my head before I finally blurt out “just some pot sir” he says “pot eh..?” He laughs and I am left thoroughly confused. 

He takes a leak at the toilet while I stand there awkwardly wondering if I should pack up my weed and run. When he turns to leave, my stupid high ass says “You want to try it?” because he looked genuinely intrigued. He smiles and to my amazement says yes. I pack him a bowl of greens and sprinkle some precious keif on top (I wanted him to feel the effects and figured he would only take a tiny hit). He then proceeds to scorch the bowl like there’s no tomorrow and CLEARS THE WHOLE THING IN ONE RIP. 

I asked him if he’s ever smoked weed before and he says “only tobacco” and I didn’t believe him because he just ripped it like a pro. He said he just moved from Russia and they smoke tobacco out of pipes. 

Every week after that I would ride my bike and he would honk his car horn when I passed and I would sell him a little sack out of my personal stash. I honestly didn’t have a scale so I hooked him up with a handful when I had it for $10. When I only had a little I just gave him a few nugs for free. I didn’t realize I could be making serious money off of this guy. 

One time in passing he mentioned how the old guy down the street was selling pills, and how my neighbors a few houses down gave him cocaine after he got a noise complaint. This opened my young 14 year old eyes to how common drug use was, even in rich communities. I didn’t even know there was cocaine in my city until that day. 

About two and a half years after our first exchange, he just disappeared. After many smoke sessions, talks about russia, drugs, my neighbors, school, his fiancé... he was just gone. Just like that. Disappeared. I asked some of the other security and none of them knew what happened. Maybe he was finally drug tested, maybe he moved back to russia, maybe he got himself into some trouble. I’m not really sure. All I know, is I miss you old fella. I hope ur doin alright, and I’m gonna go pack a bowl for you right now.(Just for background, my parents are cool with me smoking weed, drinking, etc, as long as I keep my grades good and keep doing sports) So one night I was chilling in my living room with some of my friends geeking on my dmt cart. I left it on the shelf there attached to my battery and we went out of the house to fuck around. Well basically when we came back my parents were both sitting on the couch watching a movie. I assumed they were baked because they do that sometimes, so I didn’t really notice anything weird. Well about 10-15 minutes later I go to the living room to make popcorn and both of my parents are both looking a little spacey and they tell me something along the lines of “that cart was really strong”. It takes me a couple seconds to realize they completely cluelessly smoked my DMT cart. They refuse to smoke THC carts to this day under the false pretense that they’ll trip out again. Good times.So yeah title. I'm 16 and my mom took me to new doctor a few days ago and I do all the normal doctors office stuff with the nurse. Then the doctor walks in and I realized that she looked oddly familiar. I kept looking at her and she was looking at me and it clicked. She's the girlfriend of my plug. I've been in their appartment waiting for my plug to go get whatever when's she's been watching tv and she said hi to me and shit. She starts taking my blood pressure and looking at me kinda weird but we mostly just sit in uncomfortable silence. So yeah I left and we didn't talk about it. I brought from my plug earlier and he gave me an extra joint saying enjoy from his girlfriend.So this happened like 3 weeks ago but I got reminded of it from some other thread.

I'm hiking a trail that goes by some abandoned mines and I decide to crawl in one. When I get there I start looking around and I smell weed. I keep walking to the back of the mine cause I see a light and there's a white guy wearing jean shorts and boots rolling a blunt on a piece of wood.

 I'm like "sup man" and he's like "hey what's up dude. You smoke?" I say yeah and he asks me if I want a hit. I tellem "I'm not hitting that dude you rolled it on some wood in a mine." He starts laughing and tells me he's got some more in his bag. I ask him if he'll sell it to me cause there's no way I'm passing up this opportunity to buy weed from some guy in a fucking cave. 

He tells me its cool I can just have some. He busts it out and gives me maybe like a gram and a half. I check it out with my flashlight and it looks pretty dank so I gave him the $7 I had on me. I ask him why He's rolling up in here and he explains that "it's too fucking windy to roll a blunt out there." Understandable.

He's done rolling at this point and asks me again if I wanna hit it. In my head I'm thinking fuck it, I've put worse stuff in my body, one hit won't kill me. I hit it, tell him thanks for the bud, and that imma head out. He's like "cool cool have a good day brother" and I'm like "see you later." 

Then I crawl out of the mine.Yesterday I was cycling downtown to draw some cash and buy oxy with my last funds. As I was heading to the atm, there was a guy in a wheelchair, who had cerebral palsy and asked me to help draw him some money, since he couldn't move his hands properly. I agreed and he let me take out his card from his wallet and draw 250 bucks, he had to tell me his pin number and all, I couldnt believe it. I could have just run with his card and money and buy more drugs. I was sober tho, so I didnt, thank god. It makes almost sick that I even thought of that. 

But anyway, the guy thanked me and we went separate ways and I was happy to help him :)
But honestly he should have had his caretaker (or what are they in english) with him in that situation, since something bad could've happened. 

Thats all and thank you for reading this post, peace!

Edit: I fucked up the title, lol.You can also do it EVERY DAY and not build up any tolerance.


Is used by all the top musicians, shamans, and thinkers. 


Even politicians/world leaders do it behind closed doors…



Get some sleep fuckersCan I just say as a woman I HATE buying weed from dealers. Men dealers always want to talk down to the women or get in their pants. Like dude I just want bud. I have gotten blocked by three dealers in my EXTREMELY small town just because I told them I didn’t want to go out on a date because I had a boyfriend. My money is just as good as any mans and the fact that I have to get sexually harassed is fucked up.So today a batch of meth I ordered from the Darknet arrived and as tempting as it was to use, I managed to bring myself to flush it. It took everything in me not to walk down to the convenience store and buy a pipe, but I forced myself to walk to the bathroom, close my eyes and empty the bag down the toilet. Even though it was one of the hardest things I’ve ever had to, I’m feeling extremely proud of myself as of this moment and don’t even care that I flushed $130.

EDIT: Wow, I wasn’t expecting this post to get so popular. I just want to say thank you to you all for your support. It really motivates me to stay on track and kick addiction up the ass. I’m taking it a day at a time, but if I’m ever having a rough day with cravings, I’ll look back on this post and remind myself of all the people who are rooting for me. I’ll do my best not let you guys down. Much love.When I was in high school, my friends and I would read hours of your guys posts on harm reduction, experiences and overall advice and it helped guide us safely through our journeys of trying different drugs. You guys do the job the government doesn’t want done and teach people how to be safe with their drug uses. People like all of you keep kids safe, and if nobody else will say it, I will; Thank you! For every comment, post or article you have posted here. You made a difference. I work in sales and last week my boss asked me why I do my job. So I told him that I want to make enough money to buy enough drugs to get me through the evenings and weekends.

Today I got a raiseThe year was 2012, and we were all supposed to die in December. It was my freshman year of college. I was settling in quite well. I made friends with a bunch of people in our residence hall, we hit it off immediately. We started going out on the weekends, starting with thirsty Thursday, which turns out is actually a thing. I had more than one room mate. We lived in a four person suite with two bedrooms. I had a full ride to my University, so I had a lot of extra money to spend on my living arrangements and meal plan. Oh yeah, I was also a huge pothead.

I made friends with the dealer on my floor and started buying him extra meals in exchange for weed. That's when one of my room mates came to me with a proposition. He asked me if I knew what bitcoins were. I did not. He explained the virtual currency and how it worked. Then he really laid it all out. He told me that he had quite a lot of bitcoins and that he wants to get into selling weed. It all sounded great, but I wasn't sure what he needed me for. He then told me that he doesn't really talk to anyone and that he always sees me with people and going to parties every weekend. Okay, this makes sense. He told me how the operation would work, and it sounded swell. For the record, I was eighteen and very stupid. Anyway, he would purchase the drugs from the Silk Road, a dark website where you can buy literally fucking anything. Our friend Noah would then get the goods delivered to his apartment, which had a mailroom with hundreds of mailboxes. This was good because it would be just a little bit less suspicious, also his apartment was not on our campus. Then we'd package everything there and move it to our dorm, which had it's own security. We lived in North Philadelphia, so the security and police were always looking out for the students. After we safely had the products, I would find the buyers.

Our first shipment went well. We ordered a half pound of weed, a gram of hash, ten hits of LSD, a small bag of opium (for us), and 1000mg of Alprazolam extract for my room mate's personal anxiety treatment. We got into this business to become weed salesmen. That weed took forever to sell. Everyone who sold weed already had good connections from their hometowns. The LSD though, that sold in five fucking minutes to one buyer who was interested in buying much more than ten hits. He asked us if we could sell him a couple hundred tabs. He said he'd pay $350 for each sheet of 100. We looked at the price per sheet on the Silk Road. It would cost us only $80 each. Yes sir, we can absolutely sell you a couple sheets. We told him we'd call him when it arrived. Later that night we brewed some opium tea and celebrated entering the LSD business. We bought the sheets for him, and we also bought two extras in case anyone else wanted some.

The next shipment came with no problems. Our friend came over and bought the sheets we had promised him. We made nearly $800 on that deal. We thought that was a lot, so we celebrated. Later that same day, while smoking a blunt in our courtyard, I made friends with some art students. They invited me to their dorm on the third floor. I agreed, went with them, and we listened to music and painted the walls of the dorm room which was super against the rules. They started talking about how they had taken magic mushrooms two weeks before and how it was life changing. I told them I had two-hundred hits of acid in my room. I've never seen people get so excited in my entire life. They bought all of it. They paid $400 for each sheet. Seemingly out of nowhere we made $600. Again, we thought this was a lot.

My room mate was really happy with my networking abilities. Dude, I was just getting high with some hipster art students. I didn't really possess the "networking skills" that everyone thought I had. We went online and purchased another five sheets. We started getting a bit more confident in our ability to sell this magic money making paper. That week I was in one of my classes and had to do a group project with a kid named Eddy. We went to his apartment to work on the project after class. Eddy had an apartment off campus because he was an upperclassman. On the way he asked if I smoked weed. Of course. He said he had something to show me. When we got there he showed me a small weed plant he was growing. It was an adorable little plant in a flower pot by the window. I asked if he needed any weed and he said that he did not. We smoked a bit and then her offered me a Xanax. I had never taken Xanax, so I googled the pill he offered me. Alprazolam. Huh, that's funny. I told him I had 1000mg of alprazolam in my room. This excited him.

I asked my room mate if he was willing to sell some of his private stash. Eddy only wanted to buy around 100 milligrams. He agreed and I brought Eddy to my dorm. We gave it to him for the cool price of $150, a slick markdown from what he was paying. After all we hadn't even planned on selling that stuff. He asked how we got it so cheap and if we could get anything else. We told him that we sell LSD. He said he loves hallucinogens and would love to purchase a sheet, so he did. Four sheets left. If we sell them, we can get a new and faster computer.

The weekend came and I was hanging out with two of my friends from our residence hall. Joe, who was really chill and loved smoking weed as much as I did. And Bianca, who was so cool that it frightened me. She was really intimidating. I had a huge crush on her, but she was "talking" to a kid that lived in Johnson and Hardwick hall. Bianca was the type of person you see in movies about cool kids doing cool things. A character who has a lot of depth, but it takes nearly the whole movie to slowly peel back the layers, and by that time you're in love. I told her if we sold the rest of our acid I'd buy her a new tattoo. She was covered in them. That night Joe was going to take us to his friend Jamie's house. We were going to try cocaine for the first time. I was terrified. Not only was I terrified about trying cocaine, but I was scared of doing it with Bianca. I just didn't know how I would act, and I didn't want to do something stupid.

We arrived at Jamie's house. Jamie was also intimidating. His house was what your typical trap house looked like at the time, with a bunch of really expensive music equipment. Everybody wanted to be a rapper or a D.J. that year. He introduced all his friends and offered us lines of coke. Here we go. Joe went first, he'd already done some before. Bianca went next without hesitation. Now it was my turn. I remember my hand shaking with the rolled up bill between my fingers. I chose the smallest line and sniffed. It did not taste anything like I expected. Five minutes went by. Oh, this is what cocaine is like. It was so underwhelming. It was also some thoroughly stepped on shit. I know that now because since then I've done some foreign blow that literally almost made my heart stop. Anyway, Jamie and I got to talking, mostly about his "music career". Jamie told me if I ever wanted to buy cocaine in bulk to hit him up. I laughed and told him if he ever wanted to buy LSD in bulk to hit me up. I was half joking. He looked at me with the straightest face and asked if I was serious. Honestly, this Jamie guy really scared the shit out of me. He was a good ten inches taller than me and the whole scene was really starting to freak me out. I told him I was serious though. He told me to come with him.

He brought me into his room and closed the door. In the room it was quiet. The walls were sound proofed. I looked around and the room was full of money, cocaine, and guns. Okay, he's probably not going to kill me. I hope. He then asked about my LSD connection. I told him I could get sheets for $350. He said he wanted books. Books? This guy wants books? I didn't know this at the time, but a book is a thousand hits of LSD. I told him I had to talk to some people and I would let him know the price, but that I could definitely make it happen. We went back into the party and he gave me line after line of cocaine. Joe offered him money for the lines, but Jamie told him not to pay. He said your friend here bought you guys as much coke as you want for the night. Honestly, that made me feel really cool. After the party I talked to my room mate and told him what happened. We looked up the price of a book on the Silk Road. $300. Not only could we have saved a lot of money if we had just bought a book from the start, but we were going to make a lot more money selling by the book. The days of getting excited over $800 were about to come to an abrupt end.

I talked to Jamie and asked how much he would be willing to pay for each book. He said he would pay no more than $3000 for each book. We decided we would sell him the books for $2,800 each. He agreed and asked how many we had. I said we can start with five books. He agreed. This was perfect. Not only were we about to make more money than we had ever expected, but acid was incredibly easy to ship. They were basically sheets of paper. Our supplier used to send it to us in between the pages of large children's coloring books. The books, or prints, as our supplier called them, blended with the kid's books very well. Our prints consisted of a large picture of Bart Simpson, The Grateful Dead bears, and a double rainbow portrait. If you didn't know what acid was, you wouldn't know these were drugs. We made nearly $14,000 from that first deal.

Over the course of a few months we would sell close to thirty-thousand hits of LSD. We had $75,000 in cash sitting in an empty bedroom at Noah's apartment. I stopped going to class. My room mate had filled his entire room with computer parts and instruments. Noah, well we didn't really see him much, but he was always present when we needed a shipment. We broke our cardinal rule of not getting high on our own supply. We took a lot of acid that semester. It was an extremely enlightening period for us. Things in my world began to take on entirely new meaning. I had a newfound appreciation for things I had never noticed. The connections with my friends became very strong and we talked about a lot of stuff that was just too deep for my other peers to even scratch the surface of. It was nice.

By my birthday in February we had over $200,000 in cash. We didn't die in December, not that I thought we would, but some people were legitimately surprised. They were mostly art students. Things started getting a little crazy. My room mate and I were taking a lot of Xanax by this time and a lot of nights celebrating were never logged as memories. We always told ourselves we would only sell LSD. We had sparked a huge psychedelic scene in and around Philadelphia. There were literally parties where everyone was tripping acid. Many groups of people began taking acid and doing really creative stuff that I admired so much. So much good music and art was around during that period. I felt like I was living in San Fransisco in the middle 60's. It felt like we were part of this incredible scene that nobody outside of the city knew about. Of course every wave has to break and roll back.

It was getting close to the summer. I hadn't been to class in months. We hadn't seen Noah since the previous shipment about a month prior. It was a regular weekday, but I wasn't going to class, so I took two hits of acid. I spent most of that evening and night writing and yapping into my tape recorder. I was on the subject of togetherness and how there are so many things that are so incredible that we never notice even though they're right in front of us. Acid talk. I was looking at a glass of water, thinking about its importance, and how so many of us take it for granted. That's when my room mate came home. This was *my* room mate though. Remember, we had a two bedroom, four person suite. *My* room mate, who was never involved in our operation. He was obliterated, and not from alcohol. This was something else. He limped into the room and collapsed on the bed. I immediately got the rest of my room mates together. That's when Christian told me what transpired earlier while I was locked in the bedroom tripping acid. He told me that my room mate had broken up with his girlfriend, took an entire bottle of lorazepam, and tried to cut his leg open with my biology scalpel. What the fuck.

I examined his leg and he did not *try* to cut it open, he succeeded. He had a gigantic cut all the way down his lower leg that was fixed up by his father who is a surgeon. His father then brought him back to the dorm. The condition he was in was terrifying. He was breathing, but not well. His heart rate was also very low and we had to monitor him for the remainder of the night, taking shifts to make sure he didn't stop breathing. I couldn't believe his father had brought him back in the condition he was in. The next morning I was exhausted. My room mate and I, the one with the bitcoins, left and went to Noah's apartment to relax for an hour. While we were gone Bianca was to watch over him with her room mate. When we got to Noah's we had a new problem. Noah hadn't gotten out of bed for what looked like weeks. He had ran out of his antidepressants and was in bad shape. At this point I checked out. I walked into the living room and opened a bottle of champagne. I poured a glass, popped a Xanax, and sat on the sofa. I was still a little foggy from my acid trip and I hadn't slept all night. That's when my phone rang. It was Bianca.

I answered the phone and her first words were: "Your room is full of police.". Well, it's been a good run. On my desk were a couple thousand hits of LSD and a handgun. In the other bedroom were numerous unopened box's of expensive computer parts, scales and drug paraphernalia galore, and a large pile of white powdered alprazolam. That room also smelled heavily of weed because there was a half pound out in the open. We had gotten very sloppy. I asked her if my room mate was okay. She said that's why the police are there. She said his mom was trying to reach him and he wasn't answering her, so she called the police for a wellness check. Bianca then started talking to someone and hung up the phone.

We pondered whether or not to flee the country and become outlaws. We did after all have all the cash here at Noah's. Close to a million dollars. Maybe more. Because we were getting sloppy, we had also started selling hash, Xanax, LSD, 25i-NBOMe, 2c-b, 2c-i, 2c-E, Mescaline, cocaine, MDMA, MDA, LSA, clonazepam, ativan, and other various designer drugs. We were going down for a long time. I started thinking about my life. It literally was flashing before my eyes. I thought about my high school crush, and how I should have been more upfront with her about how much I liked her. I loved her. I thought about the time we slept in the same bed and I couldn't fall asleep because I couldn't believe she was really laying next to me. I remembered how I never wanted to wake up next to anyone else. I thought about my trivial crush on Bianca and how shallow it really was. I thought about my parents and how they'd raised me better. How they did so much for me so that I could go away to college and have a better life than they had. I thought about sitting on the beach last summer without a care in the world. The "problems" in my life that seemed hilarious now. Will I go to prom? Is my car cool enough? My k/d ratio in Call of Duty. How could so much happen in less than a year? That's when Bianca called me again.

I was terrified to pick up that phone. We looked outside to see if police were surrounding the apartment complex. They were not. I answered the phone. She said the police were gone. She had put my gun and LSD in my desk drawer. The police never entered the other bedroom. It was just a wellness check. An ambulance came and took my room mate. He was going to be okay. I hugged my partner in crime and we cried. I wish I could tell you we cleaned up our lives after that. My room mate with the bitcoins developed a really dangerous drug habit after that. He spent most of his money on drugs over the next few years. I went back to class after that summer, but stopped going again because I wanted to party instead and start a career as a writer. I failed out of college. Throughout the years I went on numerous adventures all around the world. I have hundreds of stories, I just have to write them. Oh and I have to learn how to write properly. I don't use a lot of drugs today, and I don't encourage people to use drugs. I have unfortunately lost many friends during the opiate epidemic. Weed is cool though, I like weed. I wouldn't tell people to smoke it, but I'll never shame someone for enjoying some cannabis. Actually, I don't really shame people for anything, it's just not my place to judge anyone. Feel free to judge me though, about how my dorm became a drug superhighway.

&#x200B;

*\*\*Thanks for reading, more stories available on my blog. There's a link on my profile.*

&#x200B;

*Edit: This story is based around actual events that I have experienced.* EDIT: This really blew up. Thanks for the awards, (my first ever) much appreciated. I'm working right now but will respond to comments I've missed later. Lots of good discussion in the comments, which is what this community should be about. Stay safe troops.

(long) There are plenty of stories about drugs completely fucking up people’s lives and rightfully so. That is a big risk for a lot of people when they start down this path and it shouldn’t be understated. I don’t think it's said often enough though, that it is possible to avoid sobriety every day and still have a functioning life. Sure I’ve been close to the edge plenty of times and took it too far once or twice or a thousand times, but I have created so many amazing memories and for the most part, kept everything well balanced enough to cause minimal harm to myself and those around me. This involved LEARNING AS MUCH AS I COULD ABOUT THE SUBSTANCES I WAS TAKING. Can't stress that enough. We have something the generations before us didn’t - The ability to find the truth about these substances for ourselves. Don’t ever rely on what other people tell you (especially dealers). Do your own research. Especially when it comes to dosages/purity indicators/method of intake.

My daily substance abuse evolved over time but was at its most dangerous when I was young, stupid and uneducated about what I was taking. I’ll lay out a timeline that shows what I was taking. NOTE: Where there is more than one substance, I don’t mean I was taking them all every day, just that every day I was on one or another or a combination. The only constant is weed.

Age 14 - 20  (Amphetamine, MDMA, Weed, Diazepam, Alcohol) Like everyone it started with alcohol and weed (I always preferred weed). Then speed became involved and I learned that staying up all night partying was a thing - this became a regular occurrence in my life for the next 15 years. Then I was introduced to ecstasy, which went so well with the rave scene I was into back in the early 2000s. Learned quickly that the upper/downer lifestyle that came with regular mdma/amphetamine use was not sustainable. Though I still kept the daily/weekly use going way longer than I should have, which wreaked havoc on my neurotransmitters. Began smoking weed every day by age 16, and this continued (and still does). A good friend died a drug related death during this time which made me decide that if I was going to continue this lifestyle, I was going to educate myself as much as possible, and educate others to minimize risk where possible. Also met my beautiful SO during this time, who I’m still with.

Ages 20 - 31 (Cocaine, Weed,  LSD, Alcohol, MDMA, 2CB, Oxycontin and various other opiods, Lorazopam and various other benzos, Ketamine and various other dissociatives) This is when I started to branch out into other things. It was no holds barred at parties and sometimes the substance list was ridiculous. Up to 12 substances on the go at the same time. Total madness. Every party was permeated by endless cocaine. Thousands of pounds worth of powder every weekend. Eventually my coke use started seeping into weekdays, becoming daily by my mid twenties. Started selling coke and using oxy to get through the day because I was always coming down off the powder. Generally I became a complete mess and this was the closest I came to fucking my life up. By my late twenties I was doing a lot of acid at the weekend but was still struggling with coke and oxy when I turned 30. Still smoked weed constantly mostly pipes and bongs. During this time I was partying with all manner of  people. From doctors and teachers to club promoters and scummy crack dealers. We were clubbing, raving, going to festivals, partying anywhere from penthouses to crack dens with boarded up windows and no front door. I wasn’t picky at all about the company. As long as we both took drugs I was down. At one point I sniffed ten grams (high grade flake cocaine) by myself in two hours. Low point during this period was running out of coke after a four day, £3k binge, I scraped the tissues I had been blowing my nose on all weekend and produced over two grams of (slightly green) 'recycled' powder, which I proceeded to snort. Vile, I know.

Ages 31 - 35 (Mushrooms, Weed, DMT, LSD, Codeine) Not going to lie though I know it's a complete cliche these days, discovering DMT changed everything for me. After my first breakthrough I was completely and utterly blown away. I started pushing it further and further. I broke through more than six times one night, I was smoking it at the peak of 600 microg acid trips etc. I will never forget some of the experiences I had, but sadly, as is the nature of dimethyltryptamine, I don’t and won’t remember most of them. Regardless, it completely changed me, and my attitude towards drugs and pretty much everything else. I stopped eating meat, stopped smoking, started meditating and I stopped binging on booze and cocaine almost immediately. Stopped ordering grams every time I was going out etc and basically, over time, removed cocaine from my life (other than the occasional time when I can track down proper levamisole free shit, maybe once or twice a year). Also started taking, then growing my own mushrooms, which all in all, I’d say are my favourite drug of all time. I still use weed everyday but I use a vape now, and I still use codeine most days as well (something I want to eliminate tbh), I also microdose with psilocybin which I highly recommend to anyone who wants to adjust their perspective, be more creative or feel more grateful in their life. I cut 90% of people out of my social circle in this time-period. Learned that quality is so much more important than quantity when it comes to mates. (again I know, this is super obvious)

So what was the point in that wall of text? I really just wanted to highlight that it's possible to be a healthy and happy daily poly drug user, and maintain a normal life. I drifted too close to the edge too many times, but I always pulled it back. Through all of the above I was either in education/employed at a fairly high level, and kept healthy functioning relationships with my family, SO and amazing kid. I’ll give you my take away lessons from a life of substance use;

* Avoid the big three, Heroin, Crack, Meth. The Risk/Reward balance is skewed so far towards risk with these three. Besides, there’s plenty of fun to be had without them and it could be argued that there are less harmful variants of all three so there’s no need to go there
* Cocaine is generally not worth the money. Coke parties usually devolve into no one listening and everyone waiting for their turn to talk (always egocentric bullshit). Generally speaking, in my experience it's much more fun tripping on psilocybin or LSD with your mates, and you won't wake up with an empty bank account. There’s a time and a place for every drug though.
* MDMA is an amazing drug, and going to a club/festival on madman with your best troops to listen to your favourite music and dance is one of the greatest pleasures in life BUT it’s not a drug to be taken weekly or even monthly. Take it easy with that stuff.
* Find an SO who fully accepts your drug use, or better yet, one who wants to share the experiences with you (it should be noted that sex on acid--when its someone you love and are completely comfortable with--is without doubt the best sex you’ll ever have)
* Make a pact with yourself that if things get out of hand with any substance, you’ll take a step back and adjust your behavior if need be, for the good of your health/finances/relationships. I know that sounds super obvious! But basically, don’t be a fucking idiot (all the time)
* Alcohol causes more trouble than anything else. Never forget or underestimate this fact. 90% of the stupidest shit I’ve done has been while drunk.
* Psychedelics are where it's at. I wish I had discovered sooner how much fun it is to trip with my mates/SO as opposed to drinking/stims. Get your squad into tripping, the sooner the better.
* Everyone should break through on N,N, Dimethyltryptamine at least once in their life. Many people claim to have broken through. In my experience, very few actually have. You can tell the difference easily. The ones who have really gone the distance are usually speechless about the experience - the ones who won't shut up about it typically want to tell people about the experience more than they want to actually have the experience.
* Being ‘lightweight’ is a good thing. The less of a substance you need to get high, the better. And don’t feel pressured to take a full pill/tab/whatever because everyone else is doing it. If you only need a half, take a fucking half and be thankful you’ve got another half for later.
* Share your shit man. There’s nothing worse than a stingy drug user. You’ll quickly learn who the people are who will reciprocate when they have and you don’t. These are generally the folk you want to party with.

I could go on and on but his post is already waaayy longer than I intended. If you made it this far, thanks for reading and remember, have some fucking fun out there man, do your thing, take what you want but above all else, stay wise, stay safe and look after yourself and the people around you.Hit 90 days today! Took me about double that to actually get to this point though. Anyone who's thinking about quitting, the first week is gonna suck but it's all downhill from there. Don't let a relapse or two or five stop you from trying, life gets much better. My parents no longer hate me. My brothers and sisters are actually excited to see me. I've started making new friends, started a new, better job and have money for whatever the fuck I want now! Now I just need to make it to day 120!The title might be misleading and maybe will not fit to the type of post I am about to type, but is true in every context.

I am no experienced drug user. I've done weed,alcohol,lsd,mdma,valium and xanax(low doses). I love getting high on these substances, who doesn't on this sub, lets not lie. And I am looking forward to trying more in the future (2cb, ket, dmt, maybe adderall..will never do opiates and cocaine). 

However, the feeling of peace and being clear-minded, sitting somewhere in nature and thinking about your life is so soothing. So underrating. Euphoric, yet so calming. You've made it to this day. You've gotten through the good and the bad. You've gotten through breakups, fake friends, financial crisis, family fights, depression, sleepless nights. You've had good times aswell. Regardless, you are still alive and you should be happy to be so. You still have countless opportunities in life. Nothing is over, you are still breathing, so just take a deep breath and let it go. Be happy that you have access to these substances because many people dont. Please do not abuse it, please please please, your life, and the people who will cry for you and eternally miss you..its just not worth it. Use these gifts responsibly and enjoy it.

My life has been shit recently, I'm basically a programmed robot doing the same shit every day. I lost all my friends. Today I had a decent day at work, was kinda in a good mood when leaving but my boss attacked me for something I did not do. It fucked up my mood big time. So I went to the beach after a long time being isolated and I felt so blissed.

You - reading this. It's not hopeless. ITS NOT OVER. No matter how pointless it seems at the moment, sooner or later something great is going to happen and you will heal. I believe in you. 

Sending a big hug to all.I found out an hour ago my little sister died last night from a heroin overdose. I told her last time she stayed with me I was scared she was going to leave me. Leave her son. That i would have to live the rest of my life without my other half and my partner in crime. She blew it off and told me she didn’t do enough to die. She just got out of jail yesterday. She never called me. I never got my last hug or a goodbye. My grandma asked me to promise her I’d never touch a drug again. I’m so lost and I’m scared I’ll break my promise to her. I want to numb this pain. How am I supposed to go home today and tell my kids their aunt is gone. How do I make it through another family get together without her. Who do I call now when I have a bad day or something I thought was funny that only she would understand. My heart is absolutely shattered. Rest In Peace baby girl. Sissy will be there soon to make sure you’re ok. I love you Candice.

Update? I never imagined so many people would see or reply to this post. I’ve read every comment and sincerely appreciate all the love and well wishes sent my way. To clarify, I’m not a dude. I’m her big sister and we always called each other Sissy. I’ve actually never done heroin, downers aren’t my thing. Also, I’m not suicidal. My comment about seeing her soon was said to her with the intent to comfort her. It’s all I knew to feel at the time.Whoever you are, whatever you're on, even if you're just smoking weed, heck even if you're sober, don't forget to drink water! Stay hydrated my friends!# Thanks so much to everyone who participated!

https://erowid.org/general/about/about.shtml

Erowid has been providing unbiased information about drugs for over 20 years, strongly resisting any attempts at censorship and taking strict measures to ensure utmost privacy for those wanting to learn.

We've seen many changes in policies and attitudes about drugs over the last 20 years, with the regulation of cannabis, increases in research on psychedelics, and revelations about the use of Ketamine for the treatment of depression.

Recreational markets have undergone huge changes too, with the hugely increased popularity of "research chemicals" followed by operation webtryp, and then a decade later, the huge amounts of methylone that made it into the mainstream markets as MDMA. It would have been hard to imagine the existence of darknet markets 20 years ago, let alone the shape that they now take.

Erowid also runs [ecstasydata.org](https://www.ecstasydata.org), the only publicly searchable database of drug analysis results, with results going back to 1996. The ecstasy market has changed a lot in that time, from everything being a round, crudely pressed pill like [this](https://www.ecstasydata.org/view.php?id=924) to today, where ecstasy tablets may be comparable to professional pharmaceutical manufacturing quality (even if the ingredients may not be) like [this](https://www.ecstasydata.org/view.php?id=5152). We have seen all kinds of things come through the lab, with the popularity of DXM in the early 2000s, the huge numbers of pills with piperazines in 2008-2010 and then the current situation where pills may contain dangerously high doses of nothing but MDMA.


Drug education isn't all that sexy and we don't get any government funding, but currently we have the most incredible funding opportunity that we've ever had in our 22 year history. An anonymous donor has set up [a fund to DOUBLE](https://erowid.org/donations/pineapple_drive.php) any donations received by 10th March, up to a total of $250,000.

We have been incredibly lucky to see so many supporters show themselves and are currently at 173k/250k [now at 183 of 250!] of the target. We have some incredible plans for securing the future of erowid and would hugely love the support of /r/drugs.


Looking forward to your questions,
- Earth and Fire 

PS: Don't forget that if you happen to have DogeCoins they can count towards the matching! https://erowid.org/dogecoin

It used to be a place where grown ups could talk about drugs, sometimes you would even learn something, when did it turn into a bunch of drug naive 15 year olds complaining about their mean parents who won't let them smoke crack?So I really don't remember this experience, I don't have a good memory but I will try my best.
So both my parents smoke weed since young and my dad has done a lot of drugs so he was experienced at the moment this happened. They met at college and went to a lot of places around my country (Mexico) both because they liked it and because a lot of school trips. 
On one of those trips was to a mount that is called "cerro del Tepozteco " which is a little mountain with a prehispanic temple on the top. 
The morning of the climbing my dad ate 2 little "psylocibe mexicana" shrooms and gave one to my mom, then proceeded to give me a very little piece of the shroom.
We started to walk up and my mom wanted to carry me om her back but apparently I just wanted to walk all the way up and I fucking did it, I mean it's a 600 meters walk uphill. I was high for sure. 

My parents tell me that at the trip they saw two entities that were a little mad about it and they were putting traps, they put big stones on the road so we didn't go through it. 
Also once we passed them, they would appear only meters ahead. 
Both my aprents saw these two entities that looked very strange but they didn't talk about it on the road they mentioned when we get to the top so that's just fucking weirder. 
This trip ended well but it was apparently a ver intense trip for my parents. Seeing those things was ver scary but they power it through and made it and at the top the trip went to a whole better place in which apparently helped a lot to my parents and our whole familiy relationship.


Now if you want to criticize my parents for doing this to me, well here in Mexico, more precissely in Oaxaca, in some little towns, almost the entire population eat them because it's considered medicine. Everyone, adults, the elder, and of course children ( very small amounts as what my parents gave to me) eat them constantly and they don't go crazy or shit like that they are happy and connected to the nature. So please don't freakout. I'm very well and happy 😌.


And I love shrooms ❤So just a small thing I think we should all touch base on. There have been a pretty good number of people coming into the drug subreddit seeing help or advice while in the middle of a trip. I think we should all as a subreddit work to be kinder to these people no matter what their situation, for example yes, the kid who took 2 tabs before school and is now seeing fractals in math class is not the brightest crayon in the box. But hear me out if he comes into the subreddit looking for advice wouldn’t it be better to comfort his mind given his current situation rather than calling him a fucking dumbass or being sadistic/ sarcastic in a way he might take wrong and progress into a horrible trip? We have to remember how fragile the mind can become in these situations and the damage we could cause could be permanent or at least stick around for a while. Anyways long story short I hope we can work together to approach these situations with more passive thought and positive reassurance. Much love!

Edit: rip my inbox! this post has blown up I want to make sure all the great resources for tripping in the comments don’t go unnoticed!

Edit #2: you guys are the best!!! Y’all’s comments have made me laugh, cry, and hope, it’s amazing to see so many of you make a conscious effort to do your part. THANKS FOR SILVER STRANGER!!!!!!!!!!and he won't give af, tell the same druggie the MDMA will lose it's magic, he's gonna wait 4 months to make sure.Edit: content warning, suicidal ideation

I'm 26 years old and have been using hallucinogens since I was 21. I consider myself to be in recovery from alcohol and hard drugs, but have been holding onto cannabis and hallucinogens for a while hoping I could still use them casually. Unfortunately I think I have to let go of hallucinogens now too.

The first time I tried shrooms I had an amazing time and became a huge advocate for them. I did them as often as I could, once every two weeks or so for about a year, before they just became another drug in my enormous rotation of substances. I disagreed with the conventional wisdom that LSD was an "easier" drug to do than psilocybin, but extolled the virtues of hallucinogens in all forms both for their therapeutic value and simple enjoyability.

I always encouraged people to make sure they were in a relatively healthy mindset before doing hallucinogens because I had witnessed people have bad experiences after getting hung up on some negative aspect of their life. This is advice that I, myself, ignored this time. 

For context, like many of us, I've had a pretty rough year. Between the realization that I am, in fact, an addict (and no longer a high functioning one), a quick jaunt to a crisis center resulting in a bipolar diagnosis and a fresh set of psyche meds, and an overdose death that, for reasons I won't go into, I take responsibility for, I've been getting a bit slapped around. Not to even mention the global pandemic. 

So despite my shame surrounding the death of my acquaintance, and the paranoia swirling around my manic brain, my friend and I decided that this Saturday we'd trip shrooms to help them get through a breakup and to celebrate my 90th day sober from alcohol. Before you say a word, I know how fucking stupid that sounds. 

So around 4:30 pm I weighed out about 4 grams of shrooms for each of us (and a third friend who joined us) and we begrudgingly munched through peanut butter and shroom sandwiches. An hour later I was laying on the ground, laughing at the absurdity of my life. 

I have a tendency to... romanticize my own dysfunction, and that was on full display at the beginning of the trip. I was having a great time rolling each one of my personal failings over in my mind and busting jokes for the audience of my two closest friends. But as the intensity of my trip continued to increase, something changed. It stopped being fun. I felt anxiety building up in my chest and became overcome with fear and guilt. I felt my grasp on the world around me weaken.

At this point, I'm not entirely sure what happened. I "browned out." My memories are patchy, at best. What I do remember is calling my partner and begging her to come over. I remember laying on the floor of my living room, smashing my face against the hardwood floor and clawing at my eyebrow piercings until I felt blood drip down my cheek.

I later learned that there was no blood, and I had completely imagined that. 

My friends tried to get me to take a shower but as soon as they closed the door behind them I ran screaming from the bathroom and assumed a fetal position on the floor of my bedroom. My partner still wasn't there and I demanded my roommate call my closest sober friend so she could comfort me. I begged my friends to find my journal and put it in my arms and I held it tightly to my sopping wet chest, screaming over and over into the carpet "I can't do this anymore, I'm trying so hard."

Finally my partner arrived and whispered  comfort into my ear for what felt like forever. I told her I was going to kill myself and made her promise she would burn my journals. I begged her not to call the cops. I repeated this over and over again. I truly thought I would wake up the next day back in the psyche ward, if I woke up at all. I had never been that scared in my life. 

Next thing I know I'm lying in my bed, my friends and partner are all in bed with me, and everything is more or less fine. It felt like it had been so long, but my watch said 9:30. My friends told me I'd been panicking for roughly an hour and a half. I asked them if each person in my life was okay, one by one, until I felt sure I had made it through the worst psychological experience of my life with little to no consequence except the bruise coming in on my face. 

Well, my partner was pissed. She's sober and thought I was trying to get sober too. I *was* trying to get sober. 

I'm not exactly sure why I felt compelled to share this. Maybe as a warning that you shouldn't fuck with drugs when your bipolar symptoms are at an all time high and you're in the process of balancing new psyche meds. Or maybe as a farewell to drugs in general. But if you take one thing away from this story it should be that when people tell you to be careful with hallucinogens, you should fucking listen to them, no matter how experienced you are. 

Anyway, here goes: 91 days sober from alcohol, 1 day sober from drugs.Holy shit man, I always heard people say it was a "natural high" but never took it seriously until yesterday. Cranked the cold water for 60s then switched to hot which was nice but today I did it the other way around, 60s cold for the end of my shower. As soon as the cold water hits you stimulate your sympathetic system and its like a hit of good coke man. I was literally yelling like "WOOOO HOLY SHIT" the whole time then when you get out and dry off your body feels really nice and you get filled with this explosive energy and euphoria. The music I was listening to sounded better and I started singing and everything which isnt really typical for me. Try it out bois its free for fuck sakes.

Edit: To all of you who are going to comment about how its not comparable to drugs or doesnt feel like cocaine: I know this, its exaggerated as a joke, save your breath and have a laugh. It does feel pretty damn good thoughYou were 14. You rode the bus home with us every day. We'd get to your house and run upstairs, only 15 or so minutes until your mom got home. We'd pack the bong, hit the patio, blast The Beatles and smoke until we were on the floor coughing. That 70's Show was always on at this time, right after Scrubs finished. We always talked about how similar your dad was to Red Foreman. We were young, high, and had no idea what the world had in store for us, but we were happy. Your house always had the best snacks.

You were 16. I drove us all home after school, and as always, we'd unload at your place. You and Marcus would argue over who'd roll today's blunt, and I'd sit back and laugh at how dumb the two of you were. Your mom stopped caring about us smoking pot, cause we were on the verge of young adulthood and both got accepted into the college of our dreams. Getting stoned wasn't quite what it used to be, as with all the pressures of becoming an adult, came unwarranted amounts of anxiety. We were also too old to act the way we used to when we got high, something that really only seemed to affect me because you were always so damn mature. I hated that. Your cousin sold us some xanax, and we'd split one into three and drift away. For those couple of hours we were untouchable. Nothing mattered, we were the only ones who existed. We couldn't imagine life any other way, why bother? Nobody could tell us we weren't living life exactly how we were supposed to.

You were 18. You finally had set up our dorm exactly how we envisioned; TV's facing opposite direction so screen-looking was a thing of the past, microwave on top of the toaster oven on top of the mini fridge, a drawer full of weed paraphernalia and 7 posters of our favor artists, movie scenes and cliche college quirks. You passed me the straw as I broke my roxy in half, pieces flying everywhere that I would eventually try and find later.. You were more accurate then you thought your were when you would joke about me doing that. I'd separate the big, fluffy line into three smaller ones, and you'd suck yours down all at once. My tolerance was the same as yours was, but I lacked the $200 check you'd get from your parents every Monday. I was always kind of annoyed by that, but you'd occasionally show my broke-ass some love. Me and my girlfriend were fighting, and it got so bad that you drove me 400 miles to see her while your car was literally falling apart every step of the way. Your parents were so pissed that you drove while your car was in that kinda condition, but you told them it was something you had to do. It actually hurt you to see me cry, cause it was something you had never seen me do in the 14 years we were friends. Your transmission was replaced and your parents were $2400 poorer, but we were on our way back to school. You had just affirmed yourself as the most caring person in my life. My dad had passed and my mom was back in France, but I had you.. and for that I was pretty damn lucky.

It was your 19th birthday. It was my birthday literally just the day before, and we would always celebrate them together. You walked into the dorm and I pretended not to notice you, which had recently become the norm. I had the funniest story of this failed attempt to spit game at some girls after psych class, but I knew I'd be saying that for someone else. We had stopped talking for about a month now, due to your stubbornness and my inability to break a grudge, regardless of how petty it may have been. You were wearing long sleeves in July, but I didn't notice. You'd sit on your bed and watch ancient aliens, and I'd find some excuse to leave the dorm. Your presence drove me mad, as I'm sure mind did yours. Truthfully, I don't think either of us knew why we were fighting, only that we were and that any attempt to act otherwise would make us look weak. My connection to all things opiate were officially cut off, but yours only grew stronger. After a fun week of dope-sickness, I finally started feeling like myself again. The benzos would kick in, and I'd head out to my new friends house. We'd hit every club, every big sporting event or social gathering we caught wind of, so we could take dope photos for people to admire on Facebook. You'd sit at the dorm, and watch ancient aliens with the lights always off.. No matter what time I'd come home, you were at the dorm watching that damn show. I brought some girl home one night, praying that you had found something else to do. You hadn't, and I officially had to take her somewhere else. I made sure to be as loud and obnoxious as I could while grabbing my shit, ensuring that you acknowledged my presence and current lifestyle as better than yours before walking out. It still hurt to see you like that... You said nothing. You were still wearing a long sleeve shirt, and I still hadn't noticed.

You were 22. You were outside of the gas station when I drove up, smoking a cigarette. You were bench pressing 185lbs at 14 years old our freshmen year of highschool, and here you were a senior in college looking like you weighed maybe a buck twenty. Your skin was pale, and the bags under your eyes hung about as low as my thoughts of you at that time. I smiled and you smiled, but we had nothing to say to one another. We were strangers, and we both had very different things to do. I saw you a couple weeks later, and I was pretty drunk. You looked even worse than you did the last time I saw you, which had to have been a hard task to accomplish. I was worried. I spent twenty minutes lecturing you and trying to mirror your image onto yourself so that you could see what I saw, but it was hopeless. You didn't see the issue, either that or you were too far gone and refused to acknowledge it. The kid behind you was sketchy and hung around you like a shadow, stepping in when I started to get emotional. He told me to fuck off, and I blamed him for destroying my best friend. The drunken tears started to fall, but my friends in the car were yelling my name. The tears were wiped away quicker then they fell, but I know you noticed them. Your friend laughed, but you didn't. I still cared, and you did too.

You were 23. Your oldest brother had received his sentence, and would be doing 17 years for trafficking, possession and selling to an undercover. Your younger brother still wouldn't talk to you. You had just gotten out of jail for violating probation, after getting caught stealing a drug test at Walmart. I heard the news and almost laughed, I couldn't understand how far you had fallen. You were always so much better than me in life, it was unreal to see how things had changed. I had my degree, a good job and a support system of friends that held through everything. You had a criminal record, a pocket full of pills and contact list full of people you either bought drugs from or sold to. I'd see you occasionally as I drove to work, and every time it was like seeing a ghost. I had no feelings for you anymore, no judgement. My painkiller habit had picked back up, but for some reason I still felt above you. I ended up running into you a few weeks ago, while I was picking up a few oxy 30's from my dude. You seemed almost excited that we were back on the same plane of existence, but I was disgusted. You tried conversing, generally interested in how I was, what I was doing these days and how my mom was. My answers were short, and I couldn't get away from you fast enough. It was obvious, and it didn't take you long to notice. You had fallen pretty low, but you were still as conscious as ever. I watched you take a long drag of your cigarette as I pulled away, staring directly into eachothers eyes. We were officially on two different planes of existence. I had no business on yours, and vise versa. This was the last time I ever saw you.

I got the news today. Your name and face was plastered across my Facebook wall, where every memory and funny instance with you was on full display. I considered writing my own status in your memory, but I couldn't. It just didn't feel right after all we had been through, and how I had treated you over the years. The cause of death wasn't broadcasted, but it didn't need to be, I already knew. Though it feels like 10 years since I've spoken to you, I can't help but think about all the time we spent together. Every minute of my life from 7 years old until 19, involved you in some way. You were the kid who I experienced life with, who I made mistakes with, who I got my first kiss next to.. You always gave me shit for having my eyes wide open. You brought me to parties, you fought alongside me, you accepted me as a brother and let me into your family when I felt like I didn't have my own. You cheered for me when I won, cried with me when I lost, and threw up with me when I was drunk or dope sick. You cared about me, through everything, and I threw you out of my life when you needed me the most. You never needed me, you were always the one I relied on for anything I went through, but you were always okay. When the time came that you weren't, I no longer had a need for you. I abandoned you, and you still forgave me. You still sent me invites on Xbox live, you still told funny stories about me with mutual friends and you still told your parents about all I had accomplished. You still gave a shit, you still cared. You were no longer a part of my life, but I was always a piece of yours, just a little lost along the way. You were the greatest thing I ever gave up in this lifetime, I'm sure of that.

You were my best friend.




Credits to u/Icee239
Already hit op up with a message last month asking them to post it here. Still no reply, guess the account is inactive.


Edit: According to u/Sea_of_Trees, OP has been shot and died last year. RIP u/Icee239.I have a plug for some pretty good LSD. This guy hadn’t said anything for a few days which I thought was weird, well it turns out he got caught with multiple sheets and is now facing 6 to 12 years behind bars. He was pretty up there in the distribution chain that’s why he was able to give such good prices on reagent test confirmed LSD-25 for prices cheaper than some markets on the darknet. Life can change in an instant, but i’m glad he was able to provide so many people with what I think is a pretty useful tool.Okay so basically this is a short story of how I played a competitive match of Sunday league football (league football in the UK) under the influence of good old Lucy. Would probably not recommend this shit to anyone because my mind was blown throughout this whole experience


I accepted a dare after a Friday night of partying to drop 2 tabs of acid (dosed around 100ug each) around 1h 30min before we had a football match. We play football every Sunday in a league based in the north of the uk and this particular game was not very important so I thought why the fuck not, what could go wrong ?


I’ve tripped over 20 times before (18m) with my highest dose being 600ug so I thought 200ug, no fucking problem. Anyway it’s just a 90 minute game of football maybe I will discover I’m like a prodigy whilst tripping. What the fuck could go wrong 


So after the acid is dropped (around 8:30am) I realise there is no going back, and a couple of people who also play for my team are with me at this party and although they didn’t want to take the dare up, they thought it would be funny if I done it so they could watch me trip whilst we played. Around 40 minutes after the acid is dropped I am basically tripping quite heavily already, everything is good and at this point I thought about texting my manager to let him know that I can’t play, but he needs me to play as I am also the captain funnily enough and I haven’t played for the last 2 weeks. So I just forget that idea and mentally prepare the best I can for this fucking huge important football game that I thought would be watched by hundreds of people who all knew I was tripping (in reality there was only 15 spectators). 

So the time comes round to leave for football, baring in mind me and my 2 friends (L & B) have had no sleep from the night before and have been taking fuck loads of ket, balloons and weed (we stopped at 4am) just before our match kicked off at 11am. I am sat in the passenger seat of L’s mums cars and have a funny feeling that she is driving me to the police station because she knows I’m tripping, so I ask where we are going to which she replies “football, did you not know you had a game?”and I was like oh yeah I forgot it was Sunday, even though I’m wearing my full fucking football kit which I only ever wear on sundays. L&B find this hilarious as they both know I’m tripping balls at this point (around 1h after the drop) and I just laugh it off with them, as all I can think about is the match that is upcoming. I feel like it’s life or death for the team even though I’m not usually interested in playing football on sundays. 


After having the strangest training session ever before the match and warming up I really felt as though I was the worlds fittest man and that I was going to single handedly fuck this game up and get scouted for some massive team because of my performance, I actually had a thought loop about this as it kept going around my head that I was going to be scouted at this game and have to move away from my family and friends forever. My manager didn’t really speak to me much and he had no idea I was tripping, neither did half of my teammates who I would be playing with. L&B told a couple of my other close friends on the team (who also enjoy drugs) that I was tripping and they just thought I was batshit crazy and I wasn’t going to argue with them. 


Me and the captain of the other team are called to the centre circle to shake hands and do the coin toss. I call heads as we are the home team and it landed on heads, I am a fucking genius. I start to laugh that it landed on heads for some reason and my opponent as well as the referee (who looked identical to the big fucking bald man in outlast who rips peoples heads off) are probably thinking wtf is funny, but fuck it we get on with the game anyway. I run back to my position, laughing when I notice L (who plays defence) in stitches because I laughed when we won the coin toss. I laugh back to him and we are ready to begin, let’s fucking have it 


It’s fucking kick off time boys, it is worth noting that I play as a central defender and my role is pretty important so I knew I couldn’t fuck up. This was it, now coming to what was the peak of that trip I was focused as fuck, shouting encouragement to my whole team like the passion captain which acid has made me. As soon as the game kicked off I started to think about how beautiful the sport of football is and how it brings so many people together all over the world and this just made even more determined to rip this shit up. 

I’m not getting much action in the first 20 minutes or so, maybe a few passes I have to make but nothing that would test me as of yet, until I notice this skinny ginger kid running towards me with the ball, game on mother fucker. 


I run towards him as fast I can whilst keeping my eye on the ball, (which was leaving tracers all over the grass as it was passed around) and just fucking make a huge slide tackle and take the ball straight from his feet, what a tackle. At this point I hear my team mates congratulate me and I feel like fucking Sergio Ramos on acid, and this is what was happening all game long - I was making some insane tackles and could perfectly judge where the ball was going to land by the shape of the tracers, fucking sick mate that game I played was one of the best of my life no joke. 


We are leading 2-0 at half time, and our manager calls us in for a team talk and tells me to keep up the good work and im like fuck yeah thanks let’s get on with the second half. I speak to L&B together and they ask me if I’m tripping to which I reply yeah and that I feel like an absolute athlete, they laugh and we kick off for the second half 


Not much happened in the second half and they didn’t have many attacks, but at one point I thought to myself that I should stand on this strikers toes whilst the ref wasn’t looking because I actually felt like Ramos and knew nobody could see me, I done it and he was like wtf and pushed me and I replied to him ‘all is fair in love and war’ and he looks at me like I’m about to kill him or sometbing - anyway the ref didn’t notice so I did it again to another kid, and then to another one which a parent on the sideline witnessed and he told the ref. When the ball went out the ref came over to me and said you better not let me catch you standing on people, and I seen this as a challenge from the outlast man himself, so I was like ‘you better not speak to me like that’ to the surprise of everyone (players and spectators) watching on, at which point he comes over to me and asks for my name. I tell him I forgot it, and my manager comes over like wtf and escorts me off the pitch after telling him my name. L is on the sideline when I go off and there was only around 10 minutes left to play so  I ask him if we can go home because I felt like I was gonna get lynched after the game by like 10 different people. He tells the manager we need to go as his mum was driving and she needed to be somewhere, he says yeah and tells me not to worry about being sent off and that he will speak to me at training on Friday. 

We collect our stuff and get the fuck out of there, go home and smoke a couple j’s whilst listening to music laughing about the game we just played. 


I know it was a silly idea to do this, and can’t imagine myself doing it again and would defo not recommend this to anyone, but fuck that was some experience one of my favourite trips ever. 

8/10 

tldr; Dropped 200ug LSD before a Sunday league football match as a dare, was playing amazingly until I started standing on people and was sent off by the refereeWas swinging by T Bell to grab some cheap food for me and a buddy. On the way in one of the young employees on his break and a friend of his were in the parking lot smoking a blunt. Shortly after I got inside they finished up, the employee goes back to work, and the friend gets food.

I was filling up my and my buddy's drinks and the friend who I'm guessing is about 16 was standing behind me, absolutely stoned out of his mind. Silly ass grin on his face, eyes that could be blindfolded with dental floss, the works. After I finished filling up both my drinks I joked to him "Sorry for holding you up, I'm sure your mouth is quite dry right now."

This kid's eyes went to the size of saucers with that "OH SHIT, HE KNOWS" look of horror on his face, followed by trying to force out a little awkward laugh.

I'm sorry, stoned teen. Don't feel paranoid because of me, I had bud in my car at the time too.I once ejaculated so hard whilst on GHB and Viagra that I came on the wall behind me. Thank you for reading.Hello guys, im not making this up. I boofed a 200ug tab of acid up my ass. It kicked in faster than normal, and was more intense. But now everytime i try to sit down its like my ass is scared to sit? like i traumatized my asshole? Has this happen to anyone else before? Im being serious.There's probably like an underwater equivalent of weed and shroom's and opium that we just haven't come across because we are land dwelling animals. Its like another planet down there, full of undiscovered drugs.

There could be some seriously good shit down there, someone needs to be checkingDon’t get me wrong a hydro script would be amazing especially with how bad my mouth hurts today but I just couldn’t take the risk I know I sound like a pussy saying this but Opoids are my Achilles heel once I start I can’t stop so I denied the script and got some bud and some CBD bud and been taking Tylenol and Motrin hurts but it’s worth it and honestly I couldn’t be happier with myself for saying no if I had said yes I might not be in pain from my teeth but I’d end up back on a path of destruction for myself and I’m so happy for saying no 

Also I still do other drugs I just avoid opiods

Yes this post is just to blow my own horn but I’m proud for saying no :)So yesterday I was smoking a joint on my bed and the doorbell rang. I got down to ground floor to meet the pizza guy. But when I got back in my room to eat pizza on my bed while smoking like a respected member of society, the smell of it made something in my mind click. I used to hang out a lot at my uncle's when I was in elementary school, that was the smell of this house. We liked listening to Bob Marley when he was driving me around. I remember him and her wife smoking a fuck ton of cigarettes inside but my grandmother did that too and the smell wasn't quite the same. So yes I just realised my uncle would get shamelessly baked before having me around at his house.

Fucking legend lolMy smoke buddy died today an i could not be more upset. I used to get really high and play with this little dude. His name was bandit and he was the best hamster i could’ve asked for. He put up with me petting the shit out of him while rolling, he listened to my conspiracy theorys when i would do coke and he was always happy to snuggle or be fed a peanut. Imma miss you, you soft little cutie.

Edit: https://www.reddit.com/r/aww/comments/dymruu/my_son_bandit/?utm_source=share&amp;utm_medium=ios_app&amp;utm_name=iossmf&amp;utm_term=linkToday I had the time, the money and the opportunity to buy coke but instead of doing that I took my kids to buy some surprise presents.

I'm not a regular user anymore but I've clung to these annual binges like it would be my death if it didn't happen. 

It feels great to just say no.

Ok y'all so we've all heard the meme. "How should I take X?" And there's always a comment saying "just boof it". So I did.

I decided to try taking 30mg of THC through my asshole. First of all the best way to do this is with infused coconut oil (if you can find sublingual capsules though use those). Measure out the right amount of coconut oil, freeze it, then shove that right up your shit cannon. 

Before doing this I didn't have any drugs all day to avoid any mixed results. After about 15 minutes I started to feel relaxed and hungry. At 1hr I was laughing a bit and food tasted pretty good and I was a bit high. By 2 hours it seemed to be peaking and the effects were mainly a very relaxed body high. I wasn't tired though.Things didn't get crazier than that though so I think I'm going to have to try again on another date. I will give more updates.

TLDR; I put weed in my ass and it got me high.

Edit: many people are saying "you know they sell suppositories right." And yes I do know this. The suppositories you will find are literally coconut oil and a few other ingredients in a little pill you put in your fart tunnel.19 year old kid dead, overdosed on MDMA and 3 people in a coma from suspected MDMA use at a rave this weekend.

"NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian extended her condolences to the teenager's family, but said her government would not change its stance on pill testing."

"Unfortunately we know that pill testing won't work because it will give people the green light to taking substances which in the end could still kill them," she said.

What a joke. Whilst the point may be true, people are fucking dying and the government says too bad, don't take drugs. Australian drug culture is somewhat akin to British drug culture, EVERYONE at these raves are on something, just let us test our shit and get on with it.

Apologies for the rant, needed to vent somewhere. Have a safe weekend guys.

Edit: link for those interested: https://mobile.abc.net.au/news/2018-12-09/sydney-dance-party-death-knockout-games-of-destiny/10598010

Edit2: ty for silver Anon, big love So this just happened, 

My friend is medically deaf in his left hear, and tonight he took 675mgs of dxm, his highest dose yet. This is his second dose, the previous one being 300mg. While listening to music with earbuds a few minutes ago, he took out his earbuds and said he could hear the music in his left ear. Mind you, he is completely deaf in his left ear. 

He put an earbud in his left ear only, and told us he could hear the music clearly, and that is was just very slightly muffled. 

Afterwards, we did some experiments in which he plugged his right ear completely and we whispered very quietly near his ear, and he was able to hear it and tell us what we said. 

He's actually in tears right now over this. In eighteen years, this is the first time he's ever heard from his left ear. This is both amazing and mind-blowing to us.

Edit: Left ear

Edit 2: Wow, this blew up! Thank you for the awards, and I'll try to get to every comment I can

Edit 3: These are my first awards 🥺

Update Edit: His left ear was dead again when he woke up today, it didn't persist into sobriety.listening to a rap playlist on Spotify, and a French rap song comes on. I don't understand a word until about halfway through the song, where suddenly I can understand exactly every word he's saying. I freaked out, fucked up me thought I suddenly figured out how to fluently understand French. 

listened to the song the next day, turns out the artist has a verse in English, and that's what I was listening to. So basically I was eating popcorn while on LSD with some friends and I thought I had a kernel stuck on the back of my gums. I tried to get it off and it just absolutely wouldn't come off. I was freaking out and ended up with my friends hands in my mouth - we could all feel it but couldn't get it out. For literally six hours we were all so focussed on this until the trip ended. In the end it turned out it was my wisdom teeth coming through. So trippy as fuck.Okay so I saw a random girl on my snapchat stories, its 2am over here, so i thought fuck it, im bored, im gonna send her a picture. So i sent her a picture of my face. She replied and asked me if this was "actually (insert my name)" so i was like bruh who tf is this im gonna play along, so i said yeah it is, long time no speak.

She proceeds to tell me how sorry she is for blocking me and not talking to me and shit so im like wtf do i have to pretend to be a crazy ex or sum, so i say yeah its no problem i dont hold onto things.

"Where are you right now?" i said and she told me shes in her house, why, so I said it looks different and she said "yeah i just had it decorated" 

Like wtf, idk this girl and somehow i have guessed she had her room redecorated lol.

Anyhow, i give up the fun at this point and i tell her straight "look imma be honest idk who this guy is that you think youre talking to but i aint him, but id appreciate it if you sent me a picture of him or something since it seems ive found my doppelganger"

She replies with laughing faces, telling me thats funny but no its definitely the right person. 

At this point im like what the fuck is going on, is she giving me a taste of my own medicine? Leading me on like i led her on?

&#x200B;

No. 

Turns out that during my 3 day binge of xanax BACK IN FUCKING NOVEMBER i somehow got this girls snapchat and had been talking to her but she cut me out all of a sudden. So whilst ive been sat here thinking im so funny pretending to be someone im not, she actually fucking knew me.

My head has been sent west by this situation. I swear to god, when you think you've figured out all the shit you've done on xanax, you always end up learning new shit that you done.

TL;DR I pretended to a girl of whom i didnt know that i was someone else, turns out i actually met her back in NOVEMBER when i was on a 3 day xanax binge my head is fucking gone lol im not even high rnI was just casually chatting to my sister on the phone, talking about the party tomorrow we're going to. I said I've been getting pretty wasted recently, so I'm sorry if I end up being a waster. She tells me "can't be worse than when you got so wrecked you did coke off my tits and then threw up on me"

I don't have that sort of a family relationship before any of you start thinking that way

I begrudgingly ask "what? "

Apparently I got super hammered at a party in London 3 years ago, and my sister took me outside to get some air. I was falling all over the place, so she offered me some coke to pick me back up. I go for the coke, but knock it open and all over her chest. Whilst shes checking the bouncers haven't seen, I've planted my face in and hoovered it all up. Shocked, my sister was probably hoping I'd now be able to sober up, she was a little more than shocked when I then threw up directly into her cleavage.

They got me back home, still dressed as a mermaid with a tiara on, refusing a bed for the far more comfortable pair of shoes and backpack on the floor. Kinda glad my memory wiped itself that time

Edit: I'll save the confusion for everyone and upload a pic of the costume http://imgur.com/a/XeYzVoJI'm a 30ish year old woman, and I was no stranger to drugs, having done pressed E pills, MDMA, oxy, lsd, mushrooms and coke through the years. So when one of my friends brought over a small bag of Meth one day I was like "why the fuck not" and I did a few little lines. You guys know already how it makes you feel so I don't have to describe it.. but I'll tell you one thing... they say "not even once" for a damn good reason. 


Week one -  I just snorted small bumps here n there when i wanted to feel energetic and productive

Week two - snorted small lines 

Week three -  my nose hurt like a bastard and developed sores inside so I said fuckit and started to smoke it...

Month one - smoking was wayyyyyyy "better" so I started doing more.. I'd guess about two grams a week or so.

Month two - got fired from my job for missing too many shifts cos I enjoyed sitting at home and getting high more than anything. I graduated to about a half gram a day on the pipe.

Month three - full gram a day... sometimes more if people were over

Month 4 - received eviction notice.. ignored it until the last minute, went to court and got 60 days notice to gtfo. Didn't really care much because Meth. Figured that I would find a way to pay rent or something.. IDK what my thought process was.

Month 5 - Meth Meth Meth... don't remember much of anything else but I was starting to get really paranoid and I thought people were trying to break into my house all the time

Month 6 - water, heat and electricity shut off.. oh well, I had a woodstove and snow = water so fuck it.  Meth paranoia, Meth psychosis, meth Meth, meth.. prob 2g/day

Sheriff gives me the boot, and three days to remove all my belongings.. I have no family (not because Meth, but because they died when I was 17) and my "friends" are just as methed out as I was, so I had nowhere to bring my stuff, and no money or way to put it in storage so I lose everything that wouldn't fit in a suitcase.

Wander around freezing half to death for a couple weeks.. decide for the first time in my life to apply for welfare, but I was denied because I didn't have proper identification.

No money and all my friends ditched me because I wasn't useful anymore.
 No money = no Meth so I was really dopesick. Decided I was a total loser and I needed to clean my act up.

Hitchhiked about 500 miles away, allied for welfare again even though I still had no ID.. was accepted! 

Got a small room, still no Meth. Deleted names, numbers, and anyfuckinthing related to Meth..

Jonesjonesjones...... got a job. 
Thought about Meth every day. Workworkwork... 
thought about Meth every day
Got a half decent apartment
Thought about Meth every day.
Still working, drink on the weekends, smoke pot alot, still think about Meth every day but I am committed to never ever putting that goddamned drug in my body ever the fuck again. I was at a small party the other day and was offered some.. I politely said no while I watched other people smoke. I'm done. I'm literally crying as I type this but I did it! Though I still think of it, and I know I always will. 

NOT EVEN ONCE. SERIOUSLY. 


The legal, weaker drugs I found to be the most damaging.

At the age of 14 I started abusing alcohol to drown out the sexual abuse I was experiencing by a 60+ year old friend of the family. At 16 I was struggling with juggling the continued sexual abuse, the realisation I was gay and trying to live a Christian life that was consistent with my families beliefs – I was a mess. I began suffering from very serious headaches that were later diagnosed as cluster headaches, excruciatingly painful. I was prescribed Panadiene Forte / Tylenol 3 and one night when I was 16 decided to see what happened if I took 10 at once. After an hour I decided to lie down and put some music on – that night I spoke to God for the very first time. I still remember the feeling and can only equivalate it to how a heroin addict must feel for the first time, my young body had never experienced an opiate overdose and despite Codeine being considered a weak opioid – 10 tablets were enough to send me into one of the most intense drug highs I have ever experienced. Pins and needles throughout my whole body, sinking into my bed, warmth I couldn’t explain – I was hooked and for the next few years would take copious amounts of paracetamol/acetaminophen codeine mix tablets trying to recreate the initial high.

I came out to my parents about the sexual abuse when I was 16 and then as a gay guy when I was 17. My parents were amazingly supportive through both and in hindsight things could have actually worked out OK if I had just not used drugs. But I continued and after seeing a Neurologist and not having any luck with my cluster headaches, had an appointment with a pain specialist. I was 17 and a new drug had just been released on the Australian market that promised to provide all day pain relief – OxyContin. I was prescribed 20mg tablets twice a day and after a few weeks moved up to 40mg and then 80mg three times a day. This OxyContin drug worked wonders for my headaches and enabled me to fly through each day without any pain whatsoever – both mental and physical. Stuff swallowing each tablet whole, I chewed em – much better that way. All 12 hours released at once and my brain equated the bitter taste with the most intense euphoria imaginable.

In hindsight everyone knew – the Doctor’s, my teachers, my parents, my friends – everyone except me. I was so addicted and dependent on OxyContin that it wasn’t funny. I relied upon these tablets to wake up each morning, go to school, do my homework, sleep at night. If I experienced bad news, I’d simply chew an OC 80 and was immediately able to cope, if I experienced good news, I’d chew an OC 80 and was able to celebrate – life was good during my late teens / early twenties.

I met my first boyfriend one night on Sydney’s Oxford Street whilst rolling on MDMA and OxyContin, he was 37 and a multimillionaire. I was 18 and had a job as a parking inspector. I moved in with him interstate a few months later and started a new life involving owning businesses and travelling the world. I had access to rich peoples doctors – the kind that write prescriptions on demand and ignore newly introduced legislation designed to protect citizens from the amazing euphoria offered by pharmaceutical companies. I had discovered how great OxyContin mixed with Xanax and my now team of doctors were only too happy to comply with a rather good looking 19 year old’s request for more medication to deal with a documented history of chronic pain. My psychologist’s report said it all: “Whilst John (name changed) is likely suffering from chemical dependency, his history of chronic pain, sexual abuse and sexual orientation place him in the highest category for serious self-harm and must be taken into consideration when assessing his suitability for pain relief.” Or my GP “John’s only solace is found when taking OxyContin and whilst he requires an usually high dose for pain relief, the medication is necessary for his overall wellbeing”.

In 2012 I was admitted to a rich persons rehab and remember (I don’t know how) my initial interview. I was asked what I took each day and stated honestly 8 OxyContin 80mg tablets and between 8 – 12 Xanax 2mg Tablets. “Is that all?” I was asked. I swear to God this is true, I was then placed on 9 (yes nine) 80mg OxyContin tablets each day and PRN (on-demand) access to Xanax 2mg – their reasoning was that I was lying and they didn’t want me to be uncomfortable. Throughout my six week stay I was provided with my 9 OxyContin 80mg tablets each day and unlimited Xanax – I was also placed on an antidepressant and various other medications.

After 4 years of living the high life, I broke up with my rich boyfriend and returned to live at home with my mother. My parents had gotten a divorce and I coped with taking more OxyContin.

I can’t really explain this properly – but it’s an important point. I had grown up with the idea that every event or crisis could be dealt with by using a substance. To using alcohol as a 13 year old being abused, to using Codeine for headaches, OxyContin for depression – everything was easily treated with drugs and it is how I learned to cope.

Upon moving back in with my mother, I was able to get back my job as a Parking Inspector and simply spent the day walking around giving parking tickets to cars whilst off my head on OxyContin. My medical records travelled with me and because I had attended so many rich peoples doctors, I was able to continue my habit for another few years until 2015 when everything changed.

I returned home from the Chemist one day and noticed the OxyContin packet had changed. I went to chew one and nearly broke my tooth! Also, the tablet said “OP” instead of “OC”. A quick Google search revealed what had occurred – the structure of tablet had been changed in order to deter (or make impossible) the abuse of the time release mechanism. I couldn’t believe it, I could no longer chew my pain relief tablets. It was time for a change.

I went onto Erowid and found out that OxyContin was no longer the “cool” drug anyway. I instead decided to ask my Doctor for Fentanyl. My reasoning? I felt I was “unable to control myself with OxyContin and needed a pain patch on my arm to help me”. As soon as I got the first Fentanyl patch, I ripped it open and put it in my mouth as I’d seen described on Erowid – within minutes I was experiencing an entirely new warmth feeling that would become my new OxyContin.

I found myself in Rehab again a year or so later and after “firing” my first psychiatrist for daring to suggest I had a substance abuse problem, was transferred to an “Associate Professor” who actually outranked even my “rich peoples doctor”. I liked this psych – he was quirky and I felt I was able to manipulate him into prescribing whatever I wanted. He explained I should try Methadone, stating it was “good enough for most heroin users, so should be ample for what you want it for”. He even told me if I didn’t like it I could go back to Fentanyl and agreed to sign a piece of paper I had written up acknowledging that promise.

Within an hour I had a knock on my hospital room’s door. I opened it and was greeted by my psych who had a small cup in his hand, I was given the Methadone and within an hour fell asleep. It was a strong dose and I felt warm and cuddly – I was satisfied. I decided to make a real go of this and worked with my new psych to come off the Xanax as well.

Upon coming off the Xanax, I noticed things were not very well in my head. Years of drug abuse, sexual abuse and more. I had these intrusive thoughts and felt as though the Methadone now wasn’t doing anything. As part of the Methadone prescription, I had to see my psych each month and at my next appointment I told him what I was experiencing. He upped my Methadone dose and kept monitoring me.

Then my life changed.

I got the flu and had a terrible cough. I decided to buy Robitussin cough syrup and downed the entire bottle at once – hell, it was just cough syrup. How bad could it be?

I woke up and couldn’t move my legs. My partner came home and I had to tell him what I’d done. He left the house. I was on my own, on the floor, and couldn’t move. Worse – I was in hell! The music I had put on was terrifying me. My partner came back home a second time. Then I woke up and I was in hospital. I then found myself back at home but it was a new apartment – I was so damn confused.

The voices! My God, the voices. So much noise and people! I was scared out of my mind and literally excreted myself. I still couldn’t move and was still on the floor. I was sweating, my heart was racing, it was night, then day, then night. A week had passed. The Police were here – then the ambulance.

I couldn’t put into words what was happening to me. All I knew is I had completely messed up my head. I regretted and began paying for every singe OxyContin tablet I had ever taken. The sheer horror of this new reality was 10x worse than anything I had ever experienced. I had broken my brain, my thoughts were gone. All I really remember is the voices – my mother, my grandmother, my father, my doctor, my dead uncle – everyone was yelling at me at once. I tried to listen in to what everyone was saying but I couldn’t focus on any one voice.

I soon realised I was in hospital but didn’t know where. At one point, I was in a room with my abuser and could only make out that I was in an institution for paedophiles. I had been institutionalized because everyone thought I was a pedo.

In reality, I had overdosed on Robitussin and had been at home in my bed for three days. I had consumed 4 bottles of cough syrup and my partner found me shivering in bed sculling a fifth bottle. I had many seizures. Whilst my partner was at work, I walked to the chemist to get my dose of methadone and on the way stopped at a café and ordered a coffee. I didn’t pay for the coffee (I had money, but didn’t have the mental faculty to know I had to pay) and had apparently lashed out at the Barista when he wouldn’t let me go to the second floor of the café to “jump off the roof”.

Whilst in the chemist, the Police came. The Police asked me why I thought they were there and I told them that “everyone thinks I’m a paedophile and you are here to take me to jail”. The Police detained me and took me to the Hospital. I remember again soiling my pants and having the nurses come to change me. I was being yelled at again – the voices were so loud.

I started to cry as I kind of sobered up because I realised the extent of the damage I had done to my head. The OxyContin was harmless compared to this cough syrup – this stuff had scattered my head like nothing else. I had more seizures and various tests were done in ICU. I was in all wards of the hospital – my parents and partner were told I was unlikely to make it out.

Over the next few weeks, I slowly began to understand my new normal and it was vastly different to my old normal. The new voices were so much louder than the old voices. My entire family came to see me in hospital. A few times I tried to “escape” and found myself being drugged and put back to sleep.

After several weeks, I wanted nothing more than to go home. I couldn’t. I wasn’t allowed out for a cigarette or anything. I woke up one time and I had a video camera in front of me that triggered a flashback of my sexual abuse. I was actually in hospital being broadcast to a courtroom via livestream so the Judge could make a decision as to how long I would be scheduled for. In my delusion, I was under the impression I had been falsely accused of being a paedophile and was being sentenced to death.

I screamed, I yelled – it was hell.

Another few weeks passed and I realised, finally, where I was. I was in a public psychiatric institution and all my father told me was I needed to focus really hard on getting better.

I saw my partner everyday. Everyday he came and visited me. I wanted nothing more than to go back home to him. I couldn’t though and everytime he left, I believed he had been shot. The sound of the doors closing in my mind were gunshots. People shooting at him because they figured he was the partner of a paedophile.

I asked the nurse to bring his body back in next to me so I could have one last hug. I am actually crying writing this because at the time, I believed it 100%. It’s horrible thinking your partner has died and hearing the gunshots and smelling the gunpowder and then seeing his body with bullet holes in it – I cannot tell you how traumatic that is. You mourn over it for 24 hours only to then be confused when you see him again the next day alive and well. Then as he leaves, you experience the delusion again. You don’t have enough mental faculty to understand that you are simply experiencing another delusion – it’s all very real and factual.

A few months later of working really hard to get better (like my Dad told me). I tried a new medicine. This one wasn’t fun like the others had been in the past. This medicine tasted like metal. That night I had the most intense nightmares and woke up jumping on my mattress. Yelling and screaming at the nurses that I wasn’t a paedophile and to let me out of the paedophile institution.

A few days later and all of a sudden I felt different. Like, much different. A new different. A good different.

The first thing I noticed was the peace and quiet. The voices were now whispers. I could see clearly and began seeing colours that I had never seen before. I could think and imagine things. I could talk and comprehend. The nurses and doctors were amazed and I could hear them in real life telling me that I was amazing and that I was getting better.

Soon after, I had a realisation that changed everything – I wasn’t a paedophile! The doctor asked me where I was. I told him I was in the psych ward at the hospital. The doctor smiled and said “Yes, yes you are”. I felt happy.

I was in my room and the cleaner came in. He spoke to me and asked me how I was feeling. I told him I was feeling a lot better and he couldn’t believe it. He said “what the hell…”. I heard him outside of my room talking to the nurse and that’s when I understood everything for the first time.

Cleaner: “What the hell happened to the guy in room 201? He’s talking to me like he’s normal”.

Nurse: “I know it’s amazing right. He’s on a new medication”.

Cleaner: “No, this one is different. Please, tell me what he is on – this is amazing. You have to tell me.”

Nurse: “You know I shouldn’t – but he’s a paranoid schizophrenic and he’s on antipsychotics for the first time in his life”.

Cleaner: “Oh shit, is that what they are like”.

Nurse: “Yep, he’ll be back home tomorrow and probably live a normal life”.

And I was. And I am.

.....  


Update:

Dear Reddit

Your comments have had a profound effect on me. My partner and I have both taken the day off work (it's Monday morning here in Australia) in order to read the comments together and enjoy the relationship we share. You have provided me with a unique kind of therapy that answers a question many people have that cannot be easily be answered - *what will other people think?*

I've been a member of Reddit now for 8 years and in that time I've seen so many amazing stories and it is an honor to share mine. This website offers people like me a chance to spill out thoughts and stories that would otherwise remain hidden and untold. Surprisingly, this website has been able to remain (almost) free of commercial influence and provides a snapshot into the minds and opinions of the public.

I'm saying all of this because of the impact this post has had on my life. I am so grateful and will endeavor to pay it back as best as I can. For those questioning the genuineness of this story, I can assure you it is real.

Thank you for the awards, comments, PMs, and for being so polite and supportive.

Thank you!Maybe this is NSFW. 
Imagine a fake scrotum that seems real. 
You put the drugs inside the fake scrotum and then put inside your scrotum and attach in some way the fake scrotum to yourself. 
So if cops are going to search you, the only thing they're going to say will be something like: "Man your balls are so big". 

Here's a drawing of the fake scrotum: https://imgur.com/Te5UL2q

(nothing serious but it made me laugh) *This is specifically for using psychedelics for fun, not for therapeutic reasons*

If there's one thing I've noticed in my years of tripping it's that it is never the fault of the psychedelic I'm taking if I end up having a bad time. Yes of course the fact that I'm actively tripping makes things amplified, but the fact of the matter is pretty much as follows.

**Wherever you are, and whatever you're doing while tripping, your emotions are genuine to what they would have been while otherwise sober.**

If you are tripping around people you don't know very well and start feeling uncomfortable, it's not the substance that's making you uncomfortable. Those uncomfortable feelings are **already there** in your head. You're just used to dealing with them in a sober state of mind instead of while tripping.

This is why set and setting are so important for tripping. Because it's not a matter of being somewhere "safe" necessarily like at home or in a secluded area, it's about where you feel comfortable.

Do you have social anxiety? Probably a horrible idea to trip around strangers.

Are you claustrophobic? Probably a horrible idea to trip inside a small room.

Afraid somebody might notice you're tripping? Then don't trip anywhere/anytime where that might even remotely be a possibility.

Are you hyper-aware of physical sensations that happen in your body? Then understand that you feel differently because you're tripping. Take every signal your body gives you with a grain of salt.

Your ego **wants** to find a reason to explain why things don't feel normal, and the weird thing about psychedelics is that if you ruminate on one subject too long, especially your wellbeing, you'll **forget you're tripping**. Then all of a sudden you feel strange and you don't understand why because you can't even remember why you started feeling like this in the first place.

So just **be comfortable**. And for the love of all things good in this world, test your substances. Make sure you're taking what you think you're taking, because that's another thing that usually comes up if you start to slip into a negative headspace "oh god was my LSD not LSD??"

As far as weed goes, weed is actually **every bit as good, if not better than psychedelics** at making you feel your insecurities. This is why combining weed and psychs if you don't know what you're doing is a terrible idea. Exacerbate the insecurities and reap the consequences.

Make smart decisions. Trip when you're comfortable. For some people they can trip anywhere at any time. Other people can't. Know your limits.So my lifelong dealer is one of those super generous OG growers, dude's going on 50 years old and still partying like a maniac. I head over to grab a quarter of his tasty indoor crop after work and he's already tossing back nips. Drunk is probably his 2nd most generous form, and at full power the dude would be shoveling shrooms down my throat for free but he's only half a sleeve deep so I know I've hit a sweet spot. 

After about 30 minutes of shooting the shit and catching up we head inside to do some business. He tells me he's laying off of everything in a couple days for a future doctor appointment. Something about health insurance for a company he's inheriting. He asks what I'm after and I tell him. He asks I still have an oil rig and I tell him I got rid of mine a while ago (quit after I discovered my oil dealer was cutting his shatter with some sort of clear silicone/plastic). 

Long story short we're doing laps around his house as he hooks me up with a new titanium nail, a globe, a random edible chocolate bar, and a gram of golden crumble for free. I told him I had a bong so he went looking for the nail and globe and it just kept piling up. My jacket pockets are bulging, I pull out my wallet like "let me pay you for something at least" so he runs off and grabs that bud. Except it's a half ounce and he won't take more than the $60 I had for a quarter.

Dude has hooked me up so many times as well as housing me for a summer a couple years ago, every time I leave his place I'm so thankful that I *know* there's at least one person out there in the world that has never failed to have my back. Hope you guys are having a dope night, and that you have someone like that in your lives (preferably your dealer).

Edit: First ever silver overnight. This community kicks ass

Edit 2: Now first golds, I really appreciate the positivity in this community. If everyone who's read this can pass on the positivity to others we can make the world a little better.. with drugs hahaFINAL UPDATE: Dereck has indeed died, but still I'm grateful to y'all for praying for him. 

2 nights ago, at about 12:30 am, my nana came in and said "I don't think he's breathing." So I ran in there and gave him narcan and CPR until the paramedics arrived. We're not sure how long he was dead, but he now has no brain function apparently (God I hope not). 

I don't know why I'm telling y'all this, I suppose I want his story to live on in the minds of others as well. Damn, I hate heroin so much. Please, reader, don't even THINK of trying it. Opiates and drugs like it have nearly destroyed my family. I'm lucky I didn't even smoke cigarettes, only weed. Please pray for my brother's life, he needs a miracle now more than ever and I don't want to lose him.


Edit: This got a lot more traction than I expected, thank you to everyone who prays for Dereck. For some backstory: He and I come from Boston in a town called Dorchester. Our mother fell prey to addiction as well, and ultimately died due to related illness last August. Dereck was jailed at 18 for 5 years for fighting, and got out in 2016. Since then he struggles with addiction. Having overdosed too many times before. He lost his girlfriend, Amanda to an OD last October. And just recently, he lost his friend to the epidemic as well 

He has suffered greatly in his life, and he is still a good man regardless. He only wanted the best for me. He is intelligent; caring and generous, and doesn't deserve to die at 28. 

Tomorrow they're testing if he can make it without machines, and his chances of making it are very slim. I'll update on the outcome. I just hope he wasn't dead for too long.

Edit #2: He did manage to breathe on his own for 5 minutes, but there is scary low brain activity. Our guardian doesn't want him alive in a vegetative state, so if he displays that then they won't resuscitate if he falls under. They're going to test him for real tomorrow (they will leave ventilation out permanently) and if he doesn't continue to breathe on his own then that will be the end. If you're struggling with drug addiction, know that it is a disease and it can be treated as such by professionals.

If you think you need it, please do not be like my brother; ask for all the help you can get.It’s currently 1 in the morning. I’m sitting on my back porch with a blunt of some good jenny kush, a sprite, and my thoughts. My day has been iffy. Sleep I didn’t get. Money I didn’t make.  Goals I didn’t accomplish. But right here, right now, on my porch with my blunt, my sprite, and my thoughts, everything is alright.

And that’s alright.

Good night Reddit.It's been a weird past couple of days. Had some definite moments, but I also ended up going to a psychiatrist recently, which had perfect timing. I went to him in the middle of a panic attack since I had just been fired for something completely unrelated to drugs. So the timing was great it just has been a shitty couple days. And holy shit I'm horny as hell. I had a fiance become bedridden about 2 years ago after 4 years of dating. After we ended it I just kind of gave up on girls. Not because I'm in an incel or something I was just so heart broken I couldn't be with another girl without just fucking crying. So now it's a battle with all my emotions rushing back. It's been a weird week, but I'm still clean!WE ARE ALMOST AT A FULL WEEK, MATE. WTF. & /r/drugs continued support baffles me. I swear i'd still be selling my soul for some dope if it weren't for you all. 


yesterday a bunch of you said to watch Archer instead so I switched to that & i'm enjoying it. 



Lowering my dose of kratom everyday. Aside from watching tv been doing alot of drawings which is good because like it helps calm you & you make a product that you can be proud of. 


Still got quite a bit of shit coming out each day. 


& to all you silent redditors reading my post, addicted to something, I know I haven't been clean for all that long but I think in some ways it does get easier each day it's still difficult but you gotta help yourself. I believe in you. Over the years I've ive had dozens of dealers... none of them particularly bad. But none can compare to my current guy J.

I met J when he was just a young guy, still living in his parents apartment selling quarter ounces to make a few bucks. Since then he has fully blossomed into a HUGE mover... even legalization hasn't  hurt him.  He's always on time and the odd time when he's not been he has reliably made up for it with bonus product. 
He drops off, he brings Christmas presents ( even for the kids) , he evennremembers our birthdays...he's a solid fella... and he's not even really a "friend", our relationship is pretty well only business though I would be happy to have him to supper any time. Even my kids love the guy. 


Recently my wife was in a car accident. She's laid up for a while .the second day she was in the hospital mynwife asked for some edibles, i texted J. he fired me a message right back and asked me to meet him at a pub just close. Keep in mind I'm waaaay out of the way being in at the hospital... I needed supper I figured i would kill two birds. Now i should mention at this point  I had a tab with him of about 500 andI didn't have the cash on hand. I figured i would fire it to I'm electronically when I got the chance.... anyways,  When I got to the pub i got a message on my tablet to meet him out back. when i gotin his truck hehanded me a GIANT package. And says , " no charge, I hope this helps". Shakes my hand, I peace and he's on his way....   when i opened it up there was more than my regular order ( 40 grams plus 10 extract) ... like, waaaayyyy more... plus dozens of edibles,  DOZENS and  a whole bunch of CBD oil.... also... fucking cash,, a bunch of cash. ...   J is amazing. He has no idea how much he's helped. 


But wait there's more. Today when I went to pay my tab. I try to give him the money and... nope, he won't take it.   Wiped my tab too...  

To the dealers like J. The good guys,  we thank you.I knew something was wrong after he wasn’t responding to my messages for 6 hours but I figured he might just be asleep. I found him on the floor, foil in hand, eyes glazed, mouth foaming, feeling cold to the touch. I screamed and shook him. They couldn’t do anything, he was dead for too long. 

He rarely used. Once a month, maybe. I guess this time he didn’t want to use infront of me because I’m a recovering heroin addict but I begged him to always tell me when he’s using so I could be there with Narcan. 

He’d want me to stay clean and stay on the path to recovery but he’s just gone. He’s gone. He was so young. 27. So young. I am so awfully devastated and don’t know where else to post this. I feel sick with sadness and don’t know when this feeling will end. I feel like I killed him, if only I had been there sooner, if only I was more persistent about him using around me, if only I did this or that.

Please please stay safe and please use drugs, with friends around who have Narcan and can phone an ambulance for you. I love you all

(Edit: to the people angry how I worded my last paragraph 4 hours after witnessing my dead boyfriend, what I meant to say was “If you are using drugs and don’t want to quit, do not use alone, using with friends who have Narcan and access to 911 can bring you back to life. Fent is everywhere)I work at a very large organization within the Music Industry. Now, you might be thinking “oh music industry=concerts, drugs, etc.” but where I work is quite corporate. I’m fresh out of college and want to produce music of my own and do something more creative in the future, but being with this company so far and getting this job right out of college has given me a lot of opportunities. And also, a lot of money to spend on substances since my living situation is quite cheap:)

Anywho...here we are, it’s 3pm, I’ve got a bunch of work I need to crank out and a beat I need to mix for an artist later that night, so I hit up one of my guys and within the hour he’s outside my office with 2g’s of some Colombian bam bam. Pick it up, head up to the floor where my office is, and head straight to the bathroom to rail a few lines, get a little tweaked, and get working. 
I pour out a little more than I had meant to, and was going to put it back in the bag, but decided fuck it it’s already out might as well rail it! (I’m sure all you cokeheads out there have had this experience). Ahhhh just what I needed. I upped my Zoloft dose recently and haven’t been feeling drugs work as well lately for some reason, but this guy has some fucking fish scale, and after about what amounted to 4-5 lines, I walk out the stall. Take a big ol’ gander into the mirror and think to myself “eskettit”

I open the door to exit the bathroom, and my boss happens to be walking by at the exact moment I’m opening the door. She says “oh there you are, I’ve been looking for you. Sorry for the short notice, but Nick (we’ll call him this for stories sake, as I don’t wish to reveal any real details about my company) just called you in to meet with HR” now, nick is the guy I also report to, and he also happens to be the CEO. The CEO of one of the largest organizations within the music industry. And when HR is involved, in my experience at least, they’re usually there because of employee conduct issues, some sort of disciplinary action, etc. 
SoI go, “ummm okay”.  Now, I don’t know if she could tell, but there’s no way she couldn’t, because at this point I am BUGGING tf out. I get it, don’t do coke at work, or at least not that much, fine, lesson learned. But let’s get on with the story shall we. 

I remember that my building is loaded with security cameras, and while I did meet my guy outside a good distance from the building and tried not to be a moron about it, I’m basically thinking that they somehow saw this interaction occur or caught it on tape, or that they caught me vaping my thc cart outside the office building, juuling in the stall, etc. or worst of all, they found out I was doing cocaine in the office bathroom. 

So as we’re walking in to the meeting room, the CEO hands me an envelope. They all had this kind of expression on their face that seemed quite stern and a bit nerve-wracking. He said that he needed some more time with HR and my other boss to discuss before, and that I should wait outside and read what was in the envelope to get an idea about what they had called me and everyone there to meet about. 
My hands are shaking, Palms sweaty, I had just had some of my moms spaghetti funny enough, have this huge sinking feeling in my stomach and can barely open it. I’m thinking i fucked up big time, but why not just meet with me directly and get it the fuck over with , honestly I was a little angry at this point and upset that I was about to lose my job and seriously hurt my career. 

So I open the letter. It was a bonus (not anything alarming, but pretty hefty :)) because of me and my teams performance that quarter. 
Holy fuck. Am happy now, feels great, but I think I gave myself an ulcer during all this. 

Anyway, too bad DM shut down. Now would be the perfect time to go onion picking:/So i decided to take around 0.8 mg clonazolam last night along with gabapentin and i was intending to just go to sleep. Next thing i know im getting woken up by my wife at 2am. I'm lying on the floor of the bathroom with my pants around my ankles and a firm grip on my flaccid penis. 

There was hair care oil everywhere that i suppose i was using as lube and peanut butter on the door (must have been eating peanut butter with my hands or some shit).

My herbal vape was sitting next to me.

I convinced her i must have taken too much benadryl, she thought i had overdosed on opioids and was dead because apparently the door hit my leg super hard and she was vigorously shaking me and i didnt wake up for like 2 mins.

My slumber was deep.

She was traumatized, and i just awoke with a stupid grin on my face and asked her what was wrong.

She said these are not the actions of a stable man.While walking in the snow in switzerland I found about 1/2 a joint left just chillin in the snow. I smoked it. Im high now. That is all. Hey guys,

I recently created a survey about the differences (and similarities) of LSD and psilocybin (magic mushrooms). I promised to share the results, so here they are:

&#x200B;

https://preview.redd.it/w6svucaxn1d31.png?width=1080&format=png&auto=webp&s=3dc91581859ba07f5ad9bf139c1a2e7cacd611b1

Thanks to all participants and this awesome community!

If you want to view the data for yourself, you can do so [here](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScifhfweg8Exm2hckcDM2n1sctaHeljG0s2LE1_fp6EaUzJQQ/viewanalytics).

I look forward to discuss the results with you.

Estimated time for the survey: None, it already finished...

    This survey has been approved by the moderatorsObviously, this is a one-participant trip I am referring to. I'm not talking about sending your puppy into another dimension.

Trip with your pet for the purpose of tripping with your pet. You have limited time with them, so please, create one moment of pure bliss with your pet.

Your pet doesn't need to trip to benefit from LSD. Your pet synchronizes with your headspace.

Your pet takes care of you, loves you, and accepts you, is so sensitive of your needs, and protects you.

If you have a pet, and haven't tripped with them yet, you have this experience waiting for you. Don't hold off until it's too late.

I remember sitting on my bed, looking my dog in the eyes, and seeing those big brown eyes staring into me, appreciating me.

I felt a surge towards my eyes, leaned over my dog, and started weeping at that perfect moment.

I know my dog was where I was, I knew we shared this experience and connection, and I knew we were the same. We were not each other, we were us.

And when my dog has been gone and buried for years, I'll still have that connection, and I'll still have had that moment.

Trip with your pets.I'm going to keep this story short and sweet, I was at a bar (DUH RIGHT?) and saw this girl with big boobs glaring at me. Keep in mind, I'm a decent looking guy, only downside is my shitty personality can't have everything am I right? Anyways, I try to be Ricko swavvay and make my way over there buying her a beer. I should have added on how shit faced I was, so I tried my best to not show it. Long story short, I get her to come back to my place to show her around my "antique collection" of old collections. We both know where this is heading, anyways eventually the topic of cocaine is brought up and I get to saying "A mans best dream would be to sniff some cocaine off of boobs" her eyes light up. I think hell yeah I'm just in luck mane. We get to breaking some down, I line a fat line across her big breasts and I get to snorting. I thought I'd be like the movies where I'd instantly be able to have sex for hours nonstop, major mistake. I COULD NOT GET A FUCKING BONER FOR THE LIFE OF ME. ASHAMED of my boner, I tell her its getting pretty late insinuating she needs to get the fuck out. She does so and I proceed to cry myself to sleep missing out on the opportunity of a lifetime. Meep, HAPPY HALLOWEEN U FUCKS. So my girlfriend and I took 250ug of LSD and kicked back at her place.

We were tripping pretty hard and watching Moana, and for some reason I looked up Dwayne Johnson on google images.

This photo popped up:

https://www.gstatic.com/tv/thumb/persons/235135/235135_v9_ba.jpg

We were tripping so hard that he looked like a bullet, and it made us die of laughter. I said “I feel so bad that we’re laughing at him, he’s one of the nicest people ever.” My girlfriend replied “Same here, imagine if he started crying in the photo?”

Now, let me tell y’all that I am 99% sure this man did not have a tear in his right eye when we first looked at the photo. We were peaking and could see every detail of of him, and all of a sudden he had a tear in his right eye. It made us burst out laughing even harder to the point where we were crying too.

As guilty as I feel, we made Dwayne Johnson cry on acid.So I was biking home drunk as fuck last night, when 2 teenagers shouted "oi that's my nans bike" I rode up to them, assured them that it wasn't and I payed for it. They argued, I pulled out a cigarette and lit it, they asked for one and I told them to fuck off. They told me they had a knife on them (I know of this gang in my area who have been robbing people at knifepoint for the last year) So I gave them a cigarette. 2 others turned up on pit bikes so I knew shit was about to go down. 

I turned to one of them and said "you look kinda threatening" - turned to the other and said "but YOU.. you're kinda cute, man. I'd make you mine." This caused enough confusion to get on my bike and ride away. 

Moral of the story.. If somebody tries to mug you, get gay and get out of there. I know there are so many different opinions on weed! But I let it control me for 6 years of my life. Ounces in front, reality behind. And I don’t really have anyone to tell. I don’t hate weed, I just have an addictive personality and always hid behind it. I’m not sleeping well, I’m moody, I want it very often, but I know deep down letting go is worth it
I’m finally figuring out some hobbies, my feelings and who I really am!
For anyone who can keep their weed smoking under control, well bloody done
And for anyone who is trying to give up, you’ve absolutely got this!Yeah I get we’ve been around the block, know the ins and outs of how they work down to the specific receptors they work on, at least a lot of us probably do. But the average citizen are so insistently stuck on the notion that “dRuGs aRe BaD!” while they’re guzzling down their nightly glass(es) of wine all the while reaching for a cig. Calling anyone that diverges from their “acceptable view” of substances an addict or something alone those lines. No rationing can get through to some people, despite showing evidence based facts about the ability for psychedelics to help with anxiety and depression, even cluster headaches for example, or for MDMA to be a PTSD-treating tool under clinical guidance. Some people put LSD in the same league as crack and meth, truly unbelievable. 

Anyone else get frustrated by this? How people can literally *SEE* you differently or as a “dirty hippie” once they find out you experiment with substances? Shit’s whack.

EDIT: I clearly need to state that I am referring to people that actively SPREAD misinformation and support the war on drugs without doing their OWN research. This blew up way more than I expected. I’m getting a lot of negative comments and I need to clarify. I’m not saying it’s frustrating that your grandma doesn’t know what fuckin 2CB-FLY is or why she doesn’t know how to boof 4-HO-MET. Not talking about that shit. Extremist anti-drug propaganda is what I am talking about.I've been addicted to heroin for 8 years. I was 15 the first time I used heroin. Two months later, weeks after my 16th birthday, I shot up for the first time. I'm an adult now, and all my friends are pieces of shit, everyone who I wish I was friends with are graduating school with fantastic degrees or did that years ago already and have good jobs with rewarding love in their lives. Meanwhile I sell hash and work at a gas station and every girlfriend I've had just wanted free shots, basically. I was supposed to be so much more, and I can be so much more. I haven't heard from my parents in 4 years because they care a lot more about their upcoming rugby player son rather than their heroin addict son - I can't really blame them.

That being said, at exactly 11:59:00 pm March 5th, 2018 I took my last shot. At the time I write this it is 1:59 am March 6th, 2018. All I have is cable television, a half pack of cigarettes and a quarter ounce of primo quality hashish. The longest time I've been off heroin after getting addicted to it has been about 2 days. I remember how it felt, and I'm prepared for it; no matter how bad I felt during those 2 days it can't possibly be as bad as I feel all the fucking time.

Wish me luck guys I know I won't let you all down like I've let so many others before.

I love being high and being with you. I love the way your hair feels on my hands. I love kissing your lips. I love feeling your warmth. You dont judge me. I know you try to help me but im an addict. Girl im a fuck up.Why do you love me?

No i dont have back pain. No i didnt get it from a doctor, i got it from a dealer. Dont be afraid when i take a handful, i cant take just one baby, its called drug abuse for a reason..

I dont know. ..Are you sure you want to get high with me? This shit aint like weed. Itll knock you back and put you on your feet. Leave you grinding your teeth. And sweatin when theres no heat. Girl im a fuck up dont follow my lead.

If you miss one more class their going to drop you from your nursing program. Im not one to judge but, your tolerance is building quick. Last night you took more than me. You stole from your parents that you cherish,  to get high. When you saw me you didnt kiss me, you ran towards my stash. Youre getting high everyday with me, girl im a fuck up , dont follow my lead.

Im sorry i have no cash. I cant support two habits. Only mine. Oxy is pricey. Relax stop screaming. Im sorry. Where are you going to go ? Your parents already kicked you out. Girl stay with me please..

This is the fourth time i have to pick you up from a guys house. And even though were not together anymore i still tuck you in my bed when youre sprung out. I make you eat so you can hide your ribs. I told you not to play with trains because they leave tracks. I watch you sleep and dry the sweat off your head. I hold you tight all night, because i know youll be gone  again as soon as theres light .

I love seeing words flow from your mouth. You use to have such a beautiful way of speaking. So intellectual, and from the heart. Deep conversations and ideas. Now im seeing foam flow from your mouth. Youve only been out of the hospital for three days and you want more? Girl please stop. I love you so much. I want you to be sober again. Youre taking too much. If you must get high, slow down, or else youll end up killing yourself. She said , "its called drug abuse for a reason".

i havent seen you in a year. I hope your okay. I hope you wear diamonds instead of smoking crystals. I hope the only reason why your using needles now is because you went back to school and became a nurse. I hope the only track marks you see are the ones on the road. I hope your hair grew its color, i hope your skins brighter. The last time i saw you i begged for you to come with me to rehab. I even went a month sober to influence you. I told you i hate looking at you like this. You told me then dont look. I told you i love you. You smiled and told me, "boy im a fuck up dont follow my lead".

**Note: My goal of this post isnt to be pessimistic. My goal is to show my reality with addiction. Completelty raw and unfiltered. To hopefully shine a light in any individual that is following a similar path. Cherish the ones you love.**

Feel free to follow me for more stories i post in the future. It's almost here! Before December 15 weed will be legal, we now can carry to 27 gr, and have to 6 plants in home. 
There will be specific places where you could smoke weed and at home. 
This is an awesome step, it's not only about drugs, but hitting the power of carteles. 

I'm really happy.I woke up that morning and checked the clock. I looked over at my fiance, wondering why he wasn't up yet. Immediately, I could tell something was wrong.

I put my hand on his chest - no movement. I screamed to my future mother in law to call 911.

I got a pen light and checked his eyes - fixed and dilated 

I scooped vomit out of his mouth and gave him CPR - I heard the worst sound in existence. A death rattle. 

The autopsy report says the estimated time of death was 10:54 am. I woke up at 10:58 am. Four fucking minutes. An overdose of Opana, Oxycodone and Xanax.

It was a beautiful, cloudless, sunny day on June 25, 2009. All I wanted to do was kill the fucking sun for shining. How could the sky still be there when my entire world crashed around me as I fell onto the grass while the paramedics carried his body to the ambulance. 

I got to the hospital and my mom was already there. The doctors said "let's go in this room" and I finally realized exactly what a "comfort room" was for. I pushed against the floor tiles and they barely got me inside. 

My mother looked at me while squeezing my hand and said "he didn't make it." I howled with a sound I've never been able to replicate and screamed "NO!" I fell to the floor screaming and my mom went down with me, holding me so tightly as I kicked and clawed on the floor. 

I stayed with his body for four hours. I held him, caressed him, cleaned him up and talked to him. They finally made me leave because he was grey and blue. He was getting rigor mortis.

Grief such as this is indescribable and I hope you never experience it. I have moved forward with my life but I've never moved on. I have a husband and son now but I think of him every single fucking day. 

Ten years ago today, I woke up to the love of my life dead next to me in our bed. It took me way too long to get sober after this. I now have over a year sober. I love you, Randy. I will never be over you.Just thought it was funny that like half of the posts on here are basically, “if I take 5 18 mg concerta pills with three shots of espresso and I also took three adderall pills four hours ago, what is the likelihood I will experience a heart attack?” I feel like I’m reading some sort of off-brand algebra book lmaoSo a while back i went to a big family dinner on lsd, well lsd + 2 other psyches, since these tabs had lsd +2 others and you peaked 3 times. Anyway, this was an event with my extended family, and i did not plan for this to happen.

It all started when i promised my mate id shout him a tab if we fucked the girls coming over to my house. 

So i did and we tripped, had a great time. About 5 hours in i get a call from my mom asking me where i am. I told her the truth, i was a few blocks away from my house (where we ended up trippping) and she said sweet and that she was coming to give me a ride to dinner. It was at that moment i remebered the dinner. So i went, pupilis  still going hard, but the trip wasnt super intense, very handleable. 

We get there and i was staring at the table cloth. It had these flower patterns that were growing and shrinking and what not. I also enjoyed the art around the house of the host. Then the food came out and we all sit down.

I was chilling just behaving normal, not really saying anything unless neccessary. Then somehow, the conversation steers to me, and what im going to do with the rest of my life. Suddenly everyone in my family started giving me advice and there opionion and we discussed all the different possiblities and options. 

It was amazing. I felt so loved and really felt like they cared, even though i didnt agree with a lot of there ideas. It opened my mind that family really is all you have, that these people didnt have some sort of agenda, they were my family.  I did have a giggle that none of them knew, and after it i did get a strong sense of wellbeing 10/10 would still never do again.Like i said please dont make a joke out of people asking if its ok to take a xan two years after they had a drink.

Even if the question is stupid im still glad that they are asking, if there would be more people like them the drug scene would not have such a bad Reputation.

I always thought this needs to be said,

Anyway have a good day guys n gals ❤️

Edit: srsly think of all the lost souls, all the people dying by some stupid accident, they had children they were parents they had patners....maybe some of them could have been prevented.

Edit: Thanks for silver and thank you guys for all your comments!So I’m tripping balls, playing the new Pokémon for switch that came out just a few hours ago, like you do. The game is absolutely gorgeous even while sober, its super detailed and HD and just all around awesome; theres a mode where you get to play with your pokemon up close and pet/poke/feed it and stuff

so im like “yo this is kinda cool, cute, something I’ll do once and then completely forget about.” I go to try it out with my pikachu and I’m just messing around, petting his nose when i shit you not, this squirrelly little dude sneezed at me. Not a huge sneeze, just a small, cute, unassuming sneeze. But let me tell you, it was everything you’d hope and dream a pikachu sneeze to sound like:

*“Piiika-choo!!”*

So i just stared at the little guy for a second before i just completely lost it and haven’t stopped laughing since hahahahaNot all addicts are equal. 

Let's meet Jim and David.

Jim is a heroin addict in the United States who has been in and out of prisons for the last decade. When he's not in prison, he's living on the streets. Before he was an addict, he had $100K in the bank and worked as a Salesperson for a medical devices company. He ended up spending all of his money on heroin since buying on the black-market is astronomically expensive, unstable, and cannot be planned into a budget. He recently had an absess on his arm and almost went into sepsis and died, but he got lucky and survived.

Now let's meet David from Switzerland. He became addicted to heroin in the year 2000, right around the time that they implemented their new approach to fighting addiction. He's been going to the clinic for 21 years and is still technically an addict. He works at the bank and makes a nice living. He has a wife and two children with another on the way. He drives a decent car and lives in a decent house.

Both of these men are addicts. One has lived a life full of suffering due to his country's regressive drug policies. The other has lived a good life for the last two decades thanks to his country's forward-looking drug policies. 

Addiction is addiction but not all addiction is created equal. These homeless drug addicts on Skid Row are victims of US drug policy. Yes, they made their own choices, but the drug policy of the country they live in made their choices more consequential than in more forward-thinking countries like Switzerland.*This is about illegal powder/paste amphetamine but applies to Adderall in the US too*


Amphetamine is a tricky little substance. 


The first few times you try it, often at a party, it feels amazing. You can do anything, talk to anyone, dance all night and unlike coke, you don't even have to redose. 


This is amazing, you think. But you've heard how it's addictive, so you keep your use down. Maybe once a month. Maybe more, maybe less. You use responsibly, sparingly, when someone offers it to you. 


Then you have a party coming up. You think some amph would be nice for that but your friends who usually share with you won't be there. 


So you buy your own for the first time. Just a few grams. This will last you a long time, you think. 


The party comes. You're on amph and it's amazing. While many people are drunk off their ass, stumbling around, YOU are in the perfect zone. You're having fun, you're hyped, you are a social GOD. 


Your thinking isn't impaired. It's clearer than ever. It's almost like you're MORE sober than sober. Many of the girls are keeping their distance from the slurring drunk guys but they like talking to you. Because you're sober. You seem sober. 


You even get one or two numbers, maybe. But later, you wonder. Did they like you or did they like the amphed up version of you? 


You never talked this easily or confidently. You've never been the life of the party before. But on amph, you were just that. The best possible version of yourself. 


And you have quite a bit more at home. 


There's no parties scheduled for a while. You go to work during the week, like everyone else and like everyone else, you have days where you feel like shit. You didn't sleep enough, you argued with someone, your mood is down. Well, just gotta push through and go on, right? 


Wrong. 


You have something others don't. A cheat code. A way to turn the bad days into the best ones. You discover the potential of this drug for work, school or university. 


Man this really is the perfect drug you think. It's so versatile, you can use it both for work and to party, it's great. Sure, the comedowns can be annoying and you notice you're losing weight due to eating less, but whatever. You were eating too much anyway. 


At this point, the drug has already started to take control. But you never feel like that. See, the thing about amph is, it hijacks your brain's reward center. The brain associates the surges of dopamine with healthy, good activities. Eating, socializing, sex. Amphetamine. 


You never feel like you're losing control because your brain is doing its best to tell you: This is good. Keep doing this. It's healthy. 


The rationalizing starts. You always manage to find some excuse to do some. Your friends get worried and tell you to slow down but what the hell do they know? They're overreacting. After all, you could stop if you wanted to. You're in control. You're in control. 


The comedowns get worse, the breaks get shorter. Tolerance rises. The doses rise. 


You notice that you're overdoing it. You make promises to stop. After this weekend. Next week. Next month. After that one big party. That one important work day. One last time. One more line. Just one more line. 


Promises you know you'll never keep. 


Amphetamine is a tricky little substance. Not really sure why I feel like I want to tell this story to anyone, but my sister passed away a couple years ago. She was type 1 diabetic and was 2 years younger than me, 25 at the time of her death. Apparently she died from missing her insulin shots and her blood sugar got too high. The autopsy report said that meth use also contributed to her death. I had no idea she was on it but like I said we had lost touch and had not spoken for several years. 

Since I was the only family in the city at the time I had to clean out her apartment. It was very difficult for me to do this so I kind of ended up just putting all her clothes and shit in bags and stashed them in my spare bedroom. 

After about a year I ended up moving to a different apartment so I had to go through all the shit and get rid of whatever wasn't necessary. While doing this I found a bag of meth in one of her pockets. Without even thinking too much about it i stuck it in my wallet and moved on. 

Now my sister was honestly the one who even got me into drugs in the first place. Even tho she was younger than me she started smoking, drinking, doing pills before me and naturally after I got into it we started doing drugs together and it really brought us even closer cuz we were really good friends growing up. 

So I started thinking about this and decided to do this meth to kind of do drugs with her one last time or something I don't even know. I've tried meth before but stimulants really just aren't my thing. Snorted the whole bag over a few days and honestly it was a pretty fucking fun few days. But I haven't touched meth since and I never will. I miss her so much and I feel so guilty for not getting back in touch with her before she died, she could have seriously used my help. Thanks for reading.I never laughed so hard in my life, I was puking from laughing. My buddy was taking a rip from the pipe , (we call it a pickle where I'm from) we were sitting in his car  and he was taking rip after rip before we went into the store and I was already laughing because he was shinier than a mint nickle, you know that shiny greasy look you get when you're so high and it's so hot outside, so he takes off his beanie to try to cool down and he sets it on his lap.

After taking a few rips he sets the damn near red hot pipe on his beanie. I got out of the car for a second to stretch my legs and gather my thoughts  and prepare myself to go in the store after being up for a week. I had no idea that he forgot that he set the pipe on his beanie, I  just assumed as always that he put everything away and stashed the pipe in the console. I start walking in the store and he's a few steps behind me and I go do my own thing and buy a few things I needed like popsicles, batteries for my computer mouse and swedish fish and maybe 5 minutes go by and I walk towards the register and I see my buddy talking the clerks ears off, looking greasier than a piece of chicken and there were 3 other people in line ahead of me and he sees me in line and turns towards me to say something and all I can see is the fucking pipe dangling off of his beanie, I was crying laughing but I wasn't going to yell and say "hey dipshit your pipe is stuck to your hat" plus I couldn't even talk at that point because I was literally crying laughing . He went out to the car and he still had no idea that the pipe was stuck to his beanie , It took me about 3 minutes to get through the line  and when I went outside the motherfucker was so high he was pacing around talking on his phone wearing mechanics gloves with a pipe melted to his hat. I said let's get out of here dude they are probably calling the cops as we speak and he says why " did you steal something" and I said no they weren't paying attention to me because they were too focused looking at the dope pipe forged to your hat. He rips the beanie off and sees it on there and I can't even explain the look on his face but he was in shock, I said that's why I was laughing so hard in the store but I couldnt't tell you.

This was in 2010 and a year later I moved to LA with my new girlfriend whom I credit with saving my life. I was lucky enough to find a girl that had never done drugs and was the complete opposite of me . Unfortunately my friend Dan struggled with getting his life together  and decided on Dec. 3rd of 2013 to put a gun to his head and take his life. Yesterday was the 5th anniversary of his death and I thought about him all day and that's what reminded me of the time he melted the pipe to his hat. I have a hard time coping with his death . Part of me feels guilty for leaving him behind and moving to LA but I had to save myself. I introduced him to the drug and that is the most difficult part for me because up until I gave him that first hit of dope his life was amazing , he was a journeyman electrician working for the union, had his own house on the lake with toys and cars and after he took that first hit of dope he was hooked like I have never seen anyone before. If I had never given him that hit he would still be alive today.  When I got the news of his death I was devistated, I talked to him on the phone 2 days before he took his life and he sounded good like things were going good. My heart hurts everytime I think of what he must have been thinking while he was sitting in his car on side of the road before he pulled the trigger.

It was about a month after his death and I went on [legacy.com](https://legacy.com) to his obituary where friends and family can leave messages or share a memory about a loved one that's passed and I see a comment from a couple that didn't know dan  but they happen to live near our area and the guy was a firefighter and his wife was a nurse and they said "we were with Dan when he passed, we want to let his friend and family know he didn't die alone. We don't know dan but we just happen to drive by a car parked on the side of the road on mountain highway and as we were just about to drive past it , the drivers side window of his car blew out and they stopped and saw that Dan had shot himself in the head. The lady said she held his hand  and that they stayed with him all the way to the hospital.  As you can imagine I had so many questions I wanted to ask them so I responded to the email address that they left for people to contact them and I wrote them several times and to this day I have never heard back from them. I can't imagine them just ignoring my emails so it leads me to believe that maybe the email address they left was typed in wrong or something.  I'm just thankful that atleast they took the time to go onto his obituary and leave that message and if Dan did live for a few minutes I'm glad someone was there to hold his hand and talk to him.

Have a good night everyoneI mean it’s obvious now when you think about it. Eddy (the leader of the group) was obviously on some type of stimulant (Coke/Meth) because he would always come up with these master plans and talk fast as hell to people trying to get what he wanted. Edd (double d) was the chiller and smarter one of the group which makes me think he was a major stoner and took psychedelics on the regular. Ed was your stereotypical bartard/alcoholic. He was dumb, slow and lethargic most of the time. (My friend thinks he was on dissociatives like PCP or DXM). The jawbreakers that they so desperately wanted were a metaphor for the different types of drugs or fixes they absolutely HAD TO HAVE everyday. If you know dope fiend behavior you can see the similarities between the different schemes and hustles they use to get their fix everyday and what the characters on the show were doing. Some episodes they would successfully get their jawbreakers (fixes) but something would always happen and they would either lose them or they would get stolen by the other kids in the neighborhood. Think of it like finally getting your fix and then eventually coming down and needing more. Sometimes you would feel nice and at piece while high (when they would have the huge jawbreakers in their mouths), but your reality comes crashing down on you when the drug finally wears off (losing their jawbreakers). Kind of makes sense. Thanks for coming to my TED talk.So I was catching up with psychedsubstance earlier and got the idea that smoking DMT would be a fun time tonight. Now, a few important notes of background, I'm taking a low dose of the antidepressant venlafaxine, so I didn't know how much the deems would affect me. I had also done a lot of MDMA the night before, which sorta worked in weird ways, and I had smoked two fat bowls of weed earlier in the day.

Anyway I totally eyeball a dose, at a guess it was maybe around 60mg, and take one huge toke which I hold in for as long as possible. I blow out the window of my bedroom but apparently this isn't good enough because the smell stinks out our entire house. I'm definitely feeling it, I go and lie down on a soft bed and fold inwards experiencing lots of wonky dimensions and flashing psychedelic colours morphing into pulsating fractals.

It is only a few minutes into the experience when my dad comes into my room asking about the smell. I sorta just look at him and shakily murmur a few words, not quite sure what I said. I'm seeing his face rippling with ever changing iridescent colours. I flop down and cuddle up to him for a bit, which he thinks is pretty weird but goes along with it, and then he leaves.

A few more minutes pass and then both my mum and my dad come in asking about the smell. I just look up at them and tell them plain and simple that I'm smoking DMT, it's an incredibly powerful hallucinogen, and I didn't mean to stink the house out. They both ask if I feel alright, I say yeah I'm fine, and then I tell them what the experience is like. I even ask if either of them want to do it, my mum looks quite tempted but in the end they pass and leave me to it.

They honestly were fine with it, they thought it was quite a funny situation, and said that as long as I was safe it was all cool. Maybe just go in the garden next time though.

I ride the rest of the trip out becoming one with the blankets and mattresses. I even go back to finish off the bowl and lightly trip a bit more.

Then I guess I went on reddit to rake in upvotes lolA couple days ago I decided to go on a little bender. I did some hot rails and was solidly spun when the horniness kicked in. If you've partaken in meth you know you can easy spend an entire day beating your meat. I started sending out dozens of messages to old Tinder matches. The first girl who was down to meet up was a solid 7/10 based on her carefully cropped pics. We exchanged a few messages and she said she'd come by in the evening.

I finally got the text that she was out front and was casually strolling down the driveway when this easily 300 lb, sumo-wrestler looking blob waddles out from behind a car. "Nah, that can't be her, right?" My denial turned to acceptance as she greeted me by name. She proceeded to wrap her arms around me in a hug that enveloped me in rolls of fat, moist from the sweat dripping out of crevices. It was too late to run, and my dick needed attending to, so I invited her inside.

My rule is to never smoke past 24 hours into a bender, but fuckin' hell, I needed the intoxication. We faced a blunt and the paranoia began to creep in. I sat down on my raised inflatable air mattress and she sauntered toward me with a mischievous look on her face. "Damn, she moves fast for a big girl." Next thing I knew, she was on top of me. I gasped for air as the mattress simultaneously spewed it out with a loud hiss. The frame began to collapse from her weight, so she asked to take things to the floor. I was too deep and too paranoid (because she knew my address) to back out now.

I tried to be a gain an opportunity to close my eyes or avert my gaze, so I went down south and began to eat her out, but the fishy fumes seeping out of her pussy combined with body odor and the stench of unthoroughly wiped asshole wafted up my nose. I backed off and she began to suck my dick, but I remained flaccid as the day I was born. Slightly embarrassed but more so relieved, I gave her a half-assed explanation. Since I couldn't fuck her with my floppy friend shriveled up into nothingness, she demanded that I finger her as compensation. The next few minutes were a blur of me dissociated to my safe place while vigorously fingering the ginormous woman on my bedroom floor. Ah, finally the worst had passed, right? Nope. After what seemed like 15 minutes, her shaking and moaning culminated into a herculean orgasm. Turns out she was a squirter. My sheets and carpet began to soak up copious amount of piss as I sat there dazed... But it was over. I was free of my sexual bondage to Rossie O'Donnell.

I spent the rest of the night drowning my shame in shard, but I was grateful. Stim-dick was my savior that night. Praise be to stim-dick.

&#x200B;

Edit: P.S. Just boofed meth for the first time with a pipette. Didn't make the water concentrated enough, so I had to penetrate my asshole 6 times. 10/10 didn't make me feel as violated as that night. Would recommend.I was hanging with couple of my boys last  weekend smoking weed and drinking and just chilling regular shit you feel. When we get late to the night my boy pulls out a bag of coke. Im like cool you do you i really couldnt care less what drugs other people do at this point. 

The thing is i used to be addicted to coke(and bunch of other shit) and these guys know it. I got good self control bout this shit tho and i just tell them that im good. Cue to them trying to get me to do the coke for the rest of the fucking night. Like out of a fucking d.a.r.e ad " just a lil bit wont hurt" while im trying to explain addiction to these fuckers. 

Overalls that shit pretty much ruined the night for me. When they finally understood that i wont be doing the fucking coke they started acting like i was some church boy not engaging in something safe and fun and therefor killing their mood. 

I dont get why people do this. Dont try to give drugs to someone who says no multiple fucking times people. Like thats the kinda shit you do if you want to get some blood on your hands. Made me question my friendship for sure.I got really high and went to a protest alone in a city where I've lived for 2 years and still don't know anyone. It made me feel very alone being in a crowd. I have many problems and not being able to talk to people is one. Now I'm feeling really sorry for myself so I'm going to drink and go smoke a bowl and ride my bike while listening to sad music. Just wanted to say something, I love this sub. 🧡Whether it's weed, acid, dxm, alcohol, DPH, etc., I always spend a good bit of time in the bathroom. I like the solitude. And depending on if I'm completely blasted, I love gazing into the mirror. On acid, I play with my pupils and make them expand and shrink.

Edit: thanks for the awards! I guess bathrooms are a holy place for half of us and a hell for the other half lolI really felt the need to tell someone and it's not something that is really known amongst those around me, but today marks four weeks since deciding to change my priorities. It's been a really hard time and I'm amazed that I still think about doing it. My body is still recovering and I think there is a long way to go but I feel confident.

Thanks for reading, love and peace 😘✌️

Edit: Honestly, I can't thank you all enough. It's amazing to recieve such overwhelming support and validation. Feeling very motivated to push on and all of your comments contribute to that. ❤️Just a quick edit as this post blew up: There was an overwhelming response from teens that relate to this post which breaks my fucking heart. If you need to speak with someone who'll listen to you and need any kind of advice or guidance, please feel free to PM me. I may not respond right away as I'm always working in music projects but I promise I'll get to you and you'll have an ear to listen to. I'm fucking rooting for you guys and just know you're not alone, and it's not too late to improve your quality of life <3

Hey guys, I'm gonna get downvoted to fuck here honestly. But I've been meaning to say this a while now after being a part of this Reddit.

I urge you, if you can, please go easy on the drugs as a teen. I was lucky enough not to get into them till my early twenties and enjoy the fuck of them now, but so many people who were users at earlier ages than I aren't always doing so well. I know so many 'anti lsd' people now cause they claim to have done it weekly and said eventually it messed them up. The way these drugs can fuck with your neurotransmitters during brain development is probably no joke, and don't make yourself dependent from such a young age. 

I'm a very recreational user:

1) I'm thirty years old 
2) I take vyvanse twice a week to get my passion projects done 
3) Acid every few months, I always have a self growth intention when I take it and it's made me a better human being all around 
4) I take MDMA, average once a month, it's a little bit excessive as I should really be waiting 3 months in between but so far I've had no issues 
5) I take these drugs as self therapy and self enlightenment, in my personal case they've improved my quality of life and mental health greatly 
6) Been doing this for half a decade and I've never found myself addicted to any of these substances and can take extended tolerance breaks between with no issues


I'm not saying don't do drugs, just please do it responsibly and try to limit yourself. These years are so important for your development as a human and rolling or tripping once a week just for fun isn't gonna do much good for you and in all honesty will likely prevent you from enjoying these experiences in the future. 

Try and limit yourself, pay attention to all the harm reduction posts on this Reddit, and please just be responsible! 

This probably is gonna sound conflicting from what I just said, but I am glad and proud to see our younger generation be more open minded and experimental. If you guys can grow up healthy, using drugs in the future is gonna be be most magical thing ever. But don't make yourself dependent on them, it's so much easier to get addicted at this age due to so many factors (mental illness is on the rise, our older generations fucked up the world for us, etc). 

I'm rooting for all you guys! And I swear you get no judgement from me. But please..  be fucking responsible. 

Edit: Whoever gave me Gold thank you so much! I honestly did not deserve it They say there’s no more freezer space in West Virginia.

I don’t know if that’s true.

But I heard it somewhere.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

And that’s not the kind of freezer space they use for food.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

The mothers. The fathers. The children.

Crying at graves.

The coffin and cremation industries are booming in West Virginia.

&#x200B;

But it’s not just there. It’s in Ohio.

&#x200B;

My ex-girlfriend died in Cincinnati. Left behind her 4-year-old son. One of my other friends moved back home to Ohio after staying sober for 18 months. Went down to his old room in the basement and never walked back out. The nicest kid you ever met. Really was. Wore cowboy boots. And liked to tell jokes. His parents buried him that Friday.

&#x200B;

But it’s not just in Ohio.

&#x200B;

It’s in Denver, too.

&#x200B;

And New Mexico. Where everyone I know is either sober, dead or in prison. And I’d guess that a third of them are dead. A few of them are still running around, but I can’t think of who.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

The disease needs new flesh. The plague eats new faces. The beast is hungry and we are perishing.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

They say there’s no more freezer space in West Virginia.

And they’ve got the kind of giant portable freezers FEMA uses for natural disasters.

But I don’t know if that’s true.

I just heard it somewhere.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

And now I stand under the tree behind the garage.

Mosquitoes in the trashcan.Soggy weeds growing in the ditch.

Next to the woodpile.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

I think about new year’s morning.

&#x200B;

I was 6. You were 5.

We were popping fire crackers and a black cat blew up in your hand.

You ran in. Momma held a wet rag on it. And you quit crying.

But everything changes. You did.

Started sneaking out. Lost weight. Stole my coin collection and Dad’s tools.

Ran off with Ray Ray and a dude named Ron. Come back with long sleeves and your teeth missing.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

You lost more weight. Had a black eye.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

And told me you were going to get better. That this was just a passing phase.

Well it passed. And you’re still my sister. On either side of the ground.

I love you. And miss you and wish you’d never left

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

They say there’s no more freezer space in West Virginia.

But I don’t know about that.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

It’s just something I heard.So tonight, me and two of my friends decided to meet up and smoke weed at this cool pedestrian bridge down the street from one of my friend’s houses that stretches over a ravine. After picking up my friends, we drive down the street and park a few houses away from the bridge. We get to rolling our blunts and everything is going fine. Once we’re done rolling, we start to smoke. 

As we finish the first blunt and are about to move onto the second, we see a headlight at one end of the bridge shining on us. All of a sudden, a spot light flashes on us. We look at each other and immediately pick up all of our shit and run towards the other side of the bridge. When we get to the other side, another car turns it’s lights on and drives at us forcing us to run back towards the bridge where the first officer was then waiting for us. With the cop car at my back and the officer in front of me, I realize that I’m still holding onto the two blunts that we had rolled before but hadn’t smoked. I quickly tossed them in the bushes to my right before the cop approaching us from the bridge instructed all of us to put our hands up where he could see them. 

The officers informed us that they smelled marijuana and knew that we were smoking. My friends and I denied it, saying we had absolutely no weed on us (which was true since I threw the blunts in the bushes just a few feet away). The cop who was in the car then said that he saw one of us throw something in the bushes and asked which one of us did it. After all denying it, one cop went to go look while the other stayed with us. My friends and I looked at each other, fearful about what might happen if the cop finds the blunts after we told him we didn’t have any. While one officer searched the bushes, we tried to make small talk with the other. It turns out he was our DARE officer back in 5th grade, and apparently not very good at it. 

After 15 minutes of searching the bushes, the officer came back and told us he didn’t find anything. The officers let us go and we walked back to my friends house and sat in his driveway for 15 minutes. We then walked back across the bridge to the bushes where I threw the blunts. After searching for 10 minutes, we managed to find just one of the blunts I threw. We walked back to my friends house, got in his car, and hotboxed the fuck out of it. Perfect end to an almost terrible night.

EDIT: We went back this morning and found the second blunt. About to smoke it now.Today was a grind. 

I slept well last night. Woke up feeling normal too. Made a hearty breakfast and off to work. Two energy drinks again. 

By 10 I feel like I have a fever. By 11 it's time to take an early mark. 

I go home and sleep in a pool of sweat. The urge to accept the offer to taper off disappeared as I fell asleep. 

5hrs later I wake up semi-drenched in sweat. I am groggy.   But quick to gather my thoughts and keep moving on. 
A nice dinner and a lovely chat about my SO's day plus a little bit of poking fun at our families fills our discussion.

Mentally I feel stable. Physically I feel like I have a temperature. However things like jumping like a cat when the phone rings has stopped which is nice. 

Three glasses of red with dinner and no diazapam tonight. 

Again everyone thank you for your support and let's see if tomorrow gets easier. 

I'm on my phone so I'll edit later links to the previous days and answer questions when I get a chance.  


[Day one](https://www.reddit.com/r/Drugs/comments/4acb1h/day_one_stopping_meth/)

[Day two](https://www.reddit.com/r/Drugs/comments/4ahbiy/day_two_stopping_meth/)
You ever been out and about without a care in the world and the urge his you? The pressure in your lower abdomen, your butthole quivers, you start to sweat. You are driving in an unfamiliar area, your brain starts to rush. You undo your seat belt, your pants belt, unbutton your jeans. The pressure of clothing is too much, you could shit yourself. As you scan the highway for an exit, searching for a familiar establishment that would accept your dump, you begin to go over your life and its details that lead you to this moment. "I shouldn't have ate that, I know it doesn't agree with me". "I am going to shit myself in my car, what is wrong with me?" You think hurriedly as you spot a "SUNOCO 2 MILES ->" sign and immediately pull off the highway. Your are truly in the moment, any thoughts of your bare ass touching porcelain gives your body the false sensation of safety. Better for you to clear your mind and focus on your breathing. Your dignity and sanity is at stake. You pull up to the gas station, hop out, run to the bathroom. As you get closer, you feel your sphincter begin to lose the battle. You enter the bathroom, throw open the handicap stall door to reveal the utterly disgusting toilet in the interstate gas station bathroom, you don't care though as it is your beacon of hope. As soon as your ass hits the toilet, the hot, stinging rejection leaves your root chakra. The pain is unbearable but you are letting go of your past mistakes. You are forgiving yourself for these errors and vow to learn from them to change your ways. After the cathartic release, you clean yourself off, and are in pure ecstasy. You gleefully buy $30 of snacks at the counter in harmony with the world and yourself.It started when I found a little pill capsule with a rolled up bag of white powder under my dads bed. I was playing hide and seek and climbed under the bed to hide. I had never heard of cocaine but I was 9 and curious. It wasn't labeled or anything but at that age I liked to suck on or eat anything I could. I had discovered that sugar was sweet and made me feel nice and sometimes I would sneak some out of the jar when my dad wasn't looking. I didn't realize at that age that eating mysterious white powder in a pill bottle was a bad idea. So I took a little bit and ate it. It tasted like shit. But after a while I started to feel really really good. It was like the sugar rush but 1000x more. I couldn't tell my dad that I ate his "sugar" so it was my little secret. Then every day I would come back to my dads bed to take more and more of this magical powder that made me feel amazing. This went on until the bag was empty. There was probably 6 or 7 grams in the bag although it was a long time ago so I can't be sure. The point is I used it pretty consistently for like months. When I realized I ran out of the magic powder I started to feel super irritable. My dad took me to consoling because my behavior was getting erratic. Of course I never said anything about the magic powder. 

It wasn't until I was 19 that I tried cocaine. I always had a theory that the "magic white stuff" from my childhood was cocaine but I never actually tried it until 19. The first time I used (knowingly) was like a wave of the most Euphoric nostalgia I had ever felt. It was like orgasm x100. It was like meeting up with a long lost friend for the first time in years. I knew it was bad but I didn't care because it felt too good. I was heavily addicted for 13 years. Lost many friends, jobs, and the trust of family, it was awful. 

I'm now 7 years clean and never plan on doing it again. I've shared my story with only a select few. I feel, however, that my story is an inspiration. If I could get over my addiction, so can you. It was the hardest fucking thing I've done in my life but I came out alive.  I hope this inspires some people to get clean. I'm proud of myself every day. I promise you won't regret it. So many people don’t do shit when they smoke weed they just chill laugh and watch TV and play video games. Although that’s a huge amount of fun to do, it can get bad if that’s all you do. I highly recommend doing active things when you smoke. Going for walks on the beach, running, going swimming, literally just going anywhere where you don’t sit down the whole time. If you get really lazy from weed, run a mile once a week when you’re baked to get rid of that laziness and it will do great lengths for your well being. If you exercise and be active half the time when your high, you’ll learn to have a good time then, and you will have an even better time sitting around in your friends apartment doing random shit. And you’ll be glad you took that route. Whenever I do drugs I like to give my cat catnip so she doesn’t feel left out and is on my level. That is allBefore I got on medication for bipolar, I would hallucinate out of my asshole every time I took a shot of Tina. I know it’s a fucking nightmare, especially if you’re alone and have no one to talk to. I’ve seen and heard more shit than I ever thought possible. That being said, I learned a lot of ways to cope with it while it’s happening. Having a sane person to talk to helps. It’s about fighting the illogical thoughts that are seeing a distorted reality built by anxiety. 

Seriously though. If you message me, I’ll send my phone number, email, fucking anything, any time of day. I know what it’s like to face that shit alone. Don’t hesitate to reach out. 

Much love everyone.

Edit: A lot of people are messaging asking how I dealt with the anxiety from hallucinations. I’ll tell you a little trick I learned, because panic attacks in my early 20’s were multiple times a day. This helped me stay cognitive as to what reality was, instead of what my mind was telling me. 

My dad and I love doing math in our heads. We used to race multiplying the same number against itself to see who would win. 23x23, or 87x87. It’s easy if you know how to break it down. 

But basically, it’s just easy enough for me to always be able to do if I’m cognitive, but just difficult enough for me to convince myself absolutely nothing is wrong in my head. So when I start worrying I’m crazy, I do some math, and then voila. I’m not insane lol 

It’s like in inception when he uses the top spinner to know he’s in a dream cause it never stops spinning. Doing something that will declare you sane helps your mind convince itself everything is ok. I promise, everything IS OK. LolYou are what you do, not what you think/ what you think you do. 

It’s easy to get caught up on your racing thoughts and some genius ideas that you had that you never really followed through on. It’s easy for you to understand you are a smart person and that you have unlimited potential. But if you never actually do shit you will never be shit to anyone who hasn’t already established a deep relationship with you. 


If you work a 10 hour job and make good money for your family, but you come home disconnected and just do your medicines and never actually  do anything for them, your family will find it hard to love you no matter how much you think you deserve it. 

I wanted to post in this sub because a lot of us who use and medicate tend to only pay close attention to what’s going on in your own head, and not to the people around you. I know what I said will be obvious to some, but I know there are plenty of people who need this reminder right now. 

Pay attention to the people around you and that they’re good. Look outward as much as you look inward. And sacrifice your time and physical well being for others, it will be well worth it in the long run.I recently bought a pair of shoes from my drug dealer. 

Bad mistake.

I have no idea what he laced them with but I was tripping all day long!
If I write the numbers '1984', there are some things that pop into your head. You probably assume I'm referring to a year. Maybe you think of the book. Maybe you think of 80's hair bands, or Ronald Reagan. Maybe you think of a movie from around that time. 

If I say 'black', you might think of the color. You might think of people of African descent. You might think of darkness/sadness. 

I can go on and on with different examples like this. The point I'm trying to make is that humans subconsciously make associations like this all the time, every day. In psychology, these associations are referred to as 'heuristics'. 

Some heuristics can be positive or negative. For example, if I say 'liberals', either positive or negative heuristics will automatically pop into your head. Maybe the heuristics that you think of are along the lines of forward thinking, progressive, and moral. Or maybe you think of pretentiousness, naive, and hippies. Whatever the case, it seems like some heuristics become hard coded into people's brains, and they will never question or break free from them. 

That's where LSD comes in. LSD will erase many of your heuristics, and make you see things in a new light. If you were raised religiously and developed negative heuristics towards atheists, you will question that heuristic. LSD will make you question heuristics that you didn't even know you had. 

Maybe the heuristics you had about nature were dirty, bug filled, and too hot/cold. Those heuristics will be erased, and it will feel like you are experiencing nature for the very first time.

Now the most amazing part about all of this is that we all have heuristics about ourselves, many of which we don't even realize. I have had some groundbreaking realizations about myself, solely from having acid erasing my heuristics and allowing me to clearly think about myself. I believe this is what people sometimes refer to as 'ego death'.

LSD is an amazing and powerful drug. It can lead to wonderful self development, if used responsibly. I think most everyone needs to give it a try. So I met this girl, she just moved into town and I offered to show her the city. Things are going well and before hand she says she smokes weed n what not so cool. I brought a pot brownie so after we hit a few spots(no drinking just museums and clothing stores) she ask for some brownie. So I gave her a 1/4 of it and I eat the rest. We then go to get something to eat and she starts falling asleep on the table swearing there is no way that was weed and begging me to not sex traffic her!!

Any fucking way I got the check drove her paranoid ass home and let her keep the left overs. Don’t say you have a tolerance for drugs just to be impress someone you just met bc she could have accused me of a lot of things. Jesus this makes me want to stop dating for a bit.In a few seconds I am gonna release a big fat dump that I’ve been holding in for way too long, while inhaling nitrous oxide. I will try to get the timing just right and put on some sweet Jimi Hendrix tunes (Little wing).

Hypothesis: I beleive that the nitrous will either numb out my butt senses or boost the associated euphoria that you get when taking a shit.

I will write a conclusion in the comments in a few minutes.I’m a male that has always had pretty thick thighs. I was pretty self conscious growing up. 

Eventually I realized it was because I played soccer (football) my whole life. But unfortunately it was right before being thicc was meta. 

Regardless I learned to love myself for me. 

Fast forward to me being a degen. 

(On multiple occasions) I’m stumbling around. I manage to make it to the shower. No wet floor signs in sight. I can’t even see and there’s soap everywhere. I’m gonna slip and bust something...

...but I don’t.

I remember something. 

I’m 70% thighs. 

No matter how much I wobble I just don’t lose my balance. I just stomp around in this slippery ass shower with no sense of equilibrium like a fuckin wobbuffet. 

I wash up and get out the shower still smashed. Amazed, I thank my thick thighs for getting me through yet another sticky situation.I'd like to bring up this topic because I've been part of it myself, and honestly I believe it can be dangerous for people who are approaching psychedelics for the first time and decide to read personal experiences or even ask questions on the most famous and valid psychedelic forums.

I'm talking about people who claim to have ascended into a higher state of being after a trip, people who say they can now visit other planes of existence at will and talk to other beings including the dead. People who say that the psychedelic state is the only true reality and that it's wise to trip as often as possible so you can build a better relationship with the entheogen and eventually transcend this reality. And finally people who advice taking more than 150ug of acid or 2.5g of mushrooms to first timers because if you don't get past that dose you won't have a real trip.

These posts get almost always seconded or upvoted by most people. And when someone has a bad experience after taking 3g of mushrooms, they are told to trip again, maybe on another substance, so they can overcome the trauma. 

I love psychedelics, they have helped me, and have the potential to heal people. I also don't like to completely dismiss their "spiritual" qualities. But when psychiatric research and traditional use of psychedelics are misinterpreted to justify personal delusions, I find it disrespectful and potentially dangerous, and it can also push away people who would benefit from a responsible use of psychedelics.Took a couple tabs and was laying on the carpet listening to music. Let a huge one rip and the door popped shut. I was in such amazement I opened the door and tried to work up another one. Then small breeze came through the window and shut the door again. I laid there laughing for wayyy to long when I realized what had happened. 

Too bad though, that would be cool as hell if I could do that.I was super high just finished smoking a few joints then boom a bird crashed into my window then fell on the floor right in front of me and started flapping around on the floor so I picked it up because it was messed up and he had a broken neck and a broken wing. One second the bird was alive and looking at me and I could see the life in its eyes then its head just dropped back and he died. The life just left the birds body in an instant and it triggered so many thoughts in my brain about what happens when we die.So a few days ago my mom found a ziploc bag with a few brownies inside and she suspected that I'd been taking marijuana edibles. I immediately hid the bag but she insisted she wanted to try one of the brownies to make sure they weren't pot-infused. In an attempt to cover it up, I went out and bought a package of regular brownies and replaced the pot brownies with regular brownies then offered her one. My mom is a super religious anti-drug advocate and I'm certain she's never been high or drunk in her life. Now after taking the regular brownie, she's going around pretending to be "high" based on her perception of what being high means. She's dancing really weirdly to music and she talks with this stupid baby voice and she keeps insisting she's high. What the fuck?????

Edit: turns out she was trolling me and she wanted me to see "how someone who's high actually looks like"You know, good 'ol natural vodka you pick from the vodka tree. I don't understand why everyone hypes up shrooms so much because they're ~natural~. I like shrooms too, but I enjoy acid more because it's longer, more energetic, and obscenely cheap when bought in bulk. I don't get why among nearly all of my friends shrooms are the hands down favorite. 

This rant brought to you by LSD gang.There was a post from a person who tried meth on a whim after a friend convinced them. They were posting the details, and they seemed really enthusiastic in a naive way because they felt amazing and were craving it, etc. 


It honestly breaks my heart when I see those first timer posts, and I said something that I shouldn't have, basically congratulating them for "making the worst mistake of their life."


That was a horrible thing to say to someone, and they since deleted their post. If they are reading this now, please know that I am so very sorry, and all I can say in return is that drugs feel good for a reason, but please, I beg you, educate yourself as much as you can about the drugs you have taken, and the drugs you want to take. Again, I am very sorry.



Edit: You folks are awesome, seriously.The release of Pokémon GO happened to coincide with mushroom season over here in dreary old Melbourne, Victoria.
So now when I go out picking, if I see people, I just take my phone out and hold it in front of me.

I personally don't want that kind of attention while I'm picking. Maybe it doesn't bother others too much.I was at a friends house yesterday, and our plan was to do some xanax and some subs. We popped 2 green monsters each, then railed a line of suboxone each. After about 2 hours, my friend fell asleep and wouldn't wake back up, so I decided to go into his kitchen to look for some munch material. I see his Grandma fumbling with something on the counter, and we strike up a conversation. After a few minutes of talking, she starts getting a little flirty. Normally, I would have very quickly declined because one, she's a granny, and two, she's my friends granny, but the bars made me give in. I started giving her compliments and flirting back, and when I told her I liked her dress, she invited me into her room to "look at some of the other dresses." I remember some foreplay happening, but i have no memory of intercourse at all.

Does this make me a bad person?

Also this wasn't my best friend or anything, just a dude I occasionally hang with

Also don't take xans and subs at the same time, really unhealthy. 
Me and my friend were checking out of our motel when she decided last minute to steal all the little soaps and shampoos from the bathroom “cuz why not”. She then stuffs them into my jacket pockets while my hands are full with suitcases. Of course, I somehow always end up the keeper of the contraband. Later we get pulled over, and my right jean pocket is full of bud. I’m super nervous. The trooper tells me to get out of the car for a pat down and I’m thinking this is it, I’m caught. He pats around my jacket and feels the hard bars and asks “what’s in your pocket here?” I say I don’t know, because at this point I had honestly forgotten about the soap. All I know is it’s not my right jean pocket so he can have whatever the fuck it is. “You don’t know??” He asks super suspiciously, thinking I’m playing dumb. So he plunges his hand straight into the pocket and pulls out a handful of little packages of bar soap. First he just stares at it, then just starts laughing his ass off. I tell him, “oh that’s right officer, we stole this from the hotel we were staying at. I’m sorry man” and I really play up the I’m sorry I stole soap thing. He tells us “well that’s a first for me” and is so distracted by the soap that he doesn’t finish my pat down. He says we’re free to go. “And don’t forget your soap here” still laughing at us. Whatever, I get back in the car and we take offUpstairs neighbor was having a party tonight. They were getting rowdy. I was woken up by screaming and someone being slammed on the floor above my bedroom.

I'm 29 and have struggled with addiction from the age of 16. I haven't smoked weed in 2 weeks. I'm down to less than 5 cigarettes a day. Haven't touched meth in 5 years. Only drink 1-2 nights a week. But every time there's a bit of 'extra money' in my bank I spend it on coke. Not just a little bit, but snort an 8 ball to myself in one night.

So when I woke up and couldn't sleep, I was triggered. I texted my dealer, drove into the city and waited. Was waiting for over 30 mins for the driver when I said "fuck this" and apologetically texted the dealer saying I'm leaving.

He was choked, then said that he thinks the driver sold me his own supply and told me to text him that. I told him "I have no drugs man, if your guy was quicker then I wouldn't have had time to reflect on my shitty life choices." I sincerely hope the driver isn't in trouble, but this is about me, not a coke dealer.

Came home and it's calmed down, a girl is bawling her eyes out in the driveway so I guess the party is over. Walked right up to them and basically demanded a cigarette, asked if the wrestling matches were over. They apologised for waking me up. Deleted the contact for coke, deleted the texts just to make it harder next time. This isn't the first time, it probably won't be the last either.

To the dealer, sorry for wasting your time, to the driver, I hope you aren't in big trouble. To the people upstairs, we all get a little crazy and it's all good.

I'm going to bed now, and am looking forward to sleeping in tomorrow because I made the right decision tonight.

Edit: Thanks to all you beautiful people for your love and support. This community is truly amazing. Take care of yourselves and don't beat yourselves up over the little things that happen. We all make mistakes and it's just important we learn from them. I love each and every one of you. ❤One night in the middle of winter my friends mom was out of town, so me and a group of 5 friends went to his house for a night of shrooms. None of our usual dealers were coming through, so we try a new number. Just our luck, he lives just down the road! We go get the shrooms, come back to the house, and eat up.

As we start coming up, everyone is having a great time except the host. I can tell he's starting to get into a thought loop, as he keeps saying things like "Didn't you just say that?" "And that's where you come in" (referring to the next person speaking) and my personal favorite "That's the loop". He somehow manages to rope someone else into his "loop" and they start talking about all these wild theories together.

Our one friend K is really good at calming people down, so she starts taking care of them while the other 3 of us go out to his shed to smoke. We had a vinyl player in there and we listened to Favorite Worst Nightmare by arctic monkeys, the visuals were like a neon disco, all the posters were super vibrant, it was fucking gorgeous! We sat in there and talked for probably half an hour then decided to head in.

As we enter the back door, it's utter chaos. The host and his companion are walking quickly about the house gathering random items and yelling about some shit, then they run out the front door with K following them. We ask her what the fuck is going on and she just says "I'm fine, they're not, i'll take care of them, don't worry." So we let them go out into the snowy night and have fun, and go on youtube on the hosts xbox.

When we hit search, the last search was "Vsauce does the past exist" and the last watched video was "Did the past really happen?" by Vsauce.

**THIS FUCKING VIDEO SENT THESE GUYS OFF THE RAILS FOR 3 AND A HALF HOURS GODDAMN YOU MICHAEL STEVENS**

Something I see mentioned far more rarely than it should be when it comes to hard drugs is the concept of "breaking a wall". Once you've done heroin you've now done heroin. Once you've done meth you've now done meth.

It sounds stupid and obvious but hear me out. Once that mental barrier is broken, and *especially* if you have developed any degree of habit with the shit. It means your brain starts considering it an option rather than something crazy.

I haven't had any meth in over 3 years now and I only used it for 6 months or so. Sometimes after a few drinks I crave a bit, and know if it were on the table in front of me I'd hit a line. I have 1 living relative and it's my mom. I'm pretty sure if she died I'd go get myself some meth to force me not to feel bad. And I quit the first time I decided to quit.

You can never "untake" a drug. Once you do it's something your brain thinks you can do now. It's something I think about often and a good thing to keep in mind when you're considering experimenting.6:30 am - Started drinking my cup of Joe.


7:00 am - Finished the said cup.


7:10 am - It's coming on strong. I no longer feel tired and sleepy.


7:30 am - A massive turd has left my anal cavity.


9:00 am - The effects are slowly starting to diminish. I decide to redose with another 200ml.


11:00 am - I go back to my old self. Tired and grumpy. And all is normal again for my sleep deprived body.


I decided to make this little report to help people trying this stimulant for the first time. No Thanks required, I know I'm doing gods work.


All in all 9/10 experience. The comeups are beautiful and energetic and the comedowns are depressing unless you redose all the time. 


Drink with caution and don't burn your tongue.


EDIT: I've been using coffee for 8 years now. I see no end to it.


EDIT 2:  The fact that 30% of all comments are BOOF comments makes me love this community. Who knows, coffee boof might become a future report if I get to it.So last night, I requested 4 tabs and 2 points of MD (this plug has the cleanest MD I have ever tried), but he took too long and I passed out. Got up at 5:30 this morning to find that he sent me a video and it was of him leaving acid and mdma in my mailbox. This man drove from another state and I could have easily not paid him, but he trusted me and left the drugs in my mailbox. Funny part is, that he put it in my neighbors mailbox. Best surprise to wake up to in the morning :) 

P.S- I paid him and left him a tip for being an OG

Edit: OMG guys, so I just recently moved into a new apartment and I literally just found a mason jar with at least an 1/8th of bud, a HUGE grinder, and rolling paper. This is insane 😢Long Post TL;DR: At the bottom

This happened one week ago, and it’s the story of how I quite literally shattered my life, after eating 3.7 grams of Cambodian Cubensis Mushrooms. In order to properly understand many aspects of the whole experience I’ll give you a bit of backstory.

DMT was my go to substance over the course of the last 4 months or so, and man I fucking loved it, it was just so weird... I felt like I was exploring a whole new world, taking what bits and pieces I could and bringing them back with me to this reality. I’ll get into my mushroom experience shortly but what I’m about to explain greatly affected the overall outcome of my mushroom trip and honestly maybe even my life. 

So as I stated previously, DMT was my new found love. I would use it in binge-ish ways, smoke it 4 or 5 times in a day or two, and then wait a few weeks. And over the course of about 4 months, I actually managed to put down all other drugs and solely focused on the occasional DMT experiences. There was always a key element to my DMT trips though, a reoccurring entity, I referred to him as a jester because out of all of the other similar DMT experiences I’ve read of, this was the best representation of the being that I could relate to. 

Now this jester, he wasn’t kind. He wasn’t one of the all loving DMT entities you often hear of, no, infact, he had some real sinister vibes to him. Creeeeepy smiles, he would flip me off in every trip, at first I was able to disregard him, but he began to become the main attraction, and there was no escape. I still loved DMT, even despite this unsettling entity that had been manifesting itself into my tripping dimension. I had given DMT a break for a few weeks as I usually did, but I’d began to speak about this jester openly to some friends of mine. I wanted to see what his purpose was, why was he creating such a dark mysterious presence, I believe now that I was building him up in my subconscious, giving him all sorts of power... But none the less, I decided that when the time was right I’d set out for a DMT experience in which my intent would be to confront this intriguing creature, and see what all the fuss was about. 

In the middle of this planning though, I came across a good deal on some Cambodian Cubensis mushrooms, and I decided what the hell, let’s give it a go. SPOILER ALERT: DISRESPECT TO PSYCHEDELICS ABOUT TO COMMENSE. For some reason beyond me even now, my idiot mind convinced myself I’d be okay to eat 3.7 grams of these mushrooms at midnight in my fucking grandparents house after they went to bed. No need to harp on me, I’m an idiot, a total scummy fuck, the level of disrespect towards family and psychedelic drugs was at an all time high, I’ll admit that to the fullest, but it’s what I did. 

Anywayssss.... So this all went down last Saturday night/early Sunday morning. 

11:30 PM: I ground up the 3.7 g’s of mushrooms and placed them in a bit of lemon juice, let it sit for 20 minutes while I stirred occasionally. 

(I’d eaten mushrooms twice before this event, first time eating 1.7 g’s, second time eating 1.9. Why did I decide to up the dose so heavily? Well, I’d been breaking through on DMT on the semi-regular and figured there’s no way that mushrooms could match that level of intensity, or, because I’m a fucking dumbass, both of which are accurate.) 

11:50 PM: Down the whole lemon tek shroomy smoothie in two gulps and go and put “The good dinosaur” on, on the tv while I waited for the trip to begin. I did what any good wannabe psychonaut would do and prayed to the mushroom before it kicked in lol. 

12:10 AM: I’m already feeling the mushrooms, it’s already reached the level of my peaks of my other two previous mushroom trips. I stand up and laugh hysterically at the chair in the living room because of how small it suddenly looked, typical shroom stuff ya’know? 

12:15 AM: Effects are strong, the blinds on my windows are breathing rapidly, I’m completely unable to focus on “The good dinosaur” and it’s starting to seem very weird... I decide to grab my headphones and go outside and lie under the stars. I gathered my blankets, a sweatshirt I rolled up to use as a pillow and put my headphones on and walked to the backyard where I found a nice spot to lie down. As I lied down and looked at the stars they were moving so rapidly, it was beautiful. I was listening to an EDM group called The Glitch Mob and it was so intense and amazing at the same time, the song changed to a less upbeat song and that’s when things began to go south... All of a sudden something begins to form within the night sky, it wasn’t clear to me immediately but I could sense that whatever forming’s presence had a dark vibe to it. As soon as I recognized the sinister feel, I’m intensely brought into complete DMT like visuals and the fucking jester was right in front of me. I was not ready for this at all, and I instantly felt a strong anxiety building. I decided to head inside immediately. I threw my blankets and nearly ran inside.

12:30 AM: I’m back inside and honestly I felt like I was on DMT, not a light dose either, when I closed my eyes I was in a complete entity filled DMT world. I remember seeing a carousel of beings with card bodies (like from Alice in wonderland) all spinning in circles. My headphones were playing Jimi Hendricks now, and on a lighter note, a caricaturish version of Jimi was playing the guitar on a tiny island like piece of land floating all throughout hyperspace. But at the bottom of my view of this world was the Jester, only this time, it was a trio of jesters. The main male jester, one older female jester, and one younger female jester. They didn’t have smiles like usual this time, instead they had very detailed frowns and it was quite unsettling. The world was exactly what I’ve pictured in previous DMT trips and have described as a dark and vast neon game-scape. Infinite patterns forming, in a way that seemed to be “put on” or “presented” for me by these dark jesters. I figured, although I wasn’t prepared to confront the jester (well now jester’s in the plural sense) in this trip, I did previously set an intent to do so and if I’m presented with the opportunity now, why not take it up. 

12:45 AM: I’m lying on the couch, gripped with the unexpected task at hand. “What the fuck does this being want?!”. I closed my eyes and was back in the DMT realm, sure enough the jester and his two female sidekicks were there at the bottom, I focused on them as unnerving as it was, all of my attention was set directly on them. “What do you want?” I asked out loud, I received no reaction what so ever, but I was still determined. “WHAT DO YOU WANT? Please tell me!” I said once again but now in a more stern tone. After the second time I questioned them, I still received no answer, however, they began to shrink, as if they were retracting into the placeless void from which they originally emerged. Smaller and smaller they shrunk until, poof... they were gone. “I did it!” I thought, I had confronted the manifestation of this being somehow and defeated it I guess you could say! I was still immersed in this world but the jester was nowhere to be seen/felt! I remembered though, it hadn’t even been an hour since I’d eaten the mushrooms, and I should probably get to my room before I was tripping so hard that I’d be unable to do so. This is when things took a very dark turn...

1:00 AM: I get into my bed and try to get comfortable, I’m still listening to music but it’s getting harder and harder to focus on, I’m unable to explain the visuals I’m seeing, and my head space is becoming more and more confusing. I decided to take my headphones out.

1:09 AM: I look at my phone and suddenly realize, I could no longer comprehend time. I knew I had taken the mushrooms right before midnight, but I could not put together how long ago midnight was, I knew my trip would last around 4-6 hours but I no longer knew how hours worked, I thought, “I’m losing it... I’ve really dug myself into something now. How will I be able to handle this?”. What did I do you might ask? I’ll tell you what I did. I called my fucking mom. Face palm moment of the century ladies and gentlemen, the idiot 21 year old called his god damn mom at the peak of a sanity ending mushroom trip. But let’s not forget my setting, while I was on the phone with my mom I made it clear that I needed to be picked up. However, I remembered I was at my grandparents house, and seeing as my mom wouldn’t be there for at least 30 minutes I decided to make matters even worse. 

1:15ish: I burst into my grandparents room, “Help! I ate some mushrooms and I need help!!” My grandparents are so startled, they recognized my fear however and were extremely supportive. I kept asking them “Am I going to die?” They would reassure me that I wasn’t and that I was just having a bad trip. 

I’d like to just say that “Having a bad trip” is the biggest fear for nearly everyone when using psychedelics so to hear out loud that I was having one was shattering to me. I realized they were right, and I don’t fault them for saying that obviously because they were completely right, but to have this presented to me in the midst of it was an experience unlike anything I’ve ever encountered. And it was horrifying. Anyways back to the story. 

1:30ish: My mom had called my dad who lived closer to my grandparents house and he had just arrived, I heard the doorbell ring and ran downstairs to see who had come. I saw my dad and felt instant happiness at its purest form. I hugged him but at the this point I’d completely forgotten I’d eaten any mushrooms, I forgot who I was, or where I was, all I knew was my dad was there and I loved him. I told him this and he gave me a big smile, I began reciting any word that came to mind and it would present itself in my mind as I was creating it for the first time. “Love, happiness, the universe” I was now the creator, I recited the names of everyone I knew. Usually putting an “I love” before their name. But I also recited some negative things, “Jail, prison, hell” and seeing as how I was now the creator, I was in those places, my dad tried to sway me into a positive direction. I do actually remember him saying to me “You know, I’ve tripped on mushrooms on those same exact stairs when I was around your age” lol. My mom arrived in the middle of this whole fiasco. 

1:45ish: My mom and her boyfriend arrive, I recognized her but was nearly too far gone at this point to give a proper greeting. I was now lying in the middle of the floor, completely separated from reality, unable to mutter anything that made the slightest bit of sense. Everyone agreed it’d be best if I went and stayed at my moms for the rest of the night. I do not remember this part too well, but I guess as we were walking to my moms car, I allowed myself to fall freely onto the sidewalk, successfully fucking my face up, I chipped a tooth, bit through my lip, and have now been told after getting X-rays that I also fractured my jaw during this fall. I guess I was bleeding profusely and my parents in a panic decided to take me to the emergency room. Hospitals and psychedelics, they go together like toothpaste and orange juice...

2:30 AM: I remember being in the emergency room lobby, however I did not know at the time that it was the emergency room. Instead I had entered a state of rapid repetition of emotions that was beyond my control, I would feel extreme happiness, followed by extreme sadness and fear, that was then followed by a state a extreme motivation to break free from this horrible loop. I began to convince myself that the happy and motivated states in this infinite loop were nothing but a mere illusion to spread false hope of escaping from the inevitable hellish wave I would soon feel. I no longer felt like I was in this world, I did not know who I was, nor where I was, I clearly had no control over my feelings, I began to realize at the time that I was in a game, and that game was hell. It was terrifying, and I had no way of knowing that it would soon be over. Apparently, it was taking forever at the emergency room, and at this point I had stopped bleeding so my parents decided it was a better idea for me to get the hell out of there than it would’ve have been for me to stay there. Thank god for that decision, had that not been the conclusion they came to there’d be a great chance that instead of typing this right now, I’d be in a gown and gripped socks at the fucking psych ward. 

3:30 AM: “We got into my moms car, apparently she had her dog with her and I didn’t realize it on the way to the emergency room, but I remember being in the back seat of her car and touching the dogs face, as soon as my hand made contact the world became bright, I was out of my hell loop, and was filled with love and bliss. Dogs are fucking incredible. On the drive to her house I was apparently back to my creator of the universe state and was reciting anything I god damn pleased. But I also found something that would bring me back to who I was and that thing was to sing. So I would go from muttering random to words to an angelic (to me) hum. I can’t imagine for the life of me how ridiculous this must’ve sounded, my mom later admitted to me that even despite her adamant irritation for the whole ordeal her and her boyfriend couldn’t help but crack a little laugh towards the sheer absurdity of my antics. 

4:15 AM: We arrive at my moms, I’m slowly starting to come back to reality, however, I’m unable to recollect how I’d gotten to my moms house. And given the fact I was still tripping, my mom looked entirely different than how I’d ever remembered seeing her. I looked in the mirror and saw how much of a bloody mess I was and I started to panic. “How did I get here?!” To which she would reply, “You ate a bunch of mushrooms.” This was not the answer I was looking for. And so what I subconsciously did at the time, was create an alternate reality. I now believed that I was force fed mushrooms by this woman in front of me who wasn’t actually my mom, but was instead some captor keeping me for reasons I did not know. I began to freak out and call whoever I thought could help. I called my grandparents, surprisingly they answered. “Help me grandma, I don’t know what’s going on but I need help” to which she replied “You’re just on mushrooms try and get some rest.” What the fuck! I thought, the alternate universe was true, and I WAS force fed mushrooms! HUGE FUCK UP COMES NOW. I FaceTimed my girlfriend... now let’s not forget I’m covered and blood and clearly still tripping in a horribly frantic state. She answered and I told her I needed help, she saw my bloodied up and swollen face and could barely recognize me, I scared her to death. My mom thankfully texted her letting her know I was on mushrooms. But that clearly didn’t repair the damage that was done by that one horrific FaceTime.

I slowly came to after that and by six in the morning I was relatively sober. But filled with dread after coming to the conclusion that everything that had happened was real. It’s been one week since that happened and I’m still dealing with the repercussions. Fucked up lip/chin, chipped tooth, went to the hospital on Thursday and found out I had a fractured jaw. My girlfriend decided she needed to take a break from me which I don’t blame her for. I’ve decided to put down psychedelics, I’d already put down all the other drugs but now it’s time for me to put down the psychs as well. I’m focusing on how to get back to a healthy place and it’s getting a little better every day. But man oh man... talk about a bad time. Don’t be like me guys. Plan your shit well, and if you smoke a lot of DMT be ready to go back to that realm. All of this could’ve been avoided had I put into place the measures towards having a wonderful and safe experience. 

TL;DR: Mushroom induced psychotic episode at a family reunion leading to fucked up face, broken jaw, and break up.



Before people jump down my throat on this I will say that cannabis has a lot of medical benifits. It reduces nausea and helps people eat. But I am sick of people saying it can replace Xanax for anxiety, Adderall for ADHD and its ‘better for pain relief than opioids. Sure cannabis may reduce inflammation relieving pain but it is not as good at reducing pain as opioids. It is safer than those meds and I 100% support medical marijuana so I am not against it by any means but I think its dumb that people think its a ‘cure all.’ We shouldn’t even have to argue about the medical benifits as it should be legal everywhere recreationally.And he just died of an overdose last night. He researched what he was taking for hours, he knew how everything mixed and the dangers of opiates, he was literally the most careful drug user I have ever known, and it didn't save him. He even had narcan with him, but he was alone, so he didn't take it because by the time he knew he was going he was gone. Please don't forget that when you use opiates, you are playing with fire. At least have a buddy in case you get something laced with fentanyl or its just too strong. I feel it's my responsibility to at least try and warn others, so maybe someone else doesn't have to die. Never forget the dangers. He was only 23... RIP Jared.Coke overated, heroin bad, meth bad, kratom can revive your dead nan, ketamine underated, psychs enlightening, weed also addictive.

tommorow ill be making posts such as: how meth ruined my life even tho thousands of people told not to to take it; how psychedelics are only for enlightened 200iq people with no insecureties (if you get a bad trip its your fault)I smoked a fat joint and went to the ikea for some cheap vegi hotdogs (70 cents for a delicious hotdog) after eating a ton of hotdogs went to the couch viewing area and just layd down there for an hour and went back for some more hotdogs 10/10 would recommend.

Edit: wow I didn't expect this to reach front page on the subreddit thanks for all the funny replies.We all have our vices. To some it's sugar, video games or cheeseburgers.

To you it's a drug. Something you've been told all your life is bad only probably because it's not legal. Probably by some dude who's okay drinking themselves to the point of passing our or smoking cigarettes to the point that they're coughing up a lung. 

You're not a junkie or a failure. You're just another person with a vice to deal with some bullshit in life. 

If you kill the guilt, you kill the stress. Which can enable you to kill the 'addiction' and maybe not feel the need to hide it from someone. Which can enable you to have a connection. 

Connection is the cure for addiction, so feel connected to me. To everyone in this reddit, to everyone facing the same fight in their lives as you. 

You're not any lesser than your neighbor. Don't forget that CEO probably rails lines or coke daily or that married guy with the American dream has that beer or two every night. You're not any lesser than them. 

Be safe, be responsible, and if you need that hit once in a while it's absolutely ok. 

I'm rooting for you. 

Sincerely, fellow drug user who has everything going absolutely right in his life.

EDIT: I could really use a fat double cheeseburger right now godamn lolLast week I was tripping on acid and I was sitting on a chair in the corner of my room looking at the rest of it, i thought it looked so cool I wanted to take a visual picture of it so I could draw it when I was sober, so I tried really hard to look at it and take a visual picture of everything I was seeing, then I couldn't unsee it, like on a camera when you take a picture and it comes up on the screen after you've taken it, I was getting a bit worried and trying to think of how I could get rid of the image and get my eyesight back and then i realised I was just still looking in the same place I had been...and turned my car around half way there.

Been a habit for quite some time and although I'm not dependent on them, I somehow managed to curb the itch. It was difficult because I was just coming off work and had plenty of justifications, but part of me simply didn't feel comfortable. My habit is starting to take toll on my life and feel like a part of me sensed it.

I'm having some difficulties recently and my general drug use skyrocketed, and I felt my older, toxic self coming on again. 

I hate that guy. But I'm not surprised. 

Drugs were my crutch for dealing with emotions for as long as I can remember. I want to relearn how to deal with them the healthy way... again.Took some ritalin XR to help me study for my test in the Hope's it would make me even a little smarter but no. I'm just stupid faster. FuckHi everyone. I posted here a few days ago telling you all I was going to quit. It’s been about a week and I thought I would share something with you. 
My cycle of addiction goes like this. I tell myself I’m going to quit. Then I get strong urges to quit. I fight them off for a couple hours and then I get the overwhelming impulse to get some. 

This happened today. I had the powerful impulse. I got in my car and drove off. And then I turned around. I didn’t go. I went back home and got into bed. You know, this hasn’t happened before. I always always give into this impulse. Not today. Here’s to another week of sobriety. GoodnightI’ve noticed very frequently that whenever someone asks legitimate questions about a “harder” drug (benzo, meth, heroin) or harm reduction questions, they get downvoted to oblivion and get snarky answers telling them “don’t do that drug”
Almost as if this place is full of pothead kids who can’t fathom anyone trying something harder than weed/psychs and get their panties in a bunch over it. Drugs are drugs. If you don’t like others doing the drugs you don’t like then fuck off. This is a drugs subreddit

And no, you telling a heroin or meth addict “don’t use X drug” is NOT going to make them magically stop. You think a stranger telling someone addicted to opiates to stop using, instead of simply helping them use it safely, is better? NoI just made a post about how I ate a bunch of shrooms in a short period of time. A lot of them were done while snowboarding. Here's a quick story that I hope is as funny as I thought it was. 

It was a cloudy Saturday morning at the ski resort. The lifts whirring and the Skiers bitching (as usual). I ate some shrooms about 2 hours before I got up so by the time I was on my second run the come up was about done. I met up with my buddy who wanted to hit the terrain park with me. The way this mountain was setup you have to go to the very top and ride down about half the slopes until the terrain park starts.

I strapped my board on and started going down. Man, it was amazing. Every turn felt perfect and the snow was so beautiful. I felt like a snowball speeding down the mountain and gaining speed. I realized that my buddy was leading the run, and I didn't know which way he wanted to go. I turned to look at him to see which way he was turning, and I guess I didn't realize how fast I was going because I caught my edge and went flying. In that moment I was a bird. A perfect, beautiful, enlightened bird peacefully soaring through the air at high speeds. 

The I hit my ass on the ground. I took a second to do a body scan. My ass hurt like hell but I knew I was alright. Then It hit me. A warm sensation in the nether regions. I looked at my buddy and said "Dude, I hit my ass so hard I shit myself haha" Right as I said that a skier went by and said "Bro, only legends shit themselves when they fall." I erupted into laughter. 

I ended up hitting the terrain park with a fresh Shid in my pants and had a pretty good run. 

TL;DR Caught my edge snowboarding and shit my pants when I fell

edit - He doth hath shidded his pantaloons, and receive a silver doubloon. Thank ye, thank ye. I have social anxiety disorder, so it’s really hard for me to go on dates and get to know a girl. I’ve sort of fallen into this trap where I’ve felt like the real “me” isn’t good enough. So prior to any date or major social event, I would take some kind of drug to numb my anxiety. Sometimes it was alcohol; other times it was some kind of pill.

Today, despite being extremely nervous (and probably awkward), I went on a date stone cold sober with a really nice girl and had an amazing time. We walked around the park and got to know each other — lots of smiling and laughing.

We are already planning our second date!

I want anyone with social anxiety to know that you are likely an amazing person, despite what your disorder tells you. You ARE good enough.

EDIT: I was not expecting such an overwhelmingly positive and supportive response, and it’s so damn meaningful to know that I might help inspire others who are in a similar place. Y’all are making me tear up. I fucking love you guys.

EDIT 2: Man I had NO idea this post would resonate with so many of you. It just goes to show how many of us struggle with the exact same things. We are not alone, and that’s a beautiful fact to recognize.

EDIT 3: Alright you guys officially have me crying while I eat my fuckin strawberries. Thanks a lot.Lots of kids here in denial about their drug usage. That’s okay. Anyone addicted has gone through the phase.

You fall into your routine of drugs. Sure you don’t think your addicted, but it’s your routine and it works! Why switch it up? You still do your work, make money, function normally socially. You can’t be addicted. Right?

The cracks start to show. You may notice it yourself you may not, but others will start to notice.

Your brain gets conditioned to your environment. If someone eats the same thing for a long time, they are going to be stressed trying something new.

If you aren’t used to exercise, it’s going to be stressful.

Your brain is not going to be used to not getting high, it’s not going to be used to the low/absent supply of the chemicals you’ve been feeding it. It’s mad at you, you messed up the environment you’ve created it to perform “optimally” in.

How do you beat that fucker? Give him a new routine. Give him new things to be obsessed about keeping track of. Give him a routine to get used to - so it isn’t given the false notion it’s vessels drug habits are going to be there forever.

You recognize you can’t do this endlessly and your brain doesn’t accept that. 

As your environment changes so does your brains reaction to it. The routine is going to suck. For a long time. Each day you’re going to get more used to it.

This doesn’t mean you need to wake up at a certain time 6 days a week and do the same mundane shit in and out to maintain sobriety.

It means just stick to things you know are good. If you know eating a good meal, getting some sleep and exercise will do good for you - just do it. You’re not going to have an epiphany that gives you motivation to do the things you’ve been wanting. YOU have to take initiative. 

You don’t feel like going to the gym today? You don’t have to. Do push-ups and sit-ups before your shower. It’s better than nothing and can take 5 minutes. 

I hope some of you see the message in this. It’s not hopeless and understanding your own biology/reasoning behind this diseases gives you the reigns to take control of it.

Information and intelligence wins wars, the more you can know about your personal war the better you can combat the enemy.

Edit: u/tacocharleston put this very well.

“I like it.  Substances are complementary rather than a focus and I don't have any interest in them becoming a reflexive/involuntary part of my life.”

Complementary is the word I’m looking for and he found it. Drugs shouldn’t be your routine, they should be complimentary to your routine.Hi there.

I’ve been meaning to post this for a while now, almost two years to be exact. This narrative is nothing new but I thought I’d share my piece… especially with its relevance. 

I will try to make this as short as possible.

Almost two years ago I found my closest friend at the time dead and decomposing for days in his home. He was kneeling forward, naked, with black vomit coming out of his mouth. He was all sorts of different colors, his skin was starting to peel off, and his eyes were caved in. The smell of a rotting corpse cannot be forgotten. When emergency personnel arrived and started moving the body around (I ran out of the house immediately and was not here for this), the body emits a lot of gases, and they set off the fire alarm (I say this to emphasize the intensity of the smell).  

After months of waiting, I received the autopsy report. Yeah, you probably guessed it. Fentanyl (at least the majority of it). There were more things, and I have attached a de-identified picture of what they found in his system. I think it’s one thing to read “so and so died,” but it’s another to see the actual report. **Report:** [https://imgur.com/a/m1sCTCH](https://imgur.com/a/m1sCTCH) 

I missed all the signs. I had no idea he was using opiates (not IV). I noticed some weight loss but passed it off for depression, which I am no stranger to. I knew he smoked weed and dabbled in psychedelics here and there. 

Anyways, no one can make anyone change or stop using substances. What I CAN say is, someone will find you. It may be your mother, father, sibling, grandparent, best friend, or the neighbors because your decomposing body is emitting so many fumes that it’s started to spread out of your house. If you’re lucky they’ll find you early, when you’re not marbled with colors and your eyes haven’t receded.

Please take care of yourself, you are loved. Sometimes I get caught up in doing so many other drugs I forget how much fun just smoking fuckin weed is I’m bout high as fuck with two of my closest friends and we’re all eating a bowl of different cereal (captain crunch, Cheerios, and Cocoa Puffs) and we’ve got the kind of munchies where we’re just silent and fuckin stuffing our faces lmfao and my friend was like “lemme try your cereal” and we all just in unison passed our bowls to the left LMFAO and then did it again like what other drug can I eat gorbs and gorbs of cereal with my homiesProbably going to sound retarded but I had the best night of my life yesterday on acid for the first time ever. 

Anyways, there is a hallway that comes off my living room. The hallway has a door that separates it from the living room. In the hallway there is access to two bedrooms, an extra closet, and a bathroom. 

My roommates and I figured out that if you shut every door, including the hallway door, it creates another bedroom that has its own closet and bathroom! It even has the same number of heating vents. The hallway door even closes/opens the same direction as the bedroom doors. Therefore it's a secret room!! 

We all sat on the hallway floor with the doors shut laughing about our discovery for about 3-4 hours straight. It's the smallest room in the house with the most doors!! How ironic. 

We also realized that the cats prefer that "extra room" the most because it has the most portals(doors) that humans come out of. We considered that room to be the "downtown" of our house to the cats. The living room/dining area is the "suburbs". And the basement, which is underground and smokey is obviously the subway. The life of a cat. We laughed about that for like 2 hours too. 

Acid is amazing. 


Edit: I am so overwhelmed by all the love and happiness that this post created. Also, thank you to the redditor who gave me my first Reddit silver! I am so dissapointed that I used a throwaway to make this post due to personal reasons. R/drugs gives such a positive light to drugs that are so looked down upon in my every day life.  I don't really have many people I can share "trip reports" with in my every day life, so honestly thank you.Sometimes I type away without realizing the typos I've made until it's too late. Almost happened to me tonight, thought it was worth sharing. To preface, I practice MMA thrice a week, and my phone likes to autocorrect anything that resembles MMA into MMA, which in this case, was supposed to say MDMA. If the friend in question sees this, sup man LOL

Paraphrasing, the conversation went something like this:

*Me*: "Hey man, it's been a while. Do you wanna do some MMA with me this weekend?" -> Meaning to say MDMA

*Him*: "I mean, I've never done it before, but I suppose I'll give it a shot"

*Me*: "What do you mean you've never done it before? We used to do it all the time in high school"

*Him*: "No man, you're thinking of somebody else. I can assure you I've never done MMA with you or anyone else" -> Glossed over this as if he meant to say MDMA, didn't think anything of it, at the same time still unaware of my own typo

*Me*: "Am I being /r/woooshed right now? If you don't want to do it you don't have to lol"

*Him*: "No, I want to try it, I've been meaning to try it for a while. When and where do you wanna do it?"

*Me*: "At my house on Saturday, probably around 6PM. Bring your portable speaker if you can, and a case of water or Gatorade wouldn't hurt either"

*Him*: "Yea yea, for sure. What kind of music do y'all listen to when you're sparring?" -> I glossed over the word 'sparring', which should've been a dead giveaway. I thought it was some Canadian metonym for 'rolling', since he's from Canada.

*Me*: "EDM I guess, what we've always listened to"

*Him*: "Tight. Do you have gloves or is it bare knuckle? I'm not big on the idea of bare knuckling boxing, I don't want to get injured"

*Me* ***finally scrolling up and realizing my mistake***: "Oh Jeez man, I'm talking about ecstasy. Molly. I'm talking about drugs. MDMA not MMA... LMFAO"

He's still down, so we're on for Saturday. Now he's mentioned the great idea of trying to box or wrestle while we're rolling and he probably won't let me live this down. 

Please make sure you re-read things before you send them to people or you might look stupid like I did.So yesterday I get home from work and I smoke a little puff before entering the house (can't see my car from the house). So I get in and head downstairs to my room and my mom stops me and stare at me right into the eyes and doesn't say a thing.  


Me to me : Oh shit, she knows...

After a good 5 seconds of eternal silence.

Mom : Like my new glasses :) ?

Me : Whu... Oh yeah the glasses. Super nice!I relapsed on Heroin after being clean for 11 months... in my dorm room at my school that I finally got to go to because I was sober.

Anyway, I overdosed at my desk in my dorm.  Police came and brought me to the hospital.  I survived.  I've been suspended until next semester.  I've got no where to live.  I"m living at the motel down the road until I can get into treatment on Tuesday.  

Spent couple nights in jail after I was released from the hospital.  Got a possession charge.

Set myself back a lot of money and couple of years. 

I hate relapse, I hate addiction.  I hate that this disease brings so much pain and suffering to everyone I care about.
I was doing so well.  I hope I can fix things.One just happened to me the other day. I was exiting a local bong shop and a black dude is outside and asks me what I bought. I say a bong and he asks if I want to buy any weed. I can tell he’s not a cop because he’s clearly drunk or on Xanax. So I say ya I’ll grab a gram. He motions to a car, we both get in the back seat and he starts weighing out the nug. 

About 30 seconds go by when a nerdy white guy runs out of the video game shop next door. He yells “What are you doing in my car?!” The black dude scrambles to put his weed and scale into his pocket and is like “What the fuck?” We both get out of the car and I’m like “shit man, I though this was his car and he must have thought it was mine.” The nerdy dude looks at us like we were his highscool bullies and is like “ok”. He looks in his car to make sure its in order and then locks in. The black guy looks at me like it was my fault, so just ignore it and say “did you bench it?” He says “ya” and we exchange the money. I leave quickly to hopefully never see either of them again. I wanted to know what the hype was. Why people get addicted. It's pretty expensive where I live, and the rich kids I know fucking love it. It was offered to me recently. Then again in twenty minutes. Then again afterwards.

Three lines later, and I'm about to fucking leave the party and go write a damn novel. I was about to discover a cure for cancer. I was ready to retake my SATs and nail it. Why the fuck is this a party drug, y'all? I don't get it. It's literally fancy meth. That's it. And it costs a shit ton more than ADHD drugs and makes you feel like shit afterwards.

I don't fucking get it.Throwaway account of course!

How can my dealer be operating better COVID-19 relation restrictions than my local supermarket. To give you an idea:

1. Ordered by text message in my usual way.
2. 5 Mins later I get a the usual confirmation of order & ETA phonecall  explaining - my usual dealer is self isolating due to being in contact with a positive case.
3. During said phonecall I am told to wear a mask on delivery and the person delivering will be wearing PPE and has had a COVID test the last few days that has come back negative.
4. Dealers representative turns up, with mask, gloves and sanitiser. Doesn't allow me to get into the delivery vehicle.
5. Dealers representative on delivery reiterates they have not been in contact with main dealer but still taking precautions.

Other than retaining a register of their customer details I don't see how other businesses are doing any better in the UK?!

Throwaway account of course!So awhile back I had heard from my dad that his brother had started doing acid. I was intrigued because I had always known him to be a pretty straight by the book guy, and he was now apparently doing it every week; it came as quite a shock. With my own interest in acid and various psychedelics I wondered if he’d be cool if I asked him about it, but I only see him maybe once a year, not exactly a relationship I can just spring questions on. 

  About a month back I had gotten caught testing my new tabs in my room and I got a stern talking to and promised “never again”; apparently he spoke to my uncle about it, and today at my little brother’s basketball game he stops me in the hall and goes “you take acid?” So I decide I got nothing to lose and say yeah, he tells me he’s got something for me at lunch. We eat after the game and this motherfucker flags me down by his car and waits until the rest of my family isn’t looking, and hands me a gum wrapper and says “one at a time, and you didn’t get them from me”. 
 
At this point I’m happy as hell, just wondering for what sweet treat he just handed me. Go to the bathroom and pull out the stash, a full 5-strip of some voidrealm looking tabs and I’m on the moon,  especially since I just dropped 4 goT tabs on Friday. 

Then! As I’m driving home he calls me, asks if I can talk, and tells me to only go to him, he’s my new hookup. He’s got L, mescaline, mushrooms,  sass, DMT, more I’ve forgotten because it was like hearing god himself saying  “you wanna get fucked up man” what a fucking bro. 

Edit: posted the tabs on /r/LSD so go there if you’d like to check them out I was smoking a joint walking to a homies house (alone) and some huge motherfucker and a couple of his friends stop me in the street. 

I was stressed af because I had an eighth of molly, a eighth of coke as well as the q of weed (I had gone to pick up not all the drugs were mine) and I for real thought I was gonna get robbed. 

The guy looks at me and goes 

‘Yo can I sniff that bud’ 

I was shocked 

‘Um what?’

‘Your weed can I sniff that shit’ 

I pulled out a gram bag 

‘Sure?’

He bent over and sniffed the bag said 

‘Good shit’ 

And walked away. He had at least a foot on me - at least I didn’t lose my drugs - wtf just happened.So, I recently went on a trip to Tokyo for two weeks, and I decided long ago that I wanted to bring some LSD. Now, I spent a lot of time worrying and researching ways to smuggle it into Japan. I know LSD is the easiest drug to smuggle which is why I was even considering this in the first place, but I was still nervous, considering you can get 10 years for like a tenth of a gram of weed there. 

Eventually I settled on a method. I just put a bunch of random garbage in my wallet (receipts, gum wrappers, etc) I put the tab in a gum wrapper and slid that particular one in between my cash. I got through all the security and customs just fine without even having to open my wallet anyway, but I was still mad nervous haha. Once I got to Japan I made sure to put on a long sleeve shirt to cover my tattoo just to ensure customs didn't pay any extra attention to me since Tat's aren't exactly socially accepted there just yet. 

So anyway, about a week into the the trip I decided it was time to trip, the weather was nice and I just wanted to do it. I dropped that tab at like 10 or 11 AM, it was a Goblins Den tab if that means anything to you.  The comeup was pretty hard at one point but it's nothing I can't handle as I've done up to 1000ug before, I hung out in the AirBnB with my friends while we all got ready to head out. Once I was nearing the peak and everyone was ready we set out to the Skytree. 

For those of you who aren't aware, The Skytree is the 2nd tallest building in the entire world, looking out over the largest city in the world. It was a bit of a long train ride from where we were staying but I held my cool on the train with no issues. We made it to the skytree and by this point I was tripping pretty fucking hard, I was relying on my friends to navigate and get me where I needed to go. We paid for our tickets and got into a crowded fucking elevator which wasn't very fun and we go to the top, and what a fucking view it was. A lot of people like to take psychedelics  in nature and feel a greater connection to the earth (myself included) but my god man, standing on that tower, looking out over the fucking MASSIVE urban jungle that is Tokyo is breathtaking, just insane. It really made me think about how much human beings have done and how far we've come from being hunter gatherers to taking control of our destiny as a species. I mean, it took us thousands of years to learn to fly, and then 66 years later we put a man on the fucking MOON. The MOON BITCH! After enjoying the view and having my mind blown, we went over to the skytree and I got some of the best goddamn soft serve ice cream I've ever had and continued to enjoy the view while eating. 


After all that, we left and headed back home, and I enjoyed the rest of my trip by walking around our cool little neighborhood listening to some music. Overall, a very great experience. It was very strange walking around high as shit seeing fuckin Japanese everywhere. What a cool looking language. It seems as though many parts of the world are in the process of legalizing. Not Sweden though, we still have a long road ahead because most people actually believe that weed is a super dangerous and heavy drug. Straight up lying to the population also doesn’t help... How is this any different than a dictatorship lying to their people about democracy or whatever

Edit: here is the link to the YouTube video since some were asking:

https://youtu.be/7rDCQcQaAoY

It’s in Swedish but you’ll have to manage, go and dislike ;)

Edit 2: video with english subtitles:

https://youtu.be/sft0a6UKIw4i was on 320ug acid at like 4pm on a thursday home alone and right before the peak i took a small line of k as well, i was also smoking weed throughout the whole of the trip

i sat down to play some minecraft (which is INCREDBILE on acid) and i completely forgot where i was and what i was doing and that i had ever taken acid (even though i was still tripping very hard so fuck knows how i didn’t realise), i walked around the house and started getting really freaked out cause i didn’t recognise anything and was trying to yell for someone but no one was home 

i freaked tf out and ran out of the house and as i was looking at the street i just didn’t recognise it and thought i was lost and i had absolutely no fucking clue how i got into that house in the first place

my first thought was to call for a taxi so i ordered one and sat on the sidewalk for what felt like millenniums but i remember just laughing at the sky for a bit

the taxi driver called me which scared the fuck out of me, and he asked if that was me sat on the floor, i literally didn’t even see that he had pulled up like 2 metres from my face and almost fell back in shock when it just appeared out of no where

i got in and he asked where i wanted to go, and i just couldn’t think of anything to say, eventually i just blurted out SHENFIELD and he asked if there was anywhere in specific in shenfield i wanted to go, i just told him i’ll figure it out when we get there (shenfield is like a 45 minute drive away from my house and is also quite expensive by taxi)

i was just sat in the taxi listening to the radio the guy had on, looking out the window and enjoying myself, he tried to strike up conversation a few times and i can’t remember exactly what but i do know i just gave him really blunt one word answers 

then out of nowhere my entire memory refreshed, it whacked me out of no where and i felt like a vrpmhhhh sound would feel as a feeling and i just screamed STOP and asked him where we were, he told me we were in some small ass village i had never heard of and can’t for the life of me remember the name of, so i started freaking out again and explained the situation including the drugs, he laughed then looked concerned and asked if i needed to go to the hospital, i just asked him to take me home

when we got to mine he didn’t charge me anything, which was lucky cause i didn’t even have my wallet on me, he just offered to help me into the house and told me to ‘lay off the dope’ but cracked a smile after he said it 

rami if you read this you’re an absolute legend and i have the upmost respect for you!

safe tripping guys

tldr: got wrecked on acid, ket and weed, forgot where i was, panicked n ordered a taxi to come get me and told the driver to take me to some random place 45 mins away from my house, realised after half way what happened and explained to the driver, he was super chill and friendly took me home and that was thatSo I smoked for a bit and then had the strongest munchies and was craving Chinese food. As I walked up to this joint that had two young Asians in their early 20s working behind the counter, I was super excited to order. I went straight to them and yelled " I would like an order of chicken with vegetables". They looked at me and said "This is a Mexican place, we don't sell Chinese food here." I didn't understand so I thought maybe I should try again, I walked out the place, read the name on the sign and it said "Yummy taco". But when I looked at the two young Asians working there, I reminded myself "Oh yes they sell Chinese food." SO I walked back in and asked for the same order, this time with "please". They said "It says Yummy Taco, we don't have Chinese food."  At this point I finally realized their scheme, looked them dead in the eyes and blurted " WOW, you guys are TROLLS!" I walked out with a smile. Today, I am RED in the face and ashamed.Yesterday, a friend invited me to pregame with her and two other people and then didn’t invite me to the actual event. Lol. I texted her asking about it in a roundabout way “I thought we were all going to do something after?” and she said she didn’t realize I wanted to go out, and told me to text her next time and we would do something. 

Fuck that. I’ve always been initiating plans with my friends but everyone’s busy. I decided that today, I would get really stoned and go to Olive Garden by myself.

To some people, this may seem lame as shit but who cares. I’d rather do lame shit on my own than buddy up with people who don’t even like spending time with me.

edit: I want to thank everyone for the overwhelming support and kind words in the comments. I haven’t been able to respond to everyone, but I did read every reply. 

I took some hits from my bong and finished a small bowl. I was higher than I expected. I took 1mg of klonopin as well for anxiety, then called an uber to Olive Garden. When I got there, there was a brief wait and then I was seated in a nice, quiet corner. I almost felt the host knew I was stoned. 

I got some water to start and took a long time deliberating over the options. I had to send the waiter back three times cause it was taking me so long to go through the menu lmao. I finally decided on chicken alfredo with a raspberry lemonade.

Waiting on the food, I listened to 60s psychedelic essentials, my go to playlist when I get high. I wasn’t really nervous because the only people near me was an old couple in the booth behind me. 

The food came, along with the breadsticks and some dipping sauce I ordered for them. It was better than I expected. I finished my chicken alfredo and got some breadsticks to go. My total bill was 20 something so I told the waiter to drain my card and gave him some of a cash tip as well. 

When I got home at about 5pm, I was incredibly exhausted and then I took two naps over the course of 4 hours lmao. Best way I could spend my Saturday. I want to go out to see a movie alone sometime in the future. Overall, it was a great experience and I would recommend it to everyone. We all need some self-care.My best friend committed suicide in 2013. When we were able to go into her bedroom her mother let us take what we wanted. I found an elephant bowl, still half green on her desk. Her mother said I could have it. We all burned it down there and then. I kept the piece. I've never done a full wash on it. 

I like knowing that there's at least a little bit of resin on the inside that was made by her. I smoke out of it almost daily. 

Don't hurt yourselves. Your friends love you. Ask for help. Call the help line.

We miss you Skwid.When you first get that nicotine rush, it’s nice. You’re spinning, then it’s over like that. You go on with your day. But later you say y’know what? That was pretty fun. Let me do it again. 

This keeps going and the nicotine buzz keeps filling and dulling. Eventually the buzz is so dull it’s practically nonexistent. Yet, this is now the time where you want nicotine more than ever.

You will spend your money. You will fiend for it when you don’t have it. And for such a shitty effect, the iron grip of nicotine addiction is not worth it.

If you have not tried it yet, steer clear of this dog shit chemical.I was at a rave last weekend with my boys. I am absolutely off my bean having taken 300ug acid, way too much mdma and a Valium or two or three.

My friend K is a first time mdma user and his come up was rough as hell. He puked and generally felt very nauseated and uncomfortable so I suggest we sit on the sofas at the back of venue and chill out. 

He’s up now and and we’re both pinging very hard, observing our fellow creatures from the comfort of a leather sofa, having a very pinged and soppy conversation. An absolute behemoth of a man falls over the adjacent chair and pukes all over it. He takes off his shirt and walks over to the bathroom.

Two beautiful girls approach the vomit covered chair and as one is about to sit down I play the whole scenario of her sitting in puke and ruining her night in my head. NO! 

Instinctively my hand reaches out and I prevent her from sitting by placing my hand under her booty. Her friend is looking at K and he points at the vomit on the chair. 

“I’m so sorry I grabbed your ass!” I exclaim to the girl as she looks at the vomit and the expression of relief and gratitude washes over her face. We talk and she thanks me for grabbing her ass. I basically black out after this but I went home happy knowing I saved someone’s night.

Thanks for reading. Love u guys


EDIT: Cheers for the nice comments and awards :) You're a friendly bunch.

EDIT 2: If you're the girl who's name begins with M and you're reading this somehow, hit me up ;)

EDIT 3: Last one, I do want to clarify that I didn’t actually save a girls life or sexually assault her. The title is just a figure of speech for the sake of comedy.*Edit
I am not blaming the substance here.
Cannabis is an absolute MIRACLE for the VAST MAJORITY of cannabis users.
However.....

There is this belief amongst cannabis enthusiasts that cannabis is as harmless as water, and there is ZERO chance of anyone developing a "problem" with it.

Granted, you are only really likely to become psychologically addicted if you have a predisposition (either genetic or environmental)  to going APESHIT with things that make you feel good.

I think the biggest problem is how much we demonize addiction, which is a natural part of the human experience. 

"Addicts" are, by our prejudice, "broken", "bad/stupid people" or are somehow "less than" and "wrong".

I guarantee you, if you pick 10 of your closest friends, at least 4 are addicted to either caffeine, sugar, alcohol or nicotine. 

The "withdrawals" from these substances is very similar to when a heavy smoker quits, or takes a tolerance break. 

(I use quotations for withdrawals because I have experienced ACTUAL withdrawals from benzos and tramadol)

You get irritable, your sleep is all jacked up, you have cravings for the substance. 

I feel like, if we were more open about this, and acknowledged that we are ALL susceptible to at least mild addiction, we can have a much better understanding of each other, and stop demonizing addiction while we're at it.

The vast majority of addicts AREN'T in their current position due to dumbass decisions. 

Most start down their road trying to self medicate, and it just gets out of control.

Am I making any sense? 

Anyways, thanks for coming to my Ted talk.I see people here talk a lot about nitrous saying it’s harmless, etc. let me tell y’all my story. 
throughout early 2020 i used nitrous pretty frequently. not an outrageous amount, but nothing to blink at. one day i began getting tingling in my toes and feet. thought nothing of it, kept on working and using. a couple weeks pass and it hasn’t gone away. it starts to get worse, it’s difficult to walk and i’m losing my balance. the pain from it is escalating. i get 3 days in a row off work and decide to go to an urgent care. they run all sorts of tests, find nothing wrong, write me 12 norco and send me home. the next day, i’m barely able to walk. i go to another hospital. they run the same tests, find nothing, write me tylenol 300’s and send me home. the third day, i’m very barely able to walk and the pain is so excruciating i can’t stop screaming and crying. i had never had pain like this in my life. mind you, the last two urgent cares didn’t ask if i use any drugs so i didn’t say shit. i call 911 since i can’t even walk anymore. the paramedics laugh at me and doubt anything is wrong asking “are you really sure you need us?”. i was insistent. i go to the hospital and finally a doctor asks me “what drugs do you use?”. fuck it, i’ll be honest. i tell her im using weed, cocaine, nitrous, and the occasional MDMA. i list nitrous last and her face lights up. she says she believes i have a condition called Lichtheim’s or subacute degeneration of the spine caused by a severe b12 deficiency from her nitrous. she calls her husband who is a specialist and he confirms my case. i spent july 1st 2020 until august 5th 2020 in that hospital in california relearning to walk. i was completely immobile from the waist down and had to relearn how to stand and walk despite the horrible pain. months later, i’m still in pain and deal with the occasional numbness in my feet and still have poor balance. i was 23 on a fucking walker. now, i’m “able bodied” and have made a miraculous recovery, as my original prognosis was “you’ll never walk again or live a functioning life”. 
TLDR: nitrous eats your b12, causes spinal degeneration, don’t end up like me, on a walker at 23yo.
edit: thank you for mostly supporting me yall. but i will no longer be responding to stupid comments along the lines of “wellllll if you took b12 supplements it would’ve never happened so you’re an idiot! it’s common sense!” because nitrous disables your ability to absorb b12 so EVEN IF i took supplements it would’ve made no difference. and please stop asking how much i used, i’ve answered that easily 20 times. i used a box every few days. thank you.Got pulled over with my drug dealer friend who had about a zip and 20 blues on him. He was on probation so would have been BIG time fucked had he gotten caught. Cop comes up and I look over at my friend swallowing a bag of blues like the bag is the pill. Obviously though we still have the zip and the officer asks if we had been smoking. I tell him yeah last night we smoked in the car so that's probably why it smells.

He asked if we had anything on us and we handed over a nug that was loose in the center console and said its all we have left. He goes back to the car to run our info and eventually returns with a warning. In the meantime, I ripped off a dash board panel and stashed the ounce in there for when he searched the car after giving us a warning. Didn't end up finding it, and we got away no problem.

Best part of the story is my friend shit the bag of blues out this morning and took a few he said lmao I love when I realize that is my new reality and I become aware that it’s going to require all my focus to get through this complex situation.  What I assumed was going to be an easy 5 mins on autopilot  is actually going to be 5 long hours of mental endurance , extreme focus, determination and will require a very creative solution.  I love these situationsToday I went to see an ophthalmologist for some eye inflammation I was concerned about and I left with a diagnosis of macular degeneration. 

When i think about my life sometimes I wonder if I wasted it, but in this moment I dont think that I have. I have been impulsive, thrill seeking and even careless. Drugs were never just an escape for me. They have been a way to peel back the layers, so that I could feel life just a little bit closer. I love feeling. I love sensing and seeing and hearing. I have a lifetime of memories that I hope will keep me company when it all goes dark.Holy fuck.

This is amazing.

I love everyone and everything.

I feel so connected to the earth.

And I do not want to stop living.

I want to keep living forever.

What the fuck.

Life is one fucking trip man.

Holy fuck.

Peace✌️ I hope you all are in a good place right now. ☮️ 

Idk what this is I’m on shrooms for the first time ever and I’m just writing my thought. I’ll stop now. Peace !! Haha !✌️In most everything, I would consider myself a very open minded and receptive person, however in my 20 years of living, I have always felt I was very firm, very rooted in my own sexuality, considering myself entirely straight and unwilling to deviate in the slightest, as you would find with the majority of straight males who treat their straightness as not only an extension, but the core essence of their “masculinity”. I’ve never had any issues with any other form of sexuality, I have my attractions, and who am I to deny others theirs? This being said, up until these events, I had never possessed any desire to stray from mine. The dealers in my city mainly sell weed, coke, and pills, with very little interest in psychedelics. Naturally, when my buddy said he had just gotten a batch of acid blotters, I was immediately interested and started seeking out somebody to trip with me over the weekend. 

I ended up finalizing plans with a good friend, we’ll call him Josh. Now Josh has known he was gay from about as soon as you could establish a sexual identity, and his parents were very receptive so he was very secure with it and never had to hide it. I suppose it’s worth noting that he has been with women, so I suppose he would technically be bi, but he’ll be the first to tell you he much prefers men and thus typically just considers himself gay. I picked up 4 tabs, each being 125ug, and headed on over to Josh’s. 

Josh is extremely hospitable and I had spent many a night at his place so naturally I was very comfortable with the setting. Another important note is that over many drunk nights it had come out in the past that Josh did indeed find me attractive, and it became something of an inside joke for us. He was never pushy or aggressive about his attraction so there was no cause for me to ever be uncomfortable. We did all the standard preparations one does when you’re about to trip, and when we felt everything was in order, we went ahead and dropped.

 After about an hour, it was really coming on, and both of us were having an absolute blast. As we sat there in his living room, we talked, laughed our asses off over nothing, and appreciated the new found beauty in our surroundings. As we continued our frenzied conversation, something very peculiar began to happen. I was beginning to come infatuated with him, undeniably attracted. At was as if the concept and notion of gender was stripped away from me; my attraction was based simply on him as a person, his character, the emotions he exuded. I asked him if we could move to his bed and put on a movie as to make ourselves more comfortable. He agreed and we settled in. 

We both took our shirts off (which at the moment was completely non sexual as it was quite normal for us to ditch our shirts if we were less than sober) and as the movie progressed I made a move and put my arm around the middle of his torso and pressed my body up against his. He was a tad bewildered for a moment, and asked me if I was ok. I told him I was great, and asked him if he minded the contact. He nodded his head and we both went back to watching the movie. I began to feel around and rub his chest as he did the same on my back, and as time went on I can safely say this simple skin contact evoked one of the most intimate and intense feelings I had ever felt which boggled my mind considering my previously strict attraction to women. 

Some words were exchanged and things were clarified, and at the risk of turning this into some half assed erotica, I will spare you the details of the rest of the night but he and I ended up exchanging several sexual favors. Coming out of it I can say without a doubt it was one of the most fulfilling and intense sexual encounters I have ever experienced. More importantly, I made a major discovery that I think I had refused to acknowledge beforehand due to certain expectations and what not. 

I realized from that point on I wanted my attraction to be based on the person and what made them unique, rather than such restricting categories related solely to gender and sexuality. Everybody’s journey is different and I think a lot of times people get so caught up in other people’s perceptions and expectations, they end up knowing themselves a lot less than they think they do. My encouragement would be for everyone to do some soul searching and try to go out of your comfort zone whenever possible. Obviously acid is not required for this, but it certainly proved a beneficial catalyst in my case and my recommendation is glowing to say the least. What a ride. 

Edit: Thank’s for all the kind replies. I’m glad my experience resonated well and I wish you all the best. Here’s to self discovery. 

Double edit: I wanted to clarify cause there seems to be some confusion, I am in no way saying LSD “changed” my sexuality. This substance is capable of some pretty incredible things but it can’t just change fundamental parts of who you are on a whim. What this trip did was give me insight and let me act on feelings that were always there. I have no doubts about this. Additionally, my attraction to women is the same as before, so acid did not “turn me gay” as some have so eloquently put it. I don’t mean to be pedantic, but it sort of misses the point of the story so I wanted to be clear. About a month ago I took two LSD tabs advertised as 150ug each, so 300ug total. Not enough for me to lose my mind, but enough for things to get really funky. One of my favourite things to do on this dose is walk around really busy areas and just watch people living their lives on a Saturday afternoon.

I was doing this on that weekend. If anyone knows London, around 3 hours into my trip I was on the south bank of the Thames roughly halfway between Tower Bridge and the Tate Modern. I spent about 30 minutes just staring at the boats on the river, while a lot of tourists around me were taking pictures of themselves with Tower Bridge as the backdrop.

At some point I was approached by a tourist, mid-30s guy who seemed like he was from India. He said "Hey can you take my pic?". I couldn't really think of an excuse to say no, so I just said "yeah". He handed me his phone, then positioned himself so he was in frame with the bridge. For some reason it didn't register to me that he would like the bridge to be included in the photo, and to be honest I was just overwhelmed by using this phone I didn't know how to work that didn't even belong to me. So for some reason I decided to zoom right in on his face which in hindsight probably creeped him out a bit.

When he looked at the picture he said "Ah no, I want the bridge to be included" so I took it again. I didn't really know how much of his body vs the bridge to include and ended up overthinking everything. When he looked the second time he said "Okay thanks!", I'm not sure whether I actually took a good picture or he just gave up on me.

I decided to walk down the bank a bit more to take my mind off the situation, and ended up standing staring out at the river again for about 20 minutes. After some time standing around, I got approached again by an American couple who asked if I can take a photo of them in front of the river. Learning from the last encounter, I said something like "Ah no thanks I'm busy", then turned around to stare at the river again.

TL:DR it's difficult to interact with tourists not on your wave length when you're tripping.Been a paramedic for 20 years.  Did a post on my take on drugs a few years back.  I have been doing lots of research and treated hundreds of patients since.  I have run on pretty much every drug related call you can think of.  Here is my revised list of risks vs. reward take on drugs.  


--Weed, in it's pure non-synthetic form, very safe.  Pretty much every marijuana "overdose" call ever is a panic attack and not life threatening.  Places where marijuana is legal other drug issues go down.  Marijuana is a safe, enjoyable high that has medical benefits as well as recreational value.  It's too bad people are still tested for it and denied jobs based on it.


--Alcohol.  The number one contributing factor to violence and injury as far as drugs.  This legal drug is the only drug that withdrawal alone can be fatal.  Don't get me wrong, in moderation it's great, like any substance.  But by and large if we have a trauma after 11 pm and we don't find a drunk we are missing someone.  This is prime suspect number one in most problems with both single substances and combos.


--Amphetamines.  In their pure form, ie amphetamine sulfate or adderal, it's basically stronger caffeine.  In it's home cooked state, ie meth, it's the impurities that get you.  Your average ghetto chemist isn't a Harvard graduate.  The side effects of smoking or shooting lithium ion batteries aren't pretty.  Even in the pure form stimulant psychosis and paranoia are very real.  Moderate people.


--Opiates.  In regulated doses, ie pills, we rarely see overdoses.  When ever a pill ring is busted and we see people turning to heroin, that's when the ODs happen.  Street heroin is largely cut with fentanyl and synthetics of a similar nature.  These are hard to dose and don't evenly distribute in the product.  If regulated and accurately dosed opiates were available ODs would plummet.  Obviously opiates are addictive physically, but the inconsistency brought on by prohibition and unscrupulous dealers is to blame for overdoses.  


--Hallucinogens.  LSD, LSA, shrooms, other similar chemicals are relatively harmless as long as the user is in the right state of mind and has the environment to enjoy their trip.  Again, fake synthetics passed off as acid are the bulk of our issues.


--Disassociatives. Ketamine, DMT etc.  As long as these are pure people seem to do fine.  If you haven't gotten the trend yet, things passed off as these substances that are not actually them are the issue.


--Synthetics, "Spice, bath salts" and other unnamed synthetics.  Because we don't know what they actually are they are dangerous.  If we were able to give drug consumers an accurate idea of what they were using most of our issues would be taken care of.  Manufacturers keep changing formulas to stay ahead of prohibition.   This leads to a lack of consistency across the board.


--Cocaine.  Clean, uncut coke isn't inherently a problem if used responsibly.  The problem comes with people using coke daily and fall into habituation.  Also, like any other hard drug, adulteration due to prohibition is an issue.


--Benzos.  Even when in regulated Rx form, it's easy to "bar out" and make some bad decisions on benzos.  While you can't fatally OD on benzos alone, we find them in 50% of out fatal opiate ODs.  Moderate people.  Please, I feel like I have said that.  Alone and in moderation benzos are safe.  In combos and over done, they are right behind alcohol in risk.


--Combos.  No one can tell you how you will respond to a combo of well regulated and dosed drugs, let alone an unknown group of street substances.  This is where we run into trouble.  Someone takes multiple substances all of which are street grade and untested.  Who knows the interactions at that point.  Again, I blame prohibition, but take it slow and don't make an unknown cocktail all at one.


In summary, I have come to blame drug prohibition for most of the problems. A safe well regulated and labelled supply of recreational substances would reduce harm significantly.  Until we see the day where adult Americans are free to choose what they put in their bodies, please keep in mind that what you are sold may not be what you wanted to buy.  Also keep in mind that strengths, concentrations and substances are unregulated due to being illegal.  You can always take more, you can't un-take drugs once taken.  Take it slow and see how you feel.

Also, if someone is overdosing, home fixes don't work.  Call 911.  We take 3-10 minutes to arrive.  You have plenty of time to clean up.  Get your buddy help.  Airway control and reversal agents are their only hope.  If I have to pick ice cubes of another set of testicles I swear to god people I'm gonna lose my shit.   


Stay safe, err on the side of moderation and never assume what you bought is what you ordered.  Also, advocate to end prohibition of recreational substances.  This is the only path to safe usage.

Stay safe, I got your back if you call for help.1 - Hey guys, I'm a 21yo 5"10 170lb moderately active man on occasional claritine for allergy (cat fur) and eyedrops, I have ingested ~200mg caffeine in the past day, would it be safe to dose 1 beer (4.5%vol) right now?

2 - I boofed a whole datura plant while gardening on DPH again - storyI know. Racking up a fat line, railing it, and rubbing the residue on your gums feels fucking amazing. When I first started doing cocaine regularly, I discovered the act of gumming and the pleasant numbing of the mouth. Combined with not being able to feel your face and being stimmed out of your head, it’s the icing on top of the cake. But please be careful.

I got addicted to cocaine and meth when I was around 17 years old and did 1g+ a day for around 2-3 years. I was constantly snorting lines, and constantly gumming it. Fast forward to now (I’m 1 and a half years clean) and my entire top and bottom rows of teeth has developed holes on the front, back, and bottom. Quitting cocaine was tough on its own, but the irreparable damage that gumming (and bad oral hygeine) did to my gums and teeth is already done. My front teeth have been semi-fixed after about $8000 in dental work, but that’s just from fixing the worst and most visible cavities. To fully repair my mouth I’m looking at about $20,000 in dental costs and at this point I don’t even know if it’s worth it. It killed my self-esteem, and I’m just now finally learning how to smile with my teeth. 

Drugs are fun, but please don’t gum them.

EDIT: Wow this blew up more than expected. Take my words with a grain of salt, I don’t know if cocaine or meth directly affected it but I do know that drug abuse + lack of self care can lead to a very unhealthy lifestyle, so at the very least take this as a reason to practice responsible drug use and to take care of yourself. Peace!Dealers who fuck their customers about do my fucking head in, if you're unable to get to me, just fucking tell me, don't long me off for 3 hours then turn your phone off.*Disclaimer: This post is very long and highly subjective but perhaps helpful or at least interesting to some. Most of the following substances and combinations were tested by me and/or close friends, but some of them are purely based on anecdotal evidence gathered from different reports on various subreddits and websites.*

**WARNING: Many people might disagree with my list and I strongly discourage trying some of the listed substances and/or combinations, as some of them carry a serious risk of addiction/dependence and/or are hazardous to your health. Some of the listed substances are considered "research chemicals" and have not been studied at all. Furthermore and most importantly, some of the listed drugs/combinations may even be fatal when taken in high doses so please be responsible! Please beware of the risks, do your own research and evaluate carefully, if you still want to try some of my suggestions. Stay safe!**

As there's dozens of posts on Reddit every month asking what drug is best for (...) purpose, I figured I’d create a list with the 5 drugs or drug combinations that are best, or more accurately, most effective/efficient for the most commonly asked purposes and reliably produce these effects.

In my opinion, the following psychotropic drugs (+ combinations) are best for (...) and I will briefly explain why:

&nbsp;

*(listed in no particular order)*

##tripping for psychedelic veterans / deep mind-exploration:

**LSD / 1cP-LSD**: I don't think I have to really explain why LSD is on this list. An 8-12 hour trip which can be extremely intense and ego-shattering in high doses. Very beautiful visuals, an analytical, but very deep, headspace and the potential for strong spiritual and religious revelations.

**Psilocybin mushrooms / 4-AcO-DMT**: Oh the good ol' mushrooms. High dose mushroom trips had me trapped in my head like no other drug and the thought-loops can be quite intense. Psilocybin can be very confusing due to its weird headspace, but the beautiful, organic OEV’s and the connectedness to mother earth are absolutely stunning and make it a 'must' on this list.

**5-MeO-DMT**: I have not tried 5-MeO-DMT personally, because honestly, I'm a little scared of it, but my friends that tried it said that it was more intense than regular DMT. It probably is one the most intense psychedelics known to date. Witnessing nothing and everything was never closer together. A white pit of emptiness and complete ego-loss. I only recommend this compound to experienced trippers/psychonauts.

**DMT / Ayahuasca**: I think N,N-DMT is the most unique and the most breathtaking substance I've ever consumed. It has without a doubt the most beautiful and the most intense CEV’s out of any drug. If you smoke a high enough dose you experience the so-called 'breakthrough', an incredibly intense and possibly life-changing experience with (possible) entities, machine-elves and other weird presences.  
If you take an MAOi in combination with DMT it becomes orally active and turns into a completely different beast. I have not tried Ayahuasca myself, but it is generally regarded as a very strong, introspective and healing drug combination that should be treated with caution and respect.

**DPT**: This novel compound is able to eradicate every sense of reality and plays with your mind like only a handful of substances can. Granted, if it’s used correctly! Anecdotally, it presents a sinister and eerie vibe for some and a lot of people don't really enjoy the compound. Nevertheless, DPT is very mind-bending and should be treated with utter respect. It definitely deserves a spot in the category 'most intense psychedelics'.

...all of the listed substances can be combined to achieve stronger effects, but I advise starting with a lower dose than you usually would, as combining psychedelics is highly synergistic! Be careful.

**honorable mentions**: 2C-E or 2C-P (pretty much extinct at this point) / DOx (these substances have a really long duration, strong stimulation, hefty bodyloads and visuals)

&nbsp;

##tripping for noobies / beginner-friendly hallucinogens:

**Cannabis Edibles** (atypical psychedelic): Cannabis edibles can be very psychedelic and are able to induce slight visuals, a strong euphoria and a very unique headspace (which feels different to the headspace of smoked Cannabis). I suggest starting with a low-dose and working your way up as Cannabis edibles are notorious for being underestimated and then surprising the user with uncomfortably strong effects.

**2C-B / Mescaline [low-dose]** (psychedelic): 2C-B is one of my favorite psychedelics, because it's so versatile and easy-going. It's amazing for tripping with friends, listening to music, having sex and also partying (in low-doses). It has a very manageable headspace, beautiful visuals, a short duration and can become pretty euphoric! It feels like a light-version of mescaline, which can be a very good beginners psychedelic as well, but due to it being very rare in HCl/Sulphate form this doesn't seem like a realistic/viable option. Preparing a mescaline-containing cactus takes time/practice, induces quite a bit of nausea and is unpredictable in its effects because its hard to dose properly. If you are able to get your hands on mescaline powder start with a low-dose and prepare yourself for a long ride!

**AL-LAD / LSD [low-dose]** (psychedelic): AL-LAD is a relatively rare substance, but if you get the chance to try it, take it! Its like a shorter-lasting (7-9 hours), more visual, less confusing and overall more recreational acid. It’s good as a starter psychedelic and to get a feel for lysergamides. If you can't find AL-LAD, a low-common dose of LSD (75-125ug) can be great for beginners as well. Lysergamides are amazing for spending a whole day outside, especially in summer, because of their long duration, great color-enhancement and (potentially) euphoric effects. They positively enhance music and can be very recreational, if you don't take too high of a dose.

**4-HO-MET / Psilocybin mushrooms [low-dose]** (psychedelic): 4-HO-MET is a pretty popular research chemical of the tryptamine family and is closely related to psilocybin. They share many similarities, but 4-HO-MET is considered to be a gentler, less confusing, more visual and more recreational psychedelic compared to mushrooms (similar to AL-LAD and LSD or 2C-B and Mescaline). It's cheap, readily available online and legal in many countries. If you have mushrooms then I suggest starting with a 1-2.5g dose for medium effects in strength. Just ride the mushroom wave, breathe and don't fight their effects.

**Ketamine / 2-FDCK** (dissociative): I know ketamine is technically not considered to be a psychedelic, so tripping may not be the right word here (to wonk might be more fitting), but it's a dissociative which is considered to be a hallucinogen. Ketamine can become pretty weird real quick, but it’s generally not as anxiety-provoking as psychedelics, because of its numbing and tranquilizing effects. Ketamine's effects only last for a very short period of time, so if you get overwhelmed, don’t worry because half an hour later the effects will be significantly diminished. 2-FDCK is like a less potent, often cheaper, less sedating version of ketamine and also legal in many countries. I prefer regular, ravemic ketamine over 2F-ketamine, but if you can't source it for some reason 2-FDCK might be a good alternative.

**honorable mentions**: MDxx (Entactogens are not psychedelics in a classical sense, but are good starter drugs for dipping your toes into the world of hallucinogens. “Rolls“ are usually easier to control than "trips" and extremely euphoric, that’s why I had to mention them.)

&nbsp;

##social-setting / partying:

**Alcohol + Cocaine**: Alcohol plus Cocaine is one of the most popular drug combinations around the world, and rightfully so. Both substances enhance and cancel out their effects at the same time and create a longer-lasting, more pleasurable, euphoric and talkative high. Unfortunately, this combination is very dangerous and should be avoided, especially on a regular basis. When both drugs are taken together they create the toxic substance cocaethylene in your liver, which is way more harmful than each substance individually. Not to mention the addiction potential of either substance. Be careful and take long breaks!

**Amphetamine** (+ Alcohol): Pure amphetamine sulphate can be very pleasant on its own and is perfect for raving/parties, but the strong stimulation can become too much for me at times, which is why I usually mix low-medium amounts of alcohol with it. Stimulants usually reduce the intoxicating and depressant effects of ethanol which leads to more drinking and can lead to a delayed alcohol poisoning once the amphetamine wears off, so watch your alcohol intake (The same goes for alcohol with cocaine)! The comedown/hangover of amphetamine is nasty, but drinking alongside snorting speed is absolutely horrendous!

**MDMA** (+ Stimulant): We all know that MDMA can be a fantastic party-drug, so I don’t have to say much about it, but the combination of MDMA and another stimulant (mostly caffeine, amphetamine or cocaine) is pretty popular in the rave scene even though some stimulants like speed and cocaine diminish the effects of MDMA. Some people feel too out of it and don't experience enough energy on MDMA alone, that's why these combinations are so established in Europe. I strongly advise against combining stimulants/entactogens as they increase MDMA’s neurotoxicity and put an enormous strain on your heart, especially in high doses. The MDMA comedown can be dreadful on its own, but is even worse when combined with other stims.

**4-FA / 4-FMA** (+ Alcohol): These two fluorinated amphetamines are the most recreational and the most enjoyable out of the bunch IMO. They are pretty similar, but most people I know and myself (that have tried both) prefer 4-FA. 4-FA feels like a lighter version of MDMA for 2-3 hours and then transitions over into classic amphetamine-like stimulation for another 4-5 hours. It doesn't produce a remarkable hangover and has relatively few noticeable side-effects compared to 4-FMA, which feels a little dirtier but definitely stronger on the stimulatory and empathogenic side. Both substances are research chemicals with only little history of human use and I recommend doing a lot of individual research before consuming them. 4-FA (and 4-FMA, most likely) is cardiotoxic and was the cause for several cases of brain hemmorhages and strokes in the Netherlands. It seems that some people are more susceptical to these toxic and highly dangerous effects, so please be careful and start with a low-dose!

**3-MMC / 4-MMC** (+ Alcohol): 3-MMC (Metaphedrone) and the more popular 4-MMC (Mephedrone) are empathogens of the cathinone family and they produce highly euphoric effects. Both substances are pretty fiendish and can lead to many "unplanned" redoses, because I and many people don't experience a ceiling-effect (like with MDMA), which means you experience similar effects in intensity with each redose. 3-MMC feels more dopaminergic and more stimulating (especially when insufflated), while 4-MMC feels more heavy on serotonin, thus inducing more entactogenic and more MDMA-like effects. I find 4-MMC to be superior to 3-MMC, but both substances are worth trying out if you have enough will-power. Similar to the UK 4-methylmethcathinone (4-MMC) craze in 2009, 3-methylmethcathinone (3-MMC) is taking over the Netherlands in 2021. Please beware of the highly addictive nature of these substituted cathinones!

**honorable mentions**: 2C-B [low-dosed] + Alcohol or GHB / 5-APB or 6-APB 

&nbsp;

##non social-setting / relaxing / alone-time:

**Alcohol**: A cold beer after work is great. That’s it.

**Cannabis**: A joint after work for winding down is also great.

**Dissociatives** (Ketamine / DCK / MXE / etc.): Dissociatives are a very unique class of drugs and can produce extraordinary experiences (e.g. holes) that are best experienced alone in bed with your favorite music playing IMO. They are not for everyone and can lead to bad habits, but a k-hole is an experience which is so utterly bizarre and fascinating that I think they deserve a spot on this list. Dissos are also amazing for watching movies/videos and creating an immersive and exciting experience for the user. Use sparingly to save your bladder and supplement with ECGC (which is found in green tea) an hour before dosing!

**Benzodiazepines** (Diazepam (Valium) / Triazolam (Halcion) / etc.) [low-doses] (+ Alcohol) [low-doses]: Benzodiazepines are muscle-relaxing and sedating drugs, which makes them pretty good choices for winding down, but I find combining a low-dosed benzo with a low-dose of alcohol to be even more enjoyable. This is probably one of the most controversial combinations on here because it's well-known that alcohol and benzodiazepines in combination can lead to respiratory depression and possibly death, but taking low-doses of each substance doesn’t pose a serious risk and is very euphoric and peaceful. A little .125mg Halcion with a glass of red-wine and a puff of weed is seriously underrated and also deserves a spot on here. Don’t go overboard with this combination and be responsible! 

**Opioids** (Dihydrocodeine (Paracodin) / Hydrocodone (Vicodin) / etc.): Using opioids is always a gamble because of their high addiction potential, but to probably nobody's surprise they feel great. They are a perfect mix of sedation, euphoria, anxiety-relief and pain-relief, so optimal for relaxing at home. If you decide to try them, I suggest sticking to lighter opioids like Kratom, Codeine, Dihydrocodeine, Tramadol and to use very sparingly. Opioids can also cause respiratory depression, especially when combined with other depressants, so be cautious!

**honorable mentions**: Muscle relaxants (Carisoprodol (Soma), etc.) + Opioids / Antihistamines (Promethazine, DPH, etc.) + Opioids / Barbiturates

&nbsp;

##pure pleasure / hedonism:

**Cocaine [IV or smoked]**: Users report that when cocaine is IV’d it creates a bell-ringing noise in one’s ear followed by an extremely intense euphoria far stronger and not even comparable to that of insufflated cocaine. Smoked crack cocaine is also insanely euphoric, but a very short-lived and fiendish high, which often leads to compulsive redosing. Using cocaine IV or smoking crack is highly addictive and I dont advise doing so. Binging on cocaine can easily lead to stimulant psychosis so beware!

**Methamphetamine [IV or smoked]**: I have never smoked or injected methamphetamine let alone tried it, but judging from people's experience it must be one of the most intense and euphoric highs achievable. I'd stay clear, especially if you like stimulants. If you decide to use it regardless then stick to using it orally, its way less fiendish and you don't experience that notorious meth rush which users like so much. Binging on methamphetamine can easily lead to stimulant psychosis so beware!

**Pyrovalerones (a-PVP / a-PHP / MDPV / etc.) [IV or smoked]**: Pyrovalerones are potent stimulants which induce extremely powerful euphoria and are notoriously fiendish when IV’d or vaporized (similar to methamphetamine, but shorter lasting and reported to be even more addictive) I have no personal experience with this class, because IMO they are high-risk substances to use and most of them have a very short history of human use. If you still want to try a pyrovalerone please be very careful and use sparingly, if that’s even possible. Binging on pyros can easily lead to stimulant psychosis so beware!

**Heroin [IV]**: I've never IV'd Heroin and probably never will because the risks outweigh the benefits. A Heroin nod is one of the strangest things to look at, but apparently it’s a state of extreme bliss and contentment. You're floating on a cloud where nothing is bothering you and you don't care about anything. A nod is weirdly psychedelic (similar to hypnagogia) and like falling in and out of a really euphoric dream. Beware of Fentanyl or other potent cutting agents, always start with a low dose and have your drugs tested if that's possible. Always keep Naloxone (Narcan) on you!

**Oxymorphone (Opana) [IV]**: Opana is arguably the most pleasurable painkiller available in the US and probably the most addictive. I've never tried it personally and it's pretty much non-existent in Europe, but don't let big pharma fool you. Oxymorphone is just as pleasurable and addictive as Diacetylmorphine (Heroin), which btw. can also be prescribed in a few countries. Please be careful and don't use this compound, if you don't already have an opioid-tolerance. As little as 3-5mg (intranasally) can seriously mess an opioid-naive person up. Always keep Naloxone (Narcan) on you!

...Speedballing (mixing a stimulant with an opioid) is arguably more enjoyable and more pleasurable for most users than either substance individually. I strongly advise against mixing uppers with downers because of an increased overdose risk and an increased strain on your circulatory system! Stay safe!

**honorable mentions**: 4-MMC (+ GHB) / MDMA + Nitrous Oxide

&nbsp;

##sex:

**WARNING: All of the following drugs are imo even more pleasurable when mixed with GHB/GBL. They are vasodilators and make you really horny. These substances pose a serious threat to one's health and can easily lead to overdoses, because GHB and GBL are very dose-sensitive and compulsive. Dont redose before 2 hours have passed and stick to low doses! Please, only use GHB/GBL if you have done your research and never mix them with other depressants as this easily leads to an OD. GHB and GBL are also physically addictive, so use sparingly. Stay safe.**

**3-MMC / 4-MMC + GHB**: Cathinones make you a horny monster but like with other stimulants they are vasoconstricters meaning it's sometimes difficult to get or stay hard. GHB is a vasodilator which does the exact opposite. Well, I think you know what I’m referring to here. They are very synergistic and make for a very pleasurable time. But regular sex on these drugs can be very addictive and makes 'normal' sex almost boring (also goes for the following two combinations). I have to emphasize that mixing uppers/entactogens with downers can be extremely dangerous and should be avoided at any cost. If you still want to do it, please be responsible and use low-doses!

**MDMA + GHB**: Very similar to the previous combo but more lovey-dovey and feels more personal, but still makes for a great time. I have to preface that mixing uppers/entactogens with downers can be extremely dangerous and should be avoided at any cost. If you still want to do it, please be responsible and use low-doses!

**Amphetamine / Methamphetamine + GHB**: Combining stimulants and depressants can easily lead to compulsive redosing, increases your risk of an overdose and puts more strain on your cardiovascular system, especially when you mix in a 6 hour session of raw fucking. Mixing uppers/entactogens with downers can be extremely dangerous and should be avoided at any cost, but if you still want to do it, please be responsible and use low-doses!

**2C-B + GHB**: One of my favorite combos ever, even when not used for sex as the G reduces the anxiety of psychedelics but enhances the euphoria. 2C-B was originally sold as an aphrodisiac and the combination of G and 2C-B is absolutely godlike. Highly recommend this combination if you're careful and you know what you're doing.

**5-MeO-MiPT + GHB**: 5-MeO-MiPT's effect profile is a mix of an entactogen and a psychedelic. Its incredibly amazing also when used without G and without sex, but getting it on while on Moxy is freaking amazing. Especially with GHB.

**honorable mentions**: LSD + GHB / Cocaine + GHB / Pyrovalerones + GHB / GHB or GBL / Phenibut / Cannabis + Alcohol

&nbsp;

##productivity:

**Modafinil + Caffeine**: Relatively low abuse-potential imo because Modafinil is not really recreational, but it gets the job done. Long duration and especially when combined with caffeine you're most likely gonna be really productive.

**Methylphenidate (Ritalin) + Caffeine**: Similar to Modafinil and Caffeine but MPH is stronger, more euphoric and has higher abuse-potential. It’s still a good choice for productivity, but please don't use any of these drugs regularily, if you don't wanna become and emotionless shell of a human being. 

**4F-MPH** (+ Caffeine): 4F-Methylphenidate is the RC super-version of methylphenidate. Stronger, cheaper, longer-lasting but not medically approved and basically an unstudied substance. It’s very cheap and works well if your tolerance to Ritalin is too high, although I’d rather taper or cut back if your tolerance is through the roof. Please do your own research!

**2-FMA** (+ Caffeine): 2-Fluoromethamphetamine is one of the most popular stimulants for productivity in the RC world but still pretty much an unstudied substance. Works better than 4F-MPH for productivity IMO and has less side-effects. It’s also readily available and really cheap. Please do your own research!

**Lisdexamphetamine (Vyvanse)**: This suggestion may be a little controversial and some people might prefer Adderall or Dexedrine over Vyvanse. I'm not saying I prefer Lisdexamphetamine over e.g. Adderall in general, but purely for productivity Vyvanse is the better option. Granted, the other suggestions are probably better choices anyway, because they are not as euphoric, so they’re more functional and have less abuse potential.

**honorable mentions**: 3-FPM (+Caffeine) / IPPH (+Caffeine) / Dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine) / Levo + Dextroamphetamine (Adderall) / Dexmethylphenidate (Focalin) 

&nbsp;

##my favorites:

**Alcohol + Cannabis**: This combination is very common and absolutely amazing, if you mix them from the get-go or start with the cannabis. Being drunk and smoking can make you nauseous and dizzy, especially if you dont have a tolerance. Great music-enhancement, they cancel out their negative effects and produce a strong euphoria.

**2C-E**:  Its like 2C-B‘s big brother and demands more respect, feels colder, more visual, has a more introspective headspace and has a significantly stronger bodyload. Side-effects like nausea, stomach cramps, etc. are also worse. It’s capable of producing euphoria that 2C-B wont be able to achieve, but is also able to induce a far stronger sense of dread and panic. More risk, more reward. Fact is, this is one of the best psychedelics ever created and it’s a shame that it’s not more common.

**2C-B + Ketamine**: That's something special! It can be quite frightening to be numb and not being able to move while tripping because you're so aware of your dissociation, but the euphoria, the visuals and the bodyfeeling are absolutely incredible. An otherworldly amazing combination, if you're prepared. Start lower than usual with the dosage on both substances. I advise taking bumps of ket when you feel comfortable on the 2C-B.

**AL-LAD + 2C-B**: Unbelievably euphoric and the visuals were so impressive that I couldnt believe my own eyes. Still relatively easy to control mentally but the visuals were so intense that I had to lay down because everything was whirling, spinning and moving. Absolute madness, but if you love highly visual drug combinations this might be for you!

**4-substituted Tryptamines + Benzofurans**: It doesn’t really matter what substance your mixing but the 4-substituted tryptamines are highly synergistic with the benzofurans. Its like a longer-lasting and better Hippie-Flip (mushrooms + MDMA). It can get pretty wild so don't take this combination lightly. 4-HO-MET and 6-APB synergize very well!

**honorable mentions**: LSD / DMT / 4-MMC / 4-FA and a few more.  

&nbsp;

Thank you for reading and I hope this post was somehow informative!

&nbsp;

**EDIT: Thank you all for your nice words! As I predicted, there’s a lot of controversy around what the best drugs or combinations are for different purposes, but people keep in mind that we’re all different and this post should be taken with a grain of salt. I read all the comments and I gotta say that I’m still happy with my choices, THE ONE THING I COULD’VE MENTIONED THO IS “SPEEDBALLING” (An upper mixed with an opioid) in the “pure pleasure / hedonism” category. This feeling is arguably more pleasurable / enjoyable for some than opioids or methamphetamine alone. Thank you u/JuniperHillInmate for this suggestion!**

**EDIT 2: Thank you for my first gold award stranger! I appreciate it!**

**EDIT 3: Thank you for another award! :)**

**EDIT 4: multiple grammar edits**

**EDIT 5: added honorable mentions in all categories.**

**EDIT 6: I reevaluated my choices in the “pure pleasure / hedonism” category and came to the conclusion that pyrovalerones and cocaine [IV or smoked] are better fits than 5-MAPB and MDMA, as they are purely recreational and arguably even more euphoric. Thank you u/Mroto and u/TheEnchantedHunters for your suggestions.**

**EDIT 7: Revised on 04.03.21 (~1 year later).  
Multiple grammar and wording edits. Added Ayahuasca alongside DMT in the "tripping for psychedelic veterans” section. Changed DOB/DOM to DOx in the honorable mentions passage of "tripping for psychedelic veterans”. Added a bit of information for mescaline in the "tripping for beginners” section. Changed the original amphetamine + alcohol combination to amphetamine (+ alcohol). Changed the MDMA + amphetamine combination to MDMA (+ stimulant) and added more information. Added a health warning in the 4-FA/-FMA paragraph. Added information in the 3-/4-MMC paragraph. Changed benzodiazepines + alcohol to benzodiazepines (+ alcohol) and added more infos. Added more information to the opioids passage in the "non-social setting" section. Added info in the 2C-E paragraph in the "my favorites” section and changed the "4-HO-MET / 4-HO-MiPT + 5-MAPB / 6-APB” title to "4-substituted tryptamines + benzofurans”.** 

**Now that this post is almost one year old I thought I’d revise it and change a few, small things to make it more up-to-date. Thank you all for voting and making my post one of r/Drugs "Best of 2020”! Stay safe.**Whenever I’m about to try a new drug I do at least 1-2 weeks of research beforehand, and I’m not too sure why but learning about drugs and how they work is really entertaining and the most fun I’ve had “learning” in years. I’m nowhere near researcher/professor level obviously seeing as my main source of learning about drugs is reddit. I can read about a drug/drugs for hours on end and find it entertaining as fuck and ACTUALLY REMEMBER the stuff I learn, compared to school where I wouldn’t remember shit and basically can’t remember 3/4 of the stuff I learnt. So do any jobs exist that are good for someone researching drugs? Just to clarify by “research” I mean researching online etc, not actually feeding lab rats a bunch of drugs and seeing how they reactFigured I'd share this with you all. 

A few weeks ago, I took two gel tabs (100ug each), and immediately went to the gym. I began my usual pull day routine, and within half an hour I noticed that my mind-muscle connection was incredible. I could literally feel every single fiber in a muscle contracting to accomplish a movement. This has been a lasting effect since I did this, and it's amazing. 

&#x200B;

By around an hour, I was starting to come up pretty hard. LSD usually does not kick in this fast for me, and I believe my increased heart rate and bloodflow may have carried the LSD to my brain faster than usual. 

&#x200B;

The best part was the walk back to  my dorm room. Coming up on LSD, combined with the endorphin high of an intense workout was the best feeling I've ever experienced. My body felt so loose and healthy, and I could not stop smiling. I really cannot recommend this combo enough, guys. It's also a great way to kill a little time while you wait for your dose to kick in. 

&#x200B;

Happy tripping, and be safe my friends:)

EDIT: Wow this really blew up, I’m really glad that you all enjoyed my story! Have a wonderful day, I love you all dearly! Title pretty much says it all. I went on a two maybe three month crack binge. During that time I lost about 40lbs. I went down from 180 to 140. My usual weight is around 140lbs but I gained a lot due to getting clean from opiates and being on methadone.

I relapsed on crack for a few months. I was really good at hiding it though and making sure that I passed my drug tests, so nobody had any idea. During those few months, I would recieve endless complements about how healthy and how good I looked. I never felt so guilty.

I have since stopped. My last use was around February. I'm slowly starting to gain the weight back. Maybe about 20lbs Ive gained so far. Im exercising but my eating habits could be better. My mother asked me the other day what was going on with my weight. She didnt mean it in a rude way. She just said, "you lost all that weight and now youre slowly gaining it back whats going on?"

I wanted so bad to just say "yeah because I stopped smoking crack" but I didnt.  I'm actually happy right now but I could stand to lose a few pounds through Healthier eating habits and more exercise.

My methadone dose is fairly low now so its a little easier to lose weight. Its just so tempting to go back on the crack binge to lose about 20lbs and stop. Especially because I got so many compliments before. But I wont do that. I dont want to press my luck. I know thats the easy way out. Exercise and dieting is the right way to go. Im done with the drug lifestyle, but it was definitely fun while it lasted. The lying, the lack of money, the anxiety, the pain, the living a double life- its just too much for me.

I really just needed to vent because I cant talk about this stuff to just anyone. Thanks for whoever took the time to read this!Having to lay there with my thoughts. Lay there with all my mistakes, regrets, shortcomings, failures. I'm sitting on the sidewalk near where the sparse nightlife is tonight, because I dread even going home. It smells like vape and beer out here. It's 10pm and I have places to be, bright and early tomorrow morning. I don't want to be alone with my thoughts.So yea... it finally happened.

Bit about me, 17 male, live with my religious grandparents in south australia, had a good job earning good money with my granddad. Was going to start a 4 year apprenticeship next week. Smoked pot for the last year, fell in love with it straight away. Just doing a solid 8 or 9 hours and then having a cone or two to end the day off felt right. Anyway, got litty as a titty last night, went out to my shed, had a couple bongs then tried to come back through the back door to go to bed. Locked. I went outside at midnight so was very surprised that they'd gotten up again. Id have to though the front door, unfortunately it doesn't open with a key. Has some weird code lock on it and makes a loud beeping noise when each digit is entered. Both of my parents were waiting on the other side of the door, they knew what was up. Asked me why i was outside and my baked ass could only come up with "i heard a noise". So yea all of that was about 12 hours ago, just waiting on the curb with a backpack for an uber to take me somewhere. So yea lost my job and home in one night. Have no money, no car, no family. Never hurt anyone in my life. I'm done with innocent people having a bit of fun getting their lives ruined for no reason. Wish me luck.

Update: Cheers for all the good vibes everyone, I'm staying with a mate for the next few nights, havin a grill at the moment then gonna go out for a walk and talk and see what plans we can muster up.

last update: have moved back in with gaprents, been sober for a couple weeks and gonna contiune to do so. Havent started work yet but close to sorting it out. Cheers.Up until two nights ago I was extremely naive about my use. I never thought I’d overdose. I had narcan on me always, just in case but overdosing is absolutely nothing like the movies. There is no warning. 

The night started off “fine” or rather had been going fine. Had some friends over and we got some fetty. I’m talking straight white, just need a little bit fetty. When I first started using opiates fetty terrified me but it slowly became something I gravitated towards because I didn’t need as much, didn’t use as much, and got straight rocked. I had been getting this stuff all week, I thought I’d be fine.

Got it, friends fix for themselves, but I only snorted it or smoked it, never shot it. So again, I thought I’d be fine. I did a line, hit a foil sat down and we started chatting. About 20 mins later I wanted to get higher so I did another line and got another foil ready. I took a few hits before I started feeling where I wanted to be....and that was it. 

The next thing I remember I’m on my floor propped up next to my bed. I’m so cold. So cold. My apartment is normally sweltering hot but I’m so fucking cold. It felt like ice was running through my body, like my blood had replaced with ice cubes pumping through my body.
I remember groaning because words wouldn’t come out. My neighbor was lightly smacking my face,”Kai Kai wake up, Kai honey wake up...we narcaned you wake up”

All of a sudden it felt like it hit me. That things weren’t right. It felt like a weight was taken off my chest and I took the hugest breath of my life. I tried to sit up but my body just wouldn’t work. It felt like I had no control of my body at all. 

“She’s gonna be alright...she’s gonna feel like shit the next few hours but she’ll be alright...” my neighbor said. 


I managed to ask “what happened?” My neighbor touched my face. “You overdosed honey we had to narcan you three times!” 
I was soaking wet. I thought it was sweat but they later told me that they had threw water on me to wake me up. 

The entire room was spinning. I felt a sense of dread and the worst anxiety of my life. Detox withdrawals and alcohol withdrawal anxiety doesn’t come close to what I felt. I felt so sick to my stomach. One time I got sun poisoning and I thought that was the sickest I ever felt. I was wrong. I grabbed a plastic bucket that had been beside me and held onto it like my life depended on it. 

“....what?!” Was all I could say. 

“You almost died honey...you did die. You stopped breathing...” my neighbor said. And I remember just letting out this absolute guttural fucking scream. I don’t know why. 

Later I got a more clear picture of what happened. My friends boyfriend was in the shower. I had hit the foil and just looked messed up and then all of a sudden I stopped breathing. My friends boyfriend had met my neighbor for the first time earlier that night when she took us to the store and we had talked about dope. He ran outside half naked screaming because they couldn’t find any narcan in their stuff or the apartment. They had emptied every purse, backpack, everything all over the apartment. My neighbor said she almost didn’t answer his screams, thinking it was someone else. 
My neighbors husband had kept extra narcan in case, thinking one day I’d od.
They rushed over and I was slumped over and turning blue, not breathing. My friend was trying to help me manually breathe while her boyfriend went for help. She said she was elbowing me in the chest to get me hard enough to help me breathe, my chest still aches from where she did that. 

All I felt was cold. My body didn’t feel right. I can’t even convey the almost torturous, intensely fucking uncomfortable feeling. It was almost like a bad trip. I couldn’t sit up and I was so cold. It felt like it was coming from internally, like my body was freezing from the inside out. My clothes on me felt uncomfortable, sticking to my skin and starting to make me feel cold from the outside too. 
“Get those wet clothes off her”, my neighbor told them. My friend and her boyfriend helped strip me naked and then wrapped every single blanket in the house I had around me. It felt better but I still felt freezing and was shivering. 

I felt so scared. I could comprehend that I almost died, that I probably was actually dead.   And it was terrifying. To go from complete black to waking up and not even feeling human. I was crying, but tears weren’t coming out, they couldn’t. I was in a complete panic; the way I felt was so fucking scary like a very bad trip just an intense, never ending sense of dread and fear.

My friends helped me lay on my bed and it felt more comfortable but everything felt awful: my stomach I felt like I was going to piss and shit myself but at the same time I couldn’t get up to go to the bathroom because my legs wouldn’t work. I felt so weak, so cold. I was writhing around feeling so scared and anxious; I begged my friend to sit beside me and she rubbed my back. I wrapped my head in the blankets because looking around at the apartment scared me even more. But with my head under the blankets I felt like I couldn’t breathe; like I was suffocating. I had to keep trying to poke my mouth out for breaths of air while trying not to look around the apartment, because it made me more uncomfortable. 
“I don’t know if anyone called the cops but if paramedics show up don’t be scared”, her boyfriend said. The thought of strange people being in the apartment scared me even more. 

I can’t accurately describe the feeling that I felt. It was terrible. I’d wish it on nobody. My neighbor explained the next day that part of it was shock, from being so close to death and not breathing. That the narcan was pushing the shit out of my body and forcing me into sudden withdrawal. “This isn’t like pulp fiction at all” I thought. 

A few hours later after I stopped writhing around and was able to sleep, after things calmed down and my neighbor left, I was able to sit up in bed. I was naked but still soaked from the water and sweat. It finally dawned on me that I almost fucking died. That if I had been alone, and I would have done the exact same fucking amount, I’d be DEAD. I wouldn’t be alive. I had always had this indifferent attitude towards dope, as in I didn’t think I’d ever OD. I’ve been using for a year. I STUPIDLY never thought it would happen to me. Well guess what? It can. It will. 

The worst part was knowing I’d die so unhappy; working a shitty retail job, living in a tiny shithole apartment, being all around miserable. THAT is how I would have left this earth. My poor mother; her daughter would be just a girl found dead from an overdose. I remember my ex saying one day I’d just OD and die and be another statistic and I almost fucking was. This was a fucking wake up call. This was a second chance. I will FOREVER be grateful to my friends and my neighbors for saving me; I owe them my life. 

DONT use alone. 
ALWAYS keep narcan on hand. 
DONT start doing dope. 

I started using because it felt good. Because I didn’t think on it. It made me feel better. Until I started getting sick. I use to think being dope sick was the worst feeling from it; I know now that is not true. 

I almost lost my life. Over a tiny bag of white powder.I thought trees was bad but looks like this place is barely any better. I wrote a post earlier this morning about how friend had psychosis after smoking weed for years and the impact it had on his life. And yes, I'm fully aware that it's a predisposition to the illness and that weed didn't "give" him psychosis (although it likely did bring it on earlier) and I addressed this in my thread.

The replies?

"Bullshit anti'cannabis propaganda."
"Weed don't give u psychosis"
And of course a bunch of downvotes on the thread.

This place is meant to educate people on drugs, not call them wrong because it doesn't suit your views. People think they are enlightened and can see past all the awful drug propaganda out there but in reality they're just as stupid and are simply following the hivemind on this sub rather than the hivemind that the government created around drugs.

Also, reddit is a cesspool of censorship and bias. Fuck reddit.Recently I've started using low THC strains (between 7-13% THC ) usually combined with a high CBD content. My personal favourite is a 1:1 ratio.I found I prefer it to high THC strains alone. For me, strains that are more potent get me too high to function.  The high with low percentage weed is very mellow and I can actually function. I can hold a conversation and I don't get paranoid. I think most people overlord their system with super potent strains. A lower potency strain can still give very good effects and won't kill your tolerance.  

I still enjoy the occasional high THC strain, but I have to be in the right mood for it. If you've been having issues with weed, try lower percent strains and CBD and see if that makes a difference.

Edited:
I’ve also noticed improvements in my mental health since I started incorporating high CBD weed. My anxiety has been greatly reduced, even when I’m sober.So me (17) and my small group of friends had this friend. He was an old guy, 70 when I met him. And let me tell you this guy was cool as fuck. Everyone from his past had died or moved far away. Besides us he had no one. We'd go over to his house and listen to classical rock, play domino's, get stoned, and we'd occasionally trip with him when we could. He was from the army and he loved acid. He liked to drink too. Always 2 shots of cheap vodka in a glass of ice water. And don't ask me man, I couldn't drink that shit of I got paid. But Ron was a good guy, fuck he was a great guy. He fit right in with my little group of teenagers. Maybe he was lonely, idk but he always seemed happy when we were there. A few months back  he fell, hurt his hip really bad. Had to quit drinking, but didn't. We tried to convince him. It took his liver almost failing him for him to finally stop drinking. But he was an alcoholic and the withdrawals are what I think got him. After he quit drinking he always had a cigarette in his hands. He could barely hold himself up right in his chair last time I saw him. Then he got put into hospis. The day befor he left was the last time I saw him. He couldn't keep track of a conversation. He kept falling asleep in his chair. He couldn't hold his pipe by himself. We promised him we'd come see him. He was so scared. Then he left. We found his nursing home. The day we were going to go see him he passed. I don't think I'll ever forgive myself for putting it off. I miss him so much already. 

Sorry for bothering you all with my long post. Thanks for reading if you did. Make sure you spend time with the people you love whall there around, and spark one up for the old man. ❤️

Edit : you guys are all great people, thank you all so much. Your kind words helped me get through school after the bad news. This community is full of wonderful, nice people❤️I like to masturbate while high on crack cocaine.


When I cum while on it it makes me feel almighty and powerful.


LOOK AT MY CREATION. *I scream after I angrily shake my cock clean of all nut flying out like bullets*


I AM GOD!i drink that shit like i’ve been stranded in the saharan desert drinking nothing but camel piss for 6 weeks man the water goes down your face and it’s so refreshing when your high as fuck and ur mouth is dry u just wanna deepthroat the water till it’s dead and that’s just how it is morty!I love to read stories, trip reports, people making stupid posts while high on anything, people wanting to chat with random strangers while being high and all of that stuff. It's just that some of you are real toxic. I'll show with examples by what I'm talking about.

**Example 1:**

Post: I took 2 tabs of LSD and I'm tripping hard I just wanted to say that this is life is great and have a good night

Comments: Dude, if you are on 2 tabs you wouldn't be able to type. When I tripped on 2 tabs I saw my 3rd eye growing out of my dick and was paralyzed for two weeks. You're probably some kid, using drugs isn't cool grow up. Cringe.

What's wrong here: Now, this isn't a quality post but the person just wants to spread some positive vibes, there's nothing wrong with that. If you can't know for certain that it's fake then don't comment at all. Even if it is fake then why should you comment, it's not like it's hurting anyone with that post. Only thing you're doing is making him feel bad and potentially ruining his trip. 

What you could comment: Have a nice trip :) 

**Example 2:**

Post: How to get heroin out of water?

Comments: Stop using heroin, it's shit and you'll kill yourself. Kill yourself for using it.

What's wrong here: You may think that that is harm reduction, but it's not. Your comment doesn't help anything other than induce frustration. The sub is designed to be an ALL DRUG subreddit, if you just smoke weed and drop acid etc and think you're on some sort of pedestal for it then go to /r/trees. 

What you could comment: Nothing if you don't know anything about heroin. 

**Example 3:**

Post: I hate alcohol. I love weed.

Comments: Yeah way to go! Alcohol sucks dick, it's so much more harmful, why can't the general public see this?? 

What's wrong here: The alcohol is bad circlejerk is pretty common in all drug subreddits, there is some truth behind it but most of the stuff I see about it is just wrong and ignorant. Same goes for the cigarettes is bad circlejerk. This is a ALL DRUG subreddit, we're not here to discriminate other drug users, legal or illegal. Harm reduction posts are very fine and encouraged, what I'm talking about is the circlejerk behind it without any actual content. 

What you could comment: I see your point, and I agree with you but there are also health benefits to using alcohol and it's a fun drug. / I also think alcohol is bad like other humans here and I do not enjoy it at all, glad we came to a human agreement about this subject humans discuss,

**Example 4.**

Post. I'm 15 and I have a question about drugs.

Comments: Omg this subreddit is being taken over by kids, ABANDON SHIP EVERYONE! I DONT WANT TO LIVE ON THIS GAY PLANET ANYMORE

What's wrong here: Kids are really passionate to learn new stuff, drugs being one of them for most. Please help them to make to best decisions so that they won't make mistakes that they regret or that could ruin their lives forever. Drugs aren't toys and should be taken seriously, so if you are a kid and have a question about some drug that you plan on taking PLEASE DONT BE AFRAID TO ASK. There are plenty of people who have good knowledge and expertise on these substances and taking the extra hour to see some responses could really make a difference between a great night and a bad one. One mistake I made as a kid was smoking weed and taking acid for the first time and I wish I would've made a post asking if it's a good combo for the first time. It's not and if it's your first time don't do it.

What you could comment: The answer to the question to the best of your abilities, also if you see wrong information given out please try to correct it.


Now, these are just my suggestions on how you should behave in this sub. Agree or don't. Also to posters, try not to make the most idiotic threads imaginable, but if you absolutely must then fine. I myself have done some of this stuff, I'm not perfect, but I'm making a conscious effort on reducing it and I hope you will too. This is a harm reduction subreddit. Almost everyone has some problems here with life, I wish that you all could be understanding about everyone's behavior even if it gets annoying or if there's incorrect information people could correct it and be civilized about it. Let's not forget that we are all just humans and all humans are stupid animals.

Peace.

**EDIT:** It's great to see everyone agreeing on this topic, one thing I would like to say is that if you see this type of behavior in this sub or anywhere else don't be afraid to speak out against it. It's a collective effort to make this sub as friendly as possible, I like to imagine this sub as being a safe place to ask about topics I can't google about or reading other people's experiences on certain drug combinations and sharing your mistakes without being judged.

**EDIT 2: Example 5:** (thanks /u/older_druggie )

Post/comments: I took a certain drug/combination, it worked in a certain way so I expect it will work same for everyone

What's wrong here: people assuming that because certain drugs and combinations at certain doses have affected them in a particular way that this must be so for everyone else. Each person will react in their own way to various substances based upon the dose, their tolerance, their setting and mindset, among many other things. Even Erowid.org states in several places something to the effect of how 5 people in the same set, the same setting, each taking the same dose of the same potency of a drug, may in fact have drastically different experiences. This is kind of similar to the Example 1, but example one talks about skepticism.

What to comment: Assume that your drug experiences were all unique and only give a blurry picture on what are the effects of the drug. There are countless of factors to be taken into account and you can never list them all in a comment, so take everyone's advice with a grain of salt.
2 nights ago, It was his first time and my second time. We each took a point and kept small dosing throughout the night til we each had 2.5 points. We just sat in his room and bonded and talked and listened to music. We told each other everything and felt so comfortable. We got past some trauma and got to really talk to each other. We communicated better and told each other what we wanted more of, and we were both were so accepting. I feel so much closer to him, as he says the same thing. He said it was one of his favorite memories of us he'll ever have. Sorry for gushing but I honestly am just so happy. We're doing it again in February!

edit: thank you so much for the gold! i hope you all get to experience molly with someone you love. 🧡Woke up at 10 am to my mom screaming at me that she needs help. The bathroom door is locked and the sink is running, which means he is in there. She has been pounding on the door and he won't anwser ( he has a shitload of past benzo abuse ) so she knew there is an issue. I ended up getting dressed around this time and making it up the stairs to my brother laying on the bathroom floor, white. There was no chance, he had been gone for hours. I'm ranting now. Please just stay the fuck away from this shit. I've seen so many posts just like this but unfortunately it can't be stressed enough to you until this shit happens. Stay safe yall.

Edit: I saw a comment asking about what dosage and drugs he was doing to further inform people. I dont know exact dosages but it was half of a dirty 30 tops but my assumption is a quarter and some amount of kpins.Been hitting my plug up for about a year now. most times when I go see him, he's got 3 or 4 Nutella sandwiches sitting there. 

So maybe five months ago, I'm like dude, why you always got those nutellas around and he's like I like to give them to my favourite customers. I totally expected him to then offer me one, but nah he takes my coin and gives me drugs and we're done.

So today I stop in for a quarter and just as I'm about to leave out the door he calls hey bootsncatsnboo and I turn and he tosses me a sandwich and says hey bruh, you should have this, I make them for all my favourite customers. as I was so happy and hungry on account of having not eaten breakfast that day and I madly snarfed it down before heading home to get hiiiigh.[Source.](http://reason.com/blog/2016/11/16/five-reasons-jeff-sessions-no-liberty)

If Sessions is confirmed as AG, he will have the power to crack down **not only on states that have legalized recreational marijuana,** but on states that have legalized medical as well.

This old fucker even opposes medical marijuana. 

**Call your Senators today and tell them to vote NO on Jeff Sessions.**

[Senate contacts.](http://www.senate.gov/senators/contact/)

**You can still call after 5 pm eastern time...just leave a message!**Last night I got barred the fuck out and smoked a ton of weed, I completely crushed an entire bag of fuegos takis.

If y’all don’t know what these are, they’re hotter than hot Cheetos. Their fucking delicious but I have so many regrets.

I just drove home from class because I felt a shit brewing that was bad, and now I’m currently on the toilet feeling like someone just probed me with a ghost pepper.

Each push of my asshole feels like I’m giving birth to shards of glass. 

It feels like the devil is giving me an enema and I can’t do anything about it. 

If I don’t update in 15 minutes I’m prolly dead 



Edit: prolly boutta grab another bag tonight - it’s worth itAfter a very difficult LSD trip with one other friend and two trip sitters, I realized how much these people are holding me back in my life. They use me for weed, transportation, and don't really care about me. They don't even care about themselves. It's like when they talk about prison they make it sound like a place they want to end up.

As I was coming up, I learned they were possibly going to be arrested for assault with a deadly weapon. I looked back at my friend and said, "worst tripsitters EVER." My friend and I both had very uncomfortable trips and at one point I started to cry because of a very rough point in my past, in which they all started to laugh and then stopped when I made eye contact with them. 

I'm done hanging out with losers who don't want to go anywhere in life and take zero responsibility for their actions. I don't care if I will have zero friends (not the first time it's been like this) , I'm going to start searching for a career I will be happy pursuing and leave these fools in the past. It's taken awhile for me to see this, but thank you LSD, I don't even want to trip anymore.

Edit: Thank you for the overwhelming amount of support!So I was gonna pickup 5 grams from my dealer which usually cost 60$ in my country (Scandinavian). But when I turned up he only had 3.5 gram bags that cost 100$ each. He said it was imported from Cali.

Shit looked fire as hell, but 100$ for 3.5 grams is crazy. But since it took me more than an hour to get there I just bought the bag, since it was a rainy day - and I love smoking on them rainy days


So when I smoked this Cali stuff. Wow, first of all it was covered in kief. If I dropped it from like an inch from my table a ton of kief crystal fell from it. 

The high was like what I hoped Cocaine would be like. Just pure bliss, euphoria and focus. It was a Sativa-Hybrid.

I can't believe you guys in legal countries get the opportunity to smoke this quality on a regular basis. I am truly jealous.Imagine this: You take a hit of a bowl. You're high but something's missing; so you grab a salt shaker and sprinkle some kief on it.

Like, "Bro pass me the 'salt.'"Middle East correspondent Quentin Somerville gets off his nut in afghanistan, On 8 and half tons of  heroin, hash and opium burning in the background.


https://youtu.be/kLYVTdiACRA

Edit: mom I made it to the top of the drugs subreddit hope your proud. 





For anyone thinking this is fake:

https://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/tvandradio/bbc/11309288/BBCs-Quentin-Sommerville-laughs-uncontrollably-as-he-attempts-to-report-on-burning-drugs.html
Got so fucked on shrooms that I created a full medal ceremony for a small hill in the ground for being the hardest working bit of grass out of the lot.This is how I tend to explain especially the body high to people who haven't ever experienced it before. All sensory perception is turned up to maximum and your entire body just feels electric with stimulation

I guess this is basically just a drug showerthought lol.Yo, I'm out there trying to research stuff, and of course most of my questions have been asked before, but Jesus, half of the posts on any given drug forum read like ciphertext to me because of all the slang.

"Yeah, obviously, if you rattail the cone and whack at the same time, all the coils are gonna bump the hitter before you can draw. You have to gloss first. Better yet, get yourself a 7.3 off Aliexpress, some wrap, and DIY a Snoozer. It’s super easy. And ffs, don’t nosecap."

This is what drug forums sound like to a noob.I never realized until recently that my cat is very observant of me, especially when I'm high on drugs that dilate my pupils. 

While on LSD mid trip on 5 tabs when I'm lost in the cosmos on the verge of a panic attack or just laying there in space, he will jump up on me and look me straight in the eyes while meowing in a very concerned way he never does when I'm sober. 

On adderall, he will be posted up in the corner meowing very loudly and consistently purposely driving me crazy, as if hes telling me to cut that shit out. I'll put him outside, but he will jump up near my window outside and meow through that.

People never got through to me about quitting drugs, and i never thought my cat would be the one to succeed at making me change my habits.

I'll stay sober for my cat cause he actually gives a fuck.*The following text is a comment made* *to* *a post on* r/Stims *in response to a first\-time user of crack cocaine, asking for dosage advice.*

\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-

>*Posted by   u/\[deleted\]*    [*28 days ago*](https://www.reddit.com/r/Stims/comments/8ig9e2/first_time_smoking_crack_cocaine_how_much_do_you/)  
>  
>  
>  
>\>   First time smoking crack cocaine. How much do you usually smoke?

\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-

>[*NotAtweakerAnymore*](https://www.reddit.com/user/NotAtweakerAnymore)   *24 points  ·*  [*28 days ago*](https://www.reddit.com/r/Stims/comments/8ig9e2/first_time_smoking_crack_cocaine_how_much_do_you/dyrlex9/)  
>  
>  
>  
>Usually smoke? I'm going to tell you how this will go down, young freebase apprentice.  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>Usual harm reduction practices dictate that one start low and go with the flow. This is not true for crack. You don't want to get an underwhelming hit. That's just waste of crack and that shit is expensive you know?  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>You want to try three match head sized rocks. Remember to pulverize them and load. Hold the hit in for at min 30 \- max 45 seconds. After 45 you will not get any higher, just a buzz from the asphyxiation.  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>If you are pro, you will get 8 hours of euphoria out of a gram. But I will tell you how much you will smoke.  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>You will smoke it all. You will then check your bag for any overseen little crack pebble left behind. Then you will go on your knees on your carpet with a flashlight to look for anything you may or may not have dropped. You will look for leftovers for an hour or so, refusing to accept that there isn't anymore. Here comes the panic phase. You will cry internally or externally. Maybe both. You will be the saddest you've ever been, that the crack\-coaster came to a stop. You we're just getting warmed up, you feel?  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>You will then call the plug to get another pizza with everything. After you eaten that pizza, you will order another one with extra everything for your new never\-satisfied appetite. You are becoming a pizza enthusiast. You will spend all your cash. You will then spend everything on your primary account. Then your saving account. The pension account. You will max the overdraw on all of the cards. While you still got good credit, you may consider taking the biggest loan you can, in order to keep the euphoria going. When that tit is milked, you may want to pawn your xBox. Your vinyl collection is worth a lot more if you sell it on Discogs one at a time, but you don't have that time. Pawn them all too. Continue doing this with your personal belongings until you only own a mattress and a night stand for your ye\-yo paraphernalia.  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>Now you have nothing and want to keep the adventure going, it's time to drain your nearest. Call your dad and tell him that things are rough. The bill (whatever bill) needs to be payed. The car fixed and you want to propose to your girlfriend, because now is the right time, and rings are expensive. Express your sincerest gratitude. Thanks dad, you are the best. Tell him you don't want to make mom worried, so if it could be your little secret, it would be the best for the family. When the base your dad sponsored is out, go call your mom. Give her the same speech and tell her that you don't want to make dad worried. You are now getting good at the creative side of crack addiction.  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>Now let's see how much your best friends trust your crack\-smoking ass. Go get coffee with them, because you really have something you need to ask him. Get him the caffeine, sit down and then start singing the blues. Tell him about your medical condition. You want to evoke sympathy. If you are good friends, getting a good amount of crack\-cash should not be too hard. You haven't told anyone about your medical problems and per extension the medical bill. This will also be your secret and tell him that you are blessed, having such a good, good friend. Now go melt dat ye\-yo. You will have top\-tier euphoria for weeks. Do this with all the close friends and you are now ready for fucking over secondary acquaintances.  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>You know that rich\-kid from high\-school, that were so fucking flat, uninteresting and underwhelming as a person, he resorted to buying/bribing his "friends" for company? He's your new BFF. You are now into the this game, beyond the point of no return. You will know how to fuck him over yourself by now. After you are done with him it's time to be creative. Here comes my favorite way to feed your bazooka\-habit.  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>Some people go other their boundaries, when they get desperate enough. You may have heard of the term "crack\-whore"? Well, you will never have to live with that stigma. Listen here: You are a good looking boy right and there are a lot of lonely old and sexually frustrated men out there. You will pose a a rent\-boy out there. Your creativity decides how much you will make. Brand yourself as a luxury escort. When you catch a perv, you will get him to come to your "place". Throw him a dud\-address. An hour before your midnight affair, pop a Xanax, K\-pin or some other effective anxiolytica. You will have no problems with inhibition. Greet him, lure him to a safe place and fucking mug the thirsty prick. He won't go to the police. He will be way too ashamed. Trust me. It's what I like to call a cunning stunt and can be repeated infinitely and you will feel morally justified for doing it. Go get them.  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>Sorry for going on about this, the amp is clearly working. My point is that; if you start doing crack and like it; you won't stop before you are either bankrupt or dead. You are going to lose everything in the hunt of that overwhelming yet short acting euphoria nuke.  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>Experience? I almost ruined my life in two months doing freebase all day every day. Spending around 10.000 dollars on cocaine and converting it to freebase with ammonia on a fucking spoon. Interesting times, but not worth it. Felt nice, but really not worth it.   
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>If you got this far down this damn text wall. Go look up the Crack Megathread on BL. It's a comprehensive guide to getting the most out of your crack. The original post describes the mythical ***BELLRINGER***. A hit  \- close like an overdose \-  that will leave you paralyzed with euphoria for a good 45 minutes, compared to the usual 10\-15 minute euphoria you get from a "regular" hit. He also goes on to describe how he is of a lonely breed: The functional crack addict and how he maintains. It's highly controversial, even for BL. It's worth a read.  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>  
>Good luck. If you need more guidance on how to ruin your life, message me.Over the years we grew apart. I moved out of town, he got a girlfriend. We were both pretty private people, but cared a lot for each other. He didn’t always open up to everyone, but we’ve shared some deep talks sober, stoned, fried outta our minds on acid, and drunk. We experimented a lot from 19-25 with drugs. He took me to my first Oliver Tree concert as a belated birthday gift and another year he took me to see Jay and Silent Bob live. We went to multiple music festivals together and traveled quite a bit. We shared a love for the same style of art (shoutout to Spacegoth), memes, and a love for cats (RIP Pete). 
Yesterday was really hard. I ate some mushrooms with my boyfriend with the intention of snacking all day, making art, and watching comedies. Instead I cried. The entire time. No matter what I did, it made me think of him. The moment I got the txt, I was in disbelief. This is the closest person to me to have ever passed. 
I guess I’m just making this post as a way to grieve. Please, if you have any friends who mess with Xanax.. watch out for them extra carefully. My friend was just a couple weeks away from moving and getting clean. He was so close to a second chance. 
If you yourself abuse Xanax, please consider what you are doing to your body and brain. I’ve been there also, and it hurts more than just you in the long run.alright so i work at a fast food place running the drive thru. about a month ago, i took a 30mg edible before my shift and one of my ex girlfriends parents came thru. i knew em pretty well so it was awkward but i didnt think about it too much.

Literally the next car in the line was another one of my ex girlfriends and her dad. at this point i was kinda like what the fuck but shrugged it off. I shit you not, a few cars later my most recent ex girlfriend came through the fucking drive thru and i was in disbelief. i knew it was her just from her voice and i just didnt know how to process the fact that within a single 10 minute period, 3 ex interactions occured.

It doesnt end there.


Last night at work, i was high on an edible again, and i went to the bathroom to chill in the stall for 5 or so. I hear the door open and two kids walk in, hella young. i deadass hear these kids crossing streams as theyre pissin in the urinal together, yellin about how theyre piss fighting. that was enough for me to think what the fuck.

They leave, and i hear the door open again. its a man this time, and he starts pissin in the urinal when he just lets out a fucking fat moan of just sheer delight and absolutely rips fucking ass. i just sat there like jesus fucking christ, texting a friend about it, and he says "ig some pretty weird shit happens in that bathroom huh", in reference to a time where i found a baggie full of some type of benzo

literally as i read this, i notice a fucking bag of coke, little less than half a G sitting on the toilet paper holder. i went from laughing to being completely fucking disturbed and confused.  be it the universe, the simulation, whatever it is, its fucking with me.  i understand if this is hard to believe but i dont see any reason why id sit here typing all this out if it didnt happen.

EDIT::: i havent done any of thr coke and i dont plan on it, i dont really fuck with yay anymore so im trying to figute out if it belonged to any of my coworkersHe gave me a hug, smiled and said 'thats what this is all about, my man'.  It was the most intimate moment I've had in years.  I said goodnight to his wife on the way out, went home and got high.  It was lovely.the last 8 times ive bought from this dude hes been a couple hours late like he'd say he'd meet me at 7pm then meet at 2am and he was doing it this time so i said "hey dude dont message me saying you'll be here in in 1 hour then show up 3 hours later tell me it will take 3 hours and im sorry i dont mean to be mean but that shit really pisses me off" then he told me to go fuck myself like i know shit comes up but at this point its just sloppy shitty drug dealing and i also think he's a whiney little senstive bitch who cant take self critisism for shit so i guess fuck himLast night, I watched the Ann Arbor city council vote to decriminalize the use of psychedelic plants and fungi.

[Proof]( http://a2gov.legistar.com/LegislationDetail.aspx?ID=4636684&GUID=6CA2F60A-1540-4325-A819-352313DC0972&Options=&Search=)

It is now the policy of the City of Ann Arbor that the investigation and arrest of persons for planting, cultivating, purchasing, transporting, distributing, engaging in practices with, or possessing Entheogenic Plants or plant compounds which are on the Federal Schedule 1 list shall be the lowest law enforcement priority for the City of Ann Arbor; and city funds or resources shall not be used in any investigation, detention, arrest, or prosecution arising out of alleged violations of state and federal law regarding the use of Entheogenic Plants.

Ann Arbor is the fourth city in the nation to enact such a measure. This is an incredibly exciting time, and I am so proud of our city.So I’m just chilling in my baggie, being a powdered substance, rattling around in the purse of this thicc girl, and I don’t really know what’s going on at all. It’s dark as shit in there and I can only hear the odd muffled voice.

Anyway, I hear this chick and her friend arrive somewhere and stop driving, then a minute later they’re laughing hysterically, so I know some shits going down. I’m practically clumping together in excitement. Who’s nose am I going up? Please tell me I’m gonna be laid out on some smooth, flat, mirrored surface and insufflated through a crisp $100 bill. Oh boy.

There’s more rustling as I’m carried very slowly up what feels like hundreds of stairs, and finally I’m lay down on a soft surface, still in the purse.

“SAUCY LADLES!” I think I hear, or something like that. I absentmindedly take a glance to the left of me and notice through the plastic that there’s a few Cheetos in the thicc chicks purse. This makes me ponder life.

Suddenly I’m being ripped out of the purse by a pair of podgy hands. OH BOY am I excited.

Lay me on a table!

Spread me on a DVD case!

Line me up on a laser-disc!

I can’t wait fo-OH GOD JESUS NO!

Thicc lady is laying me out, onto the flaccid, tiny, smegma-stained chode of a man who looks like he’s made of more coke than I am, and not the sort you snort. 

I can taste his essence, I am become smeg. Suddenly, two nostrils are heading towards me.

I pray for death. I pray to be taken into the nasal cavities of these two beached dolphins. But it is not to be.

For the sudden proximity of females to this “man’s” previously untrodden todger proves to be too much for him and he begins to swell gloriously in size, the sudden growth scattering me across the room and mixing me with the red cheesey dust that he calls a “carpet”. His once tiny flaccid member now stands at an impressive 3.6” inches, and I am alone and defeated.

“Is that Cheeto dust?” Wide friend asks.

“Yeh.” Erection Man replies.

“Awesome.” Wide says, and begins to suck the red mist from his chode. Moments later he spews thick rope after rope of pent-up semen into her mouth and shooting across the floor.

Most of it lands on me.

There is no roommate. No-one was telling the truth this day.

I am never seen again. Coke only in name. Cheeto-dust semen now, in chemical makeup. 

Let us pray.So basically my friend and I are going on vacation. My friend wanted to bring some acid for us so he put 5 hits in a piece of gun and wrapped it back up in the tinfoil wrapper. We got "randomly" searched, definitely not a race thing, being Indian and all. Long story short my friend quickly ate the piece of gum because he knew they were going to search everything. Really clutch move. We passed both passed the "random" search and now we're sitting on our plane waiting not knowing what to expect. Am I fucked?  The last 2 I had in my possession. Along with my burner phone with dealers and clients. I'm done. I never saw myself here but I guess you never do until it happens. I did a big line about 5 minutes ago and Idk what happened. I did the line and after just got extremely angry. Angry at myself for ever touching the shit, angry for the thousands of dollars funneled in and out of my hands while I failed to pay bills. 

  Maybe angry isn't the right word. I'm disappointed for sure.  I haven't talked to my mom in months. I chose to go pick up from my dealer instead of plans with my girlfriend last week. She got upset, I was very cold. More cold than I ever thought someone could be but I stole cash from her wallet and left, haven't talked to her since.

  Just before Christmas I frauded 3 banks for massive sig loans which I'm now being sued for. I've abandoned family, friends, even left my dog with my brother sometime last year because I was sick of taking care of him. I've lied to get more, I've stolen to get more, fuck I even pretended to be clean last summer to get money from my mom.

  And then.. then I did that line tonight. It all came out at once. Big marquee style writing yelling, you're a liar, a cheater, a sick twisted fuck. And you did it all for some damn crystals. I'm not proud, I might have been at one point but not now. I'm a 24 year old man with nothing to my  name but some shitty furniture I took from the trash, my iPad, and a few broken pipes.
 
  So now I'm sitting in bed with my tablet shaking as I type this. Haven't eaten a meal since monday? Sunday? Something like that. Haven't showered in a few days. 


And I guess I'm just done. 


  Not sure where I'm going with this, I'm just killing time waiting for my buddy to pick me up so I can go turn myself in for a few petty crimes that I can't just walk away from. So I guess I'll end this here and leave you all be. 

God bless yall. It was fun while it lasted I guess. And  I hate to beat a dead horse but don't fucking touch this shit please.

 I am a housekeeper and today my job was to clean the Pharmacy of the hospital I work at.

They have all types of pills obviously cuz it is a pharmacy. 

I've been sober from hard drugs for over 2 years, the only thing i partake in is smoking weed.

But after picking up the garbage today I found myself sifting through the empty pill bottles to see if they forgot any lorazepam in there like a fucking junkie.

Thank God I didn't find any but it just goes to show I'm a retardExcept the natural high i get knowing today marks 7 months off the needle, and off crack cocaine. In january i celebrated the first birthday i can remember clearly in over 12 years. I have OD'd 6 times, 3 IV cocaine and 3 IV dope/fent od's. Rehab saved my life, i'm eternally grateful to my NA godfather and my family for helping me through this. I'm still smoking weed and drinking a beer every now and then but my life no longer revolves around my next fix. I feel great, much love to all my r/drugs peeps!My dealer sends out an updated price list every 2 weeks of what he has in stock.

Noticed today that you can also buy test kits when you buy MDMA or cocaine.

This should become the norm!This takes places about a year in a half ago. Was tripping with my headphones in when I heard a door slam. Ok it's probably just my girlfriend or my old roommate who knows my side garage code. I take my headphones out and walk out of my room to greet them. I peak around the corner and see some dude in a shitty novelty Halloween mask and I'm like "bro this can't be real"

I run back into my room in a blind frenzy and grab my machete. I feel fucking tribal and I'm seeing red. I walk into my living room and no sign of the guy so I go into my spare bedroom thinking that I'm just tripping balls. Granted the visuals were very intense and it was hard to see anything. Suddenly this guy jumped out of my closet with a baton and hit him as fast as I can right in the head and he goes down holding his head. 

I was about to swing at the dude again when he rips his mask off and starts scrambling away with blood fucking everywhere. He ran for my garage and I was too shocked to give chase. I noticed what I think was a piece of the guy's ear on my floor. I popped 30mgs of Valium to comedown and called the cops to report a break in. 

My house looked like a CSI episode or some shit for the next two hours. They got the dudes DNA and just checked if I was alright psychologically since I had no physical injuries. They left after awhile and I went to bed around 6:00 AM. One of the cops that was at my house hit up my line and told me about how they arrested the guy while he was driving. They found the mask, the baton, a few grams of black tar heroin and paraphernalia with crack residue in it as well as a stolen gun. 

The shit was kinda traumatic so I don't trip on shrooms at my place alone anymore out of some weird paranoia that it'll happen again. Bicycle Day is April 19, commemorating April 19, 1943, when Dr. [**Albert Hofmann**](https://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Albert%20Hofmann)first took LSD intentionally. Three days earlier, he had absorbed a small amount of the drug either through his fingertips or by accidentally ingesting it. On Bicycle Day, he took 250 µg of LSD intentionally and, fearing he had made himself ill, cycled home from his lab. During his [**bicycle ride**](https://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=bicycle%20ride), he experienced the effects of LSD, making this the date of the first ever acid trip. He wrote about his experiments and experience on April 22, which was later put into his book LSD: My [**Problem Child**](https://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Problem%20Child).   
This day (for LSD users) is when they celebrate the discovery and first ever use of the drug   
acid LSD tripI've been with my girlfriend for about a year now and she had a very good friend that she knew since her first college year. Her friend (we will call her "Mary") is a mild religious christian which quickly appeared to me as being very close minded about anything. It was literally her "best friend" or whatever you call best friends these days.

Anyway, I'm into drugs of all kind, never been addicted but I'm definitely a poly-drug user who reads everyday about harm reduction, pharmacology and so on. My girlfriend wasn't into drugs at all before meeting me (besides nicotine and alcohol) but I never hid anything to her and she eventually asked me if we could take MDMA together one of those days. Of course we did, but I specifically asked her not to talk about it to Mary for obvious reasons. She talked about it with many of her friends without issues at all but not to Mary.

The thing is, she eventually did a few months later, and Mary obviously said she was very worried for my girlfriend, that MDMA is bad, that I'm just bad influence for her and she knew all along, and all the classics you can imagine. Actually I don't care because this is not even significant to me and to my girlfriend. However, the issue is that my girlfriend who, by herself, researched a lot about MDMA, said to her that before talking shits, she better do her research. She literally refused and ragequitted.

The next day, we had an event where we would take MDMA together in public for the first time. The morning of the event, as we arrive at the hotel, my girlfriend activates her WiFi and sees tons of messages from her sister. To make it short, Mary, without saying a word, secretly told my girlfriend's sister during the night that she did MDMA and that she should be worried for her little sister, who lives like 700km away from familly. Luckily, her sister knows me and isn't as stupid and did her research when my girlfriend told her to.

My girlfriend is lucky not to have a stupid sister or familly member, but it's not everyone's case. People like her could ruin your relationships with your familly, friends, or ruin your couple, call the cops on you thinking they are doing right and ruin your life or whaveter. So just one thing, please, shut the fuck up.Baseball player Bernie Carbo hit a huge, game-tying home run in Game 6 of the 1975 World Series. Some call this game the greatest ever played in baseball history. This is what he said about what happened prior to his big hit:

"The day of the game I probably smoked two joints, drank about three or four beers, got to the ballpark, took some amphetamines, took a pain pill, drank a cup of coffee, chewed some tobacco, had a cigarette, and got up to the plate and hit."

Edit: Thanks for the awards! :)I’ve never been this lucky in my life. 

So I just got off work, bartending, was trying to go across the street to the bar that stays open later. Clocked out, roll blunt, head to gas station. A fight is about to break out. I watch for 5 minutes while hotboxing. They aren’t fighting, they’re just bullshitting. And I’m chilling here next to them while the cops are probably on the way. I need to leave, they’ll smell me. I dip. Too fast, the cops that were on the way see me pull out and immediate blue light. Shit. I pull into the bar’s parking lot, flick my blunt in front of my truck instead of out the side, stuff my quarter in my crotch and wait to get arrested. I’ve been in this situation before, just a year prior, I know what to expect from smoking and driving. 

The cop comes to my passenger window. Asks for my info and asks if it’s ok to search. I don’t consent, he walks away. Comes back and pulls me out. My weed falls out of my crotch and gets stuck at my kneecap. I try to kick it out of my leg under my truck, it gets stuck in my ankle. Cops immediately ask me what fell out of my truck and start looking around. I feel my weed in my ankle and know they haven’t caught me yet, I play dumb and innocent. 

K-9 unit pulls up. The dog obviously hits, my blunt is still burning in a bush. They find rillo wrappers galore. They know what’s up. I feel my hope leaving me. Body search. 

The pull another 5 packs of rillos out of my pocket, start making comments about it. They go down my left leg.. pats on the weed in my ankle. Lifts my pants leg up. I see the weed slightly dangle above my inner ankle. I wait for the “there it is!”. It falls out. They pat down my right leg. What the fuck is going on? They tell me I’m good. I step back onto the weed. I get my license and insurance back and drop it. Pick my weed up along with the license and insurance. Walk away. Drink beer. Went and found my blunt. Finished it. What the fuck? Went to a performance of Siegfried earlier today. Of course, I wanted to enjoy it so I decided to take 100mg of thc gummies in addition to bringing a few airplane bottles in my jacket pocket. Arrived about a half hour before it started and the edibles were hitting. Feeling good, I decided to go to the restroom to finish all the liquor I brought prior to the show starting.

Ended up passing out on the shoulder of the poor lady sitting next to me. Guess she was too embarrassed to wake me up. Missed the whole thing and finally became conscious again during the standing ovation.

Overall, 10/10 enjoyed fifteen minutes of beautiful singing and got a decent napWell, I put water in my ass with the mushrooms to help with the discomfort  I tried taking a shit and could not no madder how hard I tried. I went to the ER, after waiting 2 hours in the ER room I finally got a called up and got a bed and waited again, for the doctor to come, we discussed what had happened and he immediately brought up gettin an x-ray done, so after the x-ray and analyzing the doctor told me that the mushrooms were acting the a cork in my anus, idk what's going to happen the doctor explained to me there may need to be an operation but just waiting to see what next. Ps. My asshole hurts like a motherfucker still I asked for some painkillers but they ignored me. Probably because there are mushrooms in my ass.[Link](https://www.politico.com/story/2018/03/01/donald-trump-death-penalty-suggestion-opioid-crisis-376176?cid=apn) to Trump's comments.

Dealers selling drugs to 50 maybe 75 people would get executed, and pharmaceutical executives who pump millions of pills into poor communities would continue getting rich.

Make no mistake, this isn't about getting rid of the drug problem... this is about getting rid of the competition.Hey guys, I don't mind if you dont read. I just wrote it cause i feel weird and Idk wanted to share for some peculiar reason. Enjoy, maybe idk. 
Edit: reposted, was posted in opiates. 


Edit: wow thank you all for reading and enjoying. Didn’t realise my little vent would get to so many people. Bless you all. 
&#x200B;

Edit 2: wow thank you everyone for the amazing feedback, heart felt responses and awards. I appreciate you all very much thank you! 

Guess we start when I was young,

my dad leaves, i still have fun.

My mum did great, she raised me well,

she thought this too, no one can tell.

the years pass, the pain it fades

getting stronger for later days.

Mum finds another a decent man

I call him "dad" I am a fan.

&#x200B;

in grade 6 now hes gone too

I scare them off, am I the flu?

Again they leave mum is alone

I spend my days on the phone

Talking, chatting, to my friend so dear

Always happy, to lend an ear.

Mum finds another, from a different state

I follow here, a delayed blate

&#x200B;

New town, new school, new friends I see

Maybe this isnt too bad for me

15 now, and I start to seek

an altered state, escape the bleak

I tell myself its just for fun

I take the tabs, i swallow its done

the next few hours are amazing and bliss

why would people keep me from this

&#x200B;

I realise then that media lies

drugs are fun they don't ruin lives

I order more, I feel so great

I tell some people, share with a mate

Now this is where i slip and fall

down that white rabbits fucking hole

"Hey man come round, got XTC"

I find a lift "Just you and me?"

&#x200B;

We lick the bag and laugh like mad

Rolling, falling, how could this be bad

the come down hits its pretty rough

I soldier through i can be tough

I look online and there I see

A magnificent drug, surely for me!

You get so high, warm and content

they had me there my money is spent

&#x200B;

I try the opiate, warm bliss and glee

No damn comedown, i feel so free

codiene codiene i wish i knew

the propoganda for you was true

this is great how bout oxy

"Even better, you shall see"

grab a pill, down it goes

put a little up my nose

&#x200B;

HOLY SHIT FUCK THIS IS GREAT

I Want to live, in this state

Now come on man, just once a week

felt so easy, future was bleak

I lose my foot, and down i fall

down further the rabbits hole

&#x200B;

I don't know why I still do choose

I take the oxy for fun not blues

The lie manifests deep within

Was it my father, begins with him?

Am I just weak, faint of heart

Atleast no heroin I shall start

&#x200B;

My heart goes out to you alone

Suffering struggling trapped by a stone

deeper than me within the hole

that damn white rabbit, it took my soul.Unless u wanna have great fucking times while creating funny memories that u will carry with u for the rest of ur life LMAOwell started using heroin heavily early november. lost my girlfriend, some best friends, my license, my car. all in less than a month. i signed up for an iop and the night before i started, i copped 2 last bags. well i woke up on my bedroom floor surrounded by emts. don’t really remember much but apparently i had yelled at them, told my mother to fuck herself, and made suicidal threats in the ER. ended up in the psych for 6 days, just got out a couple days ago thankfully. 
when i was found by my mom i was pretty much dead. no vitals, no pulse, no breathing nothing. my step dad ushered my mom and sister out the room and began CPR, he told me he legitimately thought i was dead and was thinking about how he was gonna tell my mom and sister. then 30 seconds in i took a breath and emts rushes in right after that and narcanned me 4 times. 
i’m not really sure why i’m posting this. i guess to tell a story and get it off my chest. haven’t really been the same since it’s happened, haven’t seen any friends. just thankful to be alive and have a warm bed to sleep in. i can’t do this anymore.It’s my day off today, and I wanted to do a lot. Get my apartment clean, pack some boxes for our move, take a shower and wash off my makeup, maybe spend time with somebody. 

Instead, I woke up today, earlier than usual, and just got high. Declined the opportunity to hang out with my mom, I’m just too drained to do it. Went back to sleep. Woke up, watched Bojack Horseman for the 60th day in a row, smoked bowl after bowl, didn’t eat, stayed in bed all day. I’m so sick of feeling helpless with depression and addiction and how they interact to make you feel like the most useless piece of shit to ever live. The disappointment of letting another day pass by like this and realizing if you don’t change you’ll look back on a wasted, regretful, hazy life that you know wasn’t worth living.  Laying in the dark in your pajamas smelling like weed and sweat and failure because you can’t even force yourself to shower.

I don’t wanna be a piece of shit forever.



edit: man. As somebody that comes from a house where mental health and addiction were always dark secrets to hide away, and my pain could never be as bad as my clinically depressed parents, I’m overwhelmed by just seeing the amount of people that relate and sympathize with me. It makes me sad because I know that we’re better than this. Humans are capable of so much and we just get stuck in our own shit and waste it all. I want to look back on my life and be proud, and I want everybody else to say they’ve done the same. Hopefully this time next year I’ll be in school for substance abuse counseling, I’m 21 and tired of wasting my life like this. 

Also, thanks for the gold, I did not expect that lmaoI quit heroin yesterday.

&#x200B;

Don't applaud, I'm still using all kinds of other shit.

&#x200B;

But in the past 48 hours my life has already improved significantly because I haven't got a way to get heroin or oxy anymore due to the quarantine. I suppose there is one person I know, but for once in my life I've had the strength to resist. I'm not sure why.

&#x200B;

Coming off of opiates is a piece of cake by the way compared to GHB/GBL or benzodiazepine withdrawal. It's really made me lose a lot of empathy for anyone that's "dope sick" that I've been around in the past - either at detox facilities or just in life. I've been through tramadol withdrawal in the past and it was certainly not as pronounced as heroin withdrawal, but the symptoms are extremely similar.

&#x200B;

Oh, and on another note, I think it's a perfect time that I quit, because I believe my heart was failing. I'm showing signs of congestive heart failiure and I'm only 29. I'm terrified to turn 30 but at this point I don't even know if I'll make it there.

&#x200B;

Thanks for reading. I really needed to write this and post it somewhere to reassure myself that I'm actually done with opiates. At least the hard ones. Might start kratom just to ease these rapid temperature swings, but I don't want to end up addicted to that as well. God damnit I'm depressed, I hope if you're reading this you're doing better than I am right now. Emotions are a lot more pronounced when you don't have half a gram of dope in you every day to supress them. I wish you good fortune even if you don't wish it for me. Peace for now.Today I faltered.

This is hard to write but the original concept was and is honesty.

I woke up after a full sleep and rushed off to work forgetting breakfast. I stopped at a cafe and got a large flat white. I feel good, or better than I have a layer of fog lifted and the andrenalin chest kicks have simmered away.

I got through work and was fine with clients however by the time the end of day came I was on fire. It felt like a proper fever. 

I went home and slept in a pool of sweat but woke up fiending. My contacts all got the message and know not to take my calls so that wasn't an issue but the pipe was still in the drawer and still enveloped interior wise with the left overs of the last hurrah. 

Tonight it I cleaned it. There wasn't much but it has gone from white to clear. 

I have no intention of buying but I realised that if it's there I will still struggle to say no.

Although I know none of you, the level of embarrassment I feel is unexpected. I will continue, just know that I am not without flaw and I know that all or most of you have probably witnessed this event with someone close and realised it was the beginning of watching someone relapse.

Not this time, but I feel I owe an apology to all of you as the support from this community does actually tug at emotions I never thought possible from a group online.

This is for me, but I will show you tomorrow that a little is for you too.


Again, I'm on the phone and will fix links later.I was making some dinner on 600ug, a buffalo chicken alfredo bake, and boy was that fun. Cooking is awesome on acid. When it got time to add sauce to the noodles I nearly passed out from the sound of it splooging into the bowl. I took a big whiff as I was stirring it in and came for minutes just from the smell alone. Cheese is ecstacy.

Edit: To clarify slightly, I'm a girl. Why are kids doing drugs so young nowadays? Ive seen posts on here about 13 year olds dropping acid. Why would they think thats a cool thing to do? 

I started snorting coke and taking mushrooms at 19 and imo that was too young. And its kind of irritating when i post something with the intent of having a rational drug discussion, then i get comments that are so inaccurate and so misinformed and clearly are from a 13-17 year old thinking they know enough on the topic to make valid points when in reality they do not know what they are talking about. 

Just because a lot of people don't know, when you got resin on your fingers or on your carpet or counter or whatever from cleaning your favorite marijuana pipe, you may be tempted to wash your hands with soap and water and realized quickly that it does not work. Just use some rubbing alcohol dissolves it instantly. Thankyou for tuning in to my public service announcement and good day.
EDIT: for those who cannot get acetone or alcohol, use some warm salty vegetable oil because the oil will pull the oils from the resin, and then rinse out what schooling hot sink water as much as you can it's not ideal but it's something.I cut off all my "friends" to get sober. Here i am like 2 years later, and finally, im not addicted to any pill. I cut out benzos, then opiates, then finally amphetamines, and now nicotine. I just smoke some weed now.

Anyway, now im feeling like im in a better place. But somehow, i totally lost my ability to talk to people. Idk how to connect with anyone anymore, user or not. I get this extreme anxiety ive never gotten before and nothing comes to my mind. I force myself into conversations and its so painfully clear that im different and theres no connection happening.

Idk where to go from here or why i wrote this. Just feeling extra lonely with covid and all that i guess. Maybe someone else has been through this before or is currently.I posted this on TIFU but it got removed so I’m moving it here.

Late Saturday night I was bored so I decided to do some coke to kill some time. Well one thing about coke is that when you do some you crave more. And for some reason, in my world of wonderful ideas, I thought I should try sniffing some flakka I had lying around back when I used to sell it. Same thing as coke right? 

I did a few lines (when  a single dose is supposed to be .1) and felt ecstatic. So ecstatic I decided to download Grindr and have as much gay sex as possible. I’ve never felt any attraction towards men in my life before last night, bear in mind. I ended up finding someone to hook up with and I took an uber to their apartment complex. My phone died as soon as I got there so I spent the next 15-20 minutes knocking on random doors that were close to what I could remember was the apartment number. I ended up walking to the nearest gas station (2 miles away) and charging my phone and then walking back. I found the guys place and proceeded to try to have sex with him. I say try because my dick was not working at all, and had no chance of working. So I ended up giving him head. Fun. After he was thoroughly freaked out and told me to go, I proceeded to find guy 2. 

I found guy 2 and took an uber to his house. Basically the same situation as guy 1. Finished that and went to guy 3, repeat. Except add extortion through (kinda) intimidation in the mix. I ended up bullying the guy out of $20. Thank god he didn’t call the cops, otherwise we wouldn’t have gotten to the final guy, guy 4. 

After getting rejected from multiple hotels for looking like the crackhead that I was, I found one and met guy 4. Guy 4 was a little different. He wanted me to humiliate him and tie him up. Never been into bondage but hey I guess on bath salts anything is possible. So ended up doing that for a little while. After unsuccessfully finding someone else for the night I decided to call it quits and head home.

I’m still uncoordinated and very scared I may have caused irreparable brain damage. This has been the worst two days of my life. 

TL:DR Snorted bath salts, went on a wacky gay adventure, possible brain damage.


Update: feeling pretty much back to normal at this point, thank you bath salt jesus. I feel no real attraction to men at this point again so I’m not sure I’ll be experimenting anymore. Thank you guys for readingHe texted me yesterday morning saying he was going to trip and he wanted some good luck and blah blah blah. He went dark the whole day, and at around 10:00 that night he calls me, stuttering, contradicting himself, and just not talking well in general. Which is nothing like him, he is usually the most in control of all of us. We move to the dms.

He kept saying his head felt hot, his brain was melting, his sleeping pills weren’t working (he took 5), and a lot of other stuff. So I took to reddit and asked for advice (I’m 38,000 miles away rn) and it was just too late. He didn’t want to go to the clinic, or wake up his parents because he was tripping. He said he was going to call me after he took a shower, and I waited, and waited.

I went to bed hoping he was alive, and saying “it can’t be too bad”. I woke up this morning to a call, from him! I pick it up and his mom is screaming at me asking if I knew, she read our conversation on his phone when she found him. I hung up. I can’t deal with this right now. I feel for his mom but I feel most for him. He was finishing school and was going to break up with his junkie girl, and get a better job. He had just came back from a trip to LA last month.

This is not an isolated incident, in South America, dealers are giving their customers 25-i or other research chemicals to save a quick buck. It is an epidemic to the proportion of fake THC carts here. I will be making a full detailed post about this problem that has taken my friend from me. Thank you all for everything, peace out y’all. 

RIP Luke, you will always be my boy, in life or death

Edit: noticed some comments about the font but don’t know how to change it. Sorry

EDIT: with the 38,000 miles thing, I typed this literally an hour after I found out and didn’t care enough to research the distance, so if you wanna be a stickler look it up yourself. NYC- South America. SmhEdit: well this blew up. This is the account I made 2 years before I got out of that house. I've detailed pretty much everything that's gone on and haven't deleted much. I swear if I had listened to my mother and stayed away from online support groups like /r/raisedbynarcissists, I'd probably still be in that house. I thought I'd die in that house. Nothing on this earth could be worse than that house. Not homelessness, not poverty, not disability, not isolation. It was really rough for a while, but even at my lowest points the abuse was worse. Anyway. 


I rolled you over one night when I walked in and found you were face down, half hanging off the bed. 

I'll always remember the look on your face.

Your pineyed smile. 

# "Live fast, hard, and dangerous" is what you slurred out. 

I'm sure you don't remember that, but I always will

It felt like I always was forced to watch you get fucked up. 


I'd watch you drink, we'd smoke together, hell the only reason you had enough pills to get a nod even once with your insane tolerance was because you were using me, your disabled son, to get pills. 

On top of your scripts you got the entire time you lied to me and told me you weren't getting "what you needed". While you had your eldest son bringing home a suitcase filled with NSAID/caffeine cut opioids from his study abroad trip to Ireland. While you had your "apocalypse stash" of decades worth of your stashed scripts.

You know what's funny, by the time I was removed from the house by police, that box didn't have a lot of bottles with your name on them, but for some reason it had a lot with mine. 

While you were keeping a dying cancerous dog alive, watching her wake up crying and not give her the tramadol because "she hates the taste". I genuinely am not sure if she kept that dog alive crying and screaming as a calculated way of getting the liquid tramadol, but she sure got 2+ bottles of it just fine. 


I don't know how the rest of my family is still under her spell. 

I have recordings where she admits to everything and sounds like an abusive maniac, but I guess gaslighting really can be that powerful. I didn't tell the cop to search the house even though I knew you had prescriptions for morphine and fentsnyl in my name in your bathroom and a fuck load of weed. 

Bitch, I watched you in one day eat an entire bottle of 30mg Morphine left behind by your own dead mother and still be in withdrawal.

I watched as  a low dose of Kratom immediately sent you into withdrawal and had you running to the bathroom shitting green. 

You'd bang on my door after midnight when I'd hide in my room to get away from seeing you so fucked up and belligerent. You'd yell through the door asking me to come smoke a joint and come out to the hot tub room. 

This isn't even the half of it. I can't believe this isn't fiction. That I didn't see sooner. 

Everyone else seemed to, as I was 13 when my girlfriends mother told me that you were not just using painkillers to manage pain. 

Drinking on painkillers, which you did liberally and openly, is a dead giveaway. That's what countless people explained to me over the years. If I ever told you about anyone who said that, you immediately began a campaign of personal attacks and sly, manipulative bullshit to try to get me to stop talking to them. Hell, you immediately hated my ex in college when you found out I actually asked her if she would bring home pills from her trip to Ireland, which you said offhandedly when I was sitting in your bed watching TV with you. 

Some nights I wonder what would have happened if I had never rolled you over.

I can only guess that the reason you went off the deep end was the pills you stole from me. Your supply was nothing compared to what it was when you were able to coach and manipulate me into getting a mountain of opioids, benzos, and muscle relaxers. So it's a useless thought experiment, because you only got to the deep end because I happened to be disabled and also your son

Maybe if I had just let you sleep on all those nights I came into your room and rolled you over and saw those glazed over pineyes, this would be easier. 

Everyone would've stopped believing the lies. Your narcissistic bullshit wouldn't work anymore. I'd look at my brothers and sisters, friends and family, and tell them "I fucking told you so" and hope they come out of this spell without her here to manipulate them. . 

Not much would've changed.  You were already dead to me by the time I left that hellhole of a drug house, so I wouldn't be mourning your loss any differently. 

I'd have had closure.Had a cousin die couple months ago, found in his gaming chair. 32 years old. Never addicted to anything but weed. I don't even think he smoked anymore. Nobody understood why this happened. He was super healthy and held a weight lifting record for an age group in his state when he was younger. He never smoked cigarettes, never did hard drugs, but went through 2-3 years of lung cancer therapy, a long hard battle... he beat it. Been cancer free for at least 6 months, Anyways they finally got back the info from the autopsy today. Fentanyl... They gave him oxy through his cancer treatments. They stopped. Not sure of details. So he either got bad street pain meds, or got fent. He never used needles and didn't go out that way. That shit killed him after he beat so much. He left 2 kids behind. 2 great kids. This fentanyl can kill anyone. If you are doing it, you will die, it's just a matter of when. Please don't fuck with this shit y'all. Don't. This was a person that I know in my heart did not want to be doing this. And it had to be subtle enough for everyone not to even notice there was an issue. But he is now gone. I hope reading this it may help someone.Edit : All this next stuff is kind of irrelevant, it’s why he’s a bad mod but he’s actually been outed for far worse stuff now which I’m not allowed to link but people have in the comments...

I’ve browsed this sub for several years, it’s probably even saved my life as this where I learnt most the harm reduction I know. So eventually I decide I’ll make an account, I have some questions about things, some trip reports and I was really looking forward to documenting my experience with Collybia maculata. (It’s a novel psychedelic mushroom which acts on the same receptors as salvia does, very little info out there)

But unfortunately my first post got on the wrong side of the mod, I didn’t even break any rules.

https://www.reddit.com/r/Drugs/comments/ly050b/me_and_my_friends_all_got_spiked_with_a_pcp/gpq09uu/?utm_source=share&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;utm_medium=ios_app&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;utm_name=iossmf

He literally made some wrong assumptions, got called out for it, got pissed of and refused to unban my post.

So I posted again and in the comments explained the situation, https://www.reddit.com/r/Drugs/comments/lye4w7/me_and_my_friends_all_got_spiked_with_a_unknown/gpsn38u/?utm_source=share&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;utm_medium=ios_app&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;utm_name=iossmf

He allowed the first few people to respond after that anyone else would get either their comment removed or they would get banned from the sub for 99 days and muted.

This is all disappointing, petty, power tripping and low key harassing the sub he’s supposed to look after


But then I go to post about Collybia maculata, I’m really excited to post about this as this is uncharted territory and I’m one of the first people to try this novel substance but of course the mod just bans it in a from of petty revenge.

https://www.reddit.com/r/Drugs/comments/lzav0t/finally_obtained_some_mushrooms_which_work_on_the/?utm_source=share&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;utm_medium=ios_app&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;utm_name=iossmf

His reason ? ‘There's no human data, and you likely have no idea how much of the active ingredient is present in your mushroom, which doesn't help either.’ 

What rule does that break lmao, you don’t think I know that... why I’m posting on Reddit to try and get some more information.


Edit : Someone commented this 

https://www.reddit.com/r/Drugs/comments/lxjaoq/why_the_fck_my_libido_and_erections_dont_come/?utm_source=share&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;utm_medium=ios_app&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;utm_name=iossmf

https://www.reddit.com/r/Drugs/comments/lyvzry/what_subreddit_can_help_me/?utm_source=share&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;utm_medium=ios_app&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;utm_name=iossmf

Edit : Be careful what you comment because no doubt the secret police are watching this ready to remove anyone who is too critical lmao

Edit : They unbanned this post !

Edit : U/Juan_Dollar_Taco has been sadly banned for 14 days after he said ‘fuck you Roi’

Edit : A mod has posted a post which complains about the sub, in this exact sub. He’ll probably delete it soon. 


https://www.reddit.com/r/Drugs/comments/lzukrg/the_mods_here_suck/?utm_source=share&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;utm_medium=ios_app&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;utm_name=iossmf

He either deleted it or roi banned it, there’s no way of knowing

Edit : I will get banned if I post the link for this so had to delete it.

But fucking hell, now this actually pisses me off and loses any respect that I had for him. Coming from someone who’s lost close family to opioids.

That’s fucking disgraceful. Should be fucking ashamed. Gone from being a dick to a low life piece of shit, if he said something like that to my parents idk if I’d be able to hold myself back. That shit is fucked up don’t ever talk to the parents of someone who just lost their kid like that. Ever.

I was almost feeling sorry for the mod until I saw that. It’s one of the most horrific things to lose family to an over dose. Someone you watched grow, someone you’ve loved your entire life and then their just gone. You don’t even get to say goodbye. Part of you dies with them and to see someone talk to a grieving family like that brings me real sadness.

Edit: I’m banned permanently. All because that paragraph above is apparently threats of violence lmao, I assume it means this ‘if he said something like that to my parents idk if I’d be able to hold myself back.’ It’s a hypothetical though and I’m not sure how that could be possibly viewed as a threat.

I was on reddit for only 2 days and managed to get on the wrong side of the mods, then had a post blow up exposing them and then got permanently banned.On December 13, 2017 I was sitting in jail, dope sick. It smelled like a YMCA swimming pool. I was 21 years old, and didn’t have a thing to my name, but a bag of needles and a little bit of heroin and meth; for some lucky reason they didn’t find it in my jacket when they did my intake at the jail house. I had track marks covering my arms, with hepatitis infected blood, dried at the injection sites. My clothes were dirty, and my hair was greasy. My dad bailed me out of jail. I remember when I got in the car, I was already mixing up a concoction of heroin and meth in the jailhouse parking lot. I was so sick I didn’t even care that I was doing it right in front of my bails-bondsman, much less my dad. 

I saw a look of regret wash over the bail bondsman’s face, when she saw what I was doing. She probably didn’t think I would show up to court. I didn’t think I would either. Little did I know, that this would be the last shot of dope I would do. I was homeless, and I survived one day at the time. One shot at the time. I supported my drug habit by scheming, scamming, stealing, and begging on a daily basis, and this had been my life for the past 3 years. I was 100% dependent on methadone, heroin, and meth. I used every single day. I used to live, and I lived to use. This tragedy called life, was an everyday struggle for me, and I was sick and tired, of being sick and tired. 

My father gave me an ultimatum. He told me that if I didn’t go and live with him and get clean, my mom was taking her car back from me, which is understandable, and they were going to have nothing to do with me. He told me he wasn’t going to pay the bails bondsman, and they would issue a warrant for my arrest, and I would sit in jail, and nobody would bail me out. I imagined the amount of methadone that had accumulated in my bone marrow from using it everyday for the past 3 years. I would be dope sick for over 2 months. I couldn’t imagine sitting in jail, and being sick for that long.  One month in jail, would be a death sentence for me. I’m certain I would have hung myself if I had to come off the methadone cold turkey. 

He told me that if I came and lived with him, he would take me to the methadone clinic everyday, he would keep me stocked with Newport’s and food, and all I had to do, was stay away from the dope, and he would take care of the rest. Looking at my options, I would be dumb to turn it down. My dad understands addiction, he was a crackhead my entire childhood, and at the time of him telling me this, he only had 6 months clean.

He told my this was my last chance, and if I relapsed he would kick me out. I couldn’t believe how “anti-drug” he had became in the past 6 months. Only 6 months ago, me and him were smoking crack and meth together, and going on robbing sprees, to feed our demons. I was shocked at the hypocrisy he was presenting. I took him up on his offer. I slept 18-20 hours a day for 6 months straight. Everyday. You’d be surprised at how long it takes to recover from a 3 year meth/heroin binge.

I’m 1 year clean today. I have a great job, I have an amazing Bulldog, and a bearded dragon. I’ve gained 80 lbs since I got clean. Life is good. I’m content. I never thought I would be able to do this; I was the biggest junkie I knew. I’m so grateful I’m not shooting dope today, and living the life I was living one year ago. Congrats to anyone else who is clean, and to all the addicts who are still suffering; you can do this. If I can get clean, **anyone** can get clean. Much love. 

I've promised her I will stop taking drugs in the house as it was become a problem, cocaine and speed in particular .  I've been doing good but she seems to think kiwi at 7am is a sure tell sign of being on drugs!! never mind the paranoia or energy.  Kiwi at 7am is how you can tell!

She still doesn't believe me so I might as well just take drugs. Well, it’s all there in the title really. Fuck else is there to say? I was tripping last night on a heroic dose of shmarknet tabs and as I fell into ego death territory I reached for my trusty fleshlight Roxanne. As I was pumping away, a new feeling of love and acceptance came over me. I unleashed years’ worth of semen into her, possibly even a few of the first sperm that I ever produced as a teen. I love her, and I can’t get her off my mind or out of my pocket. Today I snuck away at church to pump off some more...I’m worried where this might lead me. 

Idk, AMA?When I was a toddler, my dad was a young 20 year old army soldier. He had been training me since the day I was born to be like him, a strong masculine man that doesn't take shit from anyone and isn't dragged down by emotions, those are for women. My parents got divorced very soon after, and I've lived with my mother ever since.  
In primary school, I always had to be the best at everything.  
I was the best at arm wrestling, I was the fastest reader and generally both physically and intellectually gifted, nothing too extraordinary though. I couldn't stand the idea that someone could be better than me at anything.  
This was only propelled by all the adults in my environment constantly telling me what a smart boy I was and praising me for every small achievement.

Eventually my ego got the best of me, I was not even aware of how bad things got until I'd lost all of my best friends one year ago. I was being a manipulative, narcissistic cunt, and worst of all I constantly told myself that it was everyone else's fault. They were either weak and deserved being manipulated or I was the true victim for one reason or another, but I was never to blame or to be accountable for my actions.

I am 19 now and lsd has helped me get a better perspective on how to treat others, and treat yourself.  
I regret all the bad things I've done and I haven't been sleeping, knowing how much I've hurt those around me, they deserve better than that. But we must move forward and learn from our mistakes. I feel like I am slowly recovering from my father's indoctrination and am learning empathy, but sometimes I just wonder if I'd do the world a favour by living in seclusion, in an old cabin in the woods somewhere.So a friend of mine from class and I were on our way out of class after school to smoke some weed.
This girl from class asks if we’re going out to smoke
I don’t mind people knowing and I just say yeah.
She shakes her head and says “good luck having a future, I honestly hope you get a psychosis and jump in front of a bus”
I just laugh it off but it made my friend kinda uncomfortable and killed the vibe. 

Don’t be that personJesus christ people, this shit can be life and death. Value your life enough to do your research before you take something, not after. Start with small dosages, look up interactions, know your own body enough to know whats dangerous. Im so tired of people taking something only to then stop and think "huh i wonder if what I just did was safe, i guess i should go ask a bunch of internet strangers, many of which probably have a highschool level knowledge of biology at best". This shit isnt a game, dont treat it like one.

Edit: i realize that the first things google will show are abstinence only rehab and recovery sites. If you need info, go to psychonautwiki, tripsit.org, erowid, dancesafe. All are good resourcesI did a lot of coke lines and now I feel pissed. Everything is silent, time is moving slow. I'm tired. I don't feel like doing anything. I feel like the biggest douche bag lol. 

I never liked coke but I did love uppers when I was younger.

When I'm on a downer everything is chill, it feels so good. I love nodding off. 

But nothing beats sober. Everything is balanced. I'm thinking of quitting drugs for good. All my problems came from my actions but most of it was linked with drugs. I can't wait till this comedown is done.Hey everyone,

it's been 1.5 years now since I've stopped to consume psychoactive substances for recreational reasons, and I had some time for reflection recently and realized how much of a topic it was for me growing into my 20s, and that it would have been really helpful to have a guiding hand at times. For a young boy, like I was, when I had my first hit of acid with 17, it can sometimes be quite tricky to navigate the environment you're getting yourself into.

That's why I created this guide, in the hopes that it will assist one or two people, in not losing the bigger picture while going through all the craziness that drug exploration can bring with it.

**1. Know what you're getting into**

Drugs are fun. I get that. There are plenty of reasons to take them, some better, some worse. In the end, I urge everyone to take a deep and brutally honest look at their motivations behind this 'hobby'.I've seen friends on drugs discover a beautiful philosophy, that changed their life forever, and people getting lost for years in a dark abyss, somewhere in the depths of their minds. Often, in the beginning, it was the first, and a few years later the second.

**2. Why Drugs are fun**

Drugs can help you to make new friends, explore different emotional states, and view the world from a new point of view. It can forever change your philosophy of life, and often in a good way. You might see the beauty in little things, where there was darkness before. You might understand how much you’re parents love you, and how everything they ever did was just to protect you, no matter how bad it hurt for you.

**3. Why drugs are risky**

Let’s be honest, drugs can completely destroy a life. I've seen it times and times again in people close to me, and I see it on the streets of my city day by day.

If you’re not careful, this is a monster that will swallow you whole. While it’s not as easy as the old TV Commercials were trying to sell us, you do it once and your done, it’s more of a gradual process.

I would say though, that for most urban kids doing these substances, the story of falling into an addiction to living on the street, is not really that big of a risk. More so, I observe the issue of people making these substances their main focus of life and elevating them to a quasi god-given gift. You just have to look at the modern Hip-Hop scene, and you’ll know what I am talking about.

People get so sucked into this lifestyle of going out and being high, that they completely forget about building something for themselves.

Parties, Sex, Netflix. It is easy to give away your identity to a culture that works on consuming. When your in that whirlwind of distractions, it can be fun to ride the hedonistic waves for a while, but be aware that at some point reality is going to hit and you will want to know what you’re going to do with the rest of your life. Some people just get stuck in the ‘forever young’ mode, going out for coke and beer at the age of 45.

**4. Taking care of your body**

**-Eat well!**

If you do drugs, in the days where you don’t do them, you need to take care of your body.  Eat lots of replenishing foods, in this case, that means, eggs, good oils (olive, flax,…), fish, whole grains, meat (if you're not vegetarian), and lots of freshly cooked vegetables.

This is non-negotiable!! See it like this… You’re doing a trade with your body, you consume substances on the weekend, which take a lot of resources out of your system, so you have to put back in some nourishing stuff. Otherwise, your body will start to rebel, and your in for a ride that can range from muscle cramps to hellish depression.

**-Move your body!**

If you party a lot, your body needs some exercise. Don’t let drugs become the only thing in life that gives you joy. Enjoy the endorphins of a good run, or after a good session in boulder-climbing.

There’s a whole bunch of physically engaging arts that are hugely beneficial for the development of every human being. The best choice is anything that engages the mind-body connection. Go to dancing or martial arts classes. Go climbing. Do Yoga or Qi Gong. Anything that encourages your mind to come down into your body, and builds a whole-body connection is the way to go. Imagine your body feeling as fluid as fish in the water.

I can promise you, not only will these arts increase your health, but they will also change the way your identity works. By increasing the connection between our mind and body, we are literally expanding our consciousness and grounding it into the physical realm of nature.

Getting into my body is the #1 most important thing I ever did to ground myself back into my body after years of mind-boggling psychedelic journeys.

**5. Finding a Purpose**

This is probably the most important part, which will ultimately determine everything else. At some point, you will notice, and you may be even had glimpses of it before, that there is more to life than just immediate hedonistic satisfaction. You will realize, that there is a part inside of you, that wants to build something bigger than yourself. There are different goals, while the most common one is probably business, there is also the great goal of walking down that ancient path of spiritual fulfillment. I say both parts can be part of life, both can give you satisfaction, and both have their traps built into them.

To me, that's what eventually pulled me out of going deeper into these substances, as I started to have a vision of how I want my life to be, and there simply was no version, where drugs could be part of it.

Don't worry, if your young, you don't have to choose just yet. Just be sure to keep building some sort of skill, and don’t stress too much about the bigger picture. It will come eventually, I can guarantee you that. Just keep building something!

**FINE**

That's it, I actually majorly edited some parts out, as I thought it was going into too much detail, on things that were a bit off-topic.

Feel free to leave some questions, comments, how it is/was for you with drugs in your 20s, and if you feel you can handle purpose and drugs?!

Cheers!

**-UPDATE-**

Wow, this post really blew up!

Thanks to everyone, who took the time to read, and to those sharing their stories. It's always interesting to hear people's experiences, and how so many of us go through similar shit.

I think a lot of the guide is actually common sense - but maybe something we can forget while caught up in the craziness of life.

Btw I love writing this kind of stuff, so if some people actually enjoy it, I might create some more in detail posts on some of the points, as soon as the muse hits.

**Be well everyone!**I’ve been addicted to opiates for about 6 years but for the past 3 years I was an IV heroin and meth addict and I got high everyday, and when I say everyday I mean **everyday**. (I also went to a methadone clinic) For the first year I had a good job and was able to afford it but I eventually lost my job which led me to doing all kinds of things to make money , and many I’m not proud of...I know I’m a shitty person for doing these things , and I know its wrong...I’m 5 months clean off heroin and meth so I no longer do this stuff, but I just want to tell my story on how I mostly supported my habit , some may find it interesting . 

Every so often my mom would give me a little money here and there, but definitely not enough to support the habit I had , so I had to come up with ways to make it myself . The most easiest way I made money, and what I did the most , was simply driving my best friend around . I dated this girl about 6 years ago , but we figured out we were better just as friends, and we both got strung out on drugs together . She was the first person I injected drugs with . I’m 21 and she’s 28.

As we got bad off in our addiction she became a prostitute...she lived with her father in the ghetto and had 2 kids . During the day from when they got out of school and until they went to bed around 9pm she was usually at home with them, but from 9pm
Until 7:00 am when they had to catch the bus, is when she worked . 

I would take her on outcalls all night long , and the deal was , we keep gas in the car , keep cigarettes, and the rest goes on heroin and we split it 50/50 . She didn’t do meth , just heroin . She charged 160$ an hour , 120 for a half hour , or 80 for a q.v. 95% of the calls were q.v’s. 

A q.v. stands for “quick view” and it basically means , just long enough to make the guy cum, so in most cases a q.v. only ranged from 5-15 minutes no longer. For us, it was the best deal because she could knock them out really fast , and we could get a half gram of heroin for 80$ and that was enough to start us out for the night . 

If we didn’t have dope you could talk her down to 60$ for a q.v. and if we were dopesick she would do it for 40$, but that was rare...it’s definitely happened a few times , but only if we were desperate . We always mixed all the heroin up together and split it between two syringes . She usually got anywhere from 3-10 calls a night . 3 would be a slow night and 6 would be an average night , and 10+ would be a good night. Most nights we would make around 200 being the lowest, 400-600 being normal, and 1000+ being a good night . We’ve made $2000 a few nights , but that was very rare . Luckily we never had any trouble with the police, did have *alot* of sketchy dealings though . 

I never went dope sick when I was rolling with her , we might of woke up dope sick , but it didnt stay that way for long . For some reason , people don’t do much during the day time , it would be pretty rare for her to go on a call during the day time , it was mostly always from 2am-5am. Some days she wouldn’t have good luck and we’d have to do other things .

There’s been many occasions where we would wake up sick , and have no money or anything . In those cases, I would drive my car from gas station to gas station and ask people for “gas money”. I was *very* good at talking to people , and selling my story...of course not everyone gives you money , but for the most part , I was always able to get what I needed . Out of all my friends , I was the best at doing this , because I’m pretty quick on my feet , I’m able to look people right in the eye and tell them a 100% bullshit story ,not stutter one word, and make them believe it...

I mostly sold the same story everytime...”I’m almost out of gas , left debit card at home , do you have 1 or 2 dollars I could have for gas , or even any change...I’m just trying to make it home, anything counts.” There’s small things you can do to ‘sell your story’ like look for change in your car while your talking to them, carry a gas jug etc. Depending on the person , the story would vary , but to make it short that’s it . I could always make 40$ in 2 hours max , but most of the time within 1 hour . That’s all we ever needed, was just 40.

If I didn’t feel like begging , (because it’s degrading), and somedays I just wasn’t up for it , I would go to Walmart . My golden rule was to never walk out with something you didn’t pay for...as long as you paid *something*.  There is a box of vitamins in Walmart that are 34$ for one box , and there is another kind that’s the same brand name for 4$. I would peal the barcode off of the 4$ box and place it over the top of the 34$ box barcode and go to the self checkout . Hell sometimes I would go to a regular checkout...I’ve never been caught doing this.

You can return *anything* to Walmart without a receipt, *but* you must have an ID...you can get a cash refund for any item under 40$ and anything over 40$ you will get a gift card . I would buy a box for 4$ and take it to another Walmart and return it for 32$ as long as somebody had their ID...you can only do it 3x a month, but I always got a friend or somebody to return it . 

If you have a receipt you don’t need an ID, so when I didn’t have an ID I would find a receipt for something around 30$ in the parking lot , go in and put a cheap barcode over the top of the items barcode, buy whatever it was for around 3$-5$ and return it with the receipt and get cash back . 

If I needed a bunch of money , I would go to the fishing pole section , and get a 100$ fishing pole , and peel the barcode off of a 15$ pole , and put it over the 100$ poles barcode . Return the pole at another Walmart and get a 100$ gift card , and then go to the Walmart gas pumps , and find somebody that would pay me cash to pump their gas for them . It’s kind of lengthy , but I could earn a couple hundred bucks a day doing that . 

It sounds goofy replacing the barcode , but it’s just *wayy* easier to get caught actually stealing something , than it is to “buy” it . I’ve done this hundreds of times and never have been caught once, but you can’t be obvious about it , and you have to be slick , or you will get caught.

We ate fast food everyday and 75% of the time we didn’t pay for it . I’d call and tell a restaurant I came last week and got such and such , and was missing one burger , and that I was coming for a replacement . I’d always tell them that I called back that same day , and talked to somebody and they wrote my name down...give them a fake name . You can only ask for one burger though...if you get greedy it won’t work.

The trick is , you have to be confident , and talk to them like it really happened...you can’t be sketchy , or iffy about it , you just have to be able to talk fast , and make them actually believe it...I was great at this...it would work 7/10 times...every time we did pay for food , we kept the receipt , so when we called and fed them the story , we could actually have a receipt and then it would *definitely* work. We survived off of this .

Of course we pawned all of our stuff of any value , and did a lot of middle manning , but these are just a few stories of some of our schemes that people don’t usually hear about .

I know all this is shady stuff , and I’m ashamed of it...and I know it’s wrong , but desperate times call for desperate measures...a hard drug addiction will make you do some terrible things , you’d never do in your right mind...there’s no need to comment on here and tell me I’m a piece of shit lowlife junkie , because I already know that...

I just figured a lot of people would be curious how a lot of junkies are able to make money on the streets for drugs without a job , and this is how a lot of them make it...a lot of people I know and hang around with do these same things ...most of my friends like robbing houses and stealing, and robbing people for drugs, but I never liked taking things from somebody...a multi-million dollar corporation? Yeah I don’t care , but as far as breaking in a persons house and taking all their stuff, and robbing people for their dope Nah...

I’ve been ripped off before , and I’ve worked a hard labor job for almost 4 years so I know how it is to work hard for something and then have it stolen from you , and it’s the worst feeling ....I don’t do shit like that...I could easily make more money by breaking in houses and cars and robbing people for dope , or “robbing tricks” which is what a lot of prostitutes do , but I just wasn’t okay with doing that...Hope y’all enjoy .

Trees are so weird, they're like big and tall. Real good looking plants with a lot of races. And they're like gnarly growing at the sun. Like the sun is a big dude and the trees are just coming at him. Even the small trees are tough sons of bitches making a move at the sun. Their skin is all hard and cracked and flavorless. I like to think I can grow up to be like a tree. Confident enough to try and take on the sun. But I'm way shorter than trees are and not as good looking. I bet nobody ever saw me and thought, that dude is a tree at heart. Maybe I'm like a grass or something. Not grass like weed but grass like grass. The one that's in the ground you know? Google trees are so weird they die every winter and then are reincarnated as the same thing. That is so weird and then they got dudes living in them. Luke a squirrel or rabbit home is the trees. Isn't that weird Google? Thank you for typing me phone. Phone stop listening. Phone shut off.

Edit: just want to say thanks for all the appreciation guys. My trip has ended but it was good. Me and the trees wish good vibes and trips to all of youHey everyone, I recently decided to go vegan, I am also a methamphetamine user. I’m really concerned about this because I’m committed with my new vegan lifestyle and I don’t want it to be ruined by my substance abuse. 
So, does anyone know if meth is vegan? 

Pd: sorry for the bad redaction/grammar I’m not a native english speaker

Edit: Yes, I am aware of the danger I’m exposing myself with my consumption of methamphetamine
I just wanna know if it’s vegan

Final edit: I truly appreciate all of your responses, I want to clarify that I genuinely care about all of the people that are victims of the violence that results from drug cartels, I also care about my health, that’s why I had already quit but I relapsed a few days ago, I know it’s gonna take a while till I can be totally clean again, that’s why I’m so concerned about wether it’s vegan or notThe first time I smoked weed it felt like a literal acid trip.
The first time I used benzos I felt true peace for the first time.
The first time I took Adderall I felt like a T1000 Terminator.


Drug tolerances suck. Your body is just like "woah we noticed you were having fun and we can't let that happen again."Hey errybody. I'm still holding, hurting like a bitch but I'm holding. My body feels like a bit of a trainwreck atm... blah blah blah, bitch bitch bitch.. 
I almost relapsed a couple times so I'll tell you about those two moments.

1. My plug calls me and tells me that they just got some new shit that's "fkin fire". They rarely call unless they really do have some premium shit. It always seems to be at a time when i can't pick up; like when  I'm outta town, outta money, with the girl, and now.. when I've decided to quit. He kind of caught me off guard so i told him I'd call him back and hung up. The body aches doubled right then and there. My mind was like, "you heard the guy, get your money and lets gooooo," but i fought it. God dammit i fkin fought it... here's where a half tab of xanax helped me out. Made me quiet down after 20 minutes of poppin it.

Got some sleep. 5 or 6 hours later...

2. Woke up and felt okay. Still experiencing WDs but I'm okay, god dammit. I guess I turned on my stereo at some point before i took my 6 hour nap?! Fkin Xanax will do that shit to you. So i get up and now I'm sitting on my bed, listening to the radio. Feeling kinda blank from the xan but at the still feeling sorry for myself. 

The thought of picking up some H pops into my brain. I think i was in this state of mind for about 20 minutes, hard to say. Just sitting there spacing out, unsure of whether to pick up some of that sweet, sweet heroin goodness. I decide against it and stare off for another 5 mins until, guess what starts to play??? "I Wanna Be Sedated" by The Ramones. FUCK... that's when i knew.. yep for fucking sure.. the Devil is real, and he wants me to do Heroin. I turned that radio shit off and just curled up into a ball for a good 30 minutes.

Dark moments like these are fked man... but i know when I'm sober and good, it'll be something to laugh about. It's really heartbreaking at the moment thought. Super dark and desperate. Fkin addict that i am.. anyways..

I got my Seinfeld box set running now. It's cold and raining outside so I'm just here huddled in my blankey. My bones feel like they hurt but it's kind of manageable i guess. The shit comes in waves. Haven't ate anything other than some corn nuts and a cold glass of chocolate milk. Sugar seems to help a lot. Body's asking for any kind of high, even a sugar boost.

I dunno what else to tell you lol. Just trying to count my blessings and keep at it. Thanks again to all of those who showed me support in these posts.Once or twice a month i post a story from my past on this sub reddit. Not looking for upvotes, i post to entertain and hopefully make people laugh. 

So last night i had mentioned that my buddy tricked me into doing ketamine on a date, telling me it was cocaine.

The reason he did this was because i "technically" tricked him into doing heroin one time. 

Let me explain. 

It all started out as a typical Saturday. Alcohol and plenty of cigarettes. My buddy came over and wanted to do some xanax. So i called my plug/buddy and he pulled up with a few 4mg pressed bars. Thinking my plug/buddy was bullshitting us about the bars being 4mgs, we took 3 quarters of a bar each. 

When it hit us, we had a good amount of alcohol in us at the time and it hit us like a brick shit house. We were xanned the fuck out. 

So then we decided to get some MDMA. We took about 300mg each. 

Then my plug/buddy who tossed us the bars messages me saying he's got some ice and heroin. I didn't have any money left so my plug/buddy said he'd come through with a point of H. 

Now, my plan was to go into my apartment and go straight to the bathroom and snort half the point in there without my buddy knowing because he had never done or seen heroin and he was fucked up so he would probably want to do some. 

So i get in my plug's car and he passes me the bag of H. There was a hole in the bag so half the point fell on my shorts. I railed it off my shorts and was feeling the H pretty good. I asked my buddy for another bag but he was out so i had to hold the fucking bag all the way up to my apartment. 

Without being able to hide the bag of H in my pocket, i tried a stealth move b line to my bathroom but my buddy turned and saw me holding the bag. 

He said, "What's that?" I didn't want to tell him it was heroin because i didn't want him to know i did H, and i was scared that he was already so messed up that he would want the H. So i told him it was coke. Bad idea. 

He told me he wanted some. I said no but he started begging me for it in a very annoying way. I kept denying him the privilege. Then i put the half point on the table and was checking my phone when i heard the sniff. 

I look up and he has his head straight up  with the rolled up bill in his nostril. Then he puts the bill down and sinks into his chair. He says, "Wow." Then i told him it wasn't coke and that he just snorted heroin. He said, "Really?" I'm like, "Yep." And he just looked at me and said, "Not bad." And that was that. Even when he sobered up he wasn't mad at me at all.

But he knew that one day he would have to get me back. Because if it weren't for me he would of never railed a decent bump of heroin. So, 6 months later thats when he tricked me into doing ketamine on a date. That's it folks. It's not like i'm some evil savage that tricks people into getting addicted to heroin. He has never done heroin since so i did no damage and i didn't legitimately try to make him do heroin. 


Well, that was a mistake.

&#x200B;

First of all, nitrous (NO^(2)) is a really safe and fun drug when used responsibly, and boofing DOES make a lot of drugs stronger, but, there are a lot of issues that I encountered when trying to combine the two. Based on my recent experience, I do not recommend boofing whippets ever.

It seems that for some reason, when trying to boof gas into your butt, it does not produce a heightened effect like putting solid drugs does. Not sure if other people trying this will have a different experience. But I do NOT recommend trying this AT ALL. However, I will say that it produced a very interesting effect that I was not expecting at all.

&#x200B;

Here's my experience with it:

So last night I loaded a nitrous cartridge into an empty whipped cream canister and basically lubed up the end of it. If you are going to try this, [don't use the pointy whipped cream attachments](https://imgur.com/a/nu05FF3). The smooth one will feel much better. (Learned this the hard way...)

So upon inserting the nozzle into your butt, when you pull the trigger you'll feel a really strong and violent air-like sensation in your butt. The air is very cold and comes out powerfully so be careful. I basically felt "inflated" like a balloon but I didn't feel like I was going to pop or anything. It felt very strange because I wasn't used to having that much air in my colon.

&#x200B;

I held the nozzle in my butt for a bit, like if I was taking a deep breath of a whippet and holding it in. It was really hard to hold it in because the pressure from the whippet began to feel REALLY unpleasant. So after about 15 seconds I pulled the nozzle out. I had no idea what was about to happen.

I experienced the most violent, powerful fart of my entire life. All at once, all of the gas rushed out of my butthole and it produced a VERY loud and long fart. It also was very low pitched compared to a normal fart. Nitrous is a heavier molecule than air, so when you do a whippet, if you talk right afterwards it sounds lower pitched. Apparently, the same effect happens right after you boof a whippet.

&#x200B;

I did not get high at all. Maybe if you try this with two whippets it could get you high, but I feel like you are risking your colon exploding or something from all the air. I'm not a doctor but even doing the one was too much. Yes, it created a very explosive and interesting fart, but that alone does not make me want to do this again. If you're debating boofing whippets I strongly advise against it, and recommend you just inhale them normally.

&#x200B;

TLDR: Tried to boof whippets. Didn't get high. Made my butt feel really weird.

&#x200B;

Edit: Wow, thank you everyone for the Reddit money and Like reactions to this experience journal. I really regret trying this and I am glad to see so much attention being given to this issue. Sitting around with your friends trying to boof whippets sounds like it's really fun but you will regret it. Please learn from my mistakes.

&#x200B;

Edit 2: For the people questioning why I tried this: honestly I thought it might be dangerous and not work, but my friend swore that he knew a guy who boofed whippets and said he got really high from it. So I figured it was worth a shot and hadn't seen any other experience journals for it.

I'm somewhat of a psychonaut, so I don't mind risking my body to test these experimental ways of getting high. Basically the only drug I haven't tried is Jenkem, and that's still on my bucket list. My butt feels completely normal thankfully, but I may have just been lucky that the whippet didn't do more damage.

Also a few people have pointed out that the chemical symbol for nitrous is N2O. Good thing some science nerds caught that error, I didn't pay attention during like any of my high school classes tbh.So basically I got the bright idea that hey maybe if i snort some amph ill make up for 3 years of completely fucking around and not giving a flying fuck about my physics class, and learn it all in one night, all 300 pages of it, instead ive been sitting on my ass for the past 3 hours listening to music and jerking off, im gonna fail lmaooo


Edit 1: for all of you fuckers assuming shit about my academic success dont realise that 
1. I dont give a fuck about physics i just wanna pass because
2. Im majoring in arts but its a mandatory class
3. Im doing quite well academically besides physics,biology and chemistry ,im not failing them either (ok im kinda failing physics but shit happens) i just gett shitty grades

Edit 2:  I DID IT, 95 percent sure I passed, still high off my tits doeWatup. So, I get a call from a friend of mine to smoke some pot. That's not at all unusual. When he gets to my house, he tells me that he ran into our other homie, and that he was coming over too. No problem, all gravy. After smoking a bit, the second homie starts mentioning that he was having some problems and that he smoked some heroin for the first time the day before. He didn't seem at all proud of it. He said he had actually got fronted some more though on the way over. We kept talking, I tried talking with him about his issues and mentioned that I'd be willing to trade my half ounce of weed for his heroin. He seemed interested but still hesitant. We smoked a bit more (weed) talked a bit more and just chilled. When it came time to leave, he reaches into his stuff and hands me the heroin. Says I can keep the weed. I went inside the house and flushed his little "baggy", came out and gave him his weed. He seemed grateful before leaving. I don't know what he's gonna do but I'm gonna trust him. He's a good kid.  

Edit: Thanks for all the posititivity folks.Just picked up a 7 for 55$ from one of my main dudes. I grab a 7 and instantly i didn't like the look of it at all, its poorly trimmed and doesn't have the most potent smell but i was quarter through the blunt and realized i was so damn high, i was literally watching the tv that was off, i have a huge tolerance and havent been this high in awhile. Merry Christmas!https://www.dea.gov/druginfo/ds.shtml


The above link is to the DEA’s official scheduling information. Before anyone brings the legality into it, the scheduling information states that Xanax and Valium have “low potential for abuse and low risk of dependence.” Whereas most doctors, mental health professionals, and the like would agree that benzodiazepines are some of the most addictive substances known to man. Withdrawal is so intense that “weening off” of long-term usage can be completely necessary to avoid death/stroke/other various serious health complications. What’s the DEA really afraid of? People dying, or opening up their minds to a flawed system?Inspired by a fellow post (u/whycantmy), I thought I'd review the stuff I've been in contact with for the last half of my life

Speed: 5/10 good to clean a house. Keeps me going for too long, requires other drugs to combine for a better experience (usually MDMA)

Ritalin: 6/10 basically speed, but less aggressive, makes me horny for some reason

Ketamine: 8/10 first time I thought it was coke. Enjoyable dissociative,  had some fun trips 3rd body and my type of enjoyable strange. Gentle ease out of the feeling, no comedown for me 

LSD: 9.5/10 I have to take a bit more than others oddly with acid, but when I get there, the sense of euphoria, understanding, sensory stimulation are amazing. My comedown comes as a peaceful wisdom meditative place

Mushrooms: 10/10 like acid, I've never had a bad trip on mushrooms, but they've been the most incredible visual tips. I once saw a guy change ethnicity in front my eyes once. The range of trippy, feely, or giggles earns the full 10, plus having mental healing properties 

Heroin: 6/10 first time I thought it was speed because of my plug, snorted and threw up loads, remembering little. I retried a few times, lowering the dose each time till it became pleasurable and sorta sociable. Once I got there, I stopped, too much work for me 

2cb: 8/10 swimmy acid visuals with milder feels. First time I downed 3 pills at once and then a further 3 later. Very enjoyable

MDMA: 8/10 I abused this drug a lot when I was younger and partying, at times doing 1g-2g a night. By that time it wasnt any good for me, and I can no longer take the drug. But when I started, it was my fav drug by far and one you really feel through your whole body

Cocaine: 7/10 good coke deserves a better score, but it's just too hard to get at a reasonable price. Great for catch up therapy/dmc concervastions with mates. Too expensive and its production is so unethical

Meth: 6/10 crazy, anxious hyper speed. Not my personal favourite type of drug. PSA: if you're buying coke in SE Asia, a lot of the time its meth or mashed up ritalin

Cannabis: 8.5/10 weed saves my life on a daily basis; it's more than just the high for me. But using it daily has its downfalls of course

Alcohol: 7/10 I enjoy getting drunk. Too much, and it scares me more than any other drug I do. How I'll be drunk varies more than any high. Score reflects how often the drunk is good; 7/10 times

Salvia: 5.5/10 all other psychedelics I've done, I feel some sort of control over. Not salvia, and that feeling is uncomfortable. The high is sorta scary, and although in real time is very short, it doesn't feel that way under it

Peyote: 6/10 made my own from San pedro. Not really sure what happened, don't remember much other than leaving the house with £15 and no card, returning with £17 after a night out. Will try again to solve confusion 

Mkat: 6/10 I was told it was coke the first time I did it. Definitely more like coke and meth. Was stupid cheap, and gave you a knock off coke high, made you super horny, with a killer comedown, and super addictive. Know people still suffering long damage from the drug

Crack: 5/10 quick high, fun anxious, then quickly a need for more to kill the anxiety. Not for me

Nitrous: 6/10 short lived fun. Too little for me, love the echoes though

Valium: 6/10 just good to get me relaxed to sleep, basically an accompaniment to other drugs. The high itself is almost to gentle for me to notice

DXM: 6/10 its chilled and enjoyable, but almost too lethargic on me

Poppers: 4/10 just a way to make your face feel red and give you a mild headache. Somehow enjoyable with stimulants though

Life: 7/10 firstly it's free, which is a plus. Mild effects, but sometimes hits you really hard. Comedown can be quite heavenly


Edit: since y'all have turned into Joe rogan, to answer a FAQ,I've not done DMT *yet*, sure enough I will thoughI know it's a simple, old saying. But it really makes sense.

Why break multiple laws at a time? Should any one of those laws you're breaking get noticed, the rest could inevitably be brought to light.

A drug-using couple I'm loosely connected to recently caught two felonies each for possession of meth + meth paraphernalia because they stupidly went for the 30 minute drive with their tail lights on their car not working. This could've been easily avoided had they only broke one law at a time.

So before you go swerving in and out of traffic while in possession, or speeding home after picking up your goods, remember that only breaking one law at a time could ultimately save your ass.

**Thank you for reading, and have a safe weekend.**Me and B and his brother X was chilling with Y when B's and X's mother P came in to the room yaddayaddayadda

Fukin impossible to read, use names instead please[i originally posted this on r/confession, but that was removed. im posting here because i still want to share my story 😪]

this is a story i've wanted to confess for a long time, but for obvious reasons i haven't found the right space to do it, but here i am.

this story begins around the end of my junior year in high school. my close friend and i were beginning to experiment with drugs when we discovered acid - we loved it. the second time we went to buy it, we realised we could buy 5-10 tabs at a cheaper price and sell what we didn't use to our friends so we could essentially trip for free, and it just sorta started to snowball from there.

at this time, not many people had a source for acid in our area (melbourne, australia), so demand was high. we went from 10 tabs to 25, 25 to 50, until we were buying sheets of 100 at a time. as i said before, not many people had a connect, so business grew exponentially in a very short period of time. by the time it was all said and done, i had served around 100-200 people with quite a few regulars.

i had always been slightly poorer than my peers, so this was my way of being able to fund the lifestyle. all of the money i made was blown on ridiculous things like food, alcohol, more drugs, etc. (i could not buy anything substantial, as my mum would definitely ask how i was able to afford it) i will admit, it was a lot of fun. i never had to worry about money, and i felt like the man. but, as you can expect, towards the end of this period of my life, it became less and less fun. my normal routine was to bring a considerable amount of acid to school, and afterwards i would go to the library to study until late and serve while i studied, essentially turning the library into my trap house.

naturally, always having a very illegal amount of LSD on me began to take a toll. i didn't feel like a baller any more, i was paranoid and always on edge. after being rolled a few times, every time i did a bulk serve, i was overcome by anxiety as i thought i might be beat up and robbed, or was paranoid i was about to sell to an undercover. i began carrying a tazer around, which actually saved me from a potential stabbing one time, but after that happened, i knew i was done. i sold what i had left and decided to leave it all behind me. when it was all said and done, i estimate i made around $20,000 in roughly 1 year.

what do i have to show for it? nothing besides a gucci ring. this all happened around 2 years ago now and i do look back on this time with some fondness, but every now and then i remember the feelings of paranoia and anxiety, and i relive moments of being robbed and i feel exactly as i did in the moment.

do i regret it? no, but also yes.
would i ever sell acid, or anything again? fuck no.
please dont sell drugs.

(p.s. i am happy to answer any further questions you might have in the comments 😇 )Step 1: Leave the party/house/bar or wherever you drank

Step 2: Take your keys out

Step 3: Lock your car

Step 4: Call an uber :)

*UPDATES WILL NOW BE EDITED AT THE BOTTOM OF THE POST AS THE COMMENTS ARE OVERFLOWED WITH REMINDERS*
I’ve had this idea for a while. I am extremely experienced with tripping and I also maintain a functional life and have smoked crack on occasion. Many people who have never smoked crack may see this idea and think “That sounds like a panic attack waiting to happen” but the reality is that crack is so addictive because it doesn’t make you panic, it creates a euphoria greater than ived heroin, ived coke, mdma or all three at the same time, nothing in my experience compares in terms of euphoria and bliss. I can see why people ruin their lives to get it. So would people want to know, what happens? Does it create an EVEN GREATER euphoria? Does it intensify visuals? Even if only a few people want to know, I will find out. Also merry Christmas everyone and remember you’re not alone in this community. 
*DEC 27th update: I have obtained the LSD for the live experience, I have also taken into account the people saying I’ll get a psychosis type of reaction by getting fresh zyprexa from a pharmacy plug. My next step is acquiring the crack. After that I need to decide what I will use to stream and set a date for this event. Feel free to comment ideas!
BIG JAN 1st update
All materials acquired, please pm me what platform you’d like me to stream on and I will see what is the most comfortable for me.
JAN 5th: today I’m deciding the platform to stream on, I’m just curious which one will not ban the content and also allow playback for those who miss it?
Update for the time being. 2 days after the last update had to break off a five year relationship and am in the process of getting a new job and moving, I will do this experiment in due time however my head is not in the right place as this is a strange change after half a decade. I apologize for the timing of this, this event will happen at latest mid March. To make up for this I will due multiple other experiments when I am in the right headspace. Sorry to those who looked forward to this happening earlier than it will be.I buy my blow, additional addy (aside from my script) and weed from him. Known him a few years and he’s always been a good guy. 

First of all, his response time is impeccable. He also delivers, seemingly regardless of distance (suburbs to city). He reminds me a lot of a small business owner. Also, his hustle is a side-gig - I believe, as far as I know, he does siding and whatnot as a primary occupation. 

He’d been talking about how he has gotten into scotch a lot, recently, and referenced how much he loves decanters. I, too, am a big decanter fan, so I bought him a 3-piece set for Christmas. 

He seemed to genuinely be surprised and happy with the gift. My buddies thought it was weird, but idk. I mentioned it to my parents and sister at Christmas, and my parents didn’t bat an eye but my sis (5 years younger, thought it was weird, like my friends did). 

I grew up being taught

 1) you always tip your garbage men, and in turn, they’ll likely look the other way if you’re overly full or don’t have a sticker for vegetation you’re tossing;

And

2) you always tip your mailman. No reason, like w the garbage men, other than bc American (fuck yeah!). 

Idk why, but a dealer who delivers like that....he deserves a little thank you. 

When I failed the bar the first time and called him in tears (not obviously, but he could tell something was up) he delivered me weed and was like, “I knocked a few bucks off, you only owe me X.” 

When I got promoted in my job, well after passing the bar, he was there at 2am to drop off blow when we ran out so we could celebrate (and he knocked a chunk off tthe price, but admittedly, it was a pretty hefty order to begin with lol). 

So idk. Thought it was warranted.

Edit: I fucking love y’all. Thanks for reaffirming it’s wasn’t a weird move on my part.

**Edit: since many have asked and it’s fairly buried, the following is a paste of my comment re me discussing this with my parents:**


Yes, my parents - ever since early high school- pretty much ignored my weed n alcohol use, so long as I was active in sports/activities, and my grades were *at least* 3.0

My parents always drilled in my head that 1) they love me, unconditionally; and 2) that I can speak with them about anything. 

As such, I’ve never shied away from speaking to them about matters, such as drugs. I also call/speak with them regularly enough, that I think they’d notice if I ever ended up having trouble with one (most notably, the blow, for what I think are obvious reasons).

My first concert, ever, was Spring Awakening, in Chicago, while I was in law school and it was my first time rolling. Best believe I called my mom at one point while smoking a cig, and told it was thebomb.com (I call her damom.com as a an inside joke - don’t judge lol) and mentioned she had to try it. To which, of course, she reminded my high ass she doesn’t do drugs and told me to be safe, which I did. 

Idk, they’ve always just been good people, who set **clear** expectations for me, and then trusted me with whatever else I was doing, so long as I played by “the rules,” so to speak. 

Plus, my whole immediate family talks with each other a lot, so if I ever fell into an addiction, someone would notice. Hope that makes sense.My friend got caught today at our favorite techno club caught with some 3-fpm. Security who does the searching at entrance told him he's banned for tonight and took his baggie. The club staff knows us since we are regulars so one bouncer noticed what happened approached us and told the security guy to let him in. Then he proceeded to throw the baggie into the bin.

About 15 minute later we are smoking some weed outside and he comes and hands my friend his baggie. He threw something else into the bin and hid the baggie to give it to us later.

Such a cool reaction. Have a nice evening everyone!This happened a couple hours ago, it was my high schools homecoming game and everyone was there. A lot of people come in baked or a little drunk which is really no big deal. 

Anyway I was with some friends and we sat down at a table by the field with another group of people at it. One of my friends knew one of the girls in the group and was friends with her but this girl was seriously fucked up. Like can't even walk, talk or count the amount of fingers your holding up fucked. 

My friend is trying to keep her from passing out so she's talking to her and telling her to count her fingers and look at her eyes and shit which she can't even do so after a minute or so she throws up all over my friend and passes out in a puddle of her own vomit so I'm like we need to move this girl so she doesn't throw up choke and die so we move her head to the side.

At this point I'm asking her friends what she took and they seemed fucked up as well and the only answers I got out of them were Alcohol and molly and other unspecified drugs. After hearing alcohol and molly I knew it was a bad combo so I said fuck this she needs help I'm calling 911. Her "friends" are all telling me not to call because she'll get in trouble but honestly wtf it's better than dying. 

Her friends leave as soon as I call and it just me and the group of my 3 other friends with this girl. The adults working there step in and we lay her on the ground and at this point the police and ambulance is here so we leave it to them. They're slapping her in the face and shaking her but she's not responding and I start to get worried cause it looks really bad. I think they started doing CPR but then stopped and carried her out into the ambulance.

I have no idea if she's ok but I'm sure if anything bad happened I'll hear about it on Monday. It just blows my mind how people are so irresponsible with their drug use like damn is it really that hard to not take too much and mix drugs that shouldn't be mixed? I did the right thing right? 

[Update](https://www.reddit.com/r/Drugs/comments/756w2a/remember_its_ok_to_call_911_if_someone_is/?st=J8JPC7RH&sh=8ba14819) I feel like this shouldn't even have to be said. But here we are.

I was smoking with 3 friends and they invited this person who I thought they trusted and we were smoking in his car when all of a sudden I felt like the car was shrinking inwards. Like it was folding in on itself, I tried to stay calm because no one else looked like they were freaking out but then my friend started to complain about the same feeling I had. The whole time I was extremely confused and the person just goes "oh yea there's salvia in that, I thought you guys would have liked it." uh the fuck not.

we ended up getting home somehow I felt extremely dizzy, paranoid, and at times like I wasn't even in the car just watching it. Don't think I will willingly try salvia in the future just because of that bad experience.

if u wanna lace ur own weed that's fine with me just plz inform the others smoking it.First of all, sorry if my title seems to put down therapy, because it was also very helpful and put me on the path that led me to the point where I felt confident enough in myself to take this leap.

 For my whole life, I was terrified of psychedelics, I thought they were just not for me, and that my brain wasn't designed for them, so I had accepted that in this lifetime I would sit on the sidelines when it came to anything more mind-altering than pot. I have a history of anxiety, depersonalozation, depression, and long term opioid addiction, not to mention I can't even smoke weed or drink without having a terrible and anxious experience (anyone that knows what de-personalization/de-realization is knows the absolute hell of living with it long term, and after learning to live with that mysterious condition (that peaked in high-school and was probably triggered by marijuana) I considered myself someone who was always mentally driving along the edge of a steep cliff and barely hanging on to the wheel.

^^^^^

 When I was in a really dark place in November, hopelessly addicted to oxycodone and supplementing it with adderall to stay energized, I had this feeling that I no longer had much to lose, so I tried a quarter tab of acid that was given to me by a relative, and I was blown away at the experience. I remember thinking "Holy shit, I was SO wrong", it's amazing how culture and the portrayal of psychedelics in media can make you think you know what something is like, when in reality it was basically the opposite. Instead of hanging on to my sanity for dear life, I could not have felt more at ease. I was playing Rainbow Six online with friends that night and was laughing my ass off, and couldn't stop talking. (I know the real psychonauts will probably scold me for playing games instead of like, going out in nature, but there are no rules, do whatever makes you feel comfortable)

^^^^^

 Now, after doing a few more quarter tab experiments to make sure I was stable and used to the sensations, I carefully worked my dose up to a half tab the other week (I have a super low tolerance to all drugs, if I was told it was a full tab I would have believed it) and I started watching Disney/Pixar movies on it, both old nostalgic favorites and even new ones, and it has quickly become my favorite thing to do. I get more positive emotion out of these evenings alone than months of normal existence previously, even just laughing at something by myself was a very rare occurrence before, but watching something like The Simpsons had me in tears. In 2020, the thought of me laughing and crying at something like fucking Mulan from 1998, by myself in my basement, would be laughably outrageous to the old cynical me, even just the prospect of watching a kids movie or even feeling strong emotions from one would seem highly unlikely, but fuck me, I've literally been having the time of my life no matter what i've been doing, and the couple friends that have participated with me have had just as much fun and we could talk all night like we were on coke, minus all the downsides

^^^^^


What acid has done for me is opened up long forgotten parts of my childhood brain and unlocked rusty old emotion switches that I forgot I had, and showed me what's on the other side of the curtain that surrounds you during depression and addiction. Opiates mask your emotions and make you forget what things felt like before you were hooked on them, LSD is like a lifehack that has the power to override all that, and has blown those doors back open and given me a huge wake up call & hope that there is joy waiting for me in sobriety. The thought of taking pills gets less exciting after every session, and I've already switched to low dose suboxone and cut my adderall dosage big time, which has completely changed my daily life schedule from revolving around taking my pills at certain times of the day, to feeling like I can do whatever whenever, spending more time being productive and social.

^^^^^

You don't need to leave the planet or have an ego death to reap these benefits, and don't let anyone tell you otherwise (though eventually I want to get to that point). "Damaged goods" personalities like myself, and i'm sure many of you, need to start small like I did and take it slow. The idea of a bad trip seems like a very distant threat, because I don't put myself in the position for a bad trip to arise. A bad trip virtually never comes from just the drugs themselves, it requires an ignition source, like being in a bad unfamiliar setting, being with the wrong people, or if you're hyper aware of your mental/physical state like me, taking too much before you have climatized yourself to the sensations. It's not like you saw it on TV or in dumb teen movies like Harold and Kumar, taking 1/4-1/2 tab of acid does not make you see things that are not there, or lose control of yourself, in fact it's the opposite, it enhances you and everything around you. If you do your research and eliminate ammunition for a bad head-space, you are not going to have a bad time, it's as simple as that.


Thank you LSD.

^^^^^

Oh, and I personally recommend watching "The Imagineering Story", it's a Disney+ 6 part series on the rise of Walt Disney and the inception/construction of Disneyland and all the other parks, as well as the inspiration and inside workings of all the best rides and attractions. Angela Bassett the narrator has the most soothing voice ever, and it's probably the single most inspiring and amazing show i've ever watched (I already thought it was incredible before the acid, while on acid it's awe inspiring). It's also great because she covers even the controversial and dark eras of Disney along with the political clashes, so it's very emotional but visually incredible with 4k footage all the way back to the 1950's. It's my new life goal to go with my friends to L.A. and go to Disneyland on (a managable) dose of acid.I made it through 24 hours without alcohol. Last night was hell. Ungodly anxiety, tsunami sweats, and slight shaking kept me up untill 5 am. When I woke up I noticed it was IMPOSSIBLE to keep any food down. This shit is no joke. I was only binging for about a month to get these withdrawals. My heart goes out to all of you suffering with alcoholism.In my 10 or so years of doing drugs, everything known to general public (including, but not limited to; heroin, cocaine and meth, even IV use) and RCs, the only thing that I had a real issue with addiction and quitting is weed, simply because, even though the physical aspect of WD is minimal, psychological is whack. 

I love pot, and if I had as much money as I'd like to have, and if I lived in legal country, I'd consume it 24/7. The problems starts when you don't want to quit and have to. Then the depression sets in and makes the whole world look grey for weeks on end. 

Last time I did a T-break (more like saving money break), it took me months just to not feel shitty, and that was with physical exercise, hobbies, responsibilities etc.

For all of you that have access to cheap, high quality bud, be grateful. A few years back I got hooked on alprazolam (as a sleeping aid) simply because a months supply of it was literally 100 times cheaper than weed. Quitting it was the hardest thing I did ever, and wouldn't wish it upon my worst enemy.

Even with all that in mind, I'd never recommend anyone to "stick to weed". Because ironically, sticking to it for years made it boring for me to get high, which made me experiment with other drugs. Stick to sobriety so you can enjoy everything more when you do it.So im standing in my kitchen drinking cough syrup mixed with two packs of 3-Hydroxyphencyclidine out of a giant measuring cup when I rip this MASSIVE fart *rite* as this cat starts to walk in my direction and the dummy goes running frantically head-on into a wall he knows damn well has been there since he was a kitten and he just gives me the most utterly confused, scared, bewildered look I have *ever* seen on another creature. I don't think he even knew where he *was*.

I think I just brain damaged my cat with a fart and.. I don't know how to feel about this... 

No, sorry, I laughed my ass off until I nearly vomited. Sorry cat bro.I was feeling suicidal hours ago, genuinely making plans to kill myself. Then I took a few mg of xans. Felt somewhat better, still not great. Just less motivated to do anything I would regret. On a spur of the moment type thing, i stripped and jumped in the pool. It was like 12am, I was alone. It was cold, I was shivering. But I felt more peaceful than I had in a long time. I just laid like that, on my back in the pitch dark, looking up at the stars. Just me and the skies. It was the most bliss I had felt in years. Anyways, got out and fell into bed. That was a few hours ago, and I feel much better. Just wanted to share my experience, not sure how I'll feel tomorrow but tonight I finally feel okayThis is my first post here, but I had a (fun) idea. Tell me your best  drug dealer stories.

Example: One day I was skateboarding at the skatepark, me and my buddies were talking about how stoked we were to try truffles/magic mushrooms (I live in the Netherlands so yeah that's a thing here) and one hippie looking guy just joined the conversation and told us that if we needed any psychedelics, we could just hit him up and he would help us get any drug we wanted. He was busy eating, but wanted to smoke a joint, so he asked me if i could get it out of his backpack and spark it for him. We shared the joint and continued talking about each others boards and about life in general. First time we actually contacted him for LSD (which was very good) we ended up skateboarding with him and having a genuinely good conversation. Now i follow him on instagram and really look up to his hippie lifestyle.

&#x200B;

Not sure what you guys need all this information for, but I'm curious about other peoples (funny/good or bad) experiences with drug dealers. Or if you are a dealer, tell me some weird things you've experienced while doing your thing.

&#x200B;

**WOW: didn't expect i'd have over like 10 upvotes, thanks for all the stories, I'll do my best to read and reply to them all! Love this community**I started using meth at age 13 with my mother of all people. I did marijuana, cocaine, ecstasy, alcohol, mushrooms, all until I was about 18 yrs old when Oxycontin 80mg was introduced to my life which took me on a dowhill spiral into Heroin and then into the pressed Xanax bars and Fentanyl Blues. Then I REALLY started to lose control. flipped a car, ran from police on xanax, woke up in jail, almost died. All while trying to be a father to kids who deserved better. I can finally say I can actually be there for them. It kills me when I think of all the wasted years and times I missed because of my addiction. Today I'm 1 year sober tho. Thanks to everyone whos posted. We all deserve a better life!!This is fucking monumental. It's not

"I stopped myself from getting high"

"I didn't have drugs to get high"

"I can't afford to keep getting high"

"I need to get high"

It's

"Meh, I don't really *feel* like getting high. Maybe later."



Feels fuckin' good folksOr like I did, said "ok but no mixing" and ended up having alcohol lsd mdma and cannabis all in one night My dealer recently passed away (natural causes) he was 74. This was 3 months ago. He was a kind soul, and my only connection. 

Rip Joey L~"We knew we couldn't make it illegal to be either against the war or black, but by getting the public to associate the hippies with marijuana and blacks with heroin, and then criminalizing both heavily, we could disrupt those communities. Did we know we were lying about the drugs? Of course we did."

For anyone who doesn't recognize this quote, this is John Ehrlichman, one of Nixon's top advisers. One of the most common misconceptions about drug prohibition is that the Government just wanted to keep people safe. This is obviously not the case. Same reason why MDMA was made illegal and is now likely gonna be considered a breakthrough treatment for PTSD. Or the extremely positive results for treating depression with Psilocybin mushrooms, which were made illegal in the 60s, ending all research up until recently. It's only about agenda, not safety. And it always has been. My point in making this post is to inform people that the government: 1. Does not and never did make prohibition laws to keep people safe, only to support the agenda and 2. Completely ignorantly makes laws about things they know nothing about (hence why heroin isn't as bad as weed, according to the law)

I hope this post helps some of you realize the sad reality of drug prohibition and how negative the effects of racist uneducated policies really are. I also hope whoever read this learned something. Thanks for reading!There used to be smart guys around here with valuable information and insight. People that were interested in the history, mechanisms and biopharmacology of drugs. Critical thinkers.
Nowadays its just teenagers trying to sound edgy, with hardly any knowledge about the drugs they are taking. When and why did this place turn into a kindergarten? Looking through the posts around here got cringeworthy...I'll start off by saying that I'm pretty vanilla for r/drugs. Weed most days, acid once or twice a year, and some beer after work.

Well earlier this year my landlord put a guy in my house with my roommate and I (we just rent rooms and have no written lease agreement). Roommate #1 (we'll call him Josh) is an old high school friend and super chill. We had a good thing going and all was well until roommate #2 moved in (we'll call him Steve).

Steve immediately made me uncomfortable for reasons I can't quite figure out. I just had a bad feeling about the guy from the start. He seemed okay at first but quickly I realized that something was up. He looked like a cancer patient and he was really weird about guns. He owned multiple rifles and handguns (not weird as we live in the south) but he was always talking about using them to shoot people if they broke in, and he would be up late asf at night cleaning them and generally just playing with them (like 3 am doing maneuvers in the living room with an AR). Not least of all he would take MASSIVE FUCKING SHITS IN OUR TOILET AND LEAVE THEM FOR ME TO UNCLOG CONSTANTLY. He was also always complaining about being broke despite having new guns and working full time. Over the months there were a few times where I suspected he was speeding but I just had no way to prove it and no way to kick him out of the house.

Things started coming to a head two weeks ago when he came into the living room and showed off a sawn off shotgun to my friend and I while we were hanging out. He was joking about shooting people with it and told us about how his car got stolen and he had to do "some gangsta shit" to get it back. I told him the next day that he had to get that shit out of the house as I wasn't comfortable having illegal guns in the around. He told me he brought it to a friends house and that was that.

So fast forward to 3 nights ago. I got home from work and when I pulled up to the house, Steve was pacing around the sidewalk in front of the house and into the street. I thought this was weird but he does weird shit all the time. I walk through the garage and as soon as I walked into the house proper I was hit by an overpowering smell of burning chemicals. He walked in the house behind me as I was setting my beer on the counter, and with a crazy look on his face says to me, "Hey man, I know you  probably already know this, but I just wanted to come clean. I smoke meth and that's why the house smells like this. I've been up for five days and I think I'm hallucinating. I noticed you and Josh haven't been really talking to me and I'm paranoid about the cops. Also who are those people that drive golf carts around the neighborhood?" 

Alarm bells start going off in my head immediately. He's wandering around the house and talking to himself. I walk to my room to grab my backpack and my dog's leash so I can gtfo of there and as I pass by his room I see one of his rifles on the floor. I'm basically shitting myself at this point and dip out to my parents place. I called my other roommate and told him not to come home without the cops or until Steve left. He was like "Na fuck that I'm calling our landlord right now."

Our landlord called Steve (she's his step mom) and told him he needed to leave. I guess he just drove away while tweaking his balls off and most likely with a few loaded handguns in his car. Josh and I decide to immediately get his shit out of the house so we went through his room and cleaned it out (fuck his privacy i was legit scared for my life).

That's when the last few months started to make sense. We found multiple meth pipes, various accoutrements and the sawn off shotgun that he said he had gotten rid of. We also found his rifles and enough ammo for a whole squad. Then things got interesting. I found a duffel bag in his closet and put it in the garage. I didn't want to know what was in it but Josh said we needed to make sure there were no more illegal guns or meth in our house. When he opened it up we found: giant dildos, various butt plugs, fake cum, lube, a shitload of razor blades, a mullet wig, women's underwear and like 10 dvd's of transsexual porn (no judgement but who still owns porn dvd's?). 

We unloaded all the rifles and magazines as we knew he still had a key at this point, lit some incense to get rid of the meth smell, and drank a shitload of beer to de-stress. We changed all the locks the next morning and the guy's dad came to take all of his belongings. When he opened the duffel bag he shook his head and said, "He ain't bringing this gay shit in my house." His dad also didn't seem to care at all about the sawn off shotgun or the fact that his son smoked meth in our house with multiple loaded weapons.

As of right now we haven't heard from him and I assume he's with his dad, but all I care about is that I don't have to live with the guy anymore. I'm also thankful it was me who walked in on him as my other roommate might not have handled the situation as well.

If you have a bad feeling about someone, act on that shit.

TL;DR: New roommate was weird asf. Thought we was on meth. Came home to him tweaking his balls off and possibly in psychosis while a loaded gun was in his room. Found an illegal gun and standard meth-head chem sex shit when he left.  No longer have said roommate.Ok, so this is a little more political than a lot of the stuff on this sub, but iv been getting into the discourse surrounding legalizing drugs, and I noticed that almost no one is talking about drug cartels, despite the fact that the legalization of cannabis has significantly reduced cartel profits over the past decade.

This gave me an idea, namely that we should stop presenting efforts to legalize as common sense reductions of irrational laws, and instead present them as anti-cartel movements. Hell, we could even claim that people who oppose legalization are secretly pro-cartel. Whenever someone attempts to pull the “well I’m just concerned about the youth” card, just point out the existing drug laws make it possible for gangs to exist, and that by opposing legalization they’re basically supporting street gangs.Does anyone else feel like they see right through people when they are high? It’s so easy for me to tell how fake some people are while I’m around them high to the point where I will have to remove myself from the room because I can’t handle it. This is also ruining tv shows and movies for me because it seems so obvious to me they are acting that I can’t enjoy the actual show. I’ve talked to some of my friends about it but none of them really can relate. Does anyone else feel this or am I crazy?

Edit: My bad for not being specific, high on weed. Tomorrow I am celebrating my 32nd birthday, and for the first time ever I plan on getting drunk with some friends. I pretty much grew up under a rock and only this last year have I really felt like I’ve got to experience what life has to offer, and it's been beautiful. I finally have a good group of friends and I am done with living every day alone on my computer.

And I can thank all this to one friend I met by happenstance. She introduced me to the wonderful world of drugs. MDMA helped me get over my social anxiety, DMT showed me that spirituality is real and important in our overall health and acid and shrooms are just so much fun.

At 30 I was beginning to lose hope that this life would ever turn around. Thank god I finally arrived.

Anyways, cheers! Love you all!So last Friday I went out with some friends and around 2AM people went home and it was just me and my friend who were left. We decided to smoke some weed on a bench in the city centre when we spotted some woman dancing in the streets like she got paid to do it (classic drugdancemoves). Eventually me and my friend asked her and the guy she'd been with for the past half hour if they were in for a smoke. They were and we ended up talking with them for 10 minutes. As it turned out they were high on blow but they were pretty chill to hang out with (at least he was, she couldn't stop dancing and didn't speak much). I invited them to my house and my friend immediately tried to talk me out of it and said they'd probably rob me or some shit. He went home but I still invited them in. 

The entire night they were here they were crushing up ritalin pills I had left and snorting them. She was dancing through my house naked and masturbated in my bathroom for half a hour when I offered them a shower and gave them clean shirts. I threw some fries in the oven for them too.

I spent most of past Saturday with the guy still on my couch smoking weed and drinking beer with him. The woman went out to find money and at one point she came back, high on blow and asking for more money. The guy bursted into tears and it was at this point that I thought to myself "what mess have I gotten myself into this time?". She went out a couple more times and came back a with money or food every time. She even came with a bag full of clothing from the homeless shelter at one point. It's still here.

These people had the hardest lives of anyone I've ever met. But the guy was so thankfull for me inviting them to my house, giving them food and shirts and letting them shower that he cleaned my room for me and mopped all the floors in my house.

Moral of the story: being nice to people is free, don't judge people on the kind of drugs they use.

Edit: Thanks for my first award, kind anonymous person!!Dude just sitting on a bench rippin some unwacky tabbacky out of his 5ft triple honey comb perc piece. Be strange  


Edit: thanks for the gold! If you drive under the influence of drugs or alcohol then you are a shitty person. Saw a post earlier about a guy who was fucked up on heroin and drove into a ditch. If you’re gonna do drugs then do them at a place you can stay. My cousin died due to a driver who was under the influence of drugs. Shits fucked up. If you’re driving on drugs then you don’t deserve to even be able to use drugs. Idc y’all can downvote the fuck outta me if you want but if you drive on drugs then you are a shitty humanI open up my drawer this morning to get something and an ecstasy pill I forgot was there fell onto the floor without me noticing. I only discovered this 30 mins later as my dog had eaten half of it. So I rush her to the vets. She was traumatised, but nothing seemed to happen to her, thanks god and she’s still at the vets and will be overnight so they can keep an eye on her. This will cost me over £400. Also, my parents are now disgusted in me that I had ecstasy in their house, they have lost all trust in me and they are both in tears. As am I. I tried to make an excuse, but they definitely don’t believe it. Probably one of the worst days in my life

Just felt the need to shareSo in our area the police are actually pretty later back, i wont say where I am but a clue is that our county was not red or blue last election, we actually were colored green for voting the green party in\(that should give an idea of what our area is like.\).  Well today there are cops outside all the pipe shops handing our toco bell vouchers.  I asked one of them why and he said "Well I cocould spend thousands of dollars in county money to arrest you and ruin your life for no reason, or send you to taco bell."  Gotta say I trust these cops more than others, they get it.  I'm heading to taco bell and all the cop said to me other wise was jyst don't smoke in my line of sight otherwise I am required to cite you.  So I'm just took the voucher went in got a new pipe and smoked out back, waved buy to mister trooper and am going for tacos.So, I kinda fucked up. Started smoking weed daily at 15, abused DXM, messed around with psyches, dissos, MDMA. Ended up dropping out of highschool, because I'm incapable of finding the motivation to get anywhere. I spent 3 years there basically getting nothing done, wasting my time.

So I dropped out, barely job hunting because my motivation was still lacking. Months went by, and I get a call back from a fast food joint. It's not much, but it's something to call a start to a new chapter of my life. I start in an hour.

Cheers <3I called out your name and I looked over and saw you, this kid, slowly gathering your stuff. Your phone, and your water bottle. You slowly got up and slowly walked in. You started talking but very quietly. Like you were just saying words to say it. I did my best to understand you and figure out what you needed. After the fact, you told me you were going to look around. I got your product and stood there behind my register waiting, and watched you. You did not move. You pulled out a fold of money and stood there. Your eyes were closed, head down. You slowly started counting again, but without any realization that you are Nearly falling over. Counting your bills. You nodded out again. You counted your bills, again. I came back and asked if you needed anything else. “I’m not sleeping well” We finished up, and barely held onto your change. You left your water bottle that you just barely drank a second earlier, dragged yourself through the door, and left. 

You didn’t look rough. Healthy in fact. You look like you took care of yourself, your face looked clean. No bags on your eyes yet, and you still have your cheeks. I know what you are on. You look like the early stages. I saw the same in my old friend. You think it’s all fun and games now, but the money you’re spending on weed as well as your dope, is going to turn into scraping it together for just your dope. Adventure as you will, but tread lightly down certain paths. It’s a sad one, if chosen wrong. 

I hope all the best to you Brian.There are you smoke crack and meth and us who smoke only weed.

There are us who have tried stuff like datura  and us who are afraid of it

There are us who snort cocaine while with many people in a nightclub and us who are introverts that who do pills to relax.

There are us who know more drug dealers than cops and us who use only legal things and maybe know a junkie who's gonna sell something to make a little bit.

There are us who hate tobacco and us who swear that smoking helps.

There are us who are atheists and us who believe in some form of the divine and even have spoke to God while on shrooms.

There are us who are junkies that everyone who sees us understands that we take drugs and us who are factional users that no one can tell the difference between one of us and someone who have never taken drugs.

There are us who do drugs for fun and us who try to heal psychological disorders.

There is the popular girl with 10000 instagram followers who tried lsd in a concert , that make her realize that no one of them will care about her and the nerdy guy who took it in his attic alone , who also realized that he should love himself.

But in the end of the day we are all addicted to escaping reality

Edit : WoW it blew up. I didn't expect it. Thanks you all redditors !I actually wrote and rewrote this post a couple times in the last few years, but deemed it to be way too specific and detailed so as to defy anonymity.

Here's a non-detailed, non-specific recount:

Had a good friend, did lots of dissociatives together. I told him about LSD and how it changed my life. Never had a chance to trip with him though.

A few months later, he's already tripped a few times without me. He's about to move in to my apartment, lease signing next week. He's about to spend his first night in his new place.

I smoke a joint and go to bed before Friday's workday, while he celebrates his birthday doing acid with his girlfriend.

I wake up at 2 am with his giant figure slicing at me with a kitchen knife. I escape to bathroom, he breaks through the door like a bull. I feign passing out so he leaves me alone.

I manage to get to the door when cops come knocking, his gf having fled the apartment to give the alert. They were on their way anyhow, given the door slamming at 2 am. I welcome them half-naked, bleeding from head to toes.

I didn't press charges, so he got released a couple months later. Says he thought he had to kill me to save the world.

Acid can be dangerous. It has changed my life for the best, and I still ceremoniously trip every couple years, but I can't recommend it as light-heartedly as I used to. There exists a non-null risk that the user will become all stabby stabby.

edit: Just to answer a few commonly asked questions:

1) He took about a tab, unknown dosage, from a reputable dealer he'd purchased from before.

2) A few of you folk seem to hold LSD on a mighty pedestal and can't believe either the story to be true, or the drug to have really been acid. My word is only worth so much, I think if you read the couple dozen more comments of other people who shared similar experiences, it might pop your bubble. 

3) It's still one of my favorite drugs, but it needs to be respected. If you want to be initiated, make sure the setting is perfectly positive: chill music on a charged phone, plenty of water nearby and most importantly, good friends to guide you through the journey. So I smoked a joint the other day. Started watching family guy and munch.  
Last episode i watched ended with Peter saying "good night!"  
I tought to myself "ok, yeah good night to you too" and went to bed...

That high.Mescaline- The grandfather, warm and wise.

Ayahuasca- The mother, healing and powerful.

Ibogain- The father, stern and prudent.

Psilocybin- The daughter, spiritual and creative.

LSD- The son, bright and insightful.

2 cb- The funny and horny cousin.

Mdma- The family friend that likes to give everyone a hug.

DMT- The family cat thats actually an all powerful interdimensional Alien in disguise.

Edit: psilocybin might cross dress lol.

Adding some more:

DOM- The uncle that keeps talking to you and doesn't know when its time to end the conversation.

NOS- The hibachi chef that hypes up all the family when they go out for dinner.

Amanita Muscaria- The sisters crazy ex.

PCP- The nephew stuck in a psychward.

Bromo-fly- The uncle that killed a family from a dui and no one talks about him anymore.

Salvia- The families failed abortion.

Dxm-The homeless vet the family passes by everyday and never notice.

Benadryl- The spider in the families basement.I know I’m not the first to share the ‘controversial’ opinion that weed is addictive, but I too was taken by surprise. I’m currently staying at my parents’ place to study, because when I was on my own I could hardly refrain from smoking every day. “Just one to relax before bed” turned into “just one at lunch for the taste” turned into “if I smoke before I start studying I’ll be really relaxed” turned into “now that I’ve started I might as well spark up another one”.

The idea that weed can’t be that bad, and that I can still function on weed makes it the easiest to just spark up, when really you know you shouldn’t. I literally have a drawer full of a ton of hard drugs; I have speed (amphetamines), 3-MMC, a bunch of different XTC pills, 2C-B, LSD, DXM, ketamine, a ton of nitrous canisters and poppers laying around, and all of those I can stay away from without any trouble at all. It’s just the weed and hash, that I consider least harmful, that I use against better knowing. 

Just a perspective. Drugs are fun until they aren’t. Don’t let them get in the way of your responsibilities, instead keep them for special occasions, so they will always stay fun. I’m currently on a two-week tolerance break and will be stretching it for longer as I have exams coming up, but I got a bong coming in the mail and will be getting blazed as fuck when exams are over. Know when to party boys & girls  B-)Hey guys, it's me. Decided to log in again and apparently lots of people would like an update, judging from the amount of PM's I got. Sorry it took some time but Reddit was not my priority the last few days.

original thread: https://www.reddit.com/r/drugs/comments/akfcld/_/

I had a few chats with M and we came up with a plan. Last weekend I came over to his place and S would come too. Before this I kept texting S and showed M what was going on. She kept flirting and wanted to come over to my place. Wasn't really feeling that (1 room apartment rip) and M agreed that it would be the best to catch her at his place.

We told S we both took a bar, which we didn't, and asked if she could watch over us. We did actually smoke a little bit of weed so that S would really think we were fucked up. The plan was that M would act like it knocked him the fuck out on the couch and see what S did. I tried to 'wake him up' and laid back when he didn't budge. S had noticed it and after like 5 minutes she asked if I wanted a 'massage' (that's how she said it). I told her I wouldn't mind and went to the bedroom. This was quite uncomfortable for me but eh, I knew M was going to intervene. This time S just straight up took off all her clothes and started to climb on top of me. I said 'Wow!' pretty loud and this was the sign that shit was going down. Looking back this was pretty stupid but w/e I guess it worked lol 

M came into the room and S didn't notice. When she started taking off my shirt he tapped her on the shoulder and told her to get the fuck out of his house. Her reaction is something I won't forget. She was mortified, started sobbing and said she could explain. Yeah right. She grabbed her clothes and M calmly walked her out. I think she stood in front of the door for a couple minutes before actually realizing what had happened. We threw all the shit she had at his house out of the window (3rd floor) and yelled some stuff at her. Not very proud of that but it happened. She has messaged both of us apologizing and tried to come by my house. Needless to say that didn't work out for her.

That was it for the people who care. Thanks for all the kind messages from y'all. Me and M are on decent terms. It's obviously going to take time to heal but I feel like we can work past this. We love each other to death and that hasn't changed. 

I don’t even vape but this ban is so dumb. How is the government going to call Vaping a health crisis when it helps so many people? 5 people have died from that Vaping disease which My guess is that those people were just hitting some wack carts. 5 people die from vapes?? Ban them. Think about how many people have died in mass shootings this year but the government takes no action. FunnySo like back in 2011-12, me and a bunch of my friends went to a house party in a neighbouring town about 2.5 hours from home. It was a grad party but a couple of our good friends were graduating so we wanted to go and see them... who the fuck am I kidding we were 17-18 year old kids. We wanted to crash a party. 

So we gather up the whole squad, guys and girls, and we all jump into this massive convoy of about 5 cars. 5 cars full of minors with ungodly amounts of alcohol. So we cruisin, the party having already begun for us. Tunes blasting, singing songs, drinking already, smoking joints. 

So we arrive to the party already intoxicated and feeling a bit rambunctious. We get into our buddy’s house (who was throwing the party) and there’s at least 60 people in this house going fucking mental. Like something youd see on a movie. So me and the crew walk in, and start partying. 

Later on in the night, me and my best buddy are having a “contest” seeing who could handle more cigarette burns in the garage of the house. There’s only about 10 people out here and it’s mostly all the boys, sharing the exploits of our adventure so far and laughing at our idiotic drunken “contest”. Now shit gets real. 

So I start talking to an acquaintance, my ex girlfriends brother (me and her are really good friends at this point and still to this day, no animosity or hard feelings, he was cool). We got talking about mushrooms and he’s like “yeah bro I just got back from working in BC I got all kinds of mushrooms upstairs”. And I’m like fuck off show me. 

So we go upstairs, squeeze through the kitchen-turned-dance floor, and into a bedroom. He pulls out a candy box and opens it, and it’s full of large chocolates. He says “I had to make them into chocolate to get them on the plane, which ones you want?” I said “the strongest fuckers you got, how much?” He says “20 bucks, that’s what i paid for them anyway. I’m not selling for profit, just to help the boys out.” 

Now at this point, where I live, shrooms are 10 bucks a gram. So I’m expecting a mellow and manageable trip. I eat the entire thing. Horrible mistake, bad idea, abort abort abort! 

So I walk out back into the party and start dancing with chicks, rocking out, just generally loving life. I go downstairs and find all my crew sitting on couches in the basement, what we’ll call the lounge area. It was just them and a few of our local friends drinking and catching up. 

I look at them and say “buddy fuckin ripped me off, there’s no shrooms in them chocolates” and the boys all start laughing and saying “just wait just wait”. So I did. Here’s where things get hairy. 

I go to take a piss, and There’s a 5 foot tall mirror in the bathroom. I look in the mirror and stumble backwards laughing, pissing everywhere. I did not care. What was happening in that mirror was now more important than hitting the toilet. I laughed and laughed and said “oh shit, here it is”. So I walk back out and tell
The boys “he didn’t rip me off” and everyone starts laughing hysterically, like I mean REALLY laughing. Like laughing way too much. Like ok boys stop now. Holy shit I gotta get outta here. 

The boys walk back into what now seemed like an ocean of people, and so did I. I check the time: 2:34am. I was on the dance floor as my buddies vaporized. I was alone in a sea of people. The music made no sense whatsoever. People were talking an alien language. I was dancing like a maniac while losing my mind, not fully in control of my actions. I was there for what must have been hours. I check the time: 2:34am. Uh oh. 

All of a sudden I see the dance floor open up and in the middle are the guy who sold me the shrooms, and another guy who was being belligerent beforehand, and they are just straight THROWING FUCKIN HANDS! This throws me off altogether. I think everyone is out to get me, hissing at me, talking about me, everyone’s in a bad mood now. I retreat to the garage again. I’m sitting there for god knows how long rubbing my head and I keep
Checking the time on my cell: 2:34 am. It won’t change. My buddy (cigarette burn guy) comes down the stairs laughing. He looks at me and says “what’s goin on buddy?” 

I look at him and say “it’s all falling apart man”. He chuckles and says “what???” Perplexed. 
I say it again, “everything’s falling apart man”. He walks me back up into the ocean of people and turns me loose once more. To my delight everyone’s happy and dancing again! Woo! 

I look down and see broken glass everywhere, which it turns out doesn’t exist. And I know this because it doesn’t hurt. But I see blood all over the dance floor coming from my socks. I look away and look back and it’s gone. Fuck me. 

Now I’m in the kitchen-turned-dance floor making a plan to push through about 40 people to get to the sink and get some water because I don’t feel well at all. I throw that plan out the window immediately. However, something catches my eye from under a piece of furniture in the other room where nobody is. It’s my case of beer! And it looks fucking delicious. 

So I start pounding beers and suddenly I feel
Fucking fantastic. I go back into the kitchen and my buddy is playing guitar and singing songs and has the WHOLE PARTY singing along. So I sit right by his side and start belting out tunes. The it all becomes a blur of smiling faces, dancing with girls, singing, and falling around like an idiot. 

Suddenly I snap out of it and it’s just 5 of us left there. All my buddies I came with are gone and it’s fucking daylight. I check the time once more, 6:45! Where’s the fucking night gone! 

I run outside trying to find my buddies and I see one of them getting in his car. “Yes” I think, “time to go home”. So I hopped in his car with whatever alcohol I raided from the remnants of the party and we take off. Now the rest of my buddies are in a panic because they don’t know what happened to me, but it all worked out. 

As time goes on I start wondering why I tripped so fucking hard but never get an answer. 2 grams? Not possible. Several years later I’m doing some work for mushroom guy’s sister, my ex. We get to talking about that party and she tells me. And it’s like a lightbulb moment. 

“2 grams?! Hahahahahaha!” 

“Whats so funny?” 

“You dickhead, you ate almost 6 grams of mushrooms that night!” 

Apparently each chocolate had between 5.5-6.5 grams of mushrooms in it. 

Ahhhhh. It all makes sense now. 

Tl;dr - if someone offers you mushrooms in chocolate form at a party and says they “don’t know what’s in each one”, EXERCISE CAUTION!I’m a long time lurker and semi-avid poster, but I setup this throwaway account to really talk about my work life and drugs.

I have a very specialized job function at a huge factory, that employs over 4000+ employees, where I fix a specific production line equipment.  I’ve been doing this job working w/ this equipment for over 15 years and I know everything about this giant machine.  When this machine breaks down, it costs the company $40,000 in losses per hour.  I’m so good, I can fix it very, very quickly.  And management knows this - everyone knows this - it’s so fucking easy to me, but it’s a very complex process for others.  It pays very well, I’m untouchable - but it’s not challenging for me at all.

Here’s the thing: this piece of production machinery has an average fail rate of 1 in every 26 days.  I have absolutely nothing to do otherwise.  Not only is this job simple to me, it’s boring as shit.

So... I spend most of my days experimenting with drugs on most work days.  Taking drugs, combining drugs, ordering drugs, sharing drug stories w/ folks on the factory floor, jerking off on drugs at my desk.  I’ve had coke, acid, weed, addy, ghb, ketamine, 8 TB of porn, Netflix, Taco Bell, and lube.  My desk is on the dark corner 3rd sub level of the building below rows of metal piping surrounded by piles of parts and electronic boards.  I’ve successfully repaired said machine while tweaked out, hallucinating, stoned, and sometimes all the above.  One time, I fixed the machine when it wasn’t even broken.

Think of Milton from Office Space.  I have no coworkers.  I spend my sober time on Reddit, reading European literature, and doing pull-ups on the metal pipes.  Everyone says I have the dream job, paid over six figures, highly skilled.  To me, I feel like this is voluntary jail.

You can do drugs everyday and still be successfulI smoked some keef in the morning and got pretty fucked up but needed some breakfast... I’ve broken my morale cereal code, what have I becomeJust kidding. Who the fuck would do that? You should get your ass kicked and thrown in prison for doing that. Fuck that's irresponsible and quite dangerous.So I was in my backyard, hangin out, chopping lines on an old cellphone when my neighbour peaks out his yard and asks what I'm up to (my neighbour is really friendly, fuckin rube) I couldn't think of an explanation for what I'm doing other than "Oh, I'm just doing a little science experiment, you know that thing where you take the baking powder and put it in vinegar?" that seemed to convince him that I was up to nothing but good. Unfortunately, he came in to his backyard with his kids, he said "Don't mind if the kids watch do ya? *heheh*", and he invited them to come in to my yard and go see it! Excellent! I told them to wait a moment while I went to go get the vinegar. I grabbed the dimebag of coke I had, shoved it in my pocket, and carefully brought the phone with freshly cut lines of coke on top of it inside. 

I dumped the coke on the table (in to one surprisingly perfect looking mega-line) and grabbed baking soda and chopped that in to a line (don't worry, I licked the phone right before this so no cocaine waste) and grabbed a bottle and put vinegar in to it.

Went back outside, performed the fun trick for the kids, it fizzed and they were pleased and my neighbours suspicions (if he had any) were put to rest. I went back inside, rolled a $5 bill and railed the fat line on my kitchen table and started writing this.

tl;dr: elementary school science fairs saved my ass

edit: no one has caught the title it seems. sorry about that anyway, i meant 'baking powder in vinegar'* fuckSo yesterday was a very taxing work day for me, really took it out of me more than most days.

I came home at like 8 and rolled this fat joint sprinkled with rosin and crumble and sat in my chair, then I guess I lit it and passed out like fucking instantly cuz I just woke up after a pretty solid like 6 hour sleep with this joint in my hand that has not been smoked at all.

So I smoked it now I’m smoking another and I’m pretty high and VERY hungry. I’ll probably eat something and pass out again.

I’m not sure why I posted this, but hey if you read it thanks for doin that. Have fun out there friends 
TL;DR at bottom

I want to discuss this topic with you all and get feedback on my perspective. If you agree or disagree, I'm interested.

An easy way to get addicted to a drug is thinking that you are incapable of feeling what you feel or accomplishing what you accomplish on the drug while sober. Obviously, you can't feel *exactly* the way you feel on some drugs like LSD, cocaine, heroin, etc. because those states have properties unique to having that drug in your system. You can save yourself a lot of trouble by believing that you'll be fine without your drugs from the get-go. 

(Not including pharmaceutical medications for mental disorders like schzophrenia, bipolar, multiple personalities, ADD/ADHD and related disorders especially in severe cases, and other debilitating disorders. I am not a pharmacologist, and don't know enough to speak on those things, so i won't. I'm talking about potentially addictive recreational drugs.)

But the sense of security you feel, or kicking the blues, or being social, or having a lot of focus and concentration? We don't need drugs to do that because those things come from us. Drugs don't fix your problems, you have to do that yourself.

Want to be secure in yourself and love yourself the way you do on Molly? Want to kick your social anxiety like you do while rolling or on Xanax or Coke? Want to not give a fuck? Want to be peace like on Acid or Mushrooms? Work on positive self talk, getting out of your comfort zone socially, taking risks and having the confidence to succeed or fail, have good nutrition, exercise, meditation, etc. Love yourself by living that way. Take care of your mind and body *because* you love yourself, not because doing so will give you more opportunities to be satisfied.

Want to crank out homework the way you do on adderall? Work on getting good sleep and diet, study outside of class, get organized anr train your brain and practice focusing your mind and apply yourself!

Drugs like these will at best bring something already within you to the surface.

It's the same way with sex and relationships. You don't feel good about yourself because you're in a relationship or have a lot of sex. Those things just help you to see the light in yourself and appreciate yourself more. In *Atlas Shrugged*, Ayn Rand wrote that sex is not the cause of self esteem, it's the effect of it.

TL;DR: Drugs don't make you happy, they help you at best. You have to create your happiness because it comes from within. You still have to do the work outside of being high in order for it to stick. Happiness has more to do with the way you live your life than comfort and security.

Edit: added ADHD to the list of disorders that I don't wrap in to the "using as a crutch when you don't need it" point.I've led a relatively normal life, working largely in IT and raising a family in the UK. Later in life, I became interested in researching psychedelics and recording my experiences. I also frequented the online drug forums, where I noticed that some users would suddenly drop off the radar, often having made a mistake and died during their experimentation.

I found this to be really disturbing, and thought that if I could expand and share my knowledge of what to expect for each drug, along with relevant safety information (dosage, duration, precautions, etc), I could help to save some of those lives.

I self-administered the drugs, 157 in total, over a number of years, and turned what I learned into a book: [The Drug Users Bible](https://www.amazon.com/dp/099559368X). I chose this format because I believed it might reach a different constituency of users to a website. I travelled extensively for sourcing and authenticity, basically living the project for extensive periods.

I have been interviewed by Vice and did my first on camera interview with Freethink, available [here](https://www.freethink.com/shows/dope-science/drug-use).

Please feel free to ask me literally anything, including on the drugs, the journey, the places, or anything else. I will try my best to give a sensible but at least an honest answer.

FOOTNOTE: There are hundreds of question, which is good... but it is taking a while to answer them all. Rest assured that I will get through them and answer every one. :-)So yesterday after my family had gone to sleep and I stopped playing league i thought i could go for a little joint to help me sleep like a baby and unwind a bit. Rolled my little joint and went outside to smoke. My little brother woke up from a nightmare and screamed for my mom. My mom was standing straight ahead of me when i walked in. I thought i could play it off by saying i was seeing my friend but that didnt work. She smelled me and recognized the smell. Yelled at me went to bed gave me some new house rules and yelled at me a little more. I think my hairline went back an inch because she yelled at me so loud. Now she texted me saying she was scared because there was drugs in her house. I guess im pretty fucked. Im kinda scared of going back home. I do all my school work and my chores. Just applied to university. I have all my shit together and she thinks im ruining my life by smoking a fucking plant. She really thinks its safer for me to drink a shit ton of booze than smoke a little joint. I can understand her a bit because she is from the generation of fearing all drugs but alcohol. Sorry for the long text and formatting im on mobile and im not a native speaker, just needed a place to vent.

Edit: i spoke to her when coming home. She did very much of the shouty shouty but we got into an agreement. I wont be bringing drugs in the house and she won’t talk about this anymore. She was very afraid that i wasnt only smoking weed but believed me after alot of talking. She believes that i wont stop but i wont be smoking as much as i did. Also she believed that i have no interest in doing ”harder” drugs. So all is good and im happy my mom took that so well even though i know she doesnt like it.So today marks the day I’m going into sobriety and start a program at rehab.

Can’t remember a day where I was completely sober. 

I’ve bin doing drugs for 8 years now, the last 4 I’ve been using hard drugs.

So yeah, just want to tell someone.

Wish me luck 

✌️


Edit: thank you guys ( and girls) so much for the response, this is amazing. I feel so supported. 

Some of you asked me to keep you updated, I don’t mind if you don’t mind me blabbering on about it. 

I have a few stories I like to get of my chest and just to share my knowledge and talk about the experience if that’s okay.

I’m going to sleep now. Thanks again, so much! 

Maybe talk to you guys tomorrow, we’ll see how it goes.

👋Had a pretty heavy trip yesterday. Have been dealing with some bad depression and self-induced isolation so decided to take 150ug to get some perspective. Had a pretty great trip overall just playing music and watching the visuals. As I went to sleep though I put on some lofi as the visuals were getting kind of fucked up from a mix of tiredness and weed/k. 

As soon as I put the first track on I suddenly could see my dog in crystal clear. It was me walking him then my dad petting him and finally an image of him laying down to die and then a plaque above saying his age and stuff. My mum sold him when I was 10 after only having him for two years, and I didn’t even realise I’d been repressing these feelings of betrayal and anger towards what happened, especially as I felt like I never got to properly say goodbye. 

It was amazing to be able to see and talk to him again and know he’s in a good place. Rip Inky ❤️I thought it would be a good ideea to trip on 10 drops at a rave,

After I took it I started to feel the body high 10 min later

2 hours into the trip and I was tripping harder than ever
I thought it was unusual because I took larger doses in the past

I forced myself to admit that It s not good to smoke weed everyday or trip every 2 months

It made me realize why I started to smoke weed daily for the last 7 months, it wasn't because of stress or to chill, it was because I thought that I can abuse every drug who isn't making you physically addicted and be fine, but oh man I was wrong, it made me realize that this way of thinking is the thinking of a addict, it did stole my motivation, life joy and the most precious thing I was good at, my willpower

My subconscious was telling me that everything in life has to be balanced to have a happy life

I forgot to love myself, go hit the gym hard and bind the relationship with my little sister who I can tell she is disappointed of me because since I smoke we started to go distant till we didn't spoke to each other anymore

It made me disconnect from my family and made me a stranger to them. I disappointed my mom, my dad and my sister, my only family who would do pretty much anything for me.

I have to take the wheel and turn my life on the right path, or the hole I did would be getting to big and I don't know if could climb myself up ever again

Moral of the story, don't abuse anything, even if it's harmless at first and makes u feel good

Try to get in the lifestyle where you can make yourself feel good.

Is it easy?
 Hell no

Is it worth? Absolutely

Don't sell your soul for some chill momentsI go to work, I spend time with friends and family, I go to the gym all the normal things but in my alone time in my room which is my sanctuary especially on weekends, Im getting high as fuck living like a fucking animal eating greasy ass food on my bed in my messy room binge watching movies and tv series and gaming all night with bbq sauce all over my face. I sometimes sleep on the floor just because I can. I piss in water bottles and out of my window I've even considered shitting in my bin but I wont go that far..yeti told myself i'm a pretty cool dude and how glad i am to chill in bed. i said you aren't perfect bro but you're doing work to change things and that's pretty cool.

then i went back to watching tv. thanks for reading3 weeks. feel exhausted, sweaty, and light headed. i pooped a bunch today. like 3 trips. even though its been very fucking hard i still havent gone back to it yet. 



remember to /r/dontgoback. 



STOP SUGGESTING TO TAKE KRATOM IN EVERY POST HOW THE FUCK DO YOU THINK I STOPPED?Ok this is embarrassing and my friends use reddick so throwaway time is here

So last night, I'm on my computer, playing CimSity4, drinking my old bell IPA like every night when I get a snapchat from my meth dealer. 

Now, me and the soon to be ex hore love our meth but there is a difference between us 2. I can control my use, she can't hers. So usually I pick up and distribute small amounts to her at a time. 

I thought "oh he's probably just high" because he usually doesn't text me out of nowhere. He starts asking me weird questions like if I have plans (it was Tuesday at 11:30 pm) and he'll hook me up fat. 

Now, I've always known my dealer was a trip, but not this level of weird. His entire life is a front with him as a stay at home dad and he gives his kids valium. 

Anyway he asked me to "cum over" (yes exact quote) saying he will smoke me down. Me, being a meth addict and all was at his house in under 10 minutes even though it's a good 20 minute walk. Needless to say I was not expecting this at all. 

I get in the door and instantly 2 men grab me. One is my dealer. They tie me up with rope and start hitting me in the face with a lampshade (which only hurt my ego)

It is at this moment that I look up and see my girl friend hanging from the ceiling (no joke) laughing and watching. 

Now what I didn't tell you guys before is that I'm into pegging and my girl used to peg me a lot. I guess she thought I would be OK with a guys dick in my ass too?

But anyway, the guys are taking off their pants and I'm not only thinking their gonna kill me but I just started getting so confused and then my girlfriend told me the whole story right there. 

I guess she offered my dealer my butthole in exchange for $50 sack off crystal and her getting fucked too (not in the ass) 

It was then that I jumped up, kicked my dealers in the sack and ran back to my house with only underwear and shoes on, with my hands tied behind my back with literal rope. 

Haven't seen the cunt since yesterday, she hasn't came home yet. She's probably allowing them to rape her. Anyway, if she comes up, I'm waiting with a shotgunSo last night I was playing around with my dick in the bathroom on 300ug of LSD, and I discovered something amazing. I have replicated it while sober and am amazed at the results. Here’s how you do it:

1. Go to the toilet or shower because you will have to pee first.

2. Hold your flaccid dick in one hand and then use your palm to circle around the head of your dick, similar to what you’d do when making a sphere out of clay.

3. You will get the sudden urge to piss. Do it. Empty your bladder completely.

4. Repeat step two, except this time you won’t pee and you can continue circling your palm around your head. It will feel fucking amazing, almost akin to cumming.

I realize that this isn’t the same thing as jacking off, but you can literally do this whenever you feel like it and it is most definitely pleasurable.

Note: all dicks are not created equal, and if this doesn’t work for you, I’m really sorrysometimes I’ll be vibing and I just look at my water bottle and I’m like what if I drank a lot of water right now

remember to hydrate guys water tastes so fuckng good[Link to the page introducing the bill](https://tomgarrett.house.gov/media/press-releases/garrett-introduces-legislation-remove-marijuana-controlled-substances-list)

Anyone with more knowledge than me on the subject have any idea how notable this is? I feel like I hear about stuff like this happening all the time with little success but I feel it's rarely from Republican origins. This sounds awesome if this actually has a shot at gaining traction.There's not much to say. My friend Cody was a great person whole lot of love heart of gold. A family that cared and a good business to run. Was a great human being all together. I was in a detox facility for heroin. On my seventh day my last day of my Subutex taper, I got the news. I dropped the phone and fell to my knees and beat the s*** out of the floor. I cried that whole day I cried for three more days after that. Today I am in sober living and I live soberly everyday for myself. and the days that I don't have the strength to do it for myself I'll do it for him. I just wanted y'all to know that playing with the reapers are f***** up game. Please please please be careful. I remember being f****** furious when the counselor said this is a part of your story now. because this is not a part of my story this is a good person a good son going into the ground period. I was on the fence whether or not I wanted to get sober in the long run. But the sheer excruciating pain of losing my lifelong best friend to my drug of choice took all the romanticizing out of heroin. This vain m************ drug that loves your veins hates you. And it has stripped me to my core and left a huge hole where my heart is. I love you forever bro and I'm going to do this for you I wish you were here to see me now you would be proud.I've just realised. I'm British and in the summer when I was 18 my friends and myself had a couple of weeks tour around the Western States. I kept a couple Dollar notes in my wallet and for some reason (it felt gangster, like in movies?) it was my go to tool for sniffing whatever needed sniffing. Now it's just habit. I've always used one to sniff stuff with. One night when we were out my mate noticed it was always a Dollar so I gave him the other one and he always uses that. I've been with my wife nearly 10 years and she's never questioned why I've got a filthy Dollar in my wallet.

Editing to give more information because of FAQs.
Here's a link to a picture: https://imgur.com/a/7HtSh3W
My phones not the best so there's not much detail. It's actually probably in better condition than many think it would be. I only do coke or any drugs every few months. So most of the time it's in it's own pocket in my wallet where it just stays so it doesn't get handed round or crumpled up ever. It's probably in better condition than other notes of its age. 
Those who say I should cut back if I've been doing coke for 10 years, don't worry. I've been settled down with a wife for the last few years, as have my friends. As a group (partners included, but not mine. She still knows the rest of us do, it's not a secret, she's just not interested) we all take stuff, but we only go out once every few months and that's the only time I ever take anything.MATES, THIS POST MARKS MY OFFICIAL FIRST WEEK OFF OF HEROIN. WE FUCKING DID IT. 



Next goals: 2 weeks, 3 weeks, 4 weeks, 1 month, 3 months, 6 months, 1 year. 



thank you for all your support/advice/encouragement I seriously wouldn't of been able to do absolutely any of this without you guys.




A bunch of you said you wanted to see my drawings & that is ok I will find a way to post them but until I do you can view the one I did the other day [here!](https://www.reddit.com/r/DrugArt/comments/6mha9o/something_quick_i_did_while_stoned/)



Future plans: join british army this year. I will let you guys know what is going on with that and everything if you still care lol. 

Edit: I know it seems like i'm upbeat or whenever when I make these posts but i'm not. I live in a toxic household & I suffer with severe depression. I just get a little bit of joy when I see your responses. 

Edit: woah! thanks for gold i was actually pretty depressed today!Grow some balls an love yer self, n what the shit. Go look at flowers or something. Boof mushrooms, have a time. Go fuck yourself, you're awesome, byealot of shit happening recently. life being an emotional rollercoaster. am so grateful to have all of you guys support.



am sorry for being absent these past 5 or so days. i never relapsed i just was going through some big depression. and to the troll that said i was a goner: fuck you . on some days im suicidal but never actively. except for that one time i purposefully od'd and if you count slashing wrists badly a suicide attempt.



damnit i need the toilet again peace. 



EDIT: woahh! gold again on a bunch of my progress posts? thank you so much /u/david4ie & I didn't realise this but 14 days is 2 weeks.Back in 2016 I had a job interview and I decided it would be a fantastic idea to take some Xans. So I took i'm not sure how many but it was enough lemme tell you.

I turn up to this interview, CHILL AS FUCK. I'm not nervous at all and to be frank I don't give a shit if they hire me or not. I go to the office where the interview takes place and right away I start treating the dude like a mate, popping really shitty jokes but he laughed thoe.

Like I'm not even sure what the questions were it literally just felt like I was having a chat with my mate on a Saturday night. Except from one question... "Are you okay with working the warehouse when free from your other duties?", easy question. All that was needed was a simple "Yes".

I respond with "That's shit mate, FUCK I swore". I then started laughing uncontrollably at my newest fuck up. Safe to say, I wasn't hired.Background:

Hello all. I'm a 20 year old half mexican-american dude who lives in the state of Sonora, Mexico, very close to Arizona. More precisely in Hermosillo, its biggest and capital city of the state, whose streets have been controlled by "Los Salazar" — a criminal band allied and supported by the Sinaloa's Cartel — which's sustation gets mainly financed by manufacturing meth and weed and crossing it to the US. In order for them to grow up and stay immune from the federal government, their motto "silver or lead" has lead for high commanders and politicians to take up the money and to set things up for the cartels to do them moves. 

That being said, I wanted you guys to get a bit of background on this because this is the reality we live everyday. Sorry if my English isn't that good. 

I remember these story that it happened not too long ago — 2017— when I accidentally got involved with the wrong guy and almost ended up dead.
Back to when I started to fuck with H, money wasn't the thing but finding a dealer since almost one one sell it and the ones who did were addicts from lowkey hoods , so I used to hang up with a junkie I knew from facebook who was able to get me H in exchange of some of it. I never used it daily but more like once or twice a month, and this guy helped me out with it.

Story:

I remember exactly how it happened. The day was perfect and I had the money to get half a gram, so I texted the guy on Facebook, hoping it to get a quick answer so we could meet at the point again; however, it didn't happen so I decided to take an uber to his house and hopefully he will be there. Knocking off his door with no answer, I waited 10 minutes and was thinking to go back home, but just before leaving he finally opened his door and yelled something like "the fuck are u what u want? " then I said "bruh it's me, you look really messed up. Lets go get a fix I got money." he then told me to wait a sec while he was dressing up and then go for it. 

Idk why he was so annoying at the time but i was just there for the dope so I didn't care, besides, he was a fuckin' junkey and u can't expect much from them. His dealer was 30min away from his house and so I accompanied him as we usually used to. I never expected this to happen but once arrived, he told to stay at a corner meanwhile he goes for the fix and gets back as usual, but once was coming, I looked at him running towards me making signs with his face and hands of like "get the fuck outta heree!!!". I had no idea of what was happening. We both were running away when suddenly these truck parked in front of us with a bunch of dudes that forced us to be taken inside as we both were being threatened to shut the fuck up. 

Right after they put a bag in my head so I couldn't see nothing. Once there , I remember being hold up by people. Dudes weren't saying much to me but they did threat my friend by saying "ya te cargo la verga ahora si, joto" which in English would mean "you fucked up already, gay ass". 

Can't be sure how I handled to stay in calm. I knew I fucked up. I used to watch narco videos and stuff, and was very aware these guys were not joke. 

About ten minutes after, the truck parked inside a garage where we were taken off towards inside of some house. A guy took off the bag from my face, as I was laying down in a room whose smell was very weird-nasty. My friend was next to me in the same way. I could hear people talking and moving all around the house, but just one was there looking at us all the time. 

I looked around wondering what was going on. My mind was empty at that moment. Next to me there was the junkie, with his head down and saying nothing at all. Then, I heard some man coming up asking questions related to him. 

A boss-like looking man got inside the room, but as soon as he does  my friend breaks up the ice really quick. He looked to the man and said to him something like:

"Yo, don't worry I got the money already. I can give it to you now u just gotta let me go take it. Please let me go get it, and sorry for the late. I can explain you... " 

Then he got interrupted by the man who was staring at him by saying: "Uh, shut the fuck up u stupid bitch. I ain't gon believe ur bullshit again u dummie. You're done, pal". Then I knew what was going on. 

Suddenly then man looked at me and asks: "And who's these guy??? Told ya to only him!" 

Someone replies: "We don't know, Sr. He was just with him." 

Then he asked me: "Hmm. So who the fuck are u?? " 

I was very scared and was like: "I'm a student... sir... I'm a good person. I'm sorry if I ever offended you. But I've been doing H for a while and he's the only junky I knew... I... I didn't... I won't do it again." 

He replied afterwards: "Hmmm... You shouldn't have come here. We'll see." 

I said "OK" with my head. Then he turned around to talk to his people and they seemed to be chilling and making jokes among them. The man left for a while and once he came back, he looked at us and asked to one of his guys to get him his machete (knife). 

He then proceed to use his phone. The junkie friend began to get very nervous and he even had the guts to talk to him again. Saying "Sr., I'm a father of two little kids, please accept my apologies and give me one more chance..." then I saw tears on his face, followed by his words: "please, just don't. Please". He looked so broken I thought the man would have some mercy on him. 

He got interrupted again by the man who didn't give a shit and said: "TOLD U TO SHUT THE FUCK UP!! ... STOP CRYING OR IMA CUT UR HEAD OFF AND USE IT TO SUCK MY DICK TIL' I NUT AND SEND THEM THE VIDEO....". Among other things he said. I don't remember all anymore. 

I think it was at this moment when my junkie friend kinda accepted he was bout to get killed. And he didn't say anything afterwards, he closed his eyes and began to pray in silence. By then, I knew what it was coming. For god's sake, I don't even want to think about it. I just closed my eyes and felt so scared and horrible. I don't want to describe it. It was so sick. 

I remembered it when the "boss" got the knife on his hand and said "ahora si agarrenmelo a este pendejo" which means "Now yes, hold on to this fucker." He didn't make any resistance at all. They tied him up to a chair with his whole head covered with a bag. 

Afterwards, I closed my eyes and crawled to a corner. Then I started hearing it all. I can't describe how it sounded like but the screams were just so, so terrorific. 

First off someone mentioned to begin with by cutting his fingers off his hands as to start, which appereantly they did. Then he got tortured multiple times before passing out. At some stage they cut his balls off and placed them inside of his own mouth in order to shut it up. Due to his resistance to complain, he was forced to swallow them. They also stabbed him in the ass. There tried to rape him as well but he might have not lasted that long to be aware of that. After a while he just lost councious and died. Once dead, his head was cut off as well as arms and legs. Very remorseless, chillin' bunch of psychopaths who were  joking around, such as taking his head to play soccer or to cook his cock up and eat it. 

As long as it was going on with me, somehow I was still there, alive, with my eyes closed and just praying, praying and praying. Nobody touched me or said anything about me that I could remember. My whole body was in shock as I was lying down at the corner of a wall with my eyes closed, full of fear, asking God for a miracle.

I heard someone asking his boss about myself which freaked me out, the last I remember is opening my eyes and seeing these dead human corpse completely beheaded right in front of me, fully covered of blood, which I think was the last trigger for making me to pass out.

Next morning, I woke up in the middle of the night in a ditch. My face was bleeding, my whole body was hurting. I found a car across the road who drove me to a hospital where I received medical attention. I got traumatised, but I lived to tell the story. My junkie friend didn't. Along the time I've been working on to overcome what it happened that day. I hope u guys never come through shit like this. It's no joke.Hey everyone. I am sending out free fentanyl test strips again in Canada and the USA. If you need some please email me your name and shipping address to [Fentanyl@btnx.com](mailto:Fentanyl@btnx.com) and I will send you 5 free strips. This time I have 3000 strips so I should be able to send them to everyone who needs them.

Here is how to use the test strips on your drugs.

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-ngMXiNc6k4](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-ngMXiNc6k4)

Please be safe over this holiday

Kind Regards

Michael Sunderani

&#x200B;

\*\*\* UPDATE \*\*\*

Thank you so much for all the kind and reddit gold and silver. It's really nice to see so much positivity in a reddit community. I am technically out of strips but I know around the holidays people need these things the most so keep emailing me even if you are late to the thread  I will see what I can do.

Just a reminder to please be patient I have some people helping be send these out so we can respond to more emails quickly. But even then the volume of emails will mean slow responses and slow mail outs. I have not forgotten you I am just going through the list.

Stay Safe Everyone

&#x200B;

\*\*\* FINAL UPDATE \*\*\*

I was able to get an extra 1000 strips but even they are gone and I am very sorry we are out of free strip. If you have not gotten a reply email from us yet do not worry its because we are sending your strips out but we are backlogged because of all the emails we have. We have not been able to process the order yet but we will get to you this week or next. Everyone who did not make it will receive a special offer for a discount price until December 31st. That is the best I can do for now. Again I am really sorry we did not get to send strips to everyone who needs them I will try and get some more as soon as possible.  

&#x200B;I did my best to find accurate age information about redditors in general and found that [the average redditor is actually OLDER now than 5 years ago](https://i.imgur.com/GydFPNC.png). Furthermore, if you look at the FrontPage of /r/drugs on a random day in the past (see [Archive for yourself](https://web.archive.org/web/*/https://www.reddit.com/r/drugs)) there are just as many 'silly' posts then as now ([small sample of frontpages from 2015-2020](https://imgur.com/a/KVfHZxo)). 

You can find the calculations I made, data I used and references in [this Google spreadsheet](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1RGJ4yioszF82XHS3EQZXc6Mnn_9yQyXd/view?usp=sharing). I'll try to answer any questions you have about how I came to these conclusions and my reasoning, 

From what I can gather you've just gotten older and (hopefully) smarter. You're interests and experiences have probably also changed. If you like or dislike a post then use the vote buttons. That is how we influence what reaches the top of the sub. 

###Take care and keep spreading harm reduction information.  
 ^Because ^governments ^don't ^give ^a ^shit ^about ^us ^so ^we ^need ^to ^look ^out ^for ^each ^other

PS [relevant XKCD reference](https://xkcd.com/1053/)(Edit: holy shit this kinda blew up)I’m pretty bored and it’s late so I’m prob not going to get any responses tonight but I have posted a couple times before, the first time I was still stuck in my molly bender, in august 2019 I did molly for the first time, took almost a gram and BEAMED my ass off and after that I did it Every. Single. Weekend, and I did not miss a single week, doesn’t matter if I sold half my shit to the pawn shop as long as I can get high with my friends, I had also been doing cocaine maybe once or twice a week, smoked crack once, take any pills I could really get my hands on and it was kinda fucked. So I did molly every week from august to December 22nd 2019, after a few months it would barely even affect me anymore, I would know I was high but I had no serotonin left for the molly to take out of my brain so it was a really mellow high but I kept on doing it, and people on reddit kept telling me I’m going to die if I keep going and it motivated me to stop and I got basically all of my friend group that was doing molly with me to stop and we have been a lot happier since. Today marks 53 days without molly (I think) if you actually read this whole thing than thank you because I really hope I didn’t write all this for nothing, sorry for the shitty grammar and have a good nightCannabis- 52 uses. 140 less uses than last year. I quit from December 9, 2017 to August 2018; I wanted to improve my mental state, and show my new girlfriend that I was into self improvement. 

After I smoked again I went back to my old ways. 

Nicotine- 261 uses. 187 more uses than last year. That’s what you get when you move in with roommates who have suorins and vapes constantly going round and round, mixed with extreme boredom and a desire to be...not sober. 

Nicotine makes me dizzy and sick after a while, but at least it’s *something.*

Caffeine- 255 uses. 153 more than last year. It’s the same thing. At least there’s some sort of tingle to be felt in the back of my head. 

Kratom- 160 uses. 105 more than in 2017. It seems that by cutting out weed, I only increased my desire to do everything else. I thought I was being healthy. 

Alcohol- 83 uses. 0 net change. Somehow, I managed to drink the exact same amount as last year. This is one success story: I actually remembered and enjoyed most of my 2018 adventures with booze. In 2017, those 83 days were mostly blackouts. 

Phenibut- 33 uses. 29 more than last year. I only discovered its potential in the end of 2017 when mixing it with Kratom, which gave me a feeling unlike anything else. I spent 2018 in a perpetual chase of those first few times. 

Adderall and hydrocodone: 4 and 2 uses respectively. 0 net change. At least I’ve kept those under control. 

Totally sober days (not even caffeine): 13. A decrease of 53 days.  

Out of all the drugs I counted up, this is the statistic that hit me the hardest. I spent only 4% of the year unaltered in any way. 

As another user once so poignantly put it, I microdose sobriety. It’s not my normal anymore: it’s the other. It’s become more foreign than drugs have. 

There’s not really a point to this post. I guess I just want to show that things get put in perspective when you look at them like this. It’s easy to let the days slip by in an endless haze of smoking or sniffing or pill popping or drinking. It’s easy to become enthralled with the trees and forget the forest. But these things add up. 

I recommend everyone start a drug journal. These insights are important. 

Here’s to a better, more healthy 2019. May your habits (whatever they are) improve and your life only get richer. Cheers everybody, and happy new year. 

So there we were yesterday getting high and playing video games and around 12 AM he's passed out on the couch and I'm like, well, time to get home. 

Btw, I walk because my house is like 10 minutes from his. 


But at the time, for some reason, I thought the Xbox One was mine. In my mind I was "oh, this is my Xbox. I brought it because we wanted to play PUBG"

So I disconnect it from his TV, pick up all his games that I also have, and walk home. Next day he hits me with a text "did you take my Xbox last night?"

That's the first thing I saw when I woke up. I apologized but he understood it wasn't malicious hahahaI was having a nightmare trip a few years ago after smoking too much bud on a 200ug trip and I was literally on the verge of just calling an ambulance if I could operate a phone, and my friend put Bob Ross painting a mountain on.

I had the best trip of my life watching that. 

Those happy mountains :) *scrape scrape scrape scrape* beautiful.My best friend lives in a van; I live on my own. Tonight we're celebrating his birthday the way we best know how to: Drugs, tunes, a fire pit in the forest, and a bucket of giggles

It's gonna be a fun one guys!

Edit: 2CB in nature amongst the flowers and my best mate is SO Glorious, I've no more cares left guys

http://imgur.com/a/4tsE02A

Couldnt be happier

Edit2: theres literally Caterpillars crawling on me

Edit³: realised with 8 not 6 2cb. We've had three each and going to climb a tree for sunset

Edit: climbing down in the dark was wild. 4 2cbs each dropped , and I'm in another woldYes, you can enjoy life sober. Life can be fun sober, but you can't have as much fun as you can on drugs. I mean lets be real fellas, these things where grown/created to have fun, if you were an already happy person you can be even happier.

Besides comedowns, bad trips and withdrawals that feel like death, you can't reach the heights you do on certain drugs ever while you're sober. Maybe you could get a similar feeling parachuting out of a plane but then again even that is better with Acid.

AND not to mention that you could quit and live with all those experiences UNDER your belt, life after drugs is better too. I mean look at people who've stopped taking psychedelics. The appreciation for life never goes away, you've seen wild shit and now you want to chill and relax. That's fine. You have a new found appreciation for being sober. There are even drugs that can get you off other more harmful drugs.

Sex? Better with drugs. Music? Better with drugs. Everything is better with drugs. Goodbye.

&#x200B;

EDIT: For the record I am not talking about heroin hahaha, you guys in the comments warning me about meth and shit. I'm talking about the good stuff, weed, acid , shrooms, 2cb and the lot.I'm (21M) feeling extra shitty today so I decided to post this, I hope it doesn't come across as too attention-seeking because that's not my intention.

I got hooked on MDMA/Psychadellics and other party drugs at the age of 16, it was amazing and such a violent break off from my fun but rather uneventful high school life.  Moreover, at 16 I'm entering the cusp of 'adulthood' if you can even call it that, but this made me feel on top of the world. As a kid, you hear many warnings from drug awareness classes and parents telling you the dangers of using. However, this creates such a one-sided view towards it, and when a kid like me one day tries a pill and has the absolute best time of his life, he feels betrayed that the drug awareness classes never informed him of this.

But those warnings have always been right, drugs are bad, especially to a teenager who's reward circuits haven't fully developed yet.  Fast forward to today \*boom\* anxiety, depression and ever-growing suicidal ideation. The only good thing I've got going for me is my strong will, which had to be cultivated over the years, but the rest of the baggage I know I will have for life or at least for the next several years.

Do I regret it? Yes and no, the memories I have formed during the haze were amazing and I cherish them but god damn who'dve known it would hit me like a truck years later. I'm not even in my fucking prime.

Anyways, to those saying you're here for a good time not a long time. I'm telling you the good times end sooner rather than later.

Edit: It's not much but thank you all for how well people have received this post. The support is much more appreciated than you might think. Wish the best for everyone on this sub.**Someone told me to post this here. I don't really come to this sub once, being in my late 20s I find my outlook on drugs is a lot different than most people here. I'm as staunchly pro drug as before after seeing how much misery everything but soft drugs have brought me, my family, my friends, everyone I've ever been locked up with. I'm sure someone will ask about my sobriety, I'm 7 weeks off fent/dope down to 16 grams of kratom a day from 40g. I'm facing prison time for a violation coming but my PO is recommending just to keep me on GPS tether.**   


You can take a criminal out of his neighborhood, but you can’t take his neighborhood out of him. People bring their bad habits with them to prison whether it be drug use or drug dealing the same way gangs from the streets make their way into the corrections system and vice versa. When I went to prison at age 22 I had no desire or thought of reforming my drug habit. I arrived in real prison in early January and got high for my first time while their was still winter.

&#x200B;

I remember my nerves blaring as I sat on a picnic bench with Stump, watching him huddled up into his coat hood with his arms pulled back through the sleeve holes trying to manipulate the homemade lighter inside his jacket, and thought it looked comical but couldn’t laugh. This was the first time I had ever had the nerve to smoke anything in prison, I smelled tobacco and marijuana almost every day and could not believe it. Every time I smelled the sweet sickly aroma I would giggle with delight because I’m still a highschool boy at heart that loves smoking weed where you’re not supposed to. Such a flagrant breach of the rules inside a corrections institute blew my mind… but within 6 months I would be smoking joints behind the softball fence with Gay Mike like it wasn’t against the rules. Things becomes easier like that in addiction.

&#x200B;

Drug use in prison eventually got as normal to me as drug use in the streets. Drugs are a major factor in prison, they produce an unbelievable amount of profit but with drama and violence to match. Drugs are usually ten times the price they would be worth on the street and they still sell out quicker than they can be smuggled in.

&#x200B;

People don’t really get raped in prison anymore but drug debts often lead to a sort of gray area rape. One of the biggest and most powerful subcultures in prison are the Black Muslims. These guys range from Louis Farrakhan like political beliefs to just normal gang bangers that don’t even know the first thing about Islam. In many joints they control the heroin trade through sheer numbers. In MDOC over half the inmates are black and it seems like damn near all the black guys over 35 were in some sort of Muslim group. Every one of the muslim groups does not condone homosexualty but Black Muslim men are notorious for gay sex in the joint. It’s just a known thing that they are “on the down low” more than any other group or subculture. It’s a common prison move, since they often control the heroin, to lure young white guys into heavy drug debts in an attempt to turn them out (“press them for sex”). Basically the alternative offered is either violence or being forced to leave The Yard (Locking Up) and potentially face problems at the next prison.

&#x200B;

For the most part though I didn’t have a bad time in the drug trade. I got into typical shouting matches with friends, argued with black men over my line of credit, was threatened over said line of credit, used dirty needles, and all the same antics I did on the street but never had a violent incident. I did have one close call though, a call so close I almost earned myself a few more years in prison.

&#x200B;

I was fiending hard after watching a re-run of “Drugs Inc” on NattyG in the middle of the afternoon. It was only 2pm and I was already fiending for drugs, it wasn’t looking like today was gonna be one of those “good days”. Someone more experienced with recovery might have noticed the trend of watching “Drugs Inc” then getting high and cut out that specific show out of the schedule, but it was one of my favorites. It doesn’t take much to set off my addiction. Getting a brand new, fresh syringe would set me off like no other… as if a only having a dirty one would stop me!

&#x200B;

I remember it was the Portland episode of Drugs Inc. I remember thinking Portland seemed like junky heaven. I wanted to live in Portland for this. I dreamed of a culture that accepted me for what I was. A burden on society, sure, a stain on the napkin of an otherwise beautiful cityscape, me nodded out on a bench. Not a menace, not a villain, just a guy with problems but no nefarious intent. All my life I dreamed of a place where they would just let a junky be a junky. I can take being dopesick, I can take spending all my money, I can take being alone, I just can’t take getting locked up. Portland and those pacific northwest cities seem like they don’t put you down just for being a fiend. I came down with 2 years for failing a drug test in Michigan. But I wasn’t in Portland, I was in Jackson, MI, but I could get heroin on credit.

&#x200B;

Jackson, MI is known for the MDOC with multiple prisons in the city along with quarantine. It’s also a city with a hood that doesn’t get the publicity of Saginaw or Flint but still bangs hard as fuck. Some of the craziest white guys I’ve met in my life were meth cooks from Jackson County. Some of the hardest GD’s (Gangster Disciples) I ever met were from Jackson City. Jackson also produced a strange amount of white GD’s which is something I can’t much comment on. In the parole violator camp the Jackson boys always clique up heavy. It wasn’t much of a surprise that the Jackson clique in prison were major players in the drug game due to their geographic proximity.

&#x200B;

Tank was a black kid in his mid 20’s. It’s easy to describe him as a kid because of his smaller build compared to all the other black guys in prison but he commanded as much respect as anyone. I thought that even without the drug connection he might have held just as much power in some way or another. I had many dealers in prison I got friendly with who would give me long grace periods before I had to pay my debts and never gave me terse words over big debts. Tank wasn’t like that. With him you paid your debt when it was expected and he never warmed up to me even after multiple successful deals. He had the least problems with debt collection of any dealer I ever saw because of this stone demeanor though.

&#x200B;

The fact that Tank and his crew were operating this criminal organization from the fuckin’ *honor* dorm tells you all you need to know about how “on the ball” MDOC is. I swear that more dope came out of the “Change for Life” (aka “Cons for life”) honor dorm. Not to mention the guy that got caught with 34 knives there. I spent many hours of my life sitting on the picnic tables outside the honor unit waiting for Pooky to get the drugs from Ray Ray and have Junebug run them out to me. You would think since we are fenced inside a small area a prison drug deal would be at least fast but leave it to black ingenuity to find a way to make the white man suffer even more in his chemical and physical bondage.

&#x200B;

My sewn-up dirty New Balances pitter pattered across the basketball courts as I made my way towards C-Unit. “Makin’ my way downtown…” my body bounced and swayed ipsy-pipsy as my enthusiasm for life bloomed and my outlook rose more and more positive. In the back of my mind the rotten idea bloomed, “What if I can’t get the drugs?”, I blocked the negative vibes out and focused on the positive, the syringe is always half *full*. The drugs were on The Yard the day before yesterday, and the day before that, and the day before that. But they weren’t here *so long* that the stash would have been ran through. The dealers never fucking let you know when the stash is getting low though.

&#x200B;

I side stepped a few pick up basketball games and walked by Faggot Beach (the volleyball court) and C unit came into my view. I made a quick scan of the crowd in front of the unit trying to spot someone I knew or Tank himself. I needed someone from C unit to go in and get Tank for me. I saw Bike Chain Mike Augastinus but that would be my last resort, I didn’t need Bike Chain knowing I had money or dope. I slowed down my step and considered asking a stranger to go inside and get Tank.

&#x200B;

Just when the chips were down Kyle Brewer emerged from the door with his thick black jazz musician MDOC sunglasses scanning the compound. Luck! Nothing better than a friend to shoot a move with. Kyle walked towards me muscles pushing out of his mint fresh white tank top. His arms and neck were covered in crude tattoos with “FUCK” running down one bicep and “OFF” down the other. He was often referred to as a “Solid Honkey” because of his adherence to his word and speed of paying debts. Kyle wasn’t my closest friend but I liked him more than just about anybody on The Yard. I asked Kyle to run back into his unit and give Tank a doorcall (This is sending someone into a housing unit you do not lock in to get someone). As soon as he heard my question his face turned to frustration, right away I could see he’d been getting sent in and out for people.

&#x200B;

“Good luck, mothafucka we’ve been door callin’ this nigga for half an hour,” a voice called from a picnic table.

&#x200B;

It was Trenton Palmer and Pooh-Bear, the rest of the Jackson drug ring. They had three homemade prison calzones made with dough stolen from the chow hall. One was in front of each of them with the other in front of the empty seat, obviously waiting for Tank.My heart sank with the realization there was obviously a difficulty in locating Tank.

&#x200B;

“Is he in the unit? Is he in a class or something? Or someone else on The Yard?”

&#x200B;

“He’s gotta be in there. He don’t have class today and we checked everywhere else,” answered Pooh Bear. I didn’t know Pooh as well and it was clear he was taking some pleasure in my obvious fiending.

&#x200B;

“I called fucking everywhere, his cube, both bathrooms, the day room. He’s not in there,” said Kyle.

&#x200B;

Just then Tank emerged through the double doors in button down MDOC blues. Why anyone wears state blues (*“I’m here now! In state blues. Tub of chow hall butter and some sewn-up shoes!”*) when you can just wear a white t-shirt or tank top is beyond me. I suppose Tank was probably institutionalized having been in prison half a decade but appearing to be only in his mid 20s. He was doing a 7 year sentenced for Armed Robbery after hitting a 7-11 for 70 dollars. It was an odd contrast that a guy running such a lucrative drug ring in prison was committing such desperate and petty crimes in the streets. I tried to flag down Tank first but Trent and Pooh Bear were louder and more boisterous than me and gained his attention first. Before they could finish asking where he had been Tank roared over both of them.

&#x200B;

“I was beatin’ my fuckin’ meat, nigga!”

&#x200B;

Tank had been jacking off in the bathroom to porn, which he was returning to Trent (who had a serious collection), and had ignored Kyle’s calls for him (understandable).  Trent glanced at me and locked eyes for a minute with a look that told me he was still holding. I instantly felt relieved but glanced at the calzone laid out on cardboard and knew he would most likely want to eat before getting the dope out of hiding. “*The first thing that you learn is that you always gotta wait*”. The Dopeman always has a way of hassling you around, even the good ones turn like this. Even in a place where we are literally confirmed they found ways to make me anxiously wait. Prison, home of the 2 hour drug deal.

&#x200B;

Calzones were eaten, steps were paced, watches were glanced at, prices were talked and we settled on 8 packs for $400 to be paid no later than a week. Tank went in for the dope, came back out, and things felt really right for the first time since the last time I knew I was about to get dope. Tank motioned for me to follow him away from C unit, showing respect for the unit’s “Honor Dorm” status. Kyle followed with me to make sure everything went OK. He was a solid guy like that and was one of the few people that wouldn’t just stick around in hopes of getting free dope. His tolerance was nothing and I considered giving him a shot. The day had darkened and the sun looked like shaded colored pencil. It was beautiful and a great time of day to get high but I wished it was earlier in the day so I could fully experience my high outside. I would most likely stay up all night reading, writing, and compulsively doing push ups. People knew there was dope on the compound when I was frantically running sprint/pushup circuits.

&#x200B;

For some reason that to this day baffles me Tank led us all to the Big Weight Pit. This was nearly in the center of the yard and not obfuscated from view in any way. To make things worse it was 8:30pm, which meant The Pit was closing, which meant there was a CO present to lock up the weights. Before I could voice my concerns Tank shoved an egg sized ball into my hand.

&#x200B;

I interlude to tell you that $400 worth of heroin prison is NOT an egg-sized chunk. $400 worth of heroin in the world isn’t even close to being that big. Tank in true black-drug-dealer fashion had managed to inconvience everyone involved in the transport of said narcotics by packaging a small amount of drugs in a large amount of paper. This egg sized bundle contained about half a marble worth of heroin all together. There were 8 separate $50 folds of magazine paper with dope all packaged inside an entire sandwich baggie. “What a fucking waste of time and space,” this is what was on my mind when I heard CO Fuqua shout at me.

&#x200B;

“You two! Shakedown, right now,” CO Fuqua was tall, black, muscular, and striding towards us at an authoritarian pace. The dope was in my fist, he was maybe 15-20 feet away and approaching quick. I’ve never been a good criminal, I freeze up way too easy but prison had conditioned me to act without thinking. I brought my fist to my face and put the package into my mouth. I’ll let him tackle me and take whatever ticket that is, plus the Substance Abuse ticket I get when they inevitably drug test me later. I will not just allow myself to catch a possession from *inside* the joint.

&#x200B;

The package passed my lips and felt large in my mouth. I braced for impact but nothing happened. Maybe it was God, maybe CO Fuqua had just glanced away, but as he closed in at about 5 feet he didn’t let on that he saw anything. Now I had to do something with this egg in my mouth. I prepared to choke and swallowed hard. The packaging compacted a lot, thankfully it was a thin sandwich baggie. I felt the packaging slide down my throat and felt sad knowing it wasn’t sealed so there’d be no point in trying to puke it up. Before it reached the bottom of my throat movement stopped. I checked if I could breathe and only a tiny wisp of air came through.

&#x200B;

Suddenly I panicked and became very away of my surroundings. Fuqua hadn’t saw me shoot the move, but every other person around The Pit did. The white noise of voices quieted down slightly as conversations cut off to watch and others became hushed. I could see everyone’s eyes were on me and you could even see the groups movement slowed a little bit and body language tensed up. Fuck! Why are they making it hot like this!

&#x200B;

“IDs, now,” Fuqua’s voice demanded respect and he was more aggressive than most black COs. I only now realized that Tank was nowhere to be seen and Fuqua was not also demanding Tank’s prison ID but rather Kyle’s. I was struck with hope that maybe he hadn’t witnessed the actual drug deal after all. I reached into my pocket and handed him my ID. Time slowed down and I tried to keep my breathing normal as I struggled to get air through the miniscule opening. A paranoid daydream played in my head of me holding my breath for as long as I can before breathing in deeply through the small opening, causing a sharp whistling that pierces the silent nightmare and alerts Fuqua to my contraband. Maria, Full of Grace, Johnboy, Full of Dope.

&#x200B;

“What’s your name?” Fuck!

&#x200B;

“Kyle Brewer,” Kyle answered first giving me a minute to think. Why the fuck does he need me to speak? My name is on the fuckin’ card! Fuqua handed Kyle back his ID and his gaze shifted to me. I waited for him to speak hoping for another miracle.

&#x200B;

“What about you, son?” He spoke in such an alpha confident way my hopes of getting one over on this man diminished. I did the only thing I could do and tried to speak my name.

&#x200B;

“uhOhn, uHoonEe…,” someone the lack of confidence in my answer was somehow clear in what came out as gibberish. It sounded like I either had marbles in my mouth… or something in my throat.

&#x200B;

“What? What the fuck did you say?” Fuqua was terse before but now he was bonafide upset.

&#x200B;

“uhOhn...uHoonEe!” I tried to form words but it came out the same as before just louder.

&#x200B;

“Open your fuckin’ mouth. Right now,” these words were actually said quieter than any previous exchange but they bit way harder. Now I was really fucked, and after making it this far. I opened wide and didn’t try any tongue tricks lest he examine even closer. Once again, I braced for impact.

&#x200B;

Nothing came. I guess the package was actually lodged too far down my throat for him to see. One more bullet dodged, the only problem was Fuqua wasn’t letting up about my suspicious dialect.

&#x200B;

“Why the fuck do you sound like that?” He demanded. I tried to think of answer and realized I wouldn’t be able to vocalize it anyways. I didn’t get a miracle, I didn’t have a guardian angel or God either. You don’t need those when you have a Sold Honkey watching your back.

&#x200B;

“Hey, man! Leave him alone! He’s got a fuckin’ speech impediment!” Kyle shouted back, matching Fuquas previous intensity. He said it with righteousness, he said it with confidence that assured everyone -he- was in the right. A hail mary play by the Master of Improv! Fuqua’s body language relaxed and he shrank back, it was working!

&#x200B;

“Oh, yeah, sorry…” Fuqua muttered. A few black faces watching from the crowd snickered but for the most part played it cool. He had actually fucking apologized on top of everything. He didn’t stay meek for long and proceeded to search the both of us with another CO coming to assist him. I hadn’t had a decent breath in over a minute and the tiny wisps I was getting weren’t enough. I could feel the shortness of breath gaining quicker and quicker.

I moved my feet apart widening my stance as the large black man’s hand reached up my inner thigh. I had already resigned that a GI Joe motherfucker like this was most definitely a ball-grabber and for a third time I braced for impact. Thankfully black homophobia prevailed and his hand stopped only slightly above the back of my knee. He reached into my front pocket and pulled out the bottle cap I used to mix my dope in. I prayed that he wasn’t that street smart and that there wasn’t a dried up cotton filter stuck to the inside of it. Less breath than ever now as I tried to keep my breathing slow with a post-speedball heartrate.

“The fuck is this?”

&#x200B;

I looked at him with eyes that pleaded not to be embarrassed again by speaking in my retard accent and it worked. He handed me back my ID and walked away. I didn’t feel a rush of relief yet. The entire situation had given me a rush of adrenaline from the fight or flight response. My vision was starting to cave in at the edges as the lack of oxygen really got to me. I turned the opposite way as Fuqua and made sure no CO was approaching before I tried to get the dope back up. “Whiteboy got away!” I hear someone call out.

&#x200B;

I push as hard as I can with my throat trying to push the dope out. I knew it was beyond swallowing. I notice Kyle isn’t by my side and I’m alone. I tense my stomach and push harder and the package, moving slowly from my mouth having run dry, comes up my throat and into my mouth.

&#x200B;

Relief and euphoria break through the adrenaline and I realize I’m already facing my unit and I’m thankful for this as I move at a brisk clip across field and concrete. This was what normal people can’t understand, the rush associated with the lifestyle. Some people preferred to have dope delivered or send someone, but I always liked driving to the set to pick up myself. There was no better feeling than cruising back down I-75 knowing you were out of the risky party and almost home free.

&#x200B;

None of the people standing in front of the unit or on the basketball court registered to me as I walked on autopilot through double doors. I turned sharply in the lobby and made my way down the front hallway. The unit was basically a pool barn divided up into 8 man cubicles with walls that went about 8 feet high. People on top bunks were exposed to people walking through the hallway and people laying down for the night to watch TV washed past my peripherals.

&#x200B;

I needed to find Paul Vella (RIP) aka Pauly D. He was also jokingly called “The Dirty Hamster” for his habit of sleeping with snack food wrappers strewn about him (and it *was* a habit, despite his claims of it happening only a few times). He loved prison food more than anyone I ever met and had the Diabetes to prove it, which leads me to another nickname. He was also known, by all the IV drug users on the compound, as “The Needle Man”. The insulin “required” by his lazy pancreas gave him access to syringes, and his giant balls gave him access to steal them. From what he said there was a certain nurse was less on-the-ball about watching their Diabetics administer their insulin and the rest and when she worked he had about a 50% success rate of stealing a syringe. The rest of the nurses would make sure they saw you dispose of the syringe into the sharps container, but she didn’t watch it particularly close and would sometimes turn her back allowing for an opportunity. He would drop the cap of a pen down into the box to create a convincible sound.

&#x200B;

I knew where Paul would be because the last place I saw him was laying in my bunk watching my TV. Paul didn’t really have money and he was one of my best friends even before he started stealing syringes so I genuinely liked to share my food and television with him and he was always the most appreciative out of anyone I did time with. My family ended up driving Paul home from prison so he wouldn’t have to take the bus and gave him a Costco sized tub of peanut butter, which was his prison favorite.

&#x200B;

I turned into my cube and saw from the face of one of my Cubies they weren’t happy about an outsider being in the cube. I didn’t care and walked past him to my bunk and tapped Paul’s shoulder to get his attention from the TV. He pulled out his, well, my headphones and turned to me without speaking. He did that a lot, probably because he had a slight speech impediment… and Hep C, and fucked up watery calves plus swollen feet on top of the ‘beetus. The prison actually issued guys with feet like him special shoes that are infinitely more comfortable than the regular state issues. I deemed them the “Air Force (Type) Ones”.

&#x200B;

“I need to use the loaner,” I said in shame. Paul, also being a Solid Honkey, had given me dibs on the first syringe he ever stole, plus he would let me trade out my used ones for new ones he’d steal. My old syringes became the loaners. I used rigs until the wheels fell off, until you had to use your ear wax to lubricate the plunger. I traded rigs to Pauly D at about a 2/10 and within a week they would be a -7. It would amaze you that the needle could even puncture skin.

&#x200B;

In a bout of self improvement fueled by intravenous drugs I had destroyed my last clean rig one night in the bathroom the last time I used two days prior. Paul had told me I would regret this and I knew then he was right but half ass resolved to prove him wrong. I made it one whole day before I was coming back to him, state orange hat in hand.

&#x200B;

Paul smiled, acknowledging he had been right along but didn’t rub it in thankfully. Paul hopped down from my bunk and led me out of the cube. I walked two cubes down and turned into his cube as I saw him tilt his locker backwards and grab a package wrapped in napkin from between the wall. He walked back towards the doorway of the cube and made sure no police were making rounds. He unwrapped the napkin and I saw two syringes with the numbering completely rubbed off and with numbering that still looked fairly crisp and clean.

&#x200B;

“Now these two are $2 to use and they’re the same, they’re fine. But this one, this one is $5 to use, but when you shoot it you will feel where they money goes” *Pulp Fiction*. He hadn’t quoted the right, or even very close, and it sounded silly with his lispy speech impediment but I appreciated the references none the less.

&#x200B;

“So this one’s clean?” I asked.

&#x200B;

“No, but it’s better than the others”,  He let on that he had been joking and wouldn’t charge me just to use it and just wanted to quote the film.

&#x200B;

I grabbed the half decent looking syringe and hoped maybe the cosmetic damages I was now noticing were from being hidden and not from multiple HIV infected prisoners sweaty palms. I found Fat Josh by the washing machines doing his State Job of laundry porter. I asked him for a cup of bleach and he smiled realizing what I was doing. Fat Josh was the first person to introduce me to drugs in prison and I could tell by his pinned eyes he has been using the loaner too.

&#x200B;

I assembled my shower bag with plastic spoon, cotton swabs, and bottle of hot water all inside and stuck the syringe in my waistband as I floated like a serene zombie with my cup of bleach towards the bathrooms. In security level 1 bathrooms have stalls with doors but they only go up to lower chest level. It’s enough coverage that someone would really have to be leaning over and specifically looking to see below your chest. You could hear the CO’s coming from the jingle of their keys plus they didn’t ever check the stalls anyways.

&#x200B;

I sat down in the stall closet the wall and finally spit the plastic bag out of my mouth. The bindles were all still safe inside. I broke apart each $50 fold of paper each with more disappointment than the last with regards to their size. The 8th fold I sat aside untouched for Kyle and smiled at his quick thinking. A speech Impediment! Ha! CO Fuqua (pronounced: Foo-kwaa) more like “Fuckwad”! I thought as I rinsed the syringe with shitty watered-down prison bleach 5 times. I tried to hold each rinse for a ten count but my pace increased. Finally I mixed $350 dollars worth of heroin with 90 units of hot water. The dope dissolved fine and I noticed for the first time the little rice grains in the bag and some of the dope folds. Tank must have had the dope hidden inside a bag of rice.

&#x200B;

I balled up a Q-tip cotton and dropped it in the mixture. The needle jabbed into the cotton as I pulled back on the plunger and tried to gauge how sharp the needle still was without luck. The dope drew back quickly and easily since the prison used larger 27 gauge size needles for insulin. I rung out the cotton with my finger as if the minuscule amount of dope I was getting out of it would do anything.

&#x200B;

I sat everything down and pressed the needle against my inner arm which gave resistance for a moment before succumbing to the needle which wasn’t terribly dull. I didn’t have to dig long to find the large vein of my inner arm and a thick plume of blood came up in the way blood comes up a large gauge syringe. I pressed all the way down and then some as I release the cord of the shower bag from around my arm. My fist opened and closed as I attempted to pump the blood and after a few seconds the rest of the night was good.

**Epilogue: Well that's the longest short story I ever wrote I think. Kyle  is off parole and doing fine and Tank got out, killed someone, and went right back.**Man's oldest vice. 

Never content until you reach oblivion. 

Those of you drunk right now know this well.

I tell you; beware of strong drink.I was worried about her having a bad trip because she has some shit shes been going through, on top of some mental health problems that could easily have her flip into a negative mindframe. I live on the opposite side of the country and felt like I really couldn't do anything for her,  but maybe I helped. I stayed with her on facetime as she was reaching the threshold and giving her solid advice on what to expect.

I text her about 2 hours later and her husband text me back saying that he just found her phone. I asked him what she was doing and he said she had been laughing for about an hour straight. He sends me a picture of her leaning forward in a chair staring at nothing and says "I guess she's thinking."
At this point I was half worried about her going too far into her problems and having a bad trip but apparently when I called her the next day she slept for about 14 hours and said that she was up all night she would have these laughing about super she couldn't stop laughing like minutes at a time. I was so relieved to hear this and I'm glad she had such a pleasant experience. I partly attribute this to the fact that her husband is incredible and also an experienced psychedelic user, making him a worthy trip sitter for her. I'm so glad she found someone who I know will take care of her, seeing as I'm geographically so distant from her. My sister is really amazing and deserves this guy, they are newly married, about 6 months and I'm fucking grateful for the dude.In my head at least, this is why people can overcome issues like addiction and social anxiety due to psychedelic use. **A lot** (not all) of the time, issues like addiction come from a place of being unhappy about a certain aspect of life/yourself, and the addiction of course acts as the vice that helps you put up with life.

But having a truly good trip means you have to be able to put up with yourself in your entirety, good and bad, and can facilitate the construction of true inner peace and forgiveness for the things you don't like about yourself/your life.

They can teach you to love everything about life and yourself, and there's not another kind of substance in the world that I'm aware of that can truly have such a profound effect.So I went to a NYE techno rave and did some mdma, all fine and dandy, met cool people, hung out with loved friends, yadda yadda, great experience 10/10 would do again.

Now to the part I'm not sure about.... I just went outside for a joint before bed because of a slight feel of the tuesday night blues (not the worst, usually don't get a bad comedown). I came back inside like normal and went to wash my hand and face, BEST feeling when u've smoked trust me!!! Then I caught a glimpse of myself in the mirror and got.. kind of mesmerized... I guess I just got caught up in the moment and went for a cheeky kiss?? I mean I was just kissing the mirror but it felt like I was kissing myself and now I just don't know:/ I have this tingly butterfly in my stomach and it is pretty cool but also weirding me out.. like the fuck did you do that for man

Is it possible to develop a crush on YOURSELF from doing mdma?? Will this feeling go away?Who else misses hitting a cart in the bathroom or smoking a j in the back of the school nervously while your friends look out. Ah coronavirus has me missing those days of being paranoid when the drug dog came outI struggled with eating disorders growing up and still continually struggle with them to this day. When I smoked weed for the first time, I thought it was gonna be an occasional thing. But, of course, it turned into a weekly thing, then a daily thing, then I needed it to sleep. Eventually, I needed to smoke to eat, and my weed habit was completely in control of my diet. Every time I tried to quit smoking habitually I would give up within 2 days due to the fact that I literally could not keep food down without it. Today I had my first meal completely not high, and I know that sounds like nothing but it’s huge for me and I’m really proud.  I didn’t know where to share other than here, so here it is. Here’s to long overdue tolerance breaks, they’re possible!!!!So i’ve been buying from this russian fellow for the last couple of years now, super chill and down to earth guy! He ended up in my city years ago, after leaving russia, not really speaking the language and didnt really have any friends or family around, but through some connects he managed to get one of the best weed i’ve found here! We gradually started chilling more and more, i wouldnt call us friends per se, but i guess as close as it gets. 

He helped me out several times when money was tight, as well as helping me out with other issues, simply by being there to listen! But i never really found a good way of thanking him for everything he’d done, and i’ve seen on this sub several people with the same kind of issue! 

Fast forward to today, when i hit him up to restock, and he tells me that he’s got coronavirus and feeling pretty fucked up by it. Keep in mind, the guy has no family around, and doesn’t really have close friends, or a girlfriend or whatnot. That’s when i finally found a way to thank him for all the times he’s been for me, i managed to create a little care package, with all kinds of stuff he’d want during quarantine, and dropped it off for him at his place (inb4, yes, i kept a distance and wore a mask/gloves). You could see in his eyes how happy that made him as well! 

All in all, what i’m trying to say, is for all of you who have never found the way to repay your dealers for everything they’ve done for you, keep them in mind during these times, they’re people too who might not have a lot of close ones around them, check in on them and see if they, as well, need anything. 

Thank you mr weed man ! ✌🏽

Edit: thank you all for the really kind words, and for spreading the love! I skyped him yesterday and told him about all the support he was getting from all these kind people on the internet, he almost teared up! Stay safe everyone, sending big anti corona energy to all of you, and your friends/family !So, this is my first my post, im still not fully sober so bear with me...

It began on a pretty normal saturday night. I was chillin with some friends in my room when one of them brought up the idea of taking shrooms. It was already a pretty shit day weather-wise, so i was skeptical. But fuck it. I agreed and at this point, my friend, which we'll call Mike, pulls out an enormous ziplock bag of the scariest looking shrooms ive ever seen. Now, ive taken shrooms a handful of times in my day, but this was enough to make me think twice. So i promptly grabbed my scale and weighed out 3.5 grams for each of us. Mike proceeded to call me a raging pussy for what i thought was a reasonable amount. He then topped us all off to 5gs. Btw i was already high as fuck so i didnt argue. We take them.

At first it went as expected. Stomach kinda felt funny, but everything else was also funny, as per usual. The come up was laughs and giggles. Around an hour in, i really started to trip. At this point the disassociation was coming on strong. I also started to notice my surroundings starting to have more of a personality, i was pretty sure i had reached my peak.

I had not reached my peak. I proceeded to trip out more and more as suddenly i forgot i was with my friends entirely and snuck off to the bathroom. I guesss they didnt notice because they were also tripping.

The walk to the bathroom felt like a 5 hour journey, however when i arrived, exhausted from walking, i put my hands on the sink, looked in the mirror (ik, im a fucking idiot) and bugged the FUCK out. 

What happened next is still a blur in my memory. Another friend, who we'll call Jack, had walked in when i was in the bathroom. Upon meeting him, he offered me a line of coke. In my fucked up state i had literally CONVINCED myself this was the answer to all of my problems. After the first line, i saw where Jack had placed the bag of coke and as soon as he left the room I snagged the coke and made a b line for the back door. Remember at this point im actually tripping more than ever in my entire life. I see the bushes beckon me over-- they genuinely looked like my safe haven. After a courageous face first dive, i felt fully protected by the nature entities. I take out the bag of coke and literally finish it within a 20 minute consequetive span. After an array of bumps off my house key, i proceeded to circle around the house 5 times and then ran back in the house. As soon as i enter the room filled with my friends tripping, i put on boom boom pow by blacked eye peas. As soon as the chorus hit i blacked out. My friends tell me i started break dancing and wouldnt stop for 30 minutes. I guess i slept after that.

Its currently 4 pm the next day and ive never felt weirder. Gg boizThe moment you try and bring up the downsides of weed you get downvoted into an oblivion. Guess what? Any sort of drug you do has its downsides. Stop acting like fucking kids,jesus. Yea weed might be one of the safest drug but its fucking looney to act like there isnt downsides.Imagine waking up from a crazy night out, on Xanax, in jail, and not knowing why you were there; and when you ask what you charges are, they read you: 2 counts of murder in the first degree and 2 counts of robbery with a dangerous weapon and 2 counts of conspiracy. Imagine feeling the panic creep up your back and set in, as you realize what you have just done. That’s what happened to a close friend of mine. 

This all happened about 3 years ago. Let’s call the guy T. T was a tall, lanky Native American Indian boy, who always wore clothes that were too big for him. T had always been in and out of trouble from a young age, he was the local dope boy, who came from generations of drug dealers, and drug users. He was taught from an early age, by his family, how to get away with committing crimes, and how to sell dope. He never made it past 9th grade, and he wasn’t an intellectual, but he knew how to sell drugs, and he knew how the streets worked. 

When he was 16 he got caught with heroin on school grounds and was on probation for about 4 years. He was always a “hood cat” and was always getting into fights with people, or robbing people. Everybody always knew not to fuck with T. He was the same age as my brother, and they were tight, so he never beat me, although a few times when he was zannied back he would talk shit to me, but nothing ever too serious. 

He was my first official drug dealer, selling me Xanax Percs and weed when I was around 15-he was 19 then. T had always smoked weed, and ate Xanax. He told me when he was in elementary school his mama would make him eat a 1mg blue football (xanax) before school so he wouldn’t act up. He was a wild guy. When he was around 20, the opiate epidemic got serious, and he got a taste of it, first hand. 

The first time I ever tried heroin, I was with T. I was 16 and he was 20. He had gave his uncle a ride to reup, and his uncle dropped a bundle of heroin in the back seat of his car, and he found it. (T’s uncle was a big drug dealer)...last week he got busted for trafficking heroin for the 4th time, and was given a 1 Million dollar bond; anyways, We had never done any hard drugs like heroin, but we popped a bag open, and snorted a line. 

Within 3 years T was strung out on Opanas and heroin, and so was I. I remember riding with him to get opanas, as we both sniffled and sneezed the whole ride there. One night T takes a few too many Xanax, and decides to go rob someone. There was an Old black man that lived in the country, who got prescribed Opanas, Roxy 30s, Xanax, and dilaudid. 

The old black guy was 81 years old, and paralyzed from the waist down. T went to his house at about 10pm and knocked on his door. I think T’s intentions were to strong arm him, but the old man surprised T and pulled out a gun of his own. T shot him in the head, and took his pills. I guess T’s mentality was, well I already robbed one guy, so why not another.

There was another Old Black man, who was a weed and cocaine dealer. He was well known through the community as being the “OG” and supplied all his sons, nephews, and cousins, who were all low level drug dealers. They were all crips, or “Loccs” as they called each other. The old man was known to have upwards of 10pounds of mid at a time, and up to a kilo of cocaine at a time. It was a well known rumor in our area, that he would have “shoeboxes full of money under his bed.”

T knew the OG wasn’t going to give it up easy. T went to his house, and knocked on the door, and when the guy asked who’s there through the door, T fired 4 shots through the door, all striking him in the chest, and killing him. The old man didn’t have “shoe boxes full of money”, and I guess T caught him at a bad time, because he only got off with about 3 pounds of some reggie, and 2 Oz of cocaine, and no money. 

T messaged me that night on Facebook and said word for word “Itz all on dec pillz mid an gurl hit my jack.” The next day, It was all over our local news that the 2 old men were killed. They lived within 9 miles of each other. Within 2 hours of me waking up, I had people calling my phone and telling me “Aye bro, don’t fuck with T, he caught 2 bodies last night.” T got locked up later on in the day. 

He used to call me pretty regularly from jail, and writes me letters every so often. The first time I talked to him he said “Bro I don’t even know what happened, I was zannied back mane and I woke up in jail, and didn’t know why I was here...I thought I got another DWI or something...when I asked what my charges were, they said 2 counts of 1st degree murder...I don’t think I did it bro, I couldn’t have.”

He got sentenced last year. Because of the severity of his crime, and the ages of the men (81, &amp;amp; 76) they were going for the death penalty, but he took a plea deal of 30 years, with 2 years of time served. He will be 55 years old when he gets out. 




Edit: for everyone saying the stories fake here’s his record showing he has 28 year left, and showing his drug charges from high school...if I post the news article it’s going to show where I live and I’d rather stay anonymous to an extent. 

Edit:2 I know drugs aren’t responsible for the crimes he did, he was responsible for what he did. I’m just simply telling the story how it played out. 

Edit3: it has came to my attention that people were able to find out who he was by his charges, and everything in his records I posted, so I have taken down the picture of his record so I don’t doxx him or myself. So I did Xanax for the first time... popped 1mg at 1pm tuesday while taking a shit, then popped a 2nd while driving to the grocery store, forgot what i went there for so ended up grabbing three donuts. Then i randomly met a few mates so that was nice.

After the grocery store I remember putting on the Misfits podcast on spotify and drifting my way home, but after coming home is when I blackout and wake up at 6pm on wednesday, my car was fine but my girlfriend and mom asked me what the fuck i was on so I told them i had taken ”anxiety medication”.

Apparently I was falling all over the house and when my girlfriend asked if I wanted to fuck, play video games, cuddle or go take a walk I of course proceeded to go sit at my computer and google about xanax blackouts, while drooling like a fucking bartard with her next to me.

Apparently I had taken 10 bars total, because my bag is empty and I have not found a single one yet so go figure.

So yeah kids stick to weed fuck xans

TL;DR - got xanned out, went drifting, ate donuts, got yelled at, 8/10 but not taking xans again.

Edit: I’m not in any way condoning the usage of xanax when driving, it was probably the worst thing i’ve done in my life due to the potential risk of hurting myself or others. Sometimes its hard to make the right choices when you are under the influence but please, for the sake of yourself and others DO NOT DRIVE ON XANAX.Took a good dose of ecstacy with my best friend who was doing it for the first time the other day. It was only the second time I had done mdma and I did a bigger dose this time. Hit me pretty hard but I enjoyed every second of it.

The highlight was definitely when I was just peaking and decided to do some nitrous. Clint Eastwood by the Gorillaz plays as soon as the balloon hits me and that wave of pure euphoria consumes me. The timing was perfect. I'm laying on the floor making a sound I can only describe as an angel's orgasm whilst simultaneously murmuring the lyrics and when I finally come to I realise that I've got a bit wet downstairs.

Have I pissed myself? Finger in. Nope, definitely sticky. I'm trying to figure out whether this is really happening or not. Finally, I comprehend that I've ejaculated without thinking sexual thoughts or touching myself. I think that the feeling of pure bliss cause me to jizz in my pants and honestly I'm proud of myself.

Overall I had a great time and my mate has also had a great experience. Has anyone else had anything like this before?Don't let anyone tell you you'll never accomplish anything on drugs. I got higher than astronaut dick and everyone else at the party blacked out drunk by 3 am., was bored as hell and had a lot of synapses firing so I went snooping around my friend's place, found she has a ukulele. Went on the internet. Spent past 5 hours teaching myself how to play the ukulele. I can now play ukulele

moral of the story drugs are okie dokie

edit: now that I'm sober I can more accurately evaluate my ukulele skills. I'm not very goodMy pet snake, Sherman, died today. He was good. He was there for many of an acid trip. Kept me company on lonely solo toke sessions. Im kinda stunned tbh. That reptile meant a lot to me. His cat eyes and boopable snoot. He was kind. He had been going down hill but when I got him eating I thought he would be okay.

Its weird how a wild animal kept me company and made me feel so loved...
Anyway to the point of my post. Kind stranger. Do a dab for sherman. Do a bong for sherman. Celebrate his life with 7 grams of the finest columbian marching powder, and several russian hookers.

Fuck confederates btw, his name was Sherman after my favorite civil war general William Tecumseh Sherman led a charge that cut the southern states in half and burned Atlanta to the ground. He was an alcoholic, he we, as I, hopelessly depressed and he made something of himself. I hope I can do the same the man and snake to a lesser extent are role models.

TL:DR my snake died, and I think I have a gay thing for a civil war general. Basically do a dab, bong, joint, keg stand whatever it is, I implore you, do it for sherman.

I just did a dab for the guy. You should too.

Edit: I love you guys. Thank you for the awards, my first silver. I am pretty toasted rn and just reorganizing my room. I have him in the freezer, once I am ready I will bury him and do a mushroom/lsd ceremony in the woods near my house. I will make that a live trip report, with my perspective and my sitters perspective. I am in the process of getting yall a pic of sherman, if you dmed me I am going to give you my snap if you aint susI know that the title sounds melancholy and might even evoke pity from some people... But trust me when I say – it was actually the preferred option. I weighed up the decision to take acid with the possibility of driving home for Christmas for hours before actually taking it. I guess I came to the conclusion that I would feel more comfortable taking LSD in my room and being “myself” than going home to my family who don’t accept me for being gay. I’ve told them before, but they’re in big-time denial. What can you do.

The trip itself though, was pretty cool. I showered, washed my hair for the come-up (which felt amazing!) and then played lots of bass guitar. If you’ve never played an instrument under the influence of LSD, I strongly recommend that you do. Even if you’ve never played it before. It’s so inspiring. You learn so much about the instrument and I like to think it improves your playing, too. Also, once you pick up the instrument, it’s so hard to put it back down. 

After finally being able to put the bass down, I rode the comedown by watching a bunch DVD concerts. Red Hot Chili Peppers get a special mention, because the ‘Live at Slane Castle’ DVD is just phenomenal. I was truly in a trance. The body high was intense for this trip. It felt like my whole body is constantly buzzing. It was a total happy place. Overall, it was a very enjoyable trip. I know it might be terrible to say, but I don’t regret my decision at all.

Edit: Thank you all for your support. You've made me feel so much better about my decision. Thank you also to those two kind Redditors for the silver!Yesterday I had made a post asking for advice on how to hide my habit because a teacher had noticed my track marks (look at my last post please).

None of the reply’s actually gave me the advice I was asking for. They were all concerned about me. At first I was mad because I didn’t ask for their opinion. But when more kept coming I had a moment of clarity and for the first time looked at my situation. 

This is the first time I’m being honest about this, you are the only people I have and will every tell.

I discovered opiates at age 14. Two years ago. I won’t get into to much detail about how the last two year went. But I have been dependent on opiates for a whole year. The last 3 months my choice of opiate turned to heroin (cheaper than oxy) and preferred method is injection.

I wake up in agony every morning, And if I don’t get my fix that morning there is no going to school until i do. I’m late a lot because of  wing dope sick.

I have a part time job and work full time on weekends. My parents think i work as a intern and don’t get paid, but I just spend my paychecks on drugs

My parents have been suspicious and accused me of “being on drugs” before. They noticed my change in appearance and behaviors, and they provably noticed me nodding off. When they started getting clues I started being more discreet. I spent less time at my house and put up a act every time I was home. That was enough to convince them because a few week ago they apologized for accusing me of using.

I don’t know what to do. I have only felt the beginning of my withdrawals before, I don’t want to imagine what it’s gonna feel like detoxing. 

I’m am literally alone in this. There is only ONE person that knows for sure I do drugs; and that is a college kid who is my dealer. 

I am completely alone in this. I guess its a  good thing I don’t have drug addicted friends or giving this up would be more difficult. But it’s been so hard carrying this burden.

As you can tell detoxing isn’t gonna be easy and I still have know idea how or when I’m gonna do it. God where do I even get started. 

These thoughts have formed over night, because of this community showing me the reality of my situation. Thank you.

Please help me reach my goal, I need to quit drugs just like I started them; no one needs to know.

But how the fuck do I discreetly detox?





Edit: I just threw away all my needles. I vow to never inject again. . It sounds like the best way is switching back to oxy and weening myself off slowly (maybe throw in some Kratom if I need a little more help). 

You do not know how much your words have  meant to me, thank you so much for your advice. I may not know you guys but right now you are my biggest support, my only support. 


All comments are appreciated .I just want to let everyone know that you can defeat any obstacle in your path, but admitting is the first step. I told her this after driving her away and making her misreable, but enough is enough. Never pick your loved ones over drugs. I have an example to be as a father, and I have to step up. Everyone, please pray for me that I can resist my demons and show my future daughter what a man can be. God Bless all of youWhen I was 15, a few guys I knew had codeine prescriptions and at the time I'd tried lean so I told them that codeine can get you high. I was kinda joking at the time and saying how you could snort it and stuff.

Anyway the next day they all came in with as much codeine as they could get their hands on and just started crushing it on the table and snorting it. They did this for weeks.

The worse part is that codeine needs to be digested in your liver to turn into morphine to get you high. So basically it's my fault that probably hundreds of milligrams of codeine were snorted for no reason.

We're all retardedLet me just share some wisdom with you.

If you see someone's butthole, you know more about them than they do. That is powerful. It is the ultimate display of trust. I wanted to share my love with my sister, so I pulled my pants down, spread my buttcheeks and let her see my butthole. I told her "look at my butthole, sis, look at how much I trust you to see this part of me, that I never see". 

It moved her so much she now has a hard time looking at me.When I was 7 years old, I went to daycare at an elderly lady's house before and after school. There weren't any kids at her daycare that were my age, so I would typically spend my time alone playing in her backyard (ahhh...the good ol days).

One day I met a neighbor kid through the fence in my babysitter's back yard. There was a tall privacy fence separating us. We would just chill and talk until one of us had to go. I would get yelled at by the old bird babysitting me to, "get away from that damn fence!!1"

But not long after, we switched daycares and I never talked to my fence buddy ever again. At the time, I fully regretted not exchanging names with him. Figured he was lost in the ether.

Cut to twenty years after the fact, I'm chilling with my friend-since-high school/weed man just smoking bowls & shootin' the shit. It was a marathon smoke session, and we ran out of hot topics to converse about. 

I brought up how I met a kid through the fence at daycare twenty years ago, and that I had no idea who he was, or if I will ever cross paths with him again.

My weed man says, "where was this daycare?" I said right off 12th & A****. Then I asked, "why?" He told me he lived in that same neighborhood when I would've been in daycare near there. Then he said he also had a fence friend. His fence friend mysteriously stopped talking to him over the fence one day, never to be heard from again.

**MY WEED MAN WAS MY LONG LOST FENCE FRIEND!**

Needless to say, my mind was thoroughly blown. Then we realized that we both dated the same chick in high school, so we were *also* Eskimo Brothers. If that ain't synchronicity, idk what is.

**Q: How did you meet your weed man/plug?**So I'll make this as brief as possible. I met a dude who hooked me up with a connect for the stuff. 1000 dollars for an ounce. Never was a fan of it, tried it a few times, but didn't like the jittery, palm-sweaty manic aspect of the stuff that seems so desirable to connoisseurs of the substance...

Now, I have a history of addiction and depression/anxiety myself. Mainly opiates and benzos, especially heroin. Been to rehab a few times, a couple stints in county. Have been clean for a while now though, and wanted to purchase the coke in order to sell it for a pretty profit as my side hustle.

So about a week ago, I got the brilliant idea to try IVing the coke and seeing how that went, whether I'd like it better than snorting the stuff. BAD BAD idea. Lord God Almighty, mainlining cocaine is NOTHING like sniffing it! I got the most intense euphoric rush is ever had in my life, and I've tried pretty much the entire pharmacopeia of psychoactive substances under the sun.

Things got out of hand. I started slamming it hourly, then half-hourly, then every 10 minutes. I lost 15 pounds over the past week. I lost my job. Knowing how incredibly dangerous, cardiotoxic, and even neurotoxic cocaine is, I knew I was finally on my way to my inevitable untimely demise. The past two days, every shot I'd take, I'd get down on to my knees praying to God to not let me die like this. God took pity on me; he let me live. Despite his mercy, i couldnt stop shooting up the coke I had. And I had 60 grams of it. I wouldn't last another week; I just knew it.

So in one last gasp to continue on with my life, I took 3 massive shots in quick succession, decided that my life was more valuable than $2000, and just flushed the stuff down the toilet.

Now I get to live. So much for my side hustle plans. But at least I'm alive.She is 33, I'm 25. Nice curvy lady with gigantic fun bags, owns her own house and a brand new Jeep Wrangler. I picked her up at some bar a few months ago, and at the time i was seeing two other girls. We hit it off and got a little more serious, so I broke it off with the other two girls by her request. 

Last night we were talking about her doing a bunch of cocaine with randoms, and we got into an argument. It wasn't about me being jealous she was doing cocaine with her friends and some dudes because jealousy is for suckers. My problem is she does copious amounts of adderal every day, and then does a bunch of cocaine. So I was trying to explain the damage she's doing to her heart, and she tells me, "I don't care if I die, I'm living life in the fast lane and that's all there is to it".

Now I may be young but I've partied really really fucking hard and have lost a lot of friends to stupid combinations and overdoses. I remind her about all the brands on my back that she asked me about on a previous date. I told her all those letters are initials for dead homies from the "fast lane". She trivializes it and I say whatever and the proceed to fuck her brains out.

We're laying bed after and I mention this new book I'm reading. She proceeds to tell me books are stupid, and boring, and that maybe I'm "too smart for her". I told her, you know what.. I definitely am. Byyyyeee Felicia!!!

Who the fuck doesn't like books? And who doesn't respect harm reduction? What a trip. Thank god the metaphorical sea has a lot of fish in it... 

P.s. Can't wait to tell my grandson the "a lot of fish in the sea" analogy. He will be so confused because there will be no fish in the sea.I microdose sometimes and have a spray bottle. The bottle stopped spraying and I thought it would be empty so I thought ill just open it and take the last drops. We. I did that I got about 10ml of liquid and in the moment instead of thinking I'd waste it I gulped it down. Wish me luck



Edit: I just woke up! Thanks for all the lovely comments! I'm doing good. Trip was good. I'll post a trip report. You guys are amazing. ❤️Last night I got super Baked off a carty, not the normal type of high but the type of high where your thoughts feel like a monologue, you can feel the earth spinning and you keep telling yourself wow I’m so fucking high. As I’m preparing to go to bed I realize that I forgot my charger in my car, my phone is dead and it’s 1am. I’m contemplating making the journey and decide it’s worth it. I gear up with a flickering blue flash flight and it feels like I’m playing one of those horror games where you’re stuck with nothing but a flashlight. My hearts beating faster then a race car and it feels like the most intense task I’ve ever had to do. I’m peaking around corners to make sure I’m not getting flanked and thankfully I wasn’t. I make a mad dash to my car grab my charger and head back in. A massive wave of relief washes over me as I’ve realized I’ve done it; I’ve secured the charger.So I'm in college and I don't smoke over the summer due to the rules at home. Today I came back and smoked with some friends at their house. I was at a solid 10 so I called an uber to pick me up. The driver was a sweet old white lady and she insisted I sat in the front with her so she could talk to me. I was cool with it and we went on our way.  When we were crossing the intersection on the main road, a car ran a read light full speed and crashed into us. It felt unreal. Like I saw the car coming in slow motion and I thought I was just high and it was gonna stop. Naw nigga. That car destroyed us. The airbags came out and smoke was filling the car quickly. I looked over and the driver was screaming and covered in blood. Her arm was split open. I got out of the car in shock and I realized there was too much smoke and the lady was still in he car so I ran over to help. She told me not to move her because she was in so much pain. I called 911 and the cops got there really fast and they were great. They deff knew I was stoned but they focused on what was more important, helping the woman to safety. My hand is a little sore but other than that I'm fine. The driver who hit us was an asshole frat looking motherfucker who only cared about himself.Well, the title says it all. I was smoking weed with a friend and his friend walked in. This guy is incredibly skinny, like almost anorexic. He uses meth occasionally, as well, but that's not what concerned me.

He told me he drinks 20 cups of instant coffee a day. Now, one cup of instant coffee is 1 teaspoon, according to the internet. This guy puts *1-2 tablespoons* in every one of his cups. He said if he wakes up during the night, he just makes himself a cup of coffee and doesn't go back to sleep for the rest of the night. I bet he sleeps 2-3 hours a night, at most. And he uses meth too, so I can't even imagine how his life is like.I've been drug dealing for the past 4 years now. I did have a year where I didn't sell anything but besides that, it's been pretty steady. The problem is, I just don't think I can stop. It's become an addiction. I don't give a fuck about getting high. I smoke weed and drink alcohol occasionally but, besides that, I haven't touched another drug.

There's probably a lot that has lead up to this point, starting from a young age, but 4 years ago I found the markets and Bitcoin. It was at a point in my life where things were low and I found drug dealing. My first package was a package of Xanax bars. I made $1,000 profit in about 4 days because, at the time, pressed bars weren't very well known so my prices were dirt cheap compared to everyone else's. 

That's the moment things changed for me. The moment where I fucked everything up for myself.

4 years later, here I am. It's a fucking addiction. When I stop, it's for a month, max besides the one year I quit due to personal and OPSEC related reasons. It's a craving I can't make go away. The adrenaline of doing something illegal, the money, the respect, the power you have over your little group of people...I don't know...it's impossible for me to explain so I'll explain the more addicted part now.

The money.

You think drug dealing will ruin your life because of prison or getting robbed, and while true, there's a sneakier way nobody tells you about; MONEY. I've dropped out of college and haven't held down a job more than 6 months due to it. When you make $55-75K a year WITH NO TAXES, everything else is a blur. College? That takes 4 years of being broke! I can't do that! Holding down a minimum wage job? That's like $400 a week, if you're busting ass. I was making $1,000(PROFIT, not GROSS) a week, making a couple moves. I moved bulk only so I wasn't meeting people every 30 minutes to make my money.

I was my own boss and money gave me freedom. Freedom. That's where the addiction comes into play. Drug dealing was 50% of it but the other 50% was the freedom money gave me.

I make about, on average, $4,000 NET profit a month. My monthly bills are only around $1,800 for everything besides food(Love living in a cheap state) so that leaves me a good chunk of change to myself. That leaves me $2,200 a month in my own pocket. This monthly cost includes a maid, once a week, dropping my clothes off at a laundromat to get washed, dried, and folded, and having my groceries delivered to my house. 

I have all the time in the world to myself. It's so addicting.

Want to go play Laser Tag and ride Go-Karts all day? You can! Want to go do 18 holes Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday? Grab some cigars and let's go! Want to take a week long vacation? Easy, all you gotta do is tell your people that you're leaving and to re-up while they can! Then you're free to leave! Want to smoke weed and play video games all day? Done! Want to learn a skill like playing piano, programming, or anything? You can practice 8 hours a day!

I'm not even mentioning the material items. I have a PS4, Xbox One, Nintendo Switch, Gaming PC, MacBook, TaylorMade golf club set, Boosted Board, HTC Vive, 4K TV's, all the smart home gadgets an apartment can have(Lights, outlets, TV's, ect), and clothes galore. I also have a pretty decent car. If I don't have it, I have multiple options to get it. I can either save up and wait, trade product for it, or just up my sales to cover the cost.

Oh, that's another thing you can't do with a paycheck, upping your sales. If I need money or just want to thicken the savings account, I can just push my sales a little harder. Offer a slight discount for more bulk, bring in a different product, or seek out new customers. $6,000 months are not crazy uncommon. Drugs sell themselves. 

So yeah, you can see where everything becomes an addiction. Life is just...easy. Drugs sell themselves. Money gives you freedom. It's a bad mix.

The problem is quitting. I could quit today and have a pretty decent savings to hold me over but after that, I'd have nothing. I have no college education and no work experience I'd be willing to put down on a resume. I have no references. I have no legal connections. I have nothing besides the business I've. built around myself. Surrounded by people who do the same thing that I do.

I have a couple moves I could make but my motivation is shot. I could go back to college, that's a great option. I could hone in on my weed growing skills and save up for when legalization comes to my state. I could build a legit business. 

For now though, I'll stick to what I know and what I'm good at. Hoping to find the dragon I'm chasing.Happy 4/20 to all the weed smokers here!💚
Greetings from Norway!🇳🇴I was practicing my high kicks in my basement... because that's what one does when they get high obviously. ( I literally never do martial arts.. havent in 10 years) . I broke wood beam cause i fuckin' nailed that shit guys. My house is still standing though. Thoughts? Guys, it was a fuckin' sweet kick. I kind of wanna go do more kicks.

EDIT : I've now set up christmas lights ALL over my bedroom, they are so beautiful everyone! You all gotta try this!  
EDIT : EDIT : I'm coming down , and I just want to thank everyone so much for all the amazing vibes. I never thought we could all achieve something so phenomenal and great here but we did it. All of you are amazing, I love you all, and im sure you all are here because you all love eachother. I've learned alot more than i already once new. I hope that you all can experience this great feeling as well! I hope i responded to every single person, if i missed any of you ! I'm so sorry, totally heading to bed really soon though! <3 We're all going to do this again very soon some time! Throwaway account. Over the past year or so my girlfriend and I have developed a bit of a ketamine problem. Pretty much every night without fail we buy 1-2g and share it between us. It's got to the point where I'm spending all my money on it, and we can't seem to have a good time without it. She doesn't seem to think it's much of a problem. She hasn't been earning because of covid, so it's been up to me to provide the money. Whenever I try to get us to stop she gets so moody, constantly pestering me asking if we can get more, and I'm reaching the end of my tether. I love her but she can't seem to get that I'm worried about our health and our finances. Whenever we talk about it, she agrees 'we can stop tomorrow' and 'just after this last g' but it's always tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow. I just don't know where to go from here.I posted a few weeks back about struggling with a xanny addiction. Well the dude hit me up today trying to make a lick and after about 45 minutes (I know, I'm that customer) of soul-searching, I sent him walking. Somebody get a load of me, I'm fucking proud of myself.I miss when drugs were just fun.

It used to feel like an adventure— finding the perfect smoke spot by the beach after school, getting a bus out of the city to go mushroom hunting on half a tab. Taking a pill at a club for the first time and discovering music all over again. Heading to an afters and climbing onto the roof through a skylight, getting a bit ketty and watching the sun rise and the city wake up. 

It’s different now. Going out for two days used to be a novelty, and now it’s just what we all do on the weekends. Except it’s not just the weekends anymore, either, is it? 

My flatmate overdosed on G for the second time a couple of weeks ago, and had to be taken to the hospital. Last week I had to peel him off the living room floor because he’d taken too much, again, already.

Another good friend of mine overdosed, had what the doctors are calling an “unusual epileptic fit” and slipped into a coma. He’s okay now—he’s going out again, partying. 

I’ve started hiding drugs from my boyfriend because if he has them he’ll just get as fucked up as possible and hurt himself. His therapist says he's on the verge of a psychotic episode. But what use is it when any of our flatmates are more than happy to share?

I don’t know why I’m writing this. I guess I just miss how it used to be. I catch glimpses of it sometimes, but they're fewer and further between. I’m only 21 and six months ago I felt invincible. Now it just feels like the lives of everyone around me are falling apart. Maybe mine is too. Maybe that's just growing up.

I’m worried that sometime soon someone’s going to take it too far and end up dead. I’ve been an intravenous heroin and meth user for more than decade. I shot a goofball (heroin/meth) for my first time when I was 17 - a senior in high school. I’m now 29. Just turned 29 last month on August 8th. And for the first time in my life, I hit 365-consecutive days of sobriety. Couldn’t be happier! 🙂Been taking buprenorphine for a couple of days now and I haven't taken a shit in like 4 days. Didn't pay much thought to it, just normal opioid constipation. Today I've been getting high and I drank a lot of milk with food earlier. Im lactose intolerant.

About an hour ago after smoking a bowl and taking more bupre I started feeling a pressure building in my bowels. This gradually turned into a more intense pain until it started feeling like a knife being jabbed into my bowels. I end up alternating between sitting on my toilet and lying on my cold bathroom floor because of the pain for 20 minutes, in actual agony.

I finally muster up my strength and with all my might I push out the blockade from my ass. The floodgates are open. My head is spinning, I almost go unconscious. In the background I can hear "The Great Gig In The Sky by Pink Floyd" playing from my speakers as my vision fades to black. I stay conscious.

I lie down on the floor for a moment as I gather myself. Round 2. I sit down on that bitch and I'm ready. Rip and tear. I shit for like 2 minutes straight and I end up with a cartoonishly large pile of shit in the toilet. I feel free, like a weight has been lifted off my shoulders. This was almost a religious experience. I won.

Edit: I don't know why this blew up so much but thanks everyone lmaoI don’t feel that paranoia, sweating and having insomnia at 5am, my heart racing so bad I feel like I could die any passing second, depressed and regret spending close to £100. 

Instead I’m listening to the rain on my window, warm in bed after a nice smoke of indica and sipping on some premium lager, it’s 10pm and I’ll go to sleep before 12, feeling good just wanted to shareThe other day, I consumed 2 vials of liquid psilocybin, looking to just have a fun afternoon. It actually hit me like a freight train. For about 2 hours, I lied on my bed just tripping my dick off, unable to stand up. At one point, I believe I cusped ego death, and barely avoided it. In this "hole" that I was in mentally, I thought about my problems and how I wanted to change my life. My caffeine dependency was pretty bad, over 1 liter of high strength coffee daily. I wouldn't say I was a "porn addict" but I saw signs that it was heading that way (I have been jerkin' it once a day, every day this year despite wanting to stop). This was not a bad trip by any means, lying on the bed actually gave me some of the most intense euphoria I have ever experienced, even comparable to pure MDMA. In three days, I have had zero desire to watch pornography or drink coffee. I am not even thinking about it, it is almost as if the mushrooms just erased that desire.I took 4 tabs and had to piss. I thought I pissed all over the bathroom, releasing a tidal wave of urine onto every surface in the room. I thought I soaked my pants completely from the waist down. But by the time I finished peeing, I realized I only got a little bit of pee on the bowl. Pee disaster averted.doesnt feel like im actually off any drug because ive replaced heroin with some others and combined with weed/cigs i still dont feel like "me". 


been having shits still a few days ago it even made me puke but i hadnt eaten yet so ntohing came out. 


cant eat because the depresssion always makes me not hungry. cant sleep without pills as usual. 



feel like i have nobody in the world. 



idk i haven't posted in a long time so you've all forgotten bout me i bet. 


im trying to eat bate beans at the moment and watching youtube videos . 


and also my father has been especially hard to deal with recently.


im also drinking rn.Did MDMA with my girlfriend this weekend. We're already high, about to redose, when I mention that people on the internet like to "boof" drugs these days. She doesn't like the idea but after I tell her it's supposed to hit you better that way, eventually we decide to try it.

The problem is we don't have a syringe. So I go to the kitchen to look for a funnel or something we could use as a substitute. I find some straws. I then remember that scene from The Wolf of Wall Street where the guy uses a straw to get coke up a girl's ass.

Straws it is.

So I tell her to get on all fours on the bed. I then insert a straw into her ass and scoop a little crystal into the other end. I try blowing into the straw but it's not doing much.

I think maybe I need to blow harder. So I take a deep breath and put my lips around the straw. But then I feel something in my mouth...

It's the crystals.

As the bitter, chemical taste of the MDMA hits my tongue, I smell a faint aroma of fart. That's when I realised what had happened: she farted the MDMA back into my mouth.

After sitting there for a moment with fart-infused mandy in my mouth, I spit it out. My girlfriend still on the bed with a straw stuck up her ass asking me what's going on. I don't even say anything.

Don't know about you guys but I think a syringe is essential if you're gonna plug crystals.Just stood in the shower crying because yesterday I smoked extremely much and had an "awakening" that I hate myself. Not like this teen depression stuff. Like I genuinely hate myself. I hate how I look, how I act, how I live. I don't want this to be my life. I feel disgusted by the person I became. But changing my life is very hard. Habits don't let you go like that. I just feel guilty and sorry for everything I did.. I just needed to talk about it otherwise I would go mad.My local guy has a policy where for every 10 zip lock bags brought back you get a free gram, he then re-uses the bags that are in good enough condition, thought it was a pretty cool little way to do their partOklahoma used to have some fucked up drug laws. I'm from TX so I've only heard secondhand stories. 

But they just voted to make simple posession of ALL drugs a misdemeanor and they're creating a fund to help with rehab and mental health services.

[Check it out](http://m.tulsaworld.com/news/elections/state-question-criminal-justice-reform-measures-approved-by-voters/article_eaac97df-9651-5559-9a95-89d49e141738.html?mode=jqm)

Being from the vastly superior promise land that is Texas, I hardly, if ever, have nice things to say about Oklahoma. But this time they made some suprising and sensible progress. 
Snorted almost a half gram of ketamine the other night, tripped hard and almost k-holed. Woke up perfectly fine yesterday, studied the whole morning, been productive.

Drank a few glasses yesterday at a university party, didn't even get drunk, just dizzy. Woke up feeling like shit this morning, been sitting on the couch for 4 hours doing literally nothing, feeling nauseous, stomach aching, heavy headache, had diarrhea.

God, I hate alcohol.Are they going to wake up in 10 years time from their never ending blackout and realise they have built a successful career without even realising it..?Ive had a lot of problems with smoking weed and getting paranoid and or anxious over the last year. I recently smoked with someone who was there first time and it made me remember what i loved about weed. The feeling when u cant stop but laugh, how everything is seems new and life just felt interesting. To everyone who has anxiety when smoking weed it’s important to remember to relax. Ur high and thats okay. Stop worrying about how u come off to ppl when u talk, stop worrying about what u have to do when ur not high, stop worrying about what could go wrong. Your high, and thats okay.Fuck mates the road is treacherous but kratom is a lifesaver I wouldn't be where I am without YOU because you told me to buy Kratom & its helped so I need to give u a big hug because it's day 3 & I can't believe we have come this far. I just finished a normal t-break (2-weeks), but this one was different because I started it to catch up on schoolwork. I was somewhat depressed to realize that daily smoking reduced the amount of work I could do. Even more depressing was when I found out that smoking weed every day didn’t only limit my productive hours (I don’t work well while high) but also limited my will to do work when I wasn’t high. Smoking every day made me forget about my lifetime priorities. It let me finish each night with a deluded sense that the day was productive. During my t-break, I caught up on my work and even got ahead. I already took one day off again and I may be done smoking every day. 

When I retire someday, I intend to smoke every day and many times during the day, but now, before I’ve achieved anything, I’m going to be mindful of how weed affects me reaching my goals. If you think you can smoke everyday, think about your long-term goals and whether you are better or worse off being high all the time. For me the answer is in moderation, it preserves my motivation, my time, and my bank account.

Edit: thx for support. If you can smoke at night and manage to reach your full potential you are one of the lucky ones. Even if I wait till 10 pm everyday, I’m still a bit of a blob trying to accomplish things throughout the day. If it works for you, cheers, it doesn’t for me.I have been working in OD prevention since Dec 1999. I worked in the first city sponsored naloxone program in 2003. I run a naloxone program. I’m a former drug user and advocate. Please believe me when I say EVERYONE should have naloxone. In the past year, I’ve seen local cases of fentanyl in meth, heroin, pressed Xanax bars, pressed norcos, crack, and powdered coke. I’ve been reading comments in this forum about how X drug in this area is still safe. None of it is really safe. You don’t need to be panicking but you should be prepared. Find a local place for naloxone and if you can’t find one, ask me and I will problem solve. We (a friend and I) smoked it out of a bong, sandwiched inbetween weed, and torched it from the side at low heat. I smoke a ton of weed but have never tried any sort of psychedelic so I was terrified. I actually remember how badly my hands and legs were shaking when I held the bong. I took two hits and held both of them in counting to twenty before exhaling. 

After the second hit I just sat holding the bong for a moment, and the room suddenly started morphing into geometric shapes and patterns and bright colors starting dancing before my eyes. I remember saying "Can I lay down or lean against someone?" because I knew I would be taking off soon, and my friend made room for me and I leaned against her on the couch (it was just the two of us in the room). I closed my eyes and remember taking off; I could literally feel an upward rush and hear a loud roaring in my ears. 

I couldn't feel my body and I couldn't tell if I was breathing, I was completely separated from my body. I saw strange tunnels and balls of light and eyes all morphing and bending and changing with every second, and there was a strange alien-like song playing faintly in the background (completely different from the music that was playing from our speaker when the trip started). In fact, there was an alien-like presence with me the whole time, and normally I’m kind of scared of supernatural shit but I could tell they were friendly.   

It felt like I was being catapulted through a million different worlds, and everything was flying by as if I were on a roller coaster. Colors were unbelievably vibrant, there were so many different patterns and shapes and beings and all of them were so beautiful and intricate. I saw lots of eyes watching me as I flew through (and something like the “machine elves” that are so frequently talked about). 

I was out of my body but I could still feel myself on the couch if I concentrated, and I could feel how limp all my limbs were and how shallow my breathing was. There were a bunch of voices that kind of meshed into something incomprehensible, but there was one clear voice telling me to “surrender my mind” and “just let go” and I did. I was panicked at first but I heard something tell me that I'd return safely soon so I just needed to enjoy the trip. I didn't think about anything, just observed the world unfolding in front of me. The shapes and tunnels suddenly turned into scenery near the comedown of my trip—and as if I were on a train, we traveled through streets and fields and cities and neighborhoods and forests in a manner where I was able to take in everything despite moving so quickly. At the same time my vision was split, and the top and bottom halves of my vision reflected one another like a body of water. Colors were bright and glimmery and reflective. At one point during my trip, my friend looked over at me and said I was smiling. 

I forgot who I was and who my friend was and where we were, I returned to the very core of my being and felt all my physical weight fall off, I felt spiritually in tune and also registered the presence of other beings in the universe. It felt very alien yet it felt like going home. I felt connected with the world and vice versa; all forms of life and existence felt connected somehow.

I started coming back down when my friend started moving under me and I could feel her. When I opened my eyes and returned I was indeed smiling (I also started crying) and for some inexplicable reason I felt happy and pure. That night I slept so well because there was this strange peace in my body and mind that I have not experienced in years. 

Hope this post doesn’t offend anyone. I was told I had a pretty "typical" experience but I wanted to share anyway. 

Edit:
Wording + details lol 

Thank you all so much for the overwhelming support and positive discussions on my post!!! And thank you kind stranger for the platinum ❤️My dad has always been anti drug but this morning I found him smoking a blunt. So I woke up at about 7am and smelt weed I immediately look out the window to see if there were maybe some teenagers out there but nope. The smell wasn't just weed but the burning tobacco was there. I go to put on my makeup and hear someone literally coughing their lungs out in the basement. I go down there and see my dad and his friend with eyes basically shut because of the bloodshot redness and massive grins on their faces. They don't notice I'm there until I call them and ask what's going on. They say oh we are just chilling, and I may of been harsh on you for smoking... I think that was his first time and his friend probably convinced him. Cool story I decided to share. Live in an legal state btw Yes, my pupils dilate.

Yes, I am focused on my task (That’s kinda the point)

Yes, I do take prescription amphetamines.

But I am NOT a tweaker.

I have a great work ethic, that’s me, not the pills.

I work my ass off 10 hours a day, that’s me, not the pills.

Spacing out mid conversation, missing important details, being impulsive with sex, money and drugs, having a very difficult time maintaining relationships both professional and personal, mind racing at incomprehensible speeds; that’s me, without the pills. 

If you’re reading this thinking “It’s definitely the pills”
I spent 2 years doing the hardest work I’ve done yet, working 12-15 hour shifts, stone cold fucking sober. Just to prove to myself that I could, and I can.

I have ADHD, not a crippling addiction to hard drugs. 

So I can hear you muttering under your breath calling me a tweaker, and sometimes it makes me feel like I am, but I’m not. 

And I’m tired of feeling insecure for taking my medicine. 

Don’t be a judgy fuck in your day to day lives.Thankfully someone saved it.

"My friend and I fucked up bad. We were suppose to be heading to a beach trip this past Saturday but we wanted to have some fun while at the beach. I knew my grandma had a bunch of old pills she never used so and I knew she also wouldn’t be home for a while.

I stole a key to her house so my friend and I could get in and steal some of her old pills. They were all from early 2016 to late 2017 I didn’t wanna take anything I knew she would be using as she does have several joint and back problems.

We ended up stealing 1161 gabapentin pills and about 10 clonazepam. We had 2 days to the beach and said fuck it lets each take 1mg of the kpin as soon as we found it. We don’t remember the rest of thursday night or friday until next thing I know we are both in the car with blue flashing lights behind us.

I try to hide the huge bag of gabapentin but its clear we are way too fucked up and are immediately asked to step out of the car. The officer opens my door and the bag of gabapentin falls right onto the ground. My friend and I are still severely fucked up from the kpins as we are pushed into the back of the cop car. Neither of us remember the car ride there however I remember the officer asking me while I was being processed why I was wearing so many chains. ( I dont even know how the hell I got so many) All I said to him was “trap money bitch” and then my friend and I were put in the same cell. Next morning we realize how fucked we were as we each were charged with 2 felonies.

EDIT: jesus people i clearly munched on more kpins, 1mg wouldnt black me out

yes i also know it was fucked up to steal from my grandmother even though they were a year or 2 old there is no excuseTheres approximately 116 different conversations going at once. Shits like a symphony. Have no clue how anyone can hear shit. I feel like if someone else walks in here and starts talking a fucking worm hole will open and destroy the universe.


Edit:Holy shit I never thought telling storys about my meth induced adventures would get me my first gold and silver. THANK YOU KIND STRANGERS!!I was 16 diagnosted with depression, after a few months we decided to get a second opinnion, we went to another pshyciatrist and was inmediately diagnosted (pardon my shitty english) with catatonic paranoid schizophrenia, like WTF, my parents bought it all so my new treatment began and since "they catch it early" I started with pretty heavy antipsicotics and and antidepressants and lets not forget the shit they gave me for the side effects lol. It was to a point where i couldnt stay still and had tremors all day so the doctor decided that was a good idea to up the benzos to a point where i couldnt even speak and didbt remember shit the next day (4mg lorazepam and 3,5mg clonazepam WTF). It went like that for over a month till my parents realized how fucked up I was all the time but I couldnt stop taking them just like that so we went to another doctor and he  wanted me off all those meds but still on clonazepam so i wouldnt get withdrawls, 7 months later Im finally off all those fucking awful drugs that almost melted my brain, I have never been better, did shrooms for the first time and it was a complete reset on my brain so bye bye residual anxiety and depression xd. Thanks for reading Im from chile, they have no ethics over here, they just want to sell drugs and get their check from the big pharmas at the end of the month.Hey everyone!
I posted in this group last June or July promising everyone I would quit smoking meth. Covid happened and my boyfriend of two years broke up with me. I got in anti depressants and anti anxiety medication but I finally did it. A few months off of meth so far. The longest I’ve ever been sober. I graduate from college in three weeks and debt free. Applying for jobs related to my degree and hopefully I find a job that wants to hire me when I graduate. I don’t plan on going back on meth ever again.
**Edit**
I’m a gay dude in his 20’s in case anyone is wondering and the meds I take are lexapro and buspar.So my brother had a couple friends over. Parents were out of town. They were hanging out in the basement and let me know they had a bunch of shrooms and they'd be tripping. 

>Thanks for the heads up. Let me know if you guys need anything. 

All was quiet for a couple hours. Then suddenly bro busts in and says his massive linebacker friend is having a bad trip. Freaking out. They don't know what to do. He is just pacing back and forth muttering to himself and intermittently crying then occasionally throwing something. Nothing serious. Just like empty water bottles. But the guy is giant and they couldnt restrain him if they wanted. 

I said dont worry I got this. Ran to my room and grabbed a pill. Went downstairs with my game face on and started calmly asking him questions. What did you take? How much did you take? Have you drank? Yadda yadda. Tried to project authority and confidence. 

After determining that he was just buggin, I told him that I had a tiny bit of xanax. It wont make the trip go away but it will help him relax and make it better. Handed him the pill and he swallowed it. Then I asked him to do some breathing exercises with me for a couple minutes. 

Said I'd check in on them periodically and went upstairs. Went back down in 15 mins and he was just rolling on the floor giggling. Checked in periodically til they all fell asleep. No more problems. 

That pill was just vitamin b12. I didn't actually have xanax. But damned if the placebo effect didnt calm his ass down quicker than xanax actually takes to kick in. He tried to pay me for the xanax in the morning. I told him what I did and apologized for lying to him. We all laughed our asses off about it then he bought me breakfast.I be sitting damn near two hours waiting for this shit to come out wtf bro it’s honestly so annoying I’m typing it as I trip so like why can’t I shit

Edit-finally was able to accomplish taking a shit the next morning.I’m sitting here in a hospital next to my 80 year old father that just broke his hip and is suffering from Parkinson’s. He is in pain and has hallucinations from the Parkinson’s medicine. He  went from being a very strong man mentally and physically to this and it hurts.

Both him and my mom grew up poor and made a decent life for themselves and later my sister and I. We weren’t rich by far but we had everything we needed and more.

I started using heroin at around 16 yrs old. This was in the 90s. I was all in in a short period of time. Intravenous heroin and coke followed and didn’t stop for years and years. 

The thing is my parents, especially my father, never gave up on me. He constantly came to see me wherever I was and no matter my condition. He would meet me and take me for lunch or get groceries. I would be in and out if rehab and jail and even if I had a month or two of sobriety I was still in the selfish drug mode of me, me, me and wasn’t a good son. Sometimes he’d just sit with me and not talk, which I didn’t understand then but do now. 

He enabled me to a point I guess but what was he supposed to do with no experience with drug addiction at all. Him and my mom helped me more then they should of and at the time I was so self involved with my shit life I couldn’t see what I was doing to them. It was years of chaos for me and I periodically dragged them into it. 

 Fast forward to now and I haven’t used drugs for 6 years. I have my own family and a good job and I want nothing more then to spend time with him and make up for the past and that’s something I’ll never be able to do. We have one life on this earth and it’s a really hard when it hits you like a bullet that you wasted many years of it with that bullshit. 

I did a lot of really terrible things in my life but this is by far the worst. The regret is terrible, it’s like nothing I ever felt before.

If your stuck in the grips try and get out. Kicking is temporary. I’ve kicked methodone and Xanax both at the same time in jail with little meds and that pain was nothing compared to this. Ask for help, it’s there. Hug the ones you love and if your in a spot where you feel you have no one, get strong and be someone else’s rock. It will pay off I assure you. I love all of you and hope for the bestHey everyone,

Today marks a year of me being free from xanax and I'm happier than I ever could have been!

To celebrate I actually wrote an [immersive piece of audio](https://soundcloud.com/itsyaboylofti/space-cadet), to raise money for charities that helped save my life (Action on Addiction). I'd love your support if you have anything to donate <3

https://soundcloud.com/itsyaboylofti/space-cadet

I now have a business that pays me well, a beautiful girlfriend and have found my purpose. I wanted to share my story here to educate people about what can happen if you abuse drugs like I did.

I'm a musician and it's my life's vision to educate young people about the dangers of drugs &amp; how to use them safely. I hate how the industry today glorifies the use of drugs and makes it look 'cool'. It's not fucking cool.

*Anyway...*

Here's my story:

Throughout my life I've always struggled with addiction to alcohol & drugs, but xanax took a hold of me like no other & it destroyed everything in my life.

I used to take 10/day and was pretty high functioning (from what I can remember lol)

I'd wake up surprisingly early for a xanax user (8-10am), take a xanax with my coffee and continue throughout the day until I'd had 10 or more. I don't really remember much of that period of my life... the only thing I know is I took a fuck tonne of drugs, drank loads of alcohol, sipped lean & mixed all this shit with uppers like MDMA, cocaine etc.

Now of course everyday wasn't like that, but I'd definitely do all that shit at least once a week.

What did remain consistent, was the xanax & benzo use. I would take any sedative I could get my grubby little hands on. If it was gonna make me feel confident &amp; invincible, I'd have it.

During that period of my life, I turned into a bit of a scumbag. I'd shoplift, say horrible things to those closest to me, gamble, sleep around & I'd be out most nights at bars, clubs getting fucked up.

One night, I came back obviously high as fuck and apparently broke down in front of 3 of my friends, saying I wanted to kill myself and shit like that.

Now I could only ever remember the happy times I had with xanax, never the lows, but that shit me up a bit so I dived into to taking more and more.

And weirdly...

This period of my life, I was functioning. I'd always be up doing stuff, I had a job etc.

But then the day came when I decided to go cold turkey and boy did the withdrawals commence.

**That week still haunts me to this day.**

I was scared to sleep because of how harrowing the night-time hallucinations were; I'd wake up in cold sweats from the most hyper-realistic dreams and question myself if they were real &amp; could have sworn I predicted situations happening in my dreams that then actually happened the next day.

Basically, in reality, I had no fucking idea what was going on. I was coming to paranoid conclusions about everything and all while it was happening my skin would not stop fucking crawling. (idk if it was psychosis)

It was **2 4 / 7**

If anyone has seen trainspotting, the scene where [Renton is getting clean](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FgPgumQYxUs) & the room gets bigger is the most accurate description I could give of how this felt.

To cut this part short, it ended up in me having a seizure. I have no recollection of what happened here. My memory is made up from accounts by my friends who said that - my lips went blue, I had shit round my mouth and they thought I was gonna die.

For whatever reason, something saved me that day.

When I came round in the hospital bed, my ex was sitting beside me on the bed and I just fucking broke. I started crying more than I had in years.

(seriously I hadn't cried in about 2 years at this point)

And I said to myself I'd never touch them again. I'd never even touch a drug again. I COULDN'T BELIEVE how stupid I had been.

Well...

That was all bullshit scared talk. About a month later I had started taking benzos again, but it was fine in my head because they weren't xanax... they were weaker valium so ofc it was fine.

Then I started drinking a lot more often and one night (my birthday), I thought "fuck it, it's my birthday, I'm gonna have some xans"

That night I mixed everything, MD, xans, alcohol, coke, pretty sure i drank some lean when I got home as well. We were supposed to meet my favourite DJ that night, but obviously that didn't happen because of the fucking state of me.

I pretty much continued in my old ways for the next year. This time it was less heavy on the benzos, but I still did a FUCK LOAD of them & drank lean.

I was now finding alternatives to xanax. I'd moved onto klonopin, etizolam & atvian. I was obsessed with finding new types of drugs that could make me feel that way, because I was suicidal. It would make me forget & I didn't want to remember how much I'd fucked up my life.

Me and my friends were also running huge rave events at the time that sold out, so drugs started to become free, alcohol started to become free & I dived into all of it head first. The next year was probably one of the most fun & emotional parts of my life.

We got to play festivals, got booked abroad and all kinds of amazing shit.

But, there were points on nights out where I'd get black out angry, cry and one time I got kicked out of my own event and started punching shit, wanting to fight anyone and everyone.

After absolutely destroying my right hand... (honestly the scab was so fucking big and I'm pretty sure I've done nerve damage) I came to the conclusion that I needed help.

Drugs was an issue, but nowhere near the height of my mental health problems.

One night I called my parents and I opened up to them about it all. I said I needed help, I couldn't sleep anymore & that I was going to kill myself.

(btw my parents are the nicest, most supportive people ever & I can't thank them enough for reacting how they did)

The next day I called my NHS GP for an appointment and they prescribed me some shitty anti-depressants and anxiety meds that just made me feel ill, so I pressed for therapy.

Long story short, I was diagnosed with OCD, depression, anxiety and got therapy.

I started attending bi-weekly sessions and did everything she told me.

**AND HOLY FUCK IT WORKED**

During this I was still working at my job, battling drug addiction & trying to run events based on a culture built on drugs.

Eventually I packed in the events, didn't go out and kept myself to myself.

I started working on myself, replacing negative thoughts with positive thoughts, repeating positive affirmations over and over until I fucking believed them.

And that's when I kicked drugs all-together.

I haven't touch xanax in a year or any other benzo &I can fully say I don't get an itch for them anymore. I don't want to have them.

I even recently got prescribed some diazepam for back pain and I haven't gobbed the lot, like I usually would. I used 2 to ease the back pain and didn't touch them again.

I'm honestly the happiest I've ever been! I never would have seen a day where I'd be able to say no to drugs or alcohol and here I am.

If you asked me a year ago "where do you think you'll be in a year", I would have replied "hopefully dead". Well I can proudly say that, I'm no longer suicidal & I love life.

I wanted to write this to raise awareness. Whoever is out there struggling with addiction, mental health issues... whatever it is - **you can get better**, you just gotta **ask for help** & really want change in your life.

Life is amazing and it's supposed to be hard. It's the desire to push on through the tough times that makes the good times so beautiful.

Anyway. Thank you for reading my story. I really do appreciate you. If you need help, please reach out to someone. It doesn't have to be family, it could be as simple as calling Samaritans, just do it.

Also, if you do have anything to spare this month, I urge you to help donate to Action on Addiction & help save someone's life.

I wouldn't be here without it to tell you my story.

**TL;DR**

After almost losing my life to drugs & alcohol & taking multiple trips to hospital I can now say that I haven't had an issue in a whole year, started my own business & I've got the most amazing girlfriend I could ever ask for.

I've come out the other side and I'm so happy!

To celebrate I've released an immersive piece of audio to describe my journey & all donations given to this project will go towards Action on Addiction - a charity that helps save lives & people who are in a similar situation to me.

You can donate at the link here: 

https://itsyaboylofti.bandcamp.com/releases

If you need help, please reach out and get it!

Everyone deserves a second chance at life.

I love you.

Lofti x

EDIT: Fuck me I never expected this level of upvotes &amp; support!! It really is touching to hear your stories as well. Benzos are no fucking joke and I believe it’s our responsibility as past addicts to educate people who don’t know about them - it could prevent so many bad times. I hope this has helped someone &amp; if you can donate, please do :)I’m high af and I cried because I’m so happy. I love my family and my friends and I love math and I love that I can love, and everything feels okay. 
Happy 420 everyone, spend it wisely

Edit: I wasn’t on any opioids haha 4/19 was my birthday and I was shown a lot of love so I was already pretty happy, also I really did mean math lmaoIt feels bizarre to be typing this to random strangers on the internet, but I feel like I should share this, even if I don't end up replying to anyone. On Friday, my sister died of an overdose. She had been battling addiction most of her adult life, and Friday it all came to an end. I harbored a lot of resentment against her for putting my parents through hell, but I was lucky enough to see her a couple times last week before she passed. She was normal for the first time in years, and I'm just grateful I got to have a couple good moments with my sister before she passed. It helped me let go of a lot of anger I had been holding. I have a lot of regrets, but I'm not trying to focus on that now. I'm just trying to be happy about the good moments I did have. If you're struggling with addiction, please reach out to somebody. If you're alive, it's not too late.

Edit: Thank you all for the responses and kind words. It truly does help in this difficult time. I'm stepping away from my computer for a little while, but I will be reading each response. Thank you all again.

Edit 2: The amount of love, support, and comfort I've received from reading these responses has been overwhelming. I was hesitant to make a post, but I'm happy I reached out. Thank you all for the kind words and sharing your stories. It truly does help. I'll respond to more comments tomorrow. I'm just tired right now.

Edit 3: I can't thank you all enough for all the responses and kind words. It really is helping me stay strong for my family. I'm going to try and respond to people as the day goes by. Thank you all again for your support and sharing your experiences. I reached out to this community because I expected a lot of people browsing might be able to empathize and share their stories. I'm happy I did.I posted here last week and I’m happy to report that I managed to fight through my cravings and stay clean off of all drugs for 2 weeks now!! Today is also my six month milestone for my fentanyl addiction, so I’m celebrating that as well!! Thank you all for the kind words and encouragement you gave me last week, and here’s to hopefully another day clean!

EDIT: holy shit, thanks for all the upvotes everyone!He was the nicest guy, he knew his LSD was 100%, even recommended coming to him for test kits if I came across other tabs. He had ketamine, bars, dmt, fire oil cartridges, dispensary bud, MDMA.. fucking everything you can think of. 

He would always hook me up with deals and free samples, and his LSD tabs were the strongest in the area.

Apparently, he has been under investigation for a while, and the police recently raided his house. He managed to flush most of it, but got hit with some serious charges and most definitely will face time in prison. 

I believe the guy supplying him bars sold him out after he said he was out of the state, and wouldn't respond when he said he was back. 

If it were any other dealer, I wouldn't give a fuck. But this guy, I really fucking feel from him. He was such a great guy and didn't deserve that, but he knew the risk and got way to comfortable. 

Never serve from the place you sleep. Even if they want an ounce, tell them to bounce. -biggie smalls I used to be able to google a drug and get message boards and whole websites explaining the dos and donts of said drug. Now nothing pops up but rehab clinics and websites preaching that you shouldn’t do any drugs ever. 

Dont you think this is unsafe kind of like abstinence only sex ed classes?My LSD use has made me too emphatic towards other living beings so I can no longer kill the bugs flying around in my apartment without feeling bad for the rest of the day. This is getting quite annoying so is it possible to counteract this effect by excessive cocaine use?I am gonna post this in a few subs because I’m so excited lol

Wow. Just...wow! Today I am 221 days clean from fentanyl and final grades have just been posted; I passed all of my classes and now officially have a bachelors degree in software development!!

I fought so hard for this. Through crippling mental illness and battling with addiction, I still managed to graduate...I have been working my ass off these last two semesters, and seeing it finally pay off is beyond incredible. 

This time last year I was failing every single one of my classes and spending all day every day smoking fentanyl alone in my room. I’ve come so far...and I’m so fucking proud of myself. 

:)I smoked weed and watched that planet earth where the Walrus peers off this vast cliff and makes these large grunts like "oouurrghh oooooyrgggv" then suddenly leaps off the cliff and commits suicide. His lifeless 2200lb body literally bouncing down this cliff and ending abruptly in a pile of other walrus. 
Apparently all their regular ice is melting and all that's left are these rocky islands that dont have enough room so they scale whatever they can.
I guess they have bad eye sight and when they get hungry they dont have know how to get down because they are too retarded and cannot see where they need to go. 
I have PTSD from watching it commit suicide but I also laughed hysterically.
I think about it almost every day...why can't we build rafts for these guys? Or maybe ramps up and down the mountain?So I smoked for the first time about a week ago and had a great time but when I when I had to go home I was still a little high. My mom had made soup for dinner, and my stupid ass got a plate instead of a bowl and started filling that plate up. Could not stop laughing after that. Stay safe out there!
I was unable to find information on this in /r/Drugs/wiki/drugs.Can you imagine if you played the airhorn in a rap group, but you got too baked and you start airhorning mid bar. You'd lose your job and have to go on unemployment. It's only downhill from there. 


That's how I feel sometimes
My neighbor is the cutest 80 year old man. Super nice, talks a little to much but what old guy doesn't. We know he smokes weed and drinks, so do my boyfriend and I. Well, a few hours ago I heard a knock at the door and it's my neighbor. He came by to say hi and to ask if we knew where to get some psychedelics. He would prefer mushrooms or lsd, but if we couldn't find that he would settle for peyote or mescaline. He said he hasn't done anything since the 70s or maybe was it 80s. (His words lol) And well he was just in the mood.My friend just told me this so I don't know how true it is, but he said that "flipping" e.g candy flipping or nexus flipping etc is called so for a reason.

The psychedelic you take makes you trip, and the mdma makes you roll. What happens if you physically trip over and then roll? You flip 😂 Just thought you guys would enjoy this, idk if it's common knowledge or if it's even intended lol adios homies test your shit xSo...there seems to be a story going around about this "Bri" & her friend giving this dude head while they did cocaine off his dick.

Let me be pretty blunt with you: that was me & my friend Carrie. I received a text message at 3:30 in the morning last night from Carrie and we both knew that this fool just tried to put us both on blast not even changing my actual name. 

For those that haven't read the story...read this before coming here. If you don't it might not make any sense

 https://www.reddit.com/r/Drugs/comments/86cksn/i_met_this_girl_on_tinder_and_she_looked_nothing/



Let me keep it ten toes - this story is a fucking lie. How did my friend Carrie know that it was about us? Several reasons but mainly because of the interaction in the parking lot. The interaction in the parking lot was basically spot on...except for it was completely backwards.

I'll start from the beginning. I was doing an internship at Disney working at the theme park and taking some classes. For those of you that don't already know, the girls that are part of this program are crazzyyy. They party very hard and drugs are readily available among all of us. We stay in these teeny tiny apartments where we have 5-6 roommates at a time. So we get a lil crazy and definitely find anyway to spend time away from the apartment. So u/trustmeimdonaldtrump...you think I was trying to hang out so fast cause you're so damn cool and that I was swooning over that embarrassing dick pic you sent me? Nah b. Slow your roll. My friend and I wanted a place to do coke and possibly fuck someone in the process. If we did it at our place we'd be kicked out of the program. No boys, no drugs, and no fun was allowed. 

We drive over to his place and find a parking spot. Little fuckboy trump comes out of his apartment to come meet my friend and I. who I 100% mentioned was coming due to safety reasons btw. Most girls I know do that in a college like setting so this dude was probably just salty I wouldn't come by myself. Anyways so this large fella comes out... we're sitting in our car wondering who this dude approaching our car waving his hand is. his ass was waddling in our general direction like some kind of penguin. 

(Have you ever seen that episode of Spongebob of the dude who reviews the krabby patty and lies about sponge forgetting the pickles? He looked exactly like that guy.)

We both looked at each other, realized what was happening and could not stop fucking laughing. It was embarrassing as shit. I had never been catfished before but this was definitely a first for me. The dude looked like a halloween costume.

We get out the car to greet him and I literally ask him...umm are you u/trustmeimdonaldtrump ?? You look nothing like your pics. He like grunted out a "yeah" with some heavy breathing. I couldn't tell if that was his actual voice or if he was pretending to make it deeper for us? It was so damn strained I couldn't figure it out. 

After he showed me the tinder messages on his iphone3gs he leads us back to his apartment. We probably would of made it there by the end of the night if he didn't have 3 flights of stairs. oof - I felt for the guy. Every time he took a step I swear he'd make this weird grunting sound like he was lifting weights at the gym or playing tennis. 

So after a few hours (i'm exaggerating) we finally get to his place. He had a roommate that seemed...perfectly normal? Not the worst looking dude in the world, seemed like a normal chap and was REALLY surprised to see us there. He was like uhh what's going on? As we walked in. Trump said "THESE ARE MY FRIENDS" and we walked into trump's room. We probably looked like fucking hookers because the whole thing was so strange and awkward. But the roommate really looked familiar! I couldn't quite put my finger on it just yet. 

We go into his room and see cheetos all over the ground. Uh c'mon dude you didn't even wanna pretend to clean up for us? What is this? They weren't even in the bag. It's like...are you so far gone at this point that you're just aiming for your mouth hole like it's a game of golf? When I buy a bag of cheetos, 99% of the cheetos are going into my body. The rest end up on my fingers like every other human being. 

My friend was more than uncomfortable to say the least and so was I. He did offer us some beer...fucking Natty Lite. I almost just took a water instead but fuck it, beer is beer I guess. To be honest the dude could of offered me Everclear and it wouldn't of made it any less weird.        

So he sits on his bed and you can tell that this dude spends quite of time here. He's exhausted from that walk up the stairs. Poor guy. He has some game called runescape open on his laptop playing it while we're just sitting there. I mean c'mon is this dude serious? He's not even talking to us.

A few minutes go by of just dead silence while he's sitting there on his laptop. My friend and I are sitting there looking at each other not really knowing what to do. All of a sudden he slams that shit shut and goes "OKAY LADIES" 

God what the fuck was about to happen to us?  
  
Basically in a very loud obnoxious tone he said that he wanted us to eat cheetos off his body and he'd pay us $500 each. 

Uh..fuck yeah? I mean this dude is disgusting but that really didn't sound like a bad deal. We could brush our teeth, take a shower and go home and buy so much coke with that money...

My friend was not having it. So she walked out of the room and went into the living room to go hang out with his roommate. I didn't wanna do it if it was just me, as much as I wanted the money I just couldn't do it. 

I walk out to the living room as well and see that my friend is clearly into his roommate. I realized now where I recognized him from. It was HIS pictures that trump was using on tinder. I pulled out my phone and started dying laughing and I showed it to my friend. She was screaming. He was like what...what's so funny? We show him the phone and he's like "wait...wait...what the fuck?? I don't have a tinder account!" 

Trumps door slams close at this point and we're fucking crying of laughter. 

Anyways so we're watching TV just shooting the shit and it turns out this guy is pretty chill and likes to do coke as well. We're doing lines having a good time and he then in a really smooth way asks us to go back to his room. My friend definitely wanted too cause I could tell by the way she was looking at me. Honestly I hadn't planned on it but I was so impressed by the way he asked that I was like fuck it...let's go. 

Now here's where this part of the story gets a little weird. What we did with his roommate is written in trump's story...we did coke off his dick and everything. So does that mean that they talked about it after we left? Man I don't even wanna know. Maybe he had a camera installed to live vicariously through his roommate or something.

So yeah his roommate walked us out to our car and we never saw him again. 

Also we aren't fat we're thicc but in the cool 2018 way.  Does anyone else ever go into public blasted but dressed like an upstanding gentleman? 

It’s so much fun. I imagine it must be what a chameleon feels like when he camouflages into a tree. 

“Ah, you think you see an ordinary sir? Well, you are actually staring down a drug guzzling degenerate. SURPRISE MOTHAFUCKA!”I hate this. I don't know what else I could have done. I purposely was distant, friendly but not too friendly. I always wore baggy clothes, sweatpants and no makeup. I bought big amounts and always arrived on time. What a prick. I just want to smoke a fuckin bowl.

&#x200B;

edit: thanks for the support this made my day! and don't try to source from this post either 😝Just those words got me crying a bit, it's very hard to believe that I've achieved this much in a short amount of time. I had very little hope for my future, but here I am.If you're struggling with addiction , I wish you the best of luck. Life is so much better sober.

Edit : Wow thank you so much guys! I didn't expect this much reply , I love r/drugs community <3

Edit 2 : Woke up this morning with a big smile on my face. Thank you so much for all your kinds comments, I can't barely keep up with all the replys. Wish me luck for my first day at school !  
<3 <3 <3 <3  I have beautiful light blue eyes, one of my only good physical features, and I love them.

Until I have to try and appear sober. The damn blue accentuates pupil dilation and any red or yellow in the white. On the other hand my homies with brown eyes barely have to try, their eyes just don't stand out as much. 

Oh well I still wouldn't change anything.I love learning about different kinds of drugs not because I wanna abuse it but I'm just obsessed with learning about the composition, interactions, side effects, dependence, overdose etc when I'm free. It's just so interesting. Obviously there are some times where I learn try to learn about certain drugs to get me high or achieve a certain mindset, goal etc but most of the time it's just me learning about stuff idk where I'm gonna use. The chemical names excite me coz obviously they are unique and I love words that sound unique idk it's weird. There are times when I wanna tell me own doctor to prescribe me something when he is having trouble in figuring out what to prescribe but I just keep my mouth shut. Is it weird or do a lot of ppl find it intriguing as well ? 

I honestly developed this interest because I used to always keep researching about drug interactions and overdoses because I was very suicidal, i still am but like better I guess. I used to always try and figure out what combination would lead to a fatal and deadly overdose and I guess this is what led me to find drugs so fucking surreal.No I'm not talking about spiritual or ego death I'm talking physical death so fair warning.

A post a couple days ago in this subreddit inspired me to finally post about this experience I had. I'm not going to give any names or details which will give anyone away for what I hope are obvious reasons.

For some context I live in a small rural town. I lived in a nearby major city for last year but due to covid ended up moving back to my hometown and studying online.

So a few months back I went to my friends house on a Friday night to catch up and have a few beers. Like I said before last I lived away from my hometown all of last year so this year living back at home I sort of reconnected and grew a lot closer with some of my highschool friends which was great. Anyway so I go over to the house which a few of my mates rent together, covid restrictions at the time were pretty strict but there weren't many neighbours since they lived on the outskirts of town so we were pretty confident. We drank the night away and I crashed on their couch as was tradition by this point. 

The next morning I woke up and someone walked in to the lounge room. It was my mate Dave who had been at a going away party the night before. He came in and we had a chat. He decided to have a nap on the couch and I went to go help my dad with some work he needed done on his house. I came back at about midday keen to have a few beers and waste the day away. Dave suggested that we go grab some lunch first and he wanted to see our friend (the one whose going away party it was). So we drove into town grabbed some lunch for everyone and caught up with our friend. By the time we got back everyone else was awake so we gave them lunch then cracked a couple beers and talked shit and watched trashy tv all afternoon. 

At about 5 we got a call from our mate who lived in town inviting us over since a few people from out of town were in visiting. So all of us headed over there and drank like there was no tomorrow as was usual. At some point in the night Dave and a bunch of my other friends decided to drive out to our friend who lived a little while away. Most of my mates went with the exception of few including me and my best mate Dale. Dale and I put together that our mates had left  and the party was dying down so we walked back to the previous place had a joint and crashed on the couch. 

At god knows what time our mates came back. It was obvious that one of them had driven while very drunk but I'm not one to cast stones. Anyway so they came back with a couple other people and woke me up to have a chat. One of my friends produced a bag of acid tabs. By this point I'd done it a few times so I figured I'd join them since I was already up. This was Dave's second time doing acid, a couple hours in we had a chat and were talking about a recent messy breakup that I'd gone through. He was one of the most supportive people when I went through it I thanked him for what he'd done for me.

Due to the nature of LSD time sort of blurred a bit and I was floating around talking to people. At one point I remember Dave being in his care revving the engine. The other boys telling him to knock it off and come back inside. I remember he drove down the driveway, then I went and sat out the back of the house and had a conversation with someone. Next thing I hear a loud bang. I didn't think anything of it at the time and went inside to use the toilet. 

When I came out of the toilet I heard a commotion outside so I went to the lounge room to talk with one of my mates. A little bit later my mate Paul comes in obviously distressed. Me and my other friend were tripping pretty hard at this point and asked Paul if he was alright. 

Paul looks me dead in the eye and says "Dave's gone", I just remember not even understanding him and along what he meant and where Dave was. He just said "Dave's gone he's dead". I couldn't believe him and thought he was pulling my leg. Then he grabbed me by the shirt and pulled me to the front window. I saw flashing lights and Dave's car wrapped around a tree around 200 hundred metres from the end of the driveway. At this point I went in and explained to my other friend what had happened. 

So from what I know, Dave was apparently pretty agitated and had gotten into his car (the revving). He drove out and then hit the tree (hence the bang). A neighbour heard it and came to the house we were at saying she thought some one had hit a tree. Paul and a couple others went and found Dave then called emergency services. 

The next 6 hours or so I was tripping and dealing with my good friends death. It was a raw experience to say the least. I had no mental barriers built up. I remember my friends mum came and picked us all up and have us a ride to my friends house. I remember on our way out the driveway we found Dave's wallet in the middle of the road. I spent the rest of the day at my parents house completely shook. The world didn't even feel real at that point. I felt like I couldn't even talk for the next couple days. I remember lying in my childhood bedroom seeing Dave's face manifest in the walls. Thinking about everything I could have done different.

I went and visited his family with my friends the next day. It was one of the hardest things I've ever done in my life. I couldn't go to his funeral in person due to covid but at least my friends and I watched the service together.

Dave would have driven drunk dozens of times, I'd even been in the car for some of those times. All it takes is one fuckups for this sort of heartbreak to occur. Even you don't harm anyone else physically it can scare those you love. 

If you've made it this far thank you I know it was long and rambling. I cried a bi.t while writing this but it feels good to get the E while thing off my chest.

I miss you mate. You'll forever be in my heart.

Edit: 

Ok so this post actually got a fair bit of traction and people having commenting a lot of thoughtful stuff that I feel like should active brought up in a post of this nature. When I originally wrote it, it was just to get the full story off my chest.

So in terms of the 'I'm not one to cast stones' attitude, yeah it was a terrible mindset to have, shit like this is what contributed to Dave's death and me and my friends have to live with that hanging over our heads every day. I was a fucking idiot for not immediately taking all of the keys out eveyone's cars as soon as they got back. When the first drink driving incident occurred, they left without telling me and got back while I was asleep. Even before this I hated drink driving but at the time I wasn't really in the state to give a lecture. I really hate myself for not being more vocal about it in the past.

Second is just the way we consumed drugs or whatever. Again the invincible teenager mindset was strong among these people. In the year I had away from them they'd used drugs much more than me and very irresponsibly. When I got back I did fall into the pattern a bit. My friends (me included) while fairly nice people can be extremely inconsiderate fuckwits at points especially when they're drunk. I'm still trying to work on myself in regards to this (not taking drugs limiting how much I drink and trying to focus on being social). Drugs are alright but they're better when you enhance a good experience a good mindset. Not trying to fix or escape a bad one. I try to instill this myself and hopefully my friends more each day 

So if there's a message you want to take, first and foremost drive under the influence of drugs and especially not alcohol, you could bring harm or even death to yourself or others. I've done it myself before and have cut it out of my life even if it means I need to miss certain shit. I'd rather miss something because I refuse to drive drunk than miss it because I'm in court, lost my licence, injured or even dead. I know I value my safety and that of others more than a beer.

And I guess if you're going to do drugs do them safely. I know I'm talking to a bunch of people who are very knowledgeable about these things and after having my own fuckups I know how shit it can get. Make sure you know the effects and doses of the drug and avoid mixes with unintended effects, I'm sure there are others in this subreddit with better advice than me. I guess when in doubt, give yourself a break it'll most likely do a lot of good for you.

To all the people giving me some support thank you it means a lot and gives me some hope in being able to improve my life a bit in future. 

Thanks to the other comments as well, I know it's not easy to be "the bad guy" but yeah what Dave , me and my mates have done was extremely stupid and inconsiderate. I guess I can only hope to better myself from here 

Happy holidays and lots of love to all of you 💜.Alright so here’s the story:

My buddy and I are pretty regular smokers, I had a high tolerance at this time from daily dabbing. So I pick up this 500mg edible, homemade not dispensary so I was kinda like there’s no way this will be 500 but we’ll see.

The edible was a giant hard candy Death Star, so the plan was to split the Death Star and watch blade runner: 2049. Pretty simple.

The edible was vacuum sealed and had  “2500” written on the top but there was some space between the 2 and the 5 so I jus thought it was some weird way the dude kept track of his products. No worries I sincerely doubted it could be 2500 considering the price (25 bucks).

So we take a hammer and crush up the Death Star into chunks and weigh it evenly, round this time my other buddy comes over and he’s a light weight so we give him about 20mg, which should get him straight fucked.

At 8pm it took about 20 minutes to eat and I knew something was wrong when I was getting high before I even finished the edible. About an hour in I was as high as I’d ever been in my life. I’ve taken 250mg before when I had a lower tolerance but this blew it out of the water.

Lightweight starts freaking out bc his piece was around 100mg and I’m worried because the thought that this was actually 2500 finally sets in.

So my buddy that took the other half is straight fucked and throws up. He conks out like a light at home and so my other friend and I leave to watch the movie. It was at 11 so after the movie I had to go home. The movie felt like the longest movie in history and all I remember is the edible hitting harder and harder my sense of reality getting worse and worse.

Movie ends and I’m so fucked. I can’t walk straight, literally I could not speak when I tried it came out meek and small. I just want to get home and knock out. 

It’s 2AM I get home, then I realize I locked my keys in the house. I live in an apartment so the only way to get in is for my Dad to buzz me in. Considering I could hardly speak or walk my dad would be furious if I came home super fucked so I decided interacting wasn’t an option. 

So now what. It’s the middle of the night and I’m cold as shit but I’m so high the cold doesn’t bother me. I try to walk down the street and it takes me an hour to get two blocks bc I kept going in circles on accident. It’s been 7 hours and I’m still coming up on the edible. Easy 40/10 high.

Around 4 I find a nice suitable bus stop and fall asleep. 2 hours later I wake up still hella fucked to some asian ladies who didn’t speak English poking me for the bus time. How tf do I know when this bus is coming. Get up and leave. Walked around another couple hours and threw up once. By 10am I find my way downtown, and by now I can finally walk straight and speak clearly for the most part so around 3pm i finally make it home, still feeling a solid 9 but I make it without issue. Lay down sleep 9 hours wake up at midnight, about a 4 now. My buddy tells me he went to a party the next night and still was feeling a 5-6 the whole time. I was high for around 36 hours and he claims around 48. Lightweight said it was the highest he’d ever been by far and slept like 15 hours.

Start small with edibles.

edit: [here](https://imgur.com/hvkswQU) is a pic of it if you’re curiousOk. Walking in to reading festival 2019, I'm with my mates and we are ready to get fucked up. We walk in to wristband entrance and I nervously walk past a couple big German shepherds. Didn't react to me, idiots.
We walk past bag search and oh great I'm the only one out of my group who gets called for a search and now I'm shitting it. He asks if I have anything on me. Obviously I say as calm as possible "nah". He says "right we will find out I'm just a sec then.
He pats me down then crouches and starts fucking feeling round BARE in my junk.
I look over and give my friends a wide eyed "FML look".
Turns out I had a half oz of weed, grinder, 2g of ket, 4 Lego pills, 1 2cb, 5 tabs of acid. 
Now that is phat asf and the guy DEFINITELY knew. He's asking "hey what's this" whole poking the package.
"Er, my dick" I say. Then "my balls"
He stands up, whispers in my ear. Alright I'll let u go cause that queues getting heavy. 
He lets me walk away with it all. I know security can be pricks but I was lucky enough to get this g.So I was chillin with some old friends and this story came up and one of my buddies said I should share it... Details aren't perfect but it's still pretty vivid in my mind 8 years later.

So this was my junior year in high school and I was at the time on a "temporary probation" meaning if I didn't fail any drug tests or anything, my charges would be dropped. Now as you can assume that wasn't going to stop me from doing drugs as I had a whizzanator.. So anyway I was chilling smoking weed and doing coke with my friend Josh at one of our dealers house. Now this guy sold almost everything; weed, coke, guns, smack, meth, also a pimp, pills, no psychs but almost anything else; your typical inner city (LA) drug dealer. This man truly lived the "thug life". Real nice guy despite the pain and suffering he sold people from some of his more nefarious products, but hey some neighborhoods can be a rough life. Anyway so were chillin at his house and I remember I had to take a shit, so I went to the upstairs bathroom as it was clean (ish) and I then all of a sudden I hear from outside doors slamming, curious I go to the room close by and look out and see a fuck ton of cops, I yell "cops" and right after I hear a loud bang, bang, bang! "LAPD open up, we have a warrant!" I fuckin panic! I run to the back room that has a balcony and crouch down and see cops in the back yard area! I immediately think fuck! And then in the corner of this room I see a HUGE pile of laundry, without thinking I jump in the side of it, tuck my self deep into the pile make sure I'm completely covered and wait. My heart was racing and I was sweating fuckin' bullets, not a good time to be on cocaine! As I'm in this nasty ass pile of clothes I hear footsteps coming yelling "clear" and "check that dresser", things like that. I then hear a loud "back room clear!" in the room I was in, I hear some scuffing around in the closet. I'm fuckin dying at this point! I just keep thinking if they find me I'm getting the full wrath of the LAPD, Rodney King style. I'm holding my hand to my face in my little fetal ball and breathing through my fingers, trying my damnest not to shake. This must have been like 15mins tops but it felt like hours when I finally here a loud voice who I remember sounding exactly, fucking exactly like Carl Winslow from Family Matters "up stairs is all clean!" I let out a deep breath but stay in my pile. I think I'm good but then it hits me... How the fuck are you getting out of here? I start going through all my options in my head, still in the pile. After maybe five mins or so I decide to make a peek whole in the laundry and and look out and the room is indeed empty. I then crawled out of the pile staying low as possible, and look out the window to the backyard, no cops. I peak my head out of the room and don't see anyone, all I can hear is police out front. I then made the million dollar decision. I took a breath, and then opened the sliding door to the balcony slowly, once I had enough to fit through I remember thinking "fuck it" I ran out the door jumped of the balcony and rolled and fuck did it not feel good, but I didn't care. I got up, sprinted hopped the fence to the next yard, hoped their fence was on the next street and I ran left then crossed the street in between two houses, to the next street and ran like this for maybe 6 mins, almost full sprint. Finally realizing no one was chasing me, I stopped and caught my breath and looked and I was on a commercial street. I checked my pockets for my wallet and thank god I had it! I then reached into my front pocket for my phone and pulled it out along with a little bud I had forgotten about. Still out of breath I walked into this liquor store across the street got a rillo and a lime Jarrito soda (my fav ever since) sat my ass at a bus stop, rolled a blunt and took two hits, I felt calm. I then stood up finally out of shock and threw up a shit ton! I got my shit together and then just started laughing, smoked the rest of the shit and called my girlfriend to come pick me up.

This was the most scared I have been in my life, I don't know if I was lucky or if the clothes were the right call, but hey I made it out.

My friend josh kept his mouth shut and him and the dealer told the cops they were the only one's in the house, knowing I was probably gonna try and hide. Turned out the cops only found a small amount of weed and a few grams of Coke and paraphernalia, they didn't charge josh and they only got our dealer with possession and turns out they were thinking he was using the house as a brothel, he wasn't that type of pimp, anyway.. I don't like to bring it up too much as I think it's bad luck to "brag" about not getting caught but I was told I had to share it, so there it is. Moral of the story? Don't put your clothes away when your mom or wife tells you to, never know when you need a big laundry pile ;)Once again, [researchers](https://phys.org/news/2020-05-chemistry-marijuana-breathalyzer.html) have missed the point entirely by trying to assign a value to a THC concentration in the body to an impairment amount. The problem is, there is a lot of difference in effects from person to person with the same amount of THC. Tolerance builds quickly and over time the experience is much different than the first few times ingesting cannabis.

The entire reason they are trying to come up with a breathalyzer is that they cannot otherwise detect who is under the influence while driving. Well, if you can't tell if the person is impaired then what exactly is the problem?

Why is there no breathalyzer being developed for Xanax, or Oxy? Because all you need to measure is IMPAIRMENT, not some arbitrary number on a chemical test. If you are impaired on anything, you should not be driving. If you are not impaired, it does not matter what you have ingested. 
I did heroin daily since 2013, and a few days ago I did LSD for the first time with a few friends. And jesus..
My friend gave me 1 and a half tabs. Each tab was 125ug, so I had approx 187.5ug.

It was intense and unlike anything i'd ever imagine it was going to be like. It was just unbelievable and just completely different to heroin. Its extremely hard for me to describe. Thoughts just had a black hole effect, where when a thought came up, i would get sucked in deeper and deeper into that thought. Hard to explain. 

Anyway, at one point, they mentioned the word 'mother' in some TV show, a memory came up into my mind, and it was the memory of seeing my mother cry in front of me when she discovered I was doing heroin. Then a HUGE wave of guilt swept over me, it was intense and completely changed my mood because there was such intense guilt. I started thinking about how sorry I was for doing this, and for a while i was just consumed in this. Then suddenly there was an intense feeling of disgust towards heroin, and something clicked in me. Its really hard to describe, but I had such strong thoughts like how the fuck did I let myself become like this. At this point I vowed never to do heroin again. 

The next day I remembered my epiphany very clearly. Its like its imprinted in my mind or something. I had a slight urge, but it just felt so easy to not do it. Its now 3 days since, and I haven't touched heroin. 

What an amazing drug..So I'm with this girl. Very very pretty, great personality.
We sitting on a bench.

She has a joint so I'm like "okay cool let's hit it."
She says it's some really good ass indoor. My tolerance is basically zero.
I take like 7 really big hits passing between me n her.

Took way too much. Become mega-aware of my my body and how I'm moving it. Can't decide what I must or must do. Am acting weird and the more I try to be normal/chill the worse my state becomes. 

I leave date and go back to family. Still super high. See this picture of twins who have fucked their faces up beyond repair with plastic surgery. 
Wonder if I've done the same to my personality/psyche/mind. 
Realise if I have I'll be as hideous as these twins but I won't have a visual image to blatantly demonstrate my potentially hideous mind. 

I've now finally come down from the high and had a beer so I'm okay. But jesus fucking christ that sucked.

But update: she wants to go on another date. So can't have fucked up too bad.Started drugs at 12 (solvants, spirits), until 15.
15-20 weed and some alcohol.
20-24 designer drugs. Ordered research chemicals from fucking Lithuania, sold a little gram here and there, had a trip schedule, organized my life around drugs. Crippling depression and suicidal ideation coming along nicely. Complete isolation and polyaddiction, not to one thing but to having to take something to function. 

Finally sought medical help at 24, first therapy session in August 2019, promised I’ll not use again in order not to overlap with treatment effectiveness. Diagnosed with major depressive disorder, ADHD, Bipolar II shortly after. 

Haven’t felt the need to be high in a year. My parents are coming to visit me together next week, first time in 15 years. Drugs were amazing but my sober life has something they could never give me.My first time tripping 300 ug I ended up at knotts scary farm. When I was trying to get in my ticket in my phone wasn’t loading so went out to the street to get reception and take a screenshot. 

During my second round waiting in line, the girls I was talking to in line in front of me said “holy shit are you okay your eyes...”

To where I told her I was on a monster dose of acid and having the time of my life. She gave me some water because she said I looked dehydrated and once we got in her and her friend went off and they wished me luck. 

Straight away I head towards the only ride I’ve ever refused to ride at an amusement park. The big tower shit that just drops you straight down. For some reason I’d never wanted to ride it but in that moment I was just amazed at why and how I’ve never been on it and had to ride it. After waiting about an hour and a half in line, I hear my name and whirl around to see that girl and her friend. They were where the line wrapped around and they were very far back and asked if they could join me in line.

While we were in line they were messing with me asking if I could remember things and if they looked like monsters and shit. Normie questions of people who have no idea how acid works so I was having a blast and just looking at the leaves of the trees change. Eventually me and the girl were looking at something on her phone and I asked if I could FaceTime people in her contacts and spent a good 10 minutes yelling at random people through her phone. When I was done I gave her back my phone and realized how much my small backpack was wearing on me.

I’m pretty forward with people so first I asked the girls friend if she could hold my bag for a bit or just set it on the floor or do something with it as long as I didn’t have to carry mentally and physically. Then I asked the other girl if I could have a back massage and she obliged. After about 5 minutes of the best touch I’ve ever felt in my life, I turned around and collect my bag and thank her. As soon as I was looking at her she asked if I wanted to make out. Hell fuckin yea I do. However I did realize after that the family with a bunch of little girls had saw the whole thing and I felt guilty but laughed it off later. 

While we were goin at it the dude in the front asked if there were any parties of one who would like to skip to the front. Again, me! I said see ya and went to the front where I was talking with the guy. I eventually had to have him help me with my seatbelt because I was just way to perplexed with it and the dude was lookin at me smiling and I knew he could tell I was trippin balls. He mouthed all the words of the little intro the ride does and I felt just a soul connection with this dude. I know that it sounds weird but I think I accidentally connected with this dude more than that girl I just was with. 

He asked if I was ready or if I wanted off one last time and then next thing I know I’m physically higher and mentally higher than I’ve ever been before. I was peaking off the acid at the top of the world and started to get insane visuals combined with the new feeling off just falling straight down. The people below must’ve thought I was crazy when I just start laughing on the way down and don’t stop until I’ve gathered my hat and phone from the dude back

Over all 10/10 experience and now I only like to trip outside After I smoke my king size joint I make a wish for everyone on this fucked up planet to be in good health and too live a happy and successful life.I thought I could be a recreational user, and I was for a year, but one day I did it just one more day in a row. And then again. And then again. A month later i realised I needed to go cold turkey. I'm in the middle of withdrawals right now, trying to get through my uni classes that I don't understand half of the content. And I'm not even 20 years old yet. 

The physical symptoms isn't the worst, it's the fucking depression. 

There is no such thing as a weekend warrior, or a chipper. It'll get you eventually. It's just a matter of time. 

I know there's light at the end of the tunnel but right now I wanna just pop Seroquels and sleep so I don't have to deal with life right now.

EDIT: thank you so fucking much for your support. i felt guilty as shit for unloading my problems onto my friends in real life, who warned me this would happen time and time again. this is a great community. the urge to use again hasn't crossed my mind again because every time i check my phone theres more helpful messages. 

EDIT: wow i woke up to 150 new supportive messages. this is an amazing community. i read each reply even though its perhaps too many to reply to. thank you for the PM's as well. i'm halfway through day 4 now and mentally im feeling a lot better from all this support, even though my body's still fucked. so many good suggestions here that have helped me immensely. thank you.I was 17 and had taken acid twice before this, I handled it well both times so I went into this trip with a false sense of confidence. My goal was to sit still for around 8 hours with my eyes closed while listening to the entire Pink Floyd discography watching closed eye visuals. I meditated a lot prior to the trip and I really thought I could handle it. My parents both had work in the morning so I figured they’d be asleep by around 9, I dosed at 8:00 and as soon as I began coming up I realized I fucked up.

It wasn’t like the other two times, it was much more intense. (probably because I took two more tabs than usual) This story could last hours there is so much to it, but I began feeling scared within the first two hours because of the growing intensity of the drug and my fading confidence. I ran over to my computer and clicked on discord hoping to find a friend I could talk to to put me In better spirits. My friend D was in a lobby so I explained to him what was going on and he said “ohhh man. If that’s the same stuff M took earlier you got N-bome, (for anyone who doesn’t know what N-bome is, it’s a chemical similar to lsd and is sold commonly on tabs disguised as lsd because it is cheaper. It’s nowhere near as safe and can leave all kinds of long lasting problems and is a lot of the time lethal.) those tabs aren’t real man. You’ll be safe. Just sit tight and pray it won’t last long.” So obviously in my lsd induces headspace I left discord and started panicking 

I called my other friend who has taken these tabs previously and he sounded angry that I was scared, he talked in a rough tone and kept asking why I was acting like this. Which made me feel even more stupid, so I began pacing my room. I remember my walls were morphing into each other and my posters were dancing and the music I had on sounded menacing, not calming at all. My room is very small so I realized I was stuck in the confines of this room for the next 12 hours. 

Shortly before my peak, I got a text from my mom at around midnight saying “why can I hear you walking all over your room upstairs? Are you okay? Worrying me.” So this is when the panic really set in. I somehow managed to type back and make a story up about me pulling an all nighter with some friends online. I dropped my phone and I remember the worst anxiety I had ever felt began kicking in, it felt like electricity flowing through my neck which caused a physical pain and brought me to my knees, I’m guessing it was something like a panic attack. I felt myself losing my sense of self, forgetting my name, forgetting where I was. I was just a scared child laying in my floor, my vision field became totally fucked, I no longer could see my room it was just fractals. I became basic awareness with no memories, no ego or anything of the sorts. I became a fractal, and I thought that’s all I would ever be. Just a small spec in this infinite world of fractals. In hindsight it was quite beautiful, I’d like to revisit that world at some point, just not with my Mom Texting me.

I believe I was having something like an ego death, although I hate to label it. I didn’t want to let go, I felt like I had to fight the drug to stay sane enough to text my mom so I recall forcing myself up and FaceTiming my friend and begging him “please man don’t let them take me I have to stay here, if they come again I could go crazy and kill my family I won’t be in charge of my actions anymore I don’t want to lose myself again please talk to me and don’t let them take me.” That good ass friend of mine stayed on FaceTime with me for around 4 hours listening to my rant about these beings taking me. I thought that the fractals were evil beings trying to rip my ego and make me one of them lmao. I even have a journal entry in my room somewhere I wrote while on the phone with him saying something along the lines of “should I just go with them?” Creepy stuff. I spent the rest of the trip caught in a loop playing one crash bandicoot level on my PlayStation. I believe it was called high road. I probably died in the same spot over and over for around 5-6 hours. The Beatles made me calm down some but I was still terrified for the remainder of the trip.

At one point I had to take a piss but I knew I was tripping too hard to go downstairs to the toilet. So I found an empty water bottle and positioned myself over the bottle. I probably stood there thing to figure out how to pee for 10 minutes, I don’t know what I was doing wrong but I couldn’t get it out. Once I finally achieved urination, it felt too intense for me to handle. It was like I was draining my life force. It was until after I peed that I looked down and realized I had completely missed the bottle and had pissed all in my floor. Yeah, textbook bad trip.

But long long story short, I eventually came down, but sadly went into psychosis which lasted over 20 hours, I had to talk to my parents the next morning for lunch and my pupils were still huge and their faces were still morphing as I was talking to them. It was a nightmare. They gave me a burrito to eat, but I was unable to get it down so I found a way to make them leave the room, then ran upstairs into my room, pulled all the tissues out of a tissue box, put the burrito in said tissue box, out the tissues back in the box, buried the box within a drawer, moved my bed in front of the drawer to make sure my parents couldn’t find the burrito because I was sure if the knew I didn’t eat it they would’ve known I was on acid. I went crazy. 

There was a lot more to it but those were the important parts. This was a lot for a 17 year old with already bad anxiety to handle, I was left with so much anxiety I didn’t know what to do with it. It’s been over a year and through meditation and talking to many friends I feel much better. I’ve taken lsd a few times since but in very small doses. I don’t blame the drug obviously it was my setting that did it. Happy to answer any questions (:

Tl;dr: took 4 tabs of acid, was convinced it was nbome, my mom texted me asking what was wrong, had ego death on floor pissed on my carpet and hid a burrito in a box. Was an eventful afternoon I'm not sure if this is the right place for this, but I'm just so excited and happy. For as long as I can remember, I've never been able to smell anything unless it's a very strong smell. I've only ever smelled a handful of things in my life, like Vanilla, Lavender, Peppermint, and on very few occasions, shit. But anything that has a lighter scent to it like perfume, alcohol, and even weed, I've never been able to smell. I've had blood tests and MRIs but doctors never really figured out what was wrong with me. I had a deviated septum surgery but it didn't help me get a sense of smell.

BUT. I took Adderall recreationally for the first time today, 40mg. And suddenly, after 4-5 hours after taking it, I could smell. My roommate began to burn some incense, and I could SMELL SMOKE for the very first time in my life. It was Eucalyptus incense, and I could SMELL Eucalyptus. I've tried so hard in like stores and stuff to see if maybe I could catch a whiff of Eucalyptus or any other smells, but I've never been able to. But now, I CAN ACTUALLY SMELL.

I've been spending the past few hours burning my roommate's incense and experiencing so many smells for the first time, and it's fucking amazing. I've always thought I wasn't missing out on much without smelling, but boy was I wrong.The dying started three years ago. 

First it was Mark. He and I started hanging out after his prison term. He had robbed a convenience store for  $16 using a gun his crack dealer gave him. The dealer told him to go rob a place for hit money then dimed him out a few weeks later. Mark and I got high all the time. He had a huge porn collection and used to give me old tapes. He drank cheap-ass malt liquor and it rotted his guts out before he turned 60. He left behind two young sons and I’m struggling to stand in for him as a godparent. It sucks. 

Next was Gary. He was a little older than me. He was a walking party. Everyone loved him. I helped his kid with her homework a few times when I was over there trading weed and coke for whatever he had. He looked a little green at the market one Saturday and a few days later he was dead. They said it was a heart attack. He was 56.  There’s nobody to play congos in the local cover band now. 

Yesterday it was JD. We ran grow houses together when it was illegal. He was one of those guys who always took it to that next level with partying. I had to set boundaries a lot with him but I was really happy when he came back to town last year. He said he was down to “just herb man”. I knew something wasn’t right when he turned down an invite to our family Christmas dinner. He was found floating face down in the bay a few days ago. No toxicology yet but I know what happened. He was so lonely the last time I saw him. 

The party was over for me long before the dying started. I caught a five year term and realized it was time to make changes. When I came home I tried to help my friends stay healthy so we could experience growing old together and watch our kids and grandkids grow up. Now it’s just me. 

Have your fun people. Live your best lives. Please seek help before things get out of control though.  Don’t rob the world of your presence.  You are here for a reason.

EDIT: typoI used to be a normal guy.  I had a fiance, a condo, tons of friends and family, a really cool dog, and a soaring career.  Then I got a spinal infection that spread to my brain and was in  the hospital for 5 months. The day I was released from the hospital, my dog, whom I had for 13 years died of a brain infection as well.  The fuck are the chances of that?!

I fucking lost it.  I was in so much mental anguish.  I hated the universe for the pain I perceived to be inflicted upon me.  I now know that I incorrectly marked myself as a victim.  It was pitiful "poor me" syndrome.

I had been sober for 10 years and then, in my despair, I started smoking meth again.  In a very short time, I found myself shooting meth, dope, and acid.  Needless to say I lost my goddamned mind.

I started to deal meth to support my habit and my "business" started to expand rapidly.  I found myself buying pounds of meth at a time via the dark web.  It was super good and super cheap ($200 per OZ when purchased per pound).  

What I would do is trap out of 5 star hotels because they don't ask any fucking questions.  I would check in under an alias with a fake passport and chat the concierge and front desk staff up about how I was here on business.  It wasn't a lie and they were more than willing to accommodate me since I tipped them all generously.  

I would order the meth online and have it shipped to another hotel that I rented a room at, but at which I was not staying.  I would explain that I had a sensitive package being delivered for my business and when it arrived, I needed them to call me immediately.

I didn't trust my fellow meth heads since they were in the business of gaslighting and gangstalking me to throw me off my game and steal my meth.  Dealing meth is unlike dealing any other drug;. Its a whole nother dope game.  And one night, on the depths of my paranoia, I knew I was gonna be robbed, so I locked 2 pounds of meth in the safe of my hotel room.  HUGE FUCKING MISTAKE!!!!

I went to retrieve it from the safe to flip it to a guy who bought tons of meth from me and the fucking safe was dead No matter what I did, the safe wouldn't unlatch.  I called the front desk and told them that I had locked something very expensive in the safe and it wouldn't open.  They sent the maintenance man up and I explained that I needed the safe opened, but what I had in there was not for his eyes.  I told him that I didn't trust anyone and I didn't want him to let people know what I had.  I tipped him $500 up front.  He opens this safe and then the motherfucker grabs the door and it swings wide open.  He's starring at enough meth to put me in jail for the rest of my fucking life!!!!  What the FUCK did I just tell this asshole and pay him $500 dollars not to do!!!!  I paid him another $1000 bucks and begged him to keep his mouth shut.  He happily agreed and acted like he was buddy.

1 month later, I'm trapping out of another hotel across town and again I go to a different hotel to pick up a package.  I walk up to the front desk, show them my ID and grab the package containing another 2 pounds of Tina.  I walk out of the hotel as usual to wait for my Uber.  Before I can get out of the lobby door, I'm grabbed by the concierge and three valet staff.  It was the DEA in disguise.  FUCK!!!

I got charged with trafficking narcotics, trafficking narcotics through the mail, conspiracy to violate the controlled substance act, ID fraud, money laundering (Bitcoin), mail fraud, and the worst of all, RICO predicate.  They explained to me that they had been following me for a month following a tip from a maintenance man at a hotel.  They had wrapped up 4 other people I worked with 2 weeks prior with and they all turned on me.  


I put my condo up to post bail, i turned in my passport,  I'm an ankle bracelet, and have to live in a sober house.  My fiance left me and no one I love will even speak to me.  This is fucking painful.

I made a deal with the DA.  I'll plead guilty in April and be sentenced to 20 years. My lawyer told me that if I took it to trial, the DEA has something like a 95% conviction rate and I'll spend over 40 years in prison.  

Shit in the sober house is not going well and I have a zero fucks given attitude.  My fucking life is over!!!!   My mother sent me a care package even though she won't speak to me and someone stole it from me.  I got that prick back though.

I'm seriously considering killing myself.  I've never been to prison, but I know I cannot do a 20 year piece.  I'm fucking panicking!!! How the fuck did this happen!!

Feel free to ask any questions or give me advice.  I don't know what to do.The Simpsons is the greatest comedy show ever made. The Simpsons is the story of all of us. When the martians come down and ask for Our History, I'm handing them all the seasons of The Simpsons on DVD, or whatever they watch stuff on. 

We are all Bart--We all feel unappreciated, because people decide to focus on our flaws instead of our talents. We all resent authority. We've been influenced by bad people, and been a bad influence. We all seek thrills that hurt us and those around us. 

We are all Lisa-- We all feel unappreciated when we try to be the voice of reason and intelligence, and the people we love ignore us. We all feel like we're getting nowhere, despite our gifts. We all feel like we're trapped with people that'll never get us.

We are all Marge-- We all feel unappreciated when we try to voice concern, and the people we love write us off as a nag. We all feel like we're being smothered by our loved ones, to the point that we'll never develop our own personality. 

We are all Homer--We all feel unappreciated when we don't deserve to. We're all mercurial and willfully ignorant. We all try to numb the pain of a life that'll never satisfy us, to the point of hurting our brains.

We are all Maggie (thank you for reminding me, allthereis_isnothing)-- We all feel unappreciated, because we feel like we're unheard and easily forgotten. We all have talents that we feel no one can see. And, if you do as many drugs as I do, you probably fall down a lot. 

They all never quite fit in, no matter how hard they try. They'll all never change. 

We all have bad parents, we'll all be bad parents (those of us that have kids), and we all find romance in codependency. 

Springfield is a human brain. Each inhabitant is a perfect representation of another piece of us. 

Shelbyville is another human brain. We hate each other for no reason, even though we're exactly the same.

The Simpsons evolved American society. They got us talking about corruption on both sides of American politics, gay rights, good and bad parenting, good pet ownership, the ethics of vegetarianism, the tropes in our entertainment, and just about everything else.

The best animators (like Brad Bird) and the best comedy writers worked on The Simpsons, so their template acts as a perfect example for how to write comedy and animate--to the point that EVERYONE's "ripped them off". 

But the beauty of The Simpsons is that they "ripped off" everything they did. The beauty of The Simpsons is that we are all the same, and everything's been done before, so you might as well create and express yourself freely.

We are Springfield. We are Simpsons. Matt Groening is a God. Dan Castallaneta, Yeardley Smith, Julie Kavner, Nancy Cartwright, Hank Azarea, and Harry Shearer are some of the best satirists, improvisers, and voice actors who ever lived. 

Drop acid and watch The Simpsons everybody. Now is the time of The Simpsons. God bless The Simpsons.

NOTE: As a superfan I can't claim a definite "favorite episode" but the episode *Bart Gets An F* is definitely one of the best. The first episode of season 2. It perfectly illustrates all the frustrations felt by all creative, stupid, and flawed people. What's one of your favorites?? Removed this because it was pretty cringy in retrospect. 

I just don't wanna delete the post because I've never had this many upvotes before. 

Carry on 😂Lemon water. I drink litres of the stuff every day. I have done for about a year. I can't get enough of it, my brain craves it.

Why? There's no addictive substances in it right? 

The reason why is Psychology. Specifically, classical conditioning. A smart guy called Pavlov figured out if he rang a bell whenever he fed his dog, soon the dog would salivate and get excited upon hearing the bell as the dogs associate the bell with food. Whenever the bell rang, the dogs went wild because they were so used to getting fed. They knew what was coming.

Now, I used to make poppy seed tea with my lemon water. More so, I mixed phenibut with it and amphetamine. All of these powerful substances release large amounts of dopamine and make me super happy. Although I don't use all of these drugs now, I still drink lemon water constantly. Now my brain associates lemon water with the huge dopamine release and anticipates reward.

I have conditioned myself to be addicted to lemon water. I fucking love the stuff. I am pavlov's dog. I'm a lemon water addict. It was summer 2018 when I flew to Miami Florida for a friend of mines bachelor party. He rented this huge house for the full weekend filled with every liquor imaginable & all of our drug dealer friends. The night before we checked into the house we thought it would be a good idea to have a night of our own. Just me , 2 of my bros & our female stripper friend. We got so drunk off of sailor jerry we said fuck everything. We went to a strip club that night and did so much cocaine I fell in love with every stripper that walked pass me. I nearly emptied out my entire bank account and let it fly. Near the end of the night I had remembered I brought some acid with me from home and thought we should do it. Disclaimer: don’t do acid at 4 am and think your next day will be fine. That acid trip was the beginning of the longest 3 days in my life.

The next day with no sleep we all moved like zombies trying to get everything ready for the 20 other people coming to celebrate with us the next three days. I couldn’t even think about sobering up. I hadn’t slept. My soon to be married friend suggested molly would help.... fucking wrong. I took it anyway. Coming down from the acid mixed with the cocaine and the molly put me in a cynical state. I couldn’t feel anything. I could barely talk. I wasn’t belligerent. I was perfectly aware of everything going on around me but I just couldn’t indulge. I put my hood over my head and pulled the drawstrings as tight as I could covering my mouth and everything except my eyes , I responded to everything by nodding my head yes or no. I got so high I had turned into Kenny McCormick. 

I was offered more and more coke and I took it only in hopes to feel normal again. Didn’t work. I thought maybe more drinking. I drank every kind of alcohol you could think of.... didn’t work. I still felt numb. Finally I gave up on everything and asked for more molly. I was given 8 capsules. I took them all in 15 min intervals. Still nothing. After 3 days of strip clubs and more drinking the stripper friend from the first night thought I needed help in her way. She got us a hotel room. She thought pussy could bring me back to life. I did too. 

I had secretly shit blood earlier that day but thought nothing of it. More cocaine I say! Me and the girl start messing around in the hotel room. Both naked we give each other oral sex. I start eating her out and I spit on her clit and noticed on the white bed sheets it was a blood stain. I wiped it and realized it was fresh blood. I asked her “what the fuck are you on your period?” She sat up quick and said “no I just got off my period” so I’m like fuck it, no worries. We start fucking, I turn her over doggy style and fucking her from behind. I start getting a weird and crippling pain in my stomach and my heart. I ignore it to keep fucking. I pull my dick out to spit on her pussy for lubrication. When I spit on her pussy I realize it was me bleeding out my mouth. I freaked out. My heart started racing and I started coughing. I told her and ran to the bathroom. 

I started coughing up blood in the sink for about 30 min. My heart is pounding out my chest & my stomach feels like I’m digesting razor blades. I shit more blood while coughing up blood in the bath tub. I finish up and clean everything. I get back into bed with her and she comforts me. Gives me water, massages me for a while and then finally whispers in my ear “I want to keep fucking” in my head I’m like “bitch I’m dying” but instead of saying that guess what I did! I fucked the shit out of her.... I was thinking “ay man if my hearts stops in this pussy is the best place to be.” I make her cum and roll over on my stomach in agony. 

While trying to sleep I realized that I might have finally reached my limit. Mixing different alcohols acid cocaine and molly for 3 days straight might have finally did the trick. I’m not a doctor but the way I felt I thought to myself I’m definitely not waking up tomorrow. In that same thought I deleted all the dick pics , sex tapes & embarrassing pictures out my phone and texted everyone I loved my last words. Went to sleep like a baby. Next day I literally woke up surprised to be alive and thought to myself “you lucky fuck” I packed my shit and flew back home that same day and never even went to a doctor. First place I went to when I got home you ask ? A fucking barSo my(M19) girlfriend(F19) keeps going out and taking mdma. Usually this wouldn’t be a problem because I do it occasionally myself, however it’s becoming something she’s doing every single week. Due to her taking it this often she gets very bad comedowns which includes balling her eyes out and complaining how upset she is for days - which is fine. But then as soon as the comedown goes she wants to do it all again even though she has said herself she knows it’s a bad idea but doesn’t want to ‘miss out’. The reason I get so annoyed is because it doesn’t only effect her because I’m constantly looking after her emotions every comedown.

I have tried explaining how I feel anyone got any suggestions of what I can say?Hello guys,

I've been lurking this subreddit for a while now and have to admit that I had quite a few good laughs from all the stories posted here. Now the time has come for me to share what I'm pretty sure is and for a long time will remain the most embarassing experience of my entire life.

It all started a couple of nights back when I went to a friends house intending to smoke some weed and have a few drinks with some acquaintances. The night went south when one of them brought along a drug dealer who was trying to sell off a shitload of speed. Flash forward a couple of hours later and we've done a good deal of fat lines and are about to hit a club located nearby. It was still relatively early (midnight) so the place was half empty and we stood out like an eyesore standing in the corner, all spiked up chugging down beers. A foreign  chick suddenly approached us asking if we had anything on us. I had my fill for the night and still had about 1.5 gs left so I figured I might as well sell my share. We started negotiating about the price, but she didn't have any money on her and offered a blowjob instead. Now, I'm not one for casual hookups usually, especially with women that I've never seen before in my life, but I was as high as a kite and she was smokin hot (in a slutty, but boner inducing way) so I said fuck it and we went to the bathroom to do our thing. She went down on it like a champ and it felt amazing, but 2 minutes into the deed I noticed that she started choking. I looked her in the face and could see all the storm warnings; she was fairly intoxicated and her face was completely strained. God did I want to get the fuck out of there, but before I could do anything, it happened. She vomited all over junior. But no, the fun did not end there. She suddently started maniacally throwing up all over the stall, and to my misery, the whale like noises she was producing alerted the nearby bouncers who swiftly broke into the stall, grabbed me and forcefully "escorted" me out of the club, frontview, pants down, willy swinging covered in vomit. 

It's been two days now, and I've yet to gather the cojones to leave my house or check the 23 messages I've received since. I'll probably be laying low for another week so I figured I might as well share this here.

FML.I been noticing about 75% of all these post in here are kids (17 an under) taking drugs, Freaking out, having emergencys, and all coming to reddit to seek help? 

I feel like there is less harm reduction in here and more " you'll be okay, " which is fucked when you have bunch of little kids talking about taking their moms pills or doing bunches of mdma while on ssri.

All I can say for the little ones out here is this. 

We all went thru the same stages all these little ones looking for advice around here and here mine : 

DO YOUR RESEARCH. 

KNOW YOUR BODY. 

KNOW WHAT MEDS YOU ARE ON THAT MIGHT EFFECT YOU WHILE TRIPPING OR TAKING OTHER DRUGS.

DONT DO ANY DRUG JUST CAUSE YOUR FRIEND SAID ITS COOL. 

you have your whole life ahead of you, so dont try doing 32drugs before your even 19 cause that could have long term psychological effects due to the nature of the brain doesn't stop growing until your 25+

Be smart, educate your self, don't do anything you'll regret later on life! 

Safe trips everyone. Stay true to your self.

Edit : didn't think this would gain attention and most would just call me dumb. But thank you ALL OF YOU for the agreements and disagreements. It is the whole point of this thread is to get across the simple fact of do your research if your gonna put any substance in your body. 

I'm sorry if I can't reply to all these great comments and personal reflections, just know they go along way and all we can do as advice givers is hope someone reads and takes it how they want. 

Cheers to everyone!Years ago my brother was pulled over and they found some weed on him. He had to do a urine test and of course it was in his system. Lost his license for a year, had to pay thousands of euros and had to quit college because of it. A few hours ago the same thing happened to a good friend, also had it in his system. Will probably have to quit his well-paid job. I absolutely think everyone found to have consumed this deadly plant should have their lives ruined. Props to the government for getting rid of these absolute scum of the earths. These cops truly saved the family of my friend, the weed would have probably destroyed it.  
  
(This is Germany so probably way different punishments than US.)  
Edit: Just wanted to vent because this good dude's life is basically ruined for the next 1-2 years and for what?  
It's pretty obvious sarcasmI wanted to look normal so I picked a banana up from the counter. He walked into the kitchen and I take a bite of my normal banana when I instantly spit it out and start laughing hysterically. I forgot to peel it lmao.     
Edit: just ordered pizza MMMMMM.        
Edit: wordsSo this morning I took some amphetamine sulfate. The intention was to get some work down and study. However that is not what happened. I have been sitting for 8 hours organizing a porn library and creating an excel document that lets me browse through the videos instead of opening the folders. You may wonder why I would need a local porn library on my computer?  


Well I am impulsive on amps sometimes and i bought a subscription account. So I am trying to download as much as possible before the subscription is up so i can still enjoy all of the HD videos i paid for.At the end of 2018, I came across a reddit post called "My year in drugs". Since then, I started logging my drug usage in a simple spreadsheet. I saw a few apps suggested in the comments, but none of them were what I was looking for. I liked Tablets, an app created by another r/Drugs user, but it had some disadvantages.

Three weeks ago I started working on an app that will (hopefully) combine all the best from its alternatives. Here's a list of features that are already done:

* The app will be available on both iOS and Android
* Works out-of-the-box with defaults based on TripSit/Erowid
* You can set custom premade doses to make the logging even quicker
* Has a clear calendar overview and useful substance usage stats
* Will always be free and unlimited

I'm also going to add goals feature that will help you reduce your drug usage (by ex. T-breaks or drinking only on weekends).

[Here are some screenshots](https://imgur.com/a/SuVIat2)

I want to hear back from some of You before publishing the first version. What are Your expectations for such an app? What can I do to make it better? Any suggestions will be highly appreciated.

I will publish the app here after getting some feedback and fixing minor issues.

Thanks!

Edit: Thanks for the gold, kind stranger! Please don't put me on AwardSpeechEdits.

Edit #2: I've made a discord server for everyone interested. DM me for the link.Wtf?

We’re not friends, so I don’t understand why he would react that way. I get that he’s almost always on shit, and he tweaks a lot, but that’s a strange reason to feel that way.

Perhaps he finds me cool and wants to be buddies? Either way, that shit threw me off. I just want my fucking drugs.

That’ll be like if my barber complains that I only contact him when I need a haircut.My entire life I always played video games with the y-axis look inverted, not too sure why that's just how it worked in my brain. My friends always gave me shit for switching the controls but one day while I was tripping on acid when I was 17 I picked up my controller and go "wtf who took off my look inversion?" To find out that it was already on. Sense then I've been playing video games with standard look control and it's been 4 years. Not too exciting but I thought this was very interestingI lent my Xbox to my friend so he could have something to do while in quarantine because I was tryna be nice but boy did that backfire. If I knew he was bouta go to rehab out of state a few weeks later I wouldn’t have let him have it.

He lived in a trap house type place and when he left he didn’t say anything and dropped off the grid like the last time he went to rehab so now I’m stuck without my Xbox and the people he lived with say it’s not there but I already know they sold that bitch for heroin cause they been shooting for awhile.

Fuck me for tryna be nice I guess. Now I’m out of drugs and don’t have my Xbox. Great.Opiod overdose:

Risk is highest of overdose when combined with other CNS (Central nervous system) depressants (GHB, Benzodiazepines, alcohol, 'downers') or when detoxing.

CNS depression causes slow, shallow respirations. The blood is not supplied with enough oxygen. Permanent brain/muscle damage can occur do to hypoxia (Low blood oxygen).

Someone who is high will be out of it but will respond to outside stimulation.

Assess if they are alert by shaking, shouting, or giving sternal rubs

Very High:

\-small, constricted pupils

\-Slurred speech

\-Nodding out

\-Itchy skin

Do not leave alone, monitor breathing, keep them awake and stimulated

\-sternal rubs are painful and may cause bruising but is a technique used to awake someone who is somnolent and will not respond to other verbal or physical stimulus. Make a fist and firmly rub the upper part of victim's chest with your knuckles.

Overdose:

\-Unresponsive

\-Slow, shallow, or irregular respirations

\-Snoring, choking, or gurgling sounding respirations

\-vomiting (recovery position (laying on side) for anyone who is intoxicated and vomitting to prevent aspiration)

\-Heart rate is slow, irregular, fast, weak, or absent

\-Awake but unable to talk

\-Bluish discoloration to lips and nail beds

\-Lighter skinned people will have a bluish/purple skin discoloration

\-Darker skinned people will have a grayish skin discoloration

In an overdose rescue breaths are a priority and should be given if respirations are less than every 5-10 seconds, shallow, irregular/irradic. Ampu bag is preferred.

In an overdose:

First!

Give several quick rescue breaths then administer narcan!

Nasal:

\-Tilt head back

\-Spray one half (usually 1mL) on one nostril and 1 mL in the other (Be sure to plug opposite nostril when administering)

\-May take up to 5 minutes to be effective

\-Continue rescue breaths

\-If they have not come to in approx 5 minutes give another dose up to 3 times

\-If they have not responded after 2-3 doses something is wrong. Check pulse!

Injectable:

\-Give several quick rescue breaths

\-Draw up 1mL into an IM (intramuscular) syringe or any syringe if IM is not available

\-Inject at a 90 degree angle into muscle (usually upper arm or thigh)

\-Give approximately every 5 minutes x 3 doses (same for nasal)

Rescue breaths

\-Tilt head backwards to open airway

\-lift chin

\-Plug nose

\-Give two quick breaths then deliver one respiration every 5 seconds (approximately 12 respirations per minute). Watch the chest rise to ensure respirations are adequate

\-Place victim in recovery position (See link below) after narcan is given to prevent aspirating vomit and to keep airway open.

\-Continue rescue breaths until EMS arrives. If HR is absent, start CPR.

Narcan will usually cause immediate withdrawal symptoms. Victim may be confused or aggressive after Narcan is given. Narcan will wear off in 30-90 minutes and victim can OD again and still needs to go to hospital. Narcan is available without a prescription at most major pharmacies. Intranasal is more expensive because the generic version is not available. IM is cheaper.

Good Samaritan laws are laws that provide immunity from arrest, criminal charges, or prosecution for possession of drugs/paraphanilia to the victim of drug overdose or the person who calls 911, seeks medical attention, or administers first aid. Some states this also includes protections for people who are on probation or parole.

CNS depressants overdose: (alcohol, GHB, opioids, benzos)

\-Most dangerous if combined with other CNS depressants (DO NOT MIX) (Do not mix GHB with alcohol or any other drugs, this is extremely dangerous!)

\-If someone can be aroused by verbal or physical stimuli this is always a good sign

\-If someone intoxicated is vomiting assist to recovery position to prevent aspiration of vomit

\-Monitor respirations, keep awake/stimulate, give rescue breaths/cpr if necessary, get help!

\-In hospital they may give fluids, ventilate, give activated charcoal, of Flumazenil for benzo overdose (risk of detoxing)

Check pulse on the victim's neck. To check the pulse over your carotid artery, place your index and middle fingers on your neck to the side of your windpipe. CPR is not necessary if the victim is not breathing but still has a pulse. If victim is not breathing and pulse can be felt continue to monitor their pulse and continue rescue breathing. If not pulse is felt begin CPR. If victim's breathing is very slow, shallow, and/or irregular and victim is unconscious you may still deliver rescue breaths.

Stimulant overdose: (adderall, methamphetamine, cocaine, ecstacy)

Symptoms:

\-Hypertension (High blood pressure)

\-Tachycardia (Rapid heart rate)

\-Electrolyte imbalances

\-dehydration

\-Fever

\-Chest pain

\-Head ache

\-seizures

\-agitation

\-hallucinations

\-anxiety

\-unconciousness

Risks:

\-Arrhythmias (abnormal heartbeat)

\-Stroke

\-Heart attack

\-seizures

Treatment:

\-Monitor respirations

\-Monitor vitals

\-Remain calm

\-Cooling measures if warm

\-EMS will offer Benzos, fluids, maybe antihypertensives

If someone is having a seizure do not put anything in their mouth, do not try to restrain them, try to remove hard objects nearby that could cause injury, remove any tight clothing or jewelry around the neck, put something soft under head to prevent head injury. When they stop seizing place person on side in recovery position to keep airway open and prevent aspiration. Call 911.

Withdrawals:

Some drugs have a rebound effect. Typically withdrawals from stimulants are not life threatening. Withdrawal from drugs that depress the CNS can be very dangerous. Withdrawal from alcohol and benzodiazepines can be life threatening and may need to be treated in a hospital setting.  Typically opioid withdrawals are uncomfortable but not life threatening unless they have a preexisting condition but there is a risk of dehydration/electrolyte imbalances with prolonged vomiting and diarrhea.

Alcohol withdrawal

symptoms:

CNS stimulation (rapid heart rate, hypertension, agitation, anxiety, fever, tremor, seizures, nausea, vomiting)

\-hypoglycemia (Low blood sugar)

Delerium tremens

\-A rapid onset of confusion during withdrawals (this is emergent get help)

\-Hyperandrenergic state (increased adrenal/epi norepi)

\-delusions, disoreintation, paranoia, confusion, panic, anxiety

\-Fluids, Benzos, anticonvulsants, IV thiamine (vitamin B1)

Alcohol withdrawal may need treatment with benzodiazepines in a hospital setting to prevent complications of increased stimulation caused by withdrawals.

&#x200B;

Resources:

CPR:

[https://www.redcross.org/take-a-class/cpr/performing-cpr/cpr-steps](https://www.redcross.org/take-a-class/cpr/performing-cpr/cpr-steps)

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vqfIU9CVbNI](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vqfIU9CVbNI)

Recovery Position:

[https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/first-aid/recovery-position/](https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/first-aid/recovery-position/)

Harm reduction resources:

[https://harmreduction.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/12/HisforHeroin.pdf](https://harmreduction.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/12/HisforHeroin.pdf)

[https://harmreduction.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/12/getting-off-](https://harmreduction.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/12/getting-off-right.pdf)[right.pdf](https://harmreduction.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/12/getting-off-right.pdf)

[https://www.heartlandalliance.org/mhri-staging/wp](https://www.heartlandalliance.org/mhri-staging/wp-content/uploads/sites/20/2016/10/noncompliance_5_x_7.pdf)\-[content/uploads/sites/20/2016/10/noncompliance\_5\_x\_7.pdf](https://www.heartlandalliance.org/mhri-staging/wp-content/uploads/sites/20/2016/10/noncompliance_5_x_7.pdf)Me and my friend took some LSD a couple of weeks ago and went on a long ass walk. Inside their house was two guys chilling drinking beer and smoking, and the second owner of the apartment who was rolling super hard, it was his first time. When we came back we were kinda nervous about the chaotic situation inside.

When we got in the dude on molly looked so much like an animal, licking his chin and eyes looking in different directions. They are all my very good friends so I was not scared, but still very nervous and got the feeling that "i dont have control here". I took a cookie (not a space one) and started munching on it. I was standing in middle of the room and my friend tripping was on toilet, the dude on X was rolling on the carpet and the two guys just on couches drinking. Suddenly everything was silent, and I got the feeling I have to say something or else everything freezes. I stuttered out "wow this is like I came into a fucking zoo hehe" and then this friend on couch was like "haha yeah, only monkeys! And me, the lion king" and then did this typical stoner laugh he has, and it made me realize i am in a very chill spot actually. Thanks for. Coming to my ted talk😪🤷‍♂️Welcome to my bathroom stall

I snort 30mg of crystal and proceed to open open up my phone to jump start my dick.  Depending on cock hardness, I have to apply just the right amount of grip and lube, since if I go overboard on either of them, it makes a noisy squishy sound which would tip off my neighbors shitting on either side of me.  It’s a delicate balance of these 3 variables (like a jerk-off fire triangle for all you boy scouts out there).  After 15 min and 86 tabs of porn, I shut the shit off and start studying my surroundings to stimulate my specimen.

You see, American restroom stalls have these wide gaps on the doors.  As I’m tugging my member, I look through the gap and play a game where I put my one good eye against the wide crack and peer through and try to match the eye level of the next guy that tries to open my locked stall.  Around 15.8% of the time (n=76), some guy would try to look through the gap - that’s where I SHOCK them every time as we meet eye-to-eye merely millimeters away!  The surge of adrenaline through my meth-fueled brain creates an orgasmic feeling coursing through my entire body.  The victim’s sphincter inevitably squeezes shut and pinches their loaf back in their gut and they always slink away.

I’m a goddam winner.  Every time.  I’ll see you next time we meet in the stall, okay USA?When i was 13 my mom was so strict on weed so i always had to sneak being high. I walk in the house one night absolutely fried out of my mind and start walking up the stairs and she's behind me on the couch and asks "did you eat at your friends or do you need dinner" i don't even turn around i Just keep walking and i say loud as can be "no thanks mom ill get my haircut later" and when i realized what i said i froze in my tracks on the stairs turned around just sat there feeling so stupid. And you know what was next. " are you fucking high" the rest of that night was history. I must've just was thinking i needed a haircut or something and just said out loud? ?So, I live in a small town.. and I'm one of those drug users that enjoys doing drugs by myself and i don't like getting too involved with other drug addicts and i don't know like 10 dealers i only have one, and he's a friend from high school. To be honest.. If he didn't sell me pills we wouldn't be friends. He sends me hundreds of facebook messages a day just talking about benzos, and its not interesting. he just says stuff like "my boy has sandoz brand xanax the GG25 white ones" but he does it literally.. ALL... day. 

&#x200B;

He's done horribly douchey shit in the past. I'll give you a few examples. He sells me 3 things" adderall, benzos, and subutex. One night I was in subutex withdrawal and he messaged me saying "I got subs on deck" so I call him and we work out a deal and he tells me to head up. It was like 11:30 at night and I had to be up for work in the morning and hes like a 25 minute drive away and my car is a piece of shit so i don't like driving it long distances. So I get up there, and i'm sure a lot of people on here can relate to knowing what its like to be in withdrawal and having a dealer hit you knowing you're about to get well) and when i get there i call him to tell him in 5 minutes away and he starts yelling "DUDE I DONT HAVE SHIT IM NOT A DISPENSARY WHY ARE YOU CALLING ME TRYING TO BUY MY MEDICATION" and words cant describe how fucking furious I was that I wasted my gas and time. 

He's always ripped me off/shorted me a number of times and one time i went to spend like 100 dollars i park in front of his house he comes out starts yelling "DUDE WHY ARE YOU MESSAGING ME SO MANY TIMES" (i wasnt) and hes like "HERE FUCKIN TAKE IT" throws a bag of pills at me and of course when i'm spending $100 I want to look in the bag and make sure hes not shorting me and when i looked of course there were like 5 pills missing. When he saw that I noticed he grabbed the other 5 out of his pocket and threw it in my passengers seat and i handed him the hundred. What he did NEXT though is the icing on the cake of douchebaggery he sees my iPad on my passengers seat and goes "IM TIRED OF YOUR SHIT GIVE ME THAT TABLET" and im sitting there like... wtf is happening right now? It's already hot enough to be doing an open drug deal in a residential neighborhood, I have PILLS now in my car i can't be yelling at him to give me my tablet back. and when I got home he told me he dropped it in his yard and it was raining that evening so i just kept begging him to go get it out of the rain and eventually he did because it wasn't broken when I got it.

Anyway, today I made a deal with him to get a bunch of xanax and adderall and he seemed cool over messenger about it so I trekked up there (25 minute drive) and he makes me park in front of his house, run down to his basement (this is the norm, and its sketchy as fuck) and grab the shit do the exchange then run back up to my car and leave (i've gotten less than enthused looks from his neighbors) but this time his doors locked and i knock and hes like "DUDE GET THE FUCK OUT OF HERE QUIT TRYING TO BUY MY MEDICATION" meanwhile hes yelling this through a locked door and im beginning to become infuriated that he once again is pulling this fucking odd and borderline retarded behavior. So I say to myself fuck this i did NOT just drive all the way up here for him to pull this shit so i knocked again and i hear him yell "DAD!! DAVIDS IN OUR BACKYARD TRYING TO BUY MY MEDICATION CALL THE COPS" so i said fuck it and went back up to my car and go park at the nearby gas station and message him saying "what.. .the FUCK.. just happened" and he just starts texting me insulting me saying i'm a drug addict (even though hes on 10 mg xanax a day, 90 mg adderal, 24 mg subutex not to mention the street drugs he does) 

so I text him saying "you know what fuck this im going home" (i didn't WANT to do this I really wanted the pills he said he was gonna sell me) and he goes "just come back park 2 houses down so I did just that and made an oath that i would NEVER deal with this fucking piece of shit human being again for as long as I live. I considered shorting him on money but I don't like people who do that and morally its wrong. Anyways, I get there, we do the exchange, he gives me a half ass apology but this is the SECOND time I had to park near his house and run down to his basement so i'm all sketched out and wanted to get out of there. So I run up to my car and what do you know 2 cops pull in and put their lights on. Apparently his dad DID call the cops and even knew what model and color my car was so I'm now pulled over with a bag of pills on me because a retarded drug dealer told his dad to call the cops on me for... buying drugs from him? thankfully there's a secret compartment on my body I oft hide drugs in (I won't tell you where but i'll give you a clue it's in between my buttcheeks) and all the sudden I'm being questioned by 2 cops. I just kept saying "go inside and talk to him, hes my friend and i think hes having a manic episode he told me to come over then started flipping out and I think the situation turned out worse for HIM because the whole situation made him look like a drug dealer and now i'm sure hes on their radar. When the cop got back to my car they told me I was good to go and that I didn't break any laws. 

&#x200B;

It's sad because in this small town he's the only dealer I know and I guess this is a blessing in disguise because I've been trying to get sober for over 2 years and i simply cannot deal with his bullshit anymore. Any time in the past where I've snapped at him hes said stuff like "Watch your mouth dude I will cut you off" as if he's my master and controller. FUCK him.. and i know hes subscribed to this subreddit so if you're reading this.. FUCK YOU. He's made over 200 bucks a week alone on me for the past year which is almost a part time job so I hope he misses all the money I give him.

&#x200B;

Sorry for the long post I just know drug dealer stories are interesting to fellow drug users and this one just so happens to be a horror story. thanks for reading. 

&#x200B;Posting agiain because r/cooking told me to try posting there

Context:
After my daily beating I had some food lefteover.
Meat, i dnot remember the exact animal but must be mamiferous.
I earned some free gatorad after my coworker didnt finish his bottle after washing so now I have gatroade.

Now the interestinging:

I am at the house with the leftoever and nohting interseting in the fridge, and I say to myslef: « cook »

Letsa go, but you know its blue gatorad so I am a little perturbatied and consumed substances, I see gatorad and I said to me: « hm, watter » 

Gatorad in the coook pan but the substance melanianic effects are now gone, I realise what I have done but now i dnot care anymor.

Meat go boil on the pan with gator
Put the pan thing on top to vaporwave the meat. 60 minutes after, vo-wallah, meal reeedy.

I togouth it would come blue but its was stupid thinking meat was bouled and natural coulour (well in fact seminatiral)
So yeah coulor normal.

I take bite, meat is meaty but sugar
Mhhh sugar meat aaaaah aah
Not exact gatorat tast but atleast sugar yes? Maybe? But it Was good (yeas) 
Even not good but delhi sious, nothing compared to what i hav haved before really meaty epitaste extreme zero so good, the texture was so soft, it Was surprising beacause i didnt beat the meat or touch it so I expected to be crunchy meat you know.

And so it is yes absolutely good idea, people are le deisgusted when I tell them the recipe now but I would absolute do it again 100/100 very extreme and i dont careif you not like it I find it dheli sious
👍🏾When I was 17, my friend had a free house for a week and we would have had a lot of drinking parties already so we decided to have a weed party. We each bought a few grams of pretty good street bud and dominos pizza. We were on the ground floor in the living room with quite a big window when my mate standing near it alerted everyone that there was a man pointing at us and gesturing 5 fingers, what was he implying?

I immediately think what is this man trying to say, we all notice he looks a bit angry and the kid who's house it is says it's a neighbour mad cause of the smell and noise. "Five What? Five minutes until the police get here? OMG He's alerted the police!" I say in full panic swiftly rendering everyone into a state of panic.

I come up with the bright idea of taking all my weed into the shower room and locking the door giving me chance to destroy the evidence with my lungs, everyone else bar the kid who's house it is follow and we lock him out while he goes and checks.

Now all this weed trying as fast as we can, someone turned the shower on because apparently that will make us smoke it quicker. We realise we are not going to be able to consume it in time so we just wait for the raid team to kick down the door. The sense of impending doom was immense.

Suddenly there is a knock on the door, we don't open it and ask who it is and our mate says it was just the pizza man delivering the dominos and that because it was dark he couldn't see the house number. My friend lived at number 5 and thats why the dude was holding up 5 fingers. Someone is sent out to scout and once we receive confirmation that its pizza and not a set up we go and enjoy our well deserved pizza. 

Bonus story, we left that house in a mess with ashtrays filled to the brim, empty pizza boxes and worst of all the smell. Our mate assured us that he would clean up even though we offered because his family didn't get back until the next day. Well thing is he got it wrong they got back that day, came home and caught him red  handed smoking a blunt in the god damn house.

In normal circumstances we all would have went outside the house to see what the man was implying, but we were more prone to paranoid thoughts because of the weed.

tl;dr mistook pizza delivery man for neighbour and thought he called popo on us.When I was 11 I tried smoking weed. When I was 15 was smoking blue OxyContin off of tinfoil. 

I had met a 24yo guy named Bob (real name cause fuck that dude) who was living w my best friend at the time (he was dating my best friend ((we’ll call him Trent)) sister’s best friend). Bob introduced me to a lot of shit; molly, pain killers, ecstasy, cocaine, and more. 

Trent was w me through all of this and although we haven’t spoken in a while I know that these events impacted his life heavily since conception. Things spiraled out of control when we tried to get molly from his moms new boyfriend and were unwittingly sold meth, which we got hooked on.

Fast forward a few years and I’m 18 selling drugs and living in a trap house with my new best friend (we’ll call him Monty). Monty and I were close as hell, and sold Xanax, cocaine, weed, and moon rocks (very potent molly) together. During this time I made many bad decisions.

I lied, stole, hurt, cheated, manipulated and pretty much every other shitty thing you can do.  This period of my life earned me a dui and 2 stays in jail (6 if you include overnights).

I’m 23 now and if you met me today you’d never guess any of this. 

I’ve changed for the better and I’m confident that I’m generally a good person these days. I always help those in need, am clean off all drugs (except occasional weed and I drink often to self medicate), I don’t break any laws and the people I meet fall in love with me.

I don’t know why I’m writing this... I guess because I’m not religious and this is some form of secular confession. But I’m sad. And lonely. I’m worried if people knew what I’ve done they couldn’t look at me the same, so I push them away. Every day there’s a devil on my right shoulder telling me I’m unworthy of love, but there’s no angel on my left.

Thanks to anyone who actually read the whole thing, I really appreciate it.So my 16 years old sister just started drinking a bit and when I told her that alcohol was drug she looked at me with huge eyes and didn't believe me at first. 

2 days after she came to me and asked which drug was worst between cocaine and weed. I told her that cocaine was way worst because of it's high addiction potential. Then she told that weed is also super addictive because everyone who smoke once don't stop afterward. You guys should've seen her face when I told her that it's the same thing with alcohol. She was so confused.

I hate the fact that so many people think that alcohol is not dangerous only because it's legal. Even if weed is legal in Canada, the government (at least in Quebec) is trying so hard to prevent people from smoking. They're barely doing anything to promote the negative effects of alcohol. I hope that now it's legal people will be more informed about weed and drugs in general. For something so popular in our society, way too many people don't know shit about it.

Edit : my point isn't to say alcohol is dangerous or weed is way better than alcohol blah blah. My point is that younger generations need to get proper information about drugs that isn't biased by the laws for the drug itself.This is how fentanyl deaths from laced coke happen.  Nobody does it on purpose, people who sell both accidentally cross contaminate them.

People who focus solely on coke usually have the most fire shit anyway[Reuters article](https://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-opioids-litigation-oklahoma/oklahoma-judge-finds-jj-liable-in-opioid-epidemic-orders-572-million-damages-idUSKCN1VG0V2)

I bet J&J made way more money than $572M, pushing opiods.I read on here a lot when I was naive, 16-17 years old, about how meth isn't as harmful as it's made out to be, it's the same as adderall, etc. Ended up using daily for very long periods of time, and now my brain is irreversibly damaged. Seriously, not even once is a decent approach to this one.

To elaborate, I started getting Vyvanse from my doctor when I was 16 years old. It made me more confident, full of energy, social, I performed better at work on it. Naturally, I started taking more than prescribed, started running out early. I needed a little extra each month so I wouldn't have to crash. In the US, the cheap, abundant most adderall like drug would be methamphetamine. So at 17 I bought a gram and started using it orally at work.

It was like Vyvanse in some ways, but it made me too confident, lasted too long, encouraged compulsive behaviors like marathon masturbation sessions, and of course, redosing. The paranoia was a surprise at first too.

I started losing weight and slipping into minor psychosis more often than not. Slowly but steadily my brain deteriorated, slow enough that it wasn't alarming, but 3 years in and it's clear my dopamine system is *fucked*.

I'm not really sure how to even communicate how the damage effects me, but to start, extreme lack of any motivated behaviors that I'm not forced to do. Music doesn't sound as nice. Masturbation is hugely effected, I can barely have orgasms sober. Pretty much all motivation and pleasure has been ruined for me.

There is also persistent minor psychosis all the time now. Very subtle audio hallucinations and strange thoughts, sometimes I notice my internal dialogue is complete non-sense throughout the day.   

Being functional after quitting is possible but it's miserable. 3 months sober and every day I was suicidal, and dreaded almost the entire time I was sober. SSRIs have helped quite a bit but leave a lot to be desired.

I don't think all hope is lost, I return to "normal" when on (very large doses) of stimulants, a high dose daily adderall or vyvanse maintenance regimen along with SSRIs would probably let me live a fulfilling life for sure.

I'm not trying to turn this into a pity party to be clear, but hopefully it sways a few young people from abusing that trash and fucking themselves up.

So stick to adderall, or honestly, maybe even avoid it and stick to methylphenidate or something. Amphetamine will fuck your shit up more than just about any other drug, without outright killing you. Stay safe!

Also: https://www.bluelight.org/vb/threads/461215-Amphetamine-The-Drug-You-Learn-to-Hate is a must read! So I just assume most drugs on the street are fake now days. Weed was different. You can look at weed and know its weed. Quit smoking carts after the whole death lung news stories and shit. But other than that, weed was safe. 

My illegal state has went to complete shit since hemp got big. People ripping other people off selling them 10 pounds of hemp buds at a time and shit. But whatever, hemp wont get you high or kill you. 

Now theyre spraying the god damn hemp with synth noids. Someone flooded my town with this shit. Its like the spice days 2.0. I know 2 people who have had seizures after smoking what they thought was pot. I see other friends just going along with it and getting terribly addicted. 

Ive noticed its usually small popcorn buds that are laced. I dont know if they do this because pounds of small hemp buds are cheaper, or because its easier to spray it more evenly. Probably both. 

I fucked my head up when k2 was sold in stores, was glad it went away. I dont really have a moral to this story other than fuck these stupid ass plugs around me. I think its time I take a break until I can grow my own again.My perspective on people and the world has dramatically changed after doing psychedelics. I’ve learned that a lot of people completely waste their time on earth and fail to even know who they are as a person. The lack of introspectiveness and insight in most humans is astonishing to me. Too many people do what they “should do” and worry more about what other people think rather than what they think. I used to do this and I still have those worries I just have to remember to realize I shouldn’t care what people think. 

Middle school and high school teach kids  to only care about competition. Kids waste half their lives doing meaningless things because society doesn’t provide adequate opportunity for them to figure themselves out as a person. To cover up the severe boredom kids distract themselves with social, athletic, and academic competition. 

And in high school kids start doing drugs. Speaking as a 16 year old who has done weed, lsd, shrooms, phenibut, ketamine, dxm, aderall, alcohol, and nitrous, I don’t blame myself one bit. I knew the stigma against these drugs was mostly untrue. I knew I had easy access to them. I’m not quite popular enough to be at parties every weekend. Due to school homework and sports and lifting weights (I don’t have to lift weights but I can’t go without it) I don’t have enough time to get enjoyment out of hobbies and shit, so I turn to drugs. They make my significantly more happy. 

I had a weed problem that fucked up my life but I learned my lesson and now I’m fine and have zero interest in smoking more than 3 times a week. Our society forces people to waste their youth doing meaningless shit and they don’t even give a fuck because they’re too oblivious to realize that this is happening. We could have much better people in this world if kids grew up in a system which encouraged self growth in areas to which the kids felt passionate about. Yea there’s art and sports but there’s not enough time for art and most kids play sports because it makes their dad happy and their friends play. 

This society sets kids up to not have the slightest clue what their purpose is when they get out of college, so people either get lonely and depressed and don’t understand why so they just rot their lives away, or they continue to party and eventually get married and have kids to distract themselves.

Then when people get divorced they either finally figure it all out, or they’re lucky their stupid enough to still not even think of the fact that their wasting their life. I think this is horrible and obviously there are some people who are ok with this lifestyle and that’s okay but my main point is that people need to figure out who they are and what their purpose is when it’s just them no one else. We could murder depression in this society if everyone accomplished that. 

EDIT: THANKS FOR POSITIVE FEEDBACK. AND FUCK YOU TO EVERYONE WHO CLAIMS I HAVE MY LIFE FIGURED OUT I FUCKING DONT I THOUGHT I MADE THAT BLATANTLY OBVIOUS IN THE POST BY MENTIONING I DO DRUGS REGULARLY IN ORDER TO FIND ENJOYMENT IN MY LIFE. I ALSO ATTEMPTED TO SPECIFY THAT THIS MAY NOT BE ENTIRELY ACCURATE AND DOESNT APPLY TO EVERYONE AND PEOPLE ARE STILL GETTING HEATED BECAUSE THEY FEEL OFFENDED BY MY POST. TO THOSE PEOPLE CALM THE FUCK DOWN YOU DONT HAVE TO AGREE WITH ME BUT WE COULD STILL HAVE AN ORDERLY INTELLIGENT CONVERSATION ABOUT IT IF YOU STOPPED BEING BUTTHURT. MY INTENTIONS WERE TO SHARE MY IDEAS NOT COME OFF AS A WANNABE PSYCHEDELIC PROPHET. YOUR REACTIONS WOULD BE DRAMATICALLY DIFFERENT IF I DIDN'T MENTION I WAS 16. THINK ABOUT THAT. THANK YOU ALL AND HAVE A GREAT FUCKING DAY. AND FUNNY THING IS I AGREE WITH A LOT OF THE HATE COMMENTS. I DONT KNOW WHAT IM TALKING ABOUT. NO ONE FUCKING DOES. I TRY TO REMEMBER THAT. ITS ALL OPINIONS. ONE LAST TIME: FOR THE LOVE OF GOD I DO NOT HAVE THE FUCKING WORLD FIGURED OUT!!!!!!!!! NEVER SAID THAT!!!!!!!!!I'll try to keep this short. Son is age 30. Three years ago, he became addicted, burned all his bridges. We agreed to take him in if he would commit to sobriety. He entered a methadone program, tapered down to a zero dose in about six months. He seemed proud of himself. His methadone doses started small, 35 mg./day. He got a job, seemed to be doing well. We tested him almost every day, as a condition of free rent, food and some other assistance. He seemed proud of staying clean.

About six months ago, he started fooling us with fake urine. It took us awhile to catch on. After that, he was testing positive every day, lied and acted belligerent when confronted. He got tired of the confrontations and moved out. He's been gone about a month. He's spent his money, has no job, no health insurance, living in some kind of a trap house, he's got a criminal charge pending (simple possession of heroin). He's not returning our calls (me and his mom). We're willing to let him back in the house if he will commit to sobriety.

Aside from drug-related problems, we've had a pretty good relationship with him. He has a college degree. He was planning on becoming a public school teacher, but drug charges might have spoiled that. He doesn't have a serious mental disorder, though he has a "difficult" personality.

When he's addicted, broke, and desperate, he will probably end up on our front porch. He's afraid of jail and won't like being homeless. He's not "tough" that way. Until then, we might not hear from him. If he's still using, we'll put him in a tent in our back yard, with sandwiches and drinking water. If he's willing to commit to sobriety, we'll let him in the house, provide food, shelter and consider paying for a treatment program.

I am not naive about drugs and drug users, but I don't know everything. If I'm a better informed parent, maybe I can take a more constructive role in his life. Others who have been through addiction can help educate me. I'm particularly interested in understanding the combination of meth and heroin when smoked. I wonder if the combination of these two drugs has particular effects I should understand better. Almost all of his friends "chase the dragon." I wonder if there is something about this subculture I should understand better.

Be frank and honest. This situation could not possibly be any more painful, so you're not going to hurt my feelings.

Edit: His behavior lately makes no sense, ghosting us when we are willing and able to help, burning all his bridges rapidly, with no plan. I've heard that amphetamine users sometimes develop a schizophrenia-like syndrome, and I wonder if something like this is going on. Or... Maybe this is just typical of addiction, to heroin or meth. 

Another Edit: If he wants to smoke weed, we live and let live. Sometimes he does, sometimes he doesn't.

Another mother edit: He and his friends combine meth and heroin, smoke them together.I was 22 years old. I was working at Burger King and living in my moms basement. Any free time I had was usually filled with smoking weed and playing video games. I didn't own a car so anywhere I went I had to borrow my parents or have them drop me off. 

It was December. My friends in high school had graduated in May of that year and walked in June. Around this time they all started getting big boy jobs and moving away from our shitty town. Of course none of that mattered because none of them hung out with me anymore. Once they saw I wasn't going anywhere in my life, they stopped inviting me out and ignored my text messages and calls. My current friends were all like me; losers.

A week before I took the shrooms was probably my lowest point. I found out my best friend in high school(Who doesn't talk to me anymore) got a software engineer job out in Seattle making a great salary. While I was over here trying to find a job that would pay me $9/hour or more and work me more than 20 hours a week.

I was alone and lost. I had no direction in life and didn't know where to start. I was a goldfish in this ocean we call life and I was surrounded by sharks. Very hungry sharks. 

Until one night when I went to pick up a couple grams of bud my dealer just so happened to have shrooms, something my town never had. Of course I jump on them and buy an eighth. This made my night a little better. I didn't know much about shrooms at the time besides that they "fucked you up" and made you see shit. Little did I know I was in for a wild night.

When I got home it was already dark. I rolled a couple joints and smoked one while I was eating the shrooms(The entire eighth). I had no idea what to expect so my heart was beating a little fast and I caught myself pacing around the room so I decided to go for a walk to the park. 

The first hour of the trip was spent playing in the snow, giggling the entire time, and tripping my balls off. I felt like I was 8 years old again. The only worry in the world was just to have as much fun as possible. Nothing else mattered.

I remember falling in the snow and looking up at the sky. The stars were so bright and felt so close that I felt like I was pressing my face on glass while watching a astronomy documentary. It was so amazing. I kept trying to grab at the stars and every time I came up emptied handed I would get so confused. I eventually got out of the trance and ended up walking home. 

When I got home I decided to call my friend and congratulate him on the job and just to see how he was. I didn't expect an answer but even if he didn't answer I would leave him a message so I called and to my surprise he actually answered. 

We ended up talking for the rest of my entire trip and things were just beautiful. We re-connected like we had never fell out of friendship before. I cried on the phone and confined in him about my life and everything that went wrong with it. I laughed harder than I laughed in months. 

During the call I was tripping balls. It was a very intense experience but it was so indescribable. It was just pure bliss. At the end of the call I was coming down quite a bit and everything just kind of pieced itself together. There were options and ways and help and everything I needed to get my life on track. I was just too prideful to go for them. I felt like it was college or nothing but in reality that was the opposite of what life is. College is ONE OPTION out of thousands! In my head thoughts were just connecting like puzzle pieces and all I knew was that I needed to throw my pride away and realize that I couldn't do this on my own. I needed help.

The very next day I went into a electricians union that was about a 30 minute drive from me and got an apprenticeship. It started 2-3 months later but I took the test and passed with flying colors and I was accepted a couple weeks before the program started.

That was almost 9 years ago.

Today I own my own commercial and residential electrical company, I own my own house, I own my own car, I have a wife and 2 kids, and life is looking great! Me and my best friend from high school hang out regularly and our families actually went on vacation together this year.

I don't know where my life would have gone had I not done shrooms that night but I don't think I would have been too far from my parents basement.

It was a rough ride up but once you find the path, at least there's direction. On Saturday, I took 3 grams of shrooms and 2 lines of ketamine (not sure the exact dosage on that) throughout the night. I’ve had experiences with both drugs before by themselves, but I’ve never had a trip like this. Never have I felt happier in my entire life. The whole time, I was looking at my friends and realizing this is it. This is the meaning of life - being present here and seeing the beauty in everything as it is. Seeing the swirling patterns in front of me, the most intense visuals I’ve personally experienced, everything made sense. Everything is perfect. Even all the terrible things in the world and the depression and anxiety I’ve experienced has a place here. I used to feel a little guilty doing drugs, but I didn’t feel bad about it at all and I still don’t. These are healing substances that need to be researched and distributed more. I thought these feelings would fade after the trip, but several days later and I feel the same. I’m inspired to be my highest self, and I started reading and playing guitar again after the trip. I feel liberated. I have no worries, because we all die, and I’m okay with that too. We can do whatever we want."I'll put that on the card".



Just thought of this one while browsing Reddit, probably a shit joke but I have nothing better to do so here it is.**Coping mechanisms**

(TL;DR at bottom)

As we grow older, we learn countless lessons through experience that dictate how we do and don't react to certain stimuli around us and within us. We slowly but surely teach ourselves how to properly behave/react not just in society, but while alone by ourselves as well.

As we experience difficulties while growing up, we figure out ways to properly deal with them. And everybody is different in the mechanisms they develop. But as long as the method for coping works, it doesn't really matter **what** the mechanism is. For some people it might be tapping your feet for a bit to calm down, or go on a brief walk, or play a video game, or whatever. It can genuinely be just about anything. 

We teach ourselves how to properly deal with our emotions when we aren't feeling so great. And this is the part that is super important to learn. Because at a young age, if we learn that certain substances can make certain things feel better, we start associating those "feeling better" desires with the mechanism that we first learned, which ends up being drugs for too many young people (and adults, totally not saying this only happens with younger people, that's just who this post is addressing).

This is a means (but not the only means) for anxiety and depression to **skyrocket** in young minds. Because the chemical changes associated with taking a drug become the path most traveled for dealing with the parts of life/ourselves we don't like.

TL;DR - Waiting longer to experiment with drugs allows us to form non-drug coping mechanisms for feeling bad, which in turn actually **makes taking drugs way better**. Because even if you feel uncomfortable for whatever reason, you can always fall back to the thing that always calms you down, even when under the influence of any sort of substance.-Alcohol is over rated

-Alcohol is underrated

-Caffiene is underrated

-Don't do Dph

-Don't do dxm

-Ketamine is amazing

-Ketamine is terrible

-Fake stories (God bowl, dude giving himself autobrewery etc.)

-Real and funny stories

-A tweaker breaking something down very deeply but they don't use paragraphs or punctuation

-That same tweaker's unpunctuated trip report

-A wasted man's word salad

-Can I take [Insert grandmas prescription meds] to get high?

-Lsd is amazing

-Dmt is amazing

-Shrooms are amazing

-[insert terrible situation to trip here] should I trip Reddit?

-Weed is dangerous

-Cocaine is over rated

-400ug-800ug trip reports that sound like 50-150ug

-People doing too much mdma and causing brain damage

-I'm perscribed Lyrica, can I still trip/roll?

Feel free to add more. Lol.a few months ago i tripped on 3 tabs of lsd, and i listened to old school west coast rap, and older atlanta trap rap. some of the main artists i listened to was gucci mane, warren g, ti, young jeezy, nwa, and snoop. a lot of the songs i listened to were about trapping and selling coke, and i felt immersed in that world during my trip. after the trip i was normal, but as the weeks passed by i noticed  i was thinking different. i have a voice in the back of my head saying, "push these bricks my nigga", or something alomg those lines. i dont sell drugs and i never have, but i think listening to all this rap music on acid is making me think different. all i can think about now is hustling and staying trill. does anybody have advice on this?Every holiday since I was 6 years old my grandpa gave me a nose hair trimmer

I remember the excitement I had every Christmas and birthday as a kid, the presents, the food, you feel like nothing can bring you down. But every year I’d rip open a box in excitement only to discover yet another nose hair trimmer. Did I even have nose hair? And does anyone have so much they need to trim it? And with no batteries included, I never got to find out. I usually didn’t even open the package, and over time they all got lost or thrown away. Save for one, found last month in an unopened box addressed to me, dated December 2010. I always thought that you were just gonna get powder stuck in your nose, that’s just part of life. But now I know the bliss that comes from a perfectly clear nose, free of any waste, pain, or evidence.

I love you grandpa.

TLDR: buy a nose hair trimmer if you do cokeThey we’re so non-judgmental and understanding. They took care of an overdose by injecting him with Narcan while giving him water and treating him like a human. They gave him his space once they saw he was more stable for himself. With such respect and care. I really felt like I was safe the way they treated him like a real human being who was in need. 

I wasn’t even rolling or anything. I’m just voicing my appreciation for something beautiful I saw. To all the true-hearted medics, thank you from my heart. ❤️idk ive always been a really christmassy person like i love the holiday spirit but ever since ive done meth its made me so much more christmassy, everytime i hear jingle bells or some really christmassy song i just think of meth. I feel like its just a very christmas thing to do, to do meth. It just reminds me of cookies and stockings and presents and elves. Im so excited for christmas now that i do meth because i feel like it's going to be the Christmassiest chrismas everFor 5 months I've been buying what i thought was heroin (its at least an opiate) from my guy. It was never really intense for me, just nice and calm and relaxing.  Flashback to yesterday
I'm at work when my friend Damian hits me up for 20 bucks. I knew he was down on his luck, i told him I'd throw him one if he hooked me up with his guy, he said okay.  
So we get together and this guy takes eons to respond. I'm starting to get really impatient, then he responds and we go buy 40 worth
I tell Damian I've only had the kind that my guy has. To my surprise, Damian knows my guy and says his shit is weak. So we divvy up the h and split it between us, and at first, i was in opiate heaven. Nothing felt better in my life. But last night, this morning, and as I'm typing have been utter hell. I've been throwing up every 5 minutes, shitting every 5 minutes, and had to call off work. This shit was great for 2 hours but not worth what it comes with after. 
So yesterday was my first and last heroin experience. And  I would do any drug in the world to reverse this cause i feel so fucking sick


EDIT: Wow this blew up. Great way to end this bad experience. Stay safe out there budsI’m 22 years old. I’ve been using weed on and off for about 4 years.

Obviously, being under the influence has a direct impact on my laziness. It makes me lazier! I don’t want to do laundry when I’m baked, I want to play Modern Warfare. 

Then, there’s the after effects. If I smoke weed early in the day, I get tired and lazy for the next 4-5 hours. No, it does not matter what sTrAiN I smoke. 

I usually smoke during the last 2-4 hours of the day since I usually want to just go to sleep after. However, even the next morning I wake up feeling groggy and lazy. Not exactly the way I want to wake up if I want to “take on the day”

The biggest reason that weed makes me lazy is that once I go through a period of life where I’m able to use again, it becomes all I want to do. I’m less motivated in the gym, with work, and with anything productive around the house. I just want to smoke, eat, and play games in my free time. I’m currently living this. While it sucks, weed is still awesome.

Edit: the only productive activity I enjoy while high is yard workCongratulations on 50 years of winning everyone!

It's been the longest running campaign undertaken by the largest military in world history and also in cooperation with the entire world. Yet, here we are half a century later, the degenerates are stronger than ever. Keep fighting the good fight. And be proud when you puff, pop, and/or drop this week because this week marks a half century of continously winning a war against literally the entire world. You all rock.

Fuck Nixon & fuck 12.I have shared this story a couple times in the comments and recently someone told me to post it and I’ve been think about it quite often lately so why not.

A few weeks ago we had a fun afterparty at my friends’ place. We were all taking ketamine and had the weirdest conversations ever. My best friend and I decided to take one last line, which would result in us (deliberately) falling into a K-hole.

Don’t get me wrong, I’ve entered the K-hole numerous times and every single time has been really vague and incomprehensible. This time however, was different.

As soon as I semi-felt myself falling through some sort of hole in the couch, I kept thinking about cars in general and I don’t know why. Somehow my thoughts stuck to a specific red car, which looked a lot like Lightning McQueen, from the movie Cars. At a certain point I felt like I was the embodiment of Lightning McQueen and the only thing I saw was the Piston Cup Racing logo swirling above my head. 

At a certain point something in my head told me I needed to go the racing circuit. I kept wanting to move forward but I had two flat front tires so I couldn’t drive. I eventually ended up in some sort of thought loop where I kept wanting to go the racing circuit but I couldn’t, and it made me more and more angry/frustated as time went by. The only thing I could think of was Chick Hicks winning the race. 

I fucking love ketamine.I had some grapes in my fridge that I forgot about and now they've gone bad and idk man I'm really high and I feel kinda bad about itWhen I smoke weed I walk a fine line between being chilled out and calm from one bowl and being uncomfortably stoned leaving me feeling depressed and introverted as fuck about stuff in my life.  

However, afterthese bad highs I will feel refreshed and motivated, often a lot better mentally than before I got high.

Anyone else get the same effects as me?I sold LSD for a couple of years, always tested my stuff to make sure it’s legit. Got an incredible strong batch a while ago.   

Some kids decided they wanted to take my tabs and ran away. I had to catch a train to see phish so I didn’t even brother chasing. In stead of planning a revenge or beating him up. I simply told him the tabs are cursed. Idiots decided to take 3 each. One of them had a trip that went wrong thought he was dying and went to the hospital. One of them tried to fight an officer and got him arrested.   
Best punishment is mental rather than physical. 
I can now say I've lived both sides of the fence.


For 35 years I was the picture of a 'square' having never touched any "illicit" drug aside from alcohol, caffeine and sugar; you know the ones the government can make money from. 


My career path put me in a position where drug tests were commonplace and the clearest head possible was essential to the high intensity of my profession; cyber intelligence & international law enforcement related work among other public activities and duties. 


There was no room to fuck up, I had to be the perfect picture of an abused poor black kid from a small town with a big IQ who never touched drugs and proved that the "system" was there to help kids like me become "made men" and was groomed by the best of the best who took pity on me. By 26 I had met Colin Powell among various world leaders and sat in command posts, scifs & situation rooms with every 3 & 4 letter agency you can imagine. My life was an open book, I was involved heavily in church working with children, had a charity under my belt and I was the "success story" that religious and civic organizations loved to parade around as "inspirational".


However; I was also openly battling depression, suicidal ideation, self-harm and complex post traumatic stress disorder on and off for the majority of my early life alongside having been "diagnosed" as having a high functioning aspergers at some point in the adventure. The periods between symptomatic relapse and peace varied with life circumstances and I continued to give of myself to anyone who needed help as part of what I call my 'kamikaze mission'. I was not taking care of myself until I was in crisis; at which point I would crash from months or years of running on nothing but pure warrior will power, booze and adrenaline. I was proud of myself but hated myself at the same time. That guy in his 30s with a brand new porsche who worked 10-20 hours a week sometimes while traveling on one end of the spectrum and then didn't leave his house, eat or shower for 100+ hour hacking sprints fueled by porn & hookup breaks,  whiskey and a desire to die "for a cause". Ugly cycle.


But, I always said : hey, at least I've never touched drugs like you losers. See my success is due to me being "clean".

I was a douchebag.

I was arrogant.

I hated myself.


I did not know love.

Naturally I was a wreck of an empty human to be in a relationship with.
To any woman I EVER slept with or "dated" I am so incredibly sorry.
I was nothing more than a movie character playing the role I thought I was here to perform .....and not really living.


Then it happened.


My dad, who I had met maybe 10 times in my life died.


In prison at 70 years old.


For raping an 11 year old girl.


My family had hid the fact he was even alive from me for 8 years.


Apparently I was present when he shot and killed my uncle in front of me as he was trying to molest me. 


The memory is there, but I don't go there. 


Ever.


Following this my brother committed suicide. He never had a funeral.


I fell in love with an equally as fucked girl from Hawaii, who was married and broke up with me - by having her friend text me on her birthday.


So at 35 years old... I had endured 2 wives, 2 abortions without my consent, 1 miscarriage by a girlfriend who was a meth dealer and perhaps 90+ women under my belt. At this point I am realizing; I am a wreck. 

My life is a sham. 

I am better off dead.

So at 35 I decided, I had lived an amazingly full life. Done shit people only dream of or see in movies. 

I'm good. 

I'm done.


I give up.


I planned on taking my life as a conscious and mindful resolution to my story. I told my estranged mom & family, friends, pastors, clients, everyone. My intention was not to be talked out of it, but to go out heroically I think. I thought there was something romantic and dramatic about doing it so thoughtfully and with discipline that would give my life & all the bullshit I had been through purpose.


Deciding to die, was the best decision I ever made...


I wrote my bucket list, had an insane amount of money available to me thanks to part ownership in a startup that made me a millionaire on paper ( funny how that works out later ) and was able to work anywhere in the world there was internet.


Funny thing that I noticed about my bucket list.... drugs.
I had NEVER even once smoked weed, not even a puff. I could count the number of cigarettes I had ever tried. No coke. No ecstasy despite spending years in the rave scene. I was a complete virgin.


So I decided... hey, I'm gonna throw a big party and sip Nembutal cocktails for my last night on earth... might as well try this "getting high" thing before I knock off right?


I booked a bunch of plane tickets all over the world and set a rule that I would only touch natural or relatively safe drugs & psychedelics.


This was my last year on earth. 


Rock and roll. 


------ Welcome to 'other side' ------

I spent the better part of a year in airports, hostels, deserts, couchsurfing, sleeping on the beach and hanging out with the wanderlusting hippy crowd. Nahko, Trevor Hall, Phish and Major Lazer became the soundtrack to my non-stop campaign to "do all the things".


I had started doing lots of yoga and had made my way somehow to Canada, where fucking everything is legal. 
One wondrous afternoon a group of the sweetest yoga instructors I ever met offered me weed. Nobody could believe that I had never smoked weed, despite my long ass dreads and fairly chill demeanor. 
They just kept saying 'we love you' & 'you are very worthy of love'. I don't have any clue why they kept saying that, but I'm crying as I think and write it now.


So like kids we went behind a tree in the woods and lit a joint. It was interesting but I really don't think I actually got "high"; buzzed maybe but not high. I hung out with this group for a few days and continued to try "feel" whatever everyone else was feeling... this empathy, this love. And figured wow.... I am SO wound up I can't even get stoned. Fuck man.


I failed at even trying drugs I said to myself. Luckily I was not a quitter.


I hitchhiked to Burning Man 2015... and found my Home, my family.... and was completely at peace for the first time in my life. Still sober at this point. 


My camp decided it was time for me to "experience" and set out to hook me up with a steady diet of cannabis laced food & weed. 
NOW I had finally gotten stoned. Wonderfully opened up on the most beautiful canvas to be YOU at... Burning Man.

I bloomed and enjoyed my own reflection.

The day of the Burn I ran into some folks who offered me my first dab.
Morning communion. Wow.

I felt... 

Well.. I felt. Period.

I was so connected with everyone & able to listen.... and I got it.... 
As I started telling my story a very sweet guy walks over to me and says "It's time we take the veil off brother. Are you open to this? Are you ready to see the Real You?" as he pulls out the largest vial of liquid LSD I had ever seen.


Since I don't want to write a book on reddit... I will just say that this moment changed my life. A group of at least 15 people gathered around me in a circle and hugged me and said I am Love... I will BE Love... and that is all I ever was....


And I dropped... apparently a fairly large dose on top of having an crazy amount of cannabis in my system.


Someone near me as I began to trip for the first time said I was beautiful and was crying like a newborn rolling in the dust of the Playa... :)

.

.

.

.

.


And for 12 hours, I saw... I was..... I AM.


.

.

.

.

Since then I have tried HBWR, rivea and definitely gotten into the upper levels of stoned. Apparently I have a very strong tolerance for weed.


In the past month I have taken MDMA twice following the MAPS protocol for PTSD assisted therapy... yes I know I should wait 4-6 weeks between rolling but I had a situation shortly after my first session that required intervention and the second roll actually helped tremendously. My CAPS score was 125 at its most severe, with a lifetime baseline of 113. The scale only goes to like 135 I think.... I was destined to become one of the 22 a day who commit suicide....
Following MDMA treatment this month....

My score is about 20.

As in cured.



Fucking CURED from PTSD.


Drugs...

wow.


Having come from the "other side" I know to treat them all with respect. If you abuse any drug it will tell you "NO, you have nothing to gain from me, I have nothing to teach you. I am an instrument, go and do the work you have been told to do inside yourself and don't come back." So I am mostly focused on using specific substances as a therapeutic tools and have integrated it into some of my spiritual / meditation practice.


But funny enough, I have now realized I don't even need the drugs to get to the state of bliss & love as much if at all anymore. They merely act as shortcuts and aides in this process.


Today:

I now have a beautiful 9 week old son, a stunning & supportive wife and and a life of real essence and truth.

I am grateful and music sounds and FEELS so much more vibrant.


I AM ALIVE :)


I continue to smoke weed every few days and barely touch alcohol anymore if at all. I'm healthier & have a real sense of happiness in my life.

I feel that the "drugs" actually opened me up to.... well Love.

Loving myself.

Not an image of myself.

But the reality of myself.

My darkness and my light.

I've learned to love both equally.


I would like to thank "drugs" for saving my life.


When used with respect and care these substances can save the lives of people. So friends don't get too out of hand with self medicating. 


[ never planning on taking opiates, benzos, stims etc ]

[ plant medicine & psychedelics only as self exploratory tools ]

[ considering microdosing to see if that furthers my personal development ]


As I finish this off I am now sitting in my new home in Vancouver, BC skimming Erowid & BL doing research on hippy flipping for a 3rd & hopefully final PTSD treatment session and looking for a therapist to walk with me over the next few weeks leading up to it; as I prepare to attack my abandonment issues in full force.


Powerful medicine. Use with caution.


I think I now know how to speak to my son about drugs now having been actively involved in the war on drugs and honestly... I plan on teaching him from a scientific, spiritual and logical viewpoint and allow him to make his own decision; and if he trusts me enough I would be honored to be his guide so he knows he's safe and how to respect these tools.

Anyway, long ass post. Thank you.

<3 I love you guys <3


[ stay off meth... there is nothing redeeming or beneficial about it. k ]

EDIT: For reference, the CEO of my startup ousted me when he found out I was having a kid in January 2015. The event was a thinly veiled excuse covering up personal and internal power struggle issues but I am grateful for that experience because it put us in a highly challenging position and strengthened my personal resolve even further. 

I am back in now but for what it's worth but I lost access to ALL of that money. I was wise early on thought and luckily did not get myself into debt with my own company but well....; it was a ludicrous amount of funds which would have been nice to have when you come to find out you're having a son unexpectedly.

I now realize that much of my self worth and identity had been wrapped up in this mirage of my job, money, cars and lifestyle. I was not a real person. I believe that psychedelics in particular helped ground me and alleviated hidden emotional and mental disorders that had plagued me for years. However when you "look" successful and you aren't a drug user; by society's norms you're a blazing success. It's such bullshit though because on the inside, you feel nothing and you are worse than dead.

And no, I have not recovered financially but I am blessed to have very unique skills, experience and an unstoppable work ethic.


Hoping to get it all back again in a few years and cash out this time. So keep us in your thoughts.

After the ousting, I collected what money I had and we moved to Vancouver to be close to my wife's family and take care of my 'wee peanut' because I realized it's really people that make life worth living.

So in the midst of this journey I lost all sense of stability and security as well. I want to acknowledge and in a way thank the "pre-drug" version of myself, because the discipline I had from years of not partaking is also what gave me the discipline to manage my usage and engage this endeavour with the respect and gravity it deserves.

ALWAYS FIND BALANCE!

EDIT 2: my speeling & general cognition sucks today because I'm fighting getting sick lol. Apologizes for any incoherent sentences.I am a daily weed smoker and use other drugs on occasion.  I had a very terrifying LSD experience a few months ago and everything has clicked, I have received the message so its time to put down the phone.  I've decided I want to get into politics one day and my life now has a general direction and I'm not so depressed anymore.  I will no longer risk my freedom by using drugs, no matter how little the risk is these drug laws were made for young black men like me.  I have questioned every authority in my life and even subconscious values I held and am a truly free person.  I will now question the ultimate unquestionable authority, the government.  Luckily we live in a democracy so I shall work towards participating in government and bringing actual change.  Anyways that's the dream plan B is being a crazy homeless drifter traveling around shootin up dope and shitting on the sidewalk.

&#x200B;

edit: Except the drugs I may get prescribed for mental illness.  Turns out getting beat as a child isn't very good for the psyche.  Who would have thunk it.

&#x200B;

edit:  I really fucking hope I run for president in like 2044 and the FBI digs up all my reddit accounts and I have to explain my boofing amphetamine posts, fucked up usernames, and trolling to the country. (I would also like to clarify that I am the guy that ejaculated on the wall behind me whilst wanking on GHB and viagra, but have deleted the account due to privacy reasons)

4-bromo substituted phenethylamines, my favourite. After an initial ingestion of 19mg of 4-bromo-2,5-dimethoxyphenethylamine, I embarked in to the depths of erotica which have long been repressed in my sexually impoverished psyche. Noted below are transcripts of notes written during this experience, and some comments for clarification of what I intended to say.  


A middle-aged Indian man, with an endomorphic plumpness to him entered in my field of view, whilst moaning the words "We want your seed", erratically pointing towards my testes, implying that he was so hungry that he would eat my testicular ejaculate, all said in the least sexual and imploring tone imaginable. He was so desperate for food for himself and family that the last resort for food was my own semen. The words "ve vant vour seeeeed" raged in my auditory-perception cavities, with each 'w' in 'we' and 'want' being replaced with a voiced labiodental fricative 'v'. As time passed, all I could hear was the thick monotony of this man screaming 'seeeeeed', with an annoyingly high-pitched sonorant 'eeeeeeee'. A thousand pigs in unison with an Indian accent, or so it sounded. "SEEEEEEEEED, VE VANT YOUR SEEEEEED." (Disclaimer, I am Keralan myself, perhaps my heritage is psychologically ingrained in to my consciousness, doubt it.)  


Once this hallucination passed, I decided to wank to nothing but my own thoughts, but was so involved in the robotic rigour of shifting my left hand up and down over my phallus that I ripped my foreskin. I bled, which hurt, but phallic bleeding has a dual-purpose of lubrication, which eased the pain. Wanking on drugs is great, usually. Mephedrone masturbation is unrivalled. Seriously.  


Nothing else too exciting occurred, I pissed in to a bottle and threw the piss out my window as I wanted to spare the embarrassment of having to see my housemates to get to my bathroom whilst off my nut on 2C-B. I listened to Massive Attack's 'Blue Lines' about 7 times as it was the only album I could remotely tolerate in this state of psychedelic impregnation.

I feel incredibly, incredibly confused. I hate sex, the idea of it makes me cringe, I feel its almost paradoxical by its very nature. What purpose does it hold? I don't want kids, never will do. It doesn't feel that great neither. Unless I'm psychologically disabled, which I admit is a huge possibility, in fact its inevitable. Despite this, 2C-B offered a glimpse of the depths of human to human erotica in the form of a hungry Indian man wanting to ingest my semen. Perhaps its a subconscious reflection of that fact that food shortage is inevitable during this pandemic, and that one day I will have to rely on the nutrition of my *Spermatazoa.* Maybe I should start a new thread: 'How to become an autotroph - 10 new semen recipes for you and family to enjoy'. I doubt it'll take hold.There was a post I saw on here earlier where someone was talking about how they got MDMA capsules that were overdoses and ended up in the Med tent. Basically warning people make sure to weigh your doses and be careful, which is great advice and part of proper harm reduction. So many people in the comments though were saying things along the lines of “y’all are just pussies if you can’t handle .15” and “you can’t call yourself a rave crew if you got messed up by a little over a point” and this is just ridiculous. 

Firstly if you double dose two caps thinking they’re .1 and end up taking over .3 that is a lot for someone w no tolerance and/or little experience. Secondly, advocating for people to take far more MDMA than the amount at which it begins to become neurotoxic is dangerous and careless. MDMA begins to become neurotoxic around 200mg, and trying to flex how you take 500mg+ and upwards of a gram in a night is not cool. 

A good friend of mine took about a gram and a half over the course of a night once because of this culture and he genuinely might’ve permanently fucked his brain. It’s been almost a year and he still has awful migraines, slurred speech, and is just slightly slower in general. THIS IS NOT GOOD!!!! Don’t encourage people to take dangerous doses of substances because you think they’re pussies if they don’t. The pussies are the ones who decide to forget harm reduction and the health of their bodies because of what others think. 

This is definitely part of the reason the mainstream looks down on users, and people on this forum should be encouraging proper and safe drug usage as much as they can, especially if they’re in favor of decriminalization or legalization. Please be careful, I love you all ❤️so i was walking home late night wishing i had money for weed. it was probably 1 am and i see a car coming up behind me and i’m like “fuck i hope that’s not the cops” because i was a minor at the time. and this white car pulls up next to me and i already know who tf it is. my plug sticks his arm out the window, hands me like 3/4 of a blunt and drives off fast as hell, no words spoken. next thing i know i’m walking down my street smoking a blunt 😂😂😂 bless upReposting cause I forgot to use my throwaway. 😳

I'm not talking about our utopian pipedream of legalized & well regulated drugs - although we should continue to push for that, what can we do TODAY? 

I don't want to spend a ton of money just to find fent and throw it out every time. Do I really have no option but to just stop buying coke until the epidemic is over? What needs to be done at an individual level and long term in order to put an end to fent lacing, and what can be done today to safely obtain drugs like coke that are fent free? 

WHY are creators even using fent??? Especially in stimulants?? Why is killing your clientele a good idea?? Is it secretly the fucking government or what lmao 

Also, is there a way to use drugs that may contain fent safely/to deactivate it or counter it or something? I know it's a silly idea but doesn't hurt to ask. I have heard of people trying to counter it with Suboxone or Narcan - is this effective? How To if so?This is by far my most embarrassing drug addiction story that occurred over a year ago, this was a moment in life where I accepted death but wanted to do it by drug overdose. Overdose by Computer duster.

So it all started when I was placed on probation in a drug court program, I had just gotten out of the military and was very depressed, angry, and regretted returning to civilian life. Me and my girlfriend split up because she couldn’t deal with my issues anymore, and left me while I was at work one day. I of course imploded, went to where she worked the next day and bitched her out in front of a lot of employees and customers, police were called, and I ended up fighting two police officers. I received the chance to expunge my record by completing drug court probation, drug testing weekly, court every week/2 weeks for almost a year, and drug therapy. 

I struggled to adjust to this and used OTC cough medicine to get high, ended up getting caught, and ran away before I could face the judge the following week to find out what would happen to me. I had no car, so I literally ran. Ran until I found a Walmart a few miles away, went inside and loaded a cart up with a tent, blankets, pillows, hygiene products, food, clothes, and a SHIT ton of computer duster and DXM.

I brought all my supplies to the woods behind a food store across the street from Walmart, and ended up living in the woods for almost 10 days, literally huffing computer duster and popping DXM pills until I was psychotic, I would talk to people that weren’t there, Blackout, wake up covered in puke, then huff the can again until I blacked out again, sometimes I would come back to reality after huffing eating a stick of deodorant, eating cotton balls, eating toothpaste, etc.

I would huff around 5-8 cans of duster every day, would fall asleep by huffing till I passed out, and woke up and stole more stuff from Walmart and would come back to my tent and huff till I blacked out again. I knew I was apparently going to die from this, but accepted the fact.

I remember it was just before spring started, and some nights would get down to 40 degrees, rain would get inside my tent and my blankets would be cold and soaking wet, i felt sick and lost weight rapidly, my face began to break out in rashes and bruises from passing out and hitting my head on stuff while on duster.

One day, a few druggies came back to the woods after stealing electronics from Walmart to hide out, found me in my drug induced crazy state in a tent, and asked if they could chill here for a bit. I mumbled whatever I could, no real words came out of my mouth, they figured I was just some bum. They apparently heard me huffing computer duster, and asked if they could join me. I said sure in whatever language I was speaking and passed them both a can, so me and two other drug addicts I didn’t know sat out in the woods for a few hours blacking out on duster together.

Apparently they offered for me to come to their house and do some heroin and crack with them and stay the night, I agreed and started to walk with them. As we walked I continued to huff duster, they told me to slow down on it until we got to their place, but I couldn’t. I apparently woke up on the side of a busy road face first in the dirt, alone, for who knows how long. So I returned to my tent and did more duster and slept in the rain.

On the 9th day, Walmart caught on to my stealing, seen me in the store and called the police. they blocked the doors so I couldn’t run, so I literally busted through the guards at the doors and ran, I was caught by 2 state cops, and one sheriff about two minutes later and taken to jail. I spent about 2 months in jail and then sent to rehab by the drug court judge.

Now I’m obviously no longer doing all that crazy shit, I’m no longer depressed and suicidal and have my shit together, going to college and working and staying out trouble till my record expunged in two months. I will never do duster again, and would never allow my mental health to reach that point because of a break up or drugs. This was probably one of the most embarrassing periods of my life, but damn it’s not worth it at all.As my stoned ass pulled into the McDonald’s drive thru tonight I couldn’t help feeling the deepest appreciation for the teenage kid getting me my order at 11:30 pm on a Sunday.The other day, I decided to do 6.2 grams of dried mushrooms and spend the entirety of the trip reflecting and working through trauma. 

The first few hours were typical, I was euphoric and the world started getting wavy and pattern filled etc. 
About 4 hours in, I suddenly noticed a shift in the air. I felt as if the world had gotten heavier, and more somber. 

I retreated to my room, and laid down on the floor of my guinea pig enclosure. I felt as if I was growing roots and becoming entrenched with the earth. I also became overwhelmed by the deepest, most pervasive sadness I have ever experienced. 

At that moment, as I sobbed on the ground, one of my guinea pigs approached me and licked my hand. This was the first time that she let me touch her, as she had been neglected by her previous owners and was wary of people. As I watched such a tiny creature approach me with such love and trust, everything I had ever known and believed was turned upside down.

I sat up, placed both hands above my head and extended myself to the heavens. A voice inside of me bubbled up and I found myself speaking out loud, words that I never thought I would be able to say and believe. 

“I am here and I deserve to exist. I am cementing my existence and asserting the worth of my life.” 

It was like my chest had opened, exposing my very soul. I continued to speak, recounting all of the mistakes that I had made. All of the trauma and heartache and doubts that I have spent the better part of 2 years struggling to deal with poured out of my mouth into the open. Things I had refused to think about, that kept me up at night. Suddenly, they were all in front of me and I felt naked and free and happier than I have ever been in my life. I was absolutely certain of one thing. 

I am here and things depend on me. I will never be stripped of my ability to improve life for myself, my community, and the ones I love. 

I’ve made an incredible amount of mistakes, I’ve hurt so many people and I’ve hurt myself. I’ve lived hating myself, isolating myself so that others wouldn’t have to deal with me. So that I wouldn’t have to justify the space I take up. And now, none of it matters... at all! My existence does not need to be justified. It was justified from the moment it began. 

After that realization, I cried for a solid two hours. I mourned the years I had lost, the moments I had wasted by seeking out oblivion and by trying to change myself.  I wrote poetry, I took off all of my clothes and caressed my body, apologizing for how mean I had been to myself for so long. I felt as if I was no longer myself, at least I was no longer this concept of self that I had tried so hard to cultivate and to render perfect. I was a nameless woman, born of the earth, petting a small, innocent creature, that depended on me completely. I released my sense of identity into the universe, and along with it, I released all of my insecurity, self hate, and dread.  

As I sat there, I felt older than my years. I felt like an anonymous entity, comforting my own shaking body. I was confronted with a new understanding, yet it felt somehow old and familiar. I realized that despite all of the horrible mistakes of my past I had never and will never forsake my right to exist and be happy. 

We are all struggling. All of us have become disconnected from what matters- being good and doing good. We are told that we HAVE to justify our existence. We have to look a certain way, act a certain way. We have to play by the rules or we will die forgotten and suffering. This is not true. 

If you’re reading this; please listen. No matter who you are or where you come from. 
you have the remarkable ability to do good. No matter how shitty the world is, no matter how corrupt, or how scary or how judgmental. No one can take away your ability to make others happy, to make the world a better place. It doesn’t matter how attractive you are, or how smart, or how accomplished. It doesn’t matter if you’re college educated or not, or what job you have; or what you’ve done in the past. You have just as much of a right to exist on this planet and take up space as anyone else. You have as much ability to do good, with actions both small and large. This, in itself, is enough to justify the existence of all of us. 

I am at peace now. The worries and guilt of the past still try to invade my mind, but when they do, they are exiled once more by the nameless spirit that visited me that night. I simply don’t have time to care about things that distress me. 
Maybe I won’t lose weight, like I so desperately tried to. Maybe I won’t ever become popular or well known. Maybe I won’t be able to make everyone like me. Maybe I’ll die quietly, and my memory will fade with each passing year. That doesn’t mean that I didn’t make a difference. 

To that guinea pig, my actions have made all the difference in the world.Been in this sub for ages and never noticed it wow




"I was unable to find information on this in /r/Drugs/wiki/knowledgebase."When people spend 30 minutes trying to haggle with you after you give them a set price

Snorting non soluble drugs like xanax or vyvanse

The hype of lean. People pay huge amounts for it and think it's the coolest shit ever because they heard about it in a rap song, but in reality codeine is a bottom shelf opiate and the promethazine just makes you tired

People that insist their MDMA is real without a test, because they "know their shit"

Rolling a blunt with anything less than like a .8

Thinking you know the dosage on your tabs without a lab test

Pretending to know the strain of your weed without buying it from a dispensary or growing it yourself

Putting codeine/xanax in or on your blunt and thinking it actually does something

Taking random drug combinations without bothering to google them first

When people hover around you when you're doing coke, waiting for you to offer them a line. Just fuckin ask me, and if I say no then fuck off

People that ask to buy one line of coke off you. 100% of the time they'll be fiending and asking for another 30 mins later. Don't do such a fiendish and expensive drug if you don't have the money for it.

When someone consistently gets stupid and sloppy after drinking, and just becomes a burden to everyone else. I understand that everyone can go a little overboard once in awhile, but come on, learn from your mistakes.

People that give me shit for smoking cigarettes and then proceed to drive while fucked up. At least I'm only killing myself.

That's just a few things I've seen in the drug scene that never fail to frustrate me. I'm interested to see yours, post em.Here are the links where you can find your precinct location in each state voting on RECREATIONAL marijuana:

[Arizona.](https://voter.azsos.gov/VoterView/PollingPlaceSearch.do)

[California.](http://www.sos.ca.gov/elections/polling-place/)

[Maine.](http://www.maine.gov/portal/government/edemocracy/voter_lookup.php)

[Massachusetts.](http://wheredoivotema.com/bal/MyElectionInfo.aspx)

[Nevada.](https://nvsos.gov/votersearch/)

Here are the links where you can find your precinct location in each state voting on MEDICAL marijuana:

[Arkansas.](https://www.voterview.ar-nova.org/VoterView/RegistrantSearch.do)

[Florida.](http://dos.myflorida.com/elections/for-voters/check-your-voter-status-and-polling-place/)

[Montana.](https://app.mt.gov/voterinfo/)

[North Dakota.](https://vip.sos.nd.gov/wheretovote.aspx)


**Would it not be beautiful if all 9 states with weed on the ballot voted yes and all their millions of dollars spent against legalization were a waste???** 

All those millions of dollars wasted. Poor Sheldon Adelson has pumped donations by the millions into Arizona, Florida and Nevada fighting legalization. There's no better way to say "fuck you, Sheldon!" than by ensuring that all of these states vote yes. I graduated as a theatre major from Stephen F. Austin university in Nacogdoches, Texas in 2010. I promptly did what every theatre major ought to do—move to Laredo, Texas to be with a girl they met on the internet and get addicted to meth. It’s easier to get meth in Laredo than it is to get a job, and me and the missus needed money so that we could get twacked enough to tolerate each other. We resorted to a lot of schemes. One of them involved putting my theatre with an -re training to use, and I talked a friend of ours into letting me perform for her child’s birthday party. I had a chicken outfit that I’d bought for a college party, and I told her I’d lead the kids in the chicken dance. She agreed to pay me $20, and the chicken dance only lasts a few minutes, so really $20 isn’t bad at all for that kind of work. The night leading up to the party, I was was having sex with my girlfriend. I felt too fried to drive to the party, so my girlfriend drove me there along with my chicken suit, and waited in the car. I stank. The stank filled up the suit and I kept wondering if it was escaping, and in retrospect, of course it was, there’s no such thing as an airtight chicken suit. I led the children in the dance, having just redosed in the car. The chicken didn’t have to speak, or be cordial, he just had to boogie. And I embodied that funky chicken with a jittery, almost disturbingly convicted energy, but in the eyes of the children, I was a god. I woke up with little kids looking down at me, having passed out from dehydration. The Texas heat had turned the chicken suit into a rotisserie oven, and my goose was cooked. I woke up just in time to tell them that the funky chicken doesn’t need an ambulance and, in fact, does not have health insurance. I no longer dance for meth money.so I bought myself a couple of parrots to have something by my side since this whole lockdown thing is getting on my nerves. I struggled to gain their trust for something more than a month, but after doing lots of little tricks and treats recommended by the community, they finally came to me when I called them. They're not into cuddles and kisses, but this is their way of telling me they've included me in their life.

&#x200B;

I couldn't hold back my tears and I just sat down and cried for a good half hour. After a whole life of being neglected by society and put down even by my closest peers, I finally have a couple of green buddies to call my own.

&#x200B;

Anyways, I felt a very very similar rush in that instant. Colors became more bright, I felt a very light body high inside me, and a profound sense of peace washed all over me. I just couldn't believe such a thing could be experienced without external substances. It still does not match the glory of the MDMA rush but i just never got to experience real happiness in my life before this moment. I'll probably never experience such a thing again but at least I have two little green buddies to share a smoke with.

&#x200B;

thanks for coming to my ted talk

&#x200B;

edit: thank you guys for such an amazing answer! here they are the danger duo  [http://imgur.com/gallery/e7UDwB4](http://imgur.com/gallery/e7UDwB4) I love weed and smoke pretty regularly, but the amount of people I know that love to flex how much they smoke really annoys me. For instance, one of my buddies got like a 100$ dab tool and he wears it on a string around his neck like jewelry. Not only is this just stupid because if someone robs you, you're out 100$, but because in my experience people just think you're fucking lame if you hold onto weed like sports fans hold onto their hometown team. Smoke quietly but carry a big doink, my friends.So back when i was about 16 i was sort of fantasising about becoming a dealer so me and my friends purchased a shit tonne of MDMA about probably an ounce worth. Way more that we would be able to sell in a short period of time.

I went to my mates house and we did some lines and started packing caps all night long we packed maybe a few grams worth of caps and went to parties and were flipping them pretty easily but at our rate we were moving product it would take us months to flip all the shit we bought. Which was an issue because we both still lived with our parents who were very suspicious of our behaviours and often searched our room for any drug paraphernalia so we both got very nervous about hiding our scales, hundreds of baggies and gels caps, and of course the MDMA. By this point our parents knew most of our hiding spots.

One day my friend gets back from school and calls me sounding very distressed. From his tone i pretty much knew what was up. His mum found his stash. Me in a panic needed to quickly hide my stash in a spot my parents couldn’t find because his parents and mine often collude and talk about our behaviours, so i quickly put 2 baggies of rock MDMA into a pair of sock and chuck them in a suitcase pocket. Which i only discovered last night. I must have been so worried about my parents finding it that i pushed it out of my mind for 10 years... 

I thought this was hilarious so i though id share it here. My friend is coming over tonight and we probably gonna have a throwback and rack up some lines like old times.This happened in the summer of 2018. Decided to trip one night, dropped two tabs, had a pretty standard trip. Played fortnite for the first time ever with my brother's friends on voice chat, pretty hilarious. Had some visions of Hindu gods and goddesses while laying in the dark. Normal trip stuff, had a great time.

Towards the end of the peak, I started to feel kind of nauseous, so I decided to smoke some weed out of a bong. I know it's usually not the greatest idea on psychs and I don't recommend it if you're not a fairly experienced tripper, but I'd done it before and weed always helped my nausea. So, I load the bowl up, start smoking. Immediately, I get this rush of anxiety that seems to have no reason behind it. I figure it's just typical weed paranoia, so I keep smoking. Towards the end of the bowl, I start to feel...weird. Something's not right. I'm listening to Dark Side of The Moon by Pink Floyd, and the song currently playing, "Brain Damage" starts to feel absolutely fucking sinister. I feel like it's directed toward me. Some of the lyrics, if you don't know the song, are "The lunatic is in the hall/ The lunatic is in my head...You lock the door and throw away the key/ There's someone in my head, but it's not me."  Keep those lyrics in mind and imagine that in the background of everything that follows.

&#x200B;

So I'm pretty freaked out, and I stupidly decide to finish the bowl, put the bong away, and try to ride it out. I finally cash it, but then I start feeling the slightest twinges of that "salvia book feeling". You probably know what I mean if you've done salvia. It's like your body is a book, and somebody is ruffling the pages down it eternally. Super weird and uncomfortable. The second I feel it, my mind flashes back and I realize my mistake. Two or three days before, I had smoked some 200x salvia out of that same bong, and I guess that I didn't finish the whole bowl. The second I realize this, absolute panic sets in. I did NOT want to trip on salvia anytime soon, and I DEFINITELY didn't want to do it on two fucking tabs of acid. But, I somehow manage to rein myself in a bit, and I just stay laying down. I look at my feet, and they're...how do I describe this? They're liquifying and floating upwards, toward my ceiling. Time has slowed immensely, and I can feel my memories and cognition slipping away as always happens on salvia. I look at my ceiling, and the geometry is just insane. Everything on my blank white ceiling is crystalized, complex, and I KNOW it wants to hurt me. And then, like a train entering a tunnel, the salvia fully hits.

&#x200B;

I don't entirely know how to describe what happened. I didn't fully break through and lose all contact with reality; I had some small concept of where I was and that I should stay there, but that was about it. What I saw around me became nothing more than colors, shapes, and objects, with no referents. Mentally (and this is all, essentially, metaphor), my consciousness became a Planck time. My understanding of quantum mechanics is spotty, but the definition of a Planck time is the smallest unit of time possible with our current understanding of physics. For reference, that's  5.39 × 10 ^(−44) seconds. I became a personified version of that. It felt like I was a grain of sand on the crest of a wave that was hitting a shore. Every time the wave hit the shore, it created the universe at that particular moment, and the wave hit the shore a near infinite amount of times until the random arrangement of sand/Planck time units was just right, and then it repeated the cycle over and over again. I became one of these grains, and it was horrifying. It was hell. Hitting the shore, over and over and over again, begging to be freed. I could tell that there were other things like me around me, but I couldn't perceive anything about them besides that they were trapped eternally the same way I was.

&#x200B;

Eventually, bits and pieces started returning. The place I'm in, it is called a "bedroom". I am a "human" and I live on "Earth". Each piece that returned was joyous to me. I had gone through literal hell and come out the other side clean. I wish, partially, that it hadn't happened, since it was so utterly horrifying, but at the same time I'm glad I had this experience. It changed the way I looked at the world and how I looked at time. Hope you're doing well, my fellow Planck units.

&#x200B;

tl;dr: Thought I had only weed in my bong, turns out there was a bit of salvia in there as well. Got turned into the smallest thing possible, experienced hell, and came out the other side.Hi everyone, so I when out to get my 2 Month supply of weed, the drive there was great and the deal went down with no problem, On my way back home I got pulled over. The officer came up to me and let me know that my break light was out and asked me for my license, I gave it to him and he walked back to his car, 15 to 20 minutes later a K9 unit pull and I immediately started sweating bullets. The officer came back to my car and said he could smell weed on me and in the car and he wanted to know if I had anything to declare before he searched my vehicle, I said no and he asked me to step out. I drive a 2006 Ford Bantam and I always keep my weed under the hood by the motor for the windshield wipers, and at first the dog wasn't picking anything up on the inside until they started searching around the outside and underneath the car, then I could see that the dog was trying to crawl into the engine from underneath and ended up getting burnt by the heat of the engine, cause its an old car it has a tendency to over heat at times, to conclude the story. The cops gave me my license back and told me to leave, the dog ended up going to the vet and evey time I smoke I feel regret for that poor dog. Does anyone have any other stash spots that I could possibly utilize, something preferably smell proof for dogs?Guys, i lost touch with my best friend for a couple years, he went completely off the radar.. Me and him did a 1 year tour in Iraq back in 2005-2006, he was my gunner and I was his driver on an m1a1 tank. We stayed in touch for a long time, all the way up until about 4 years ago. So I recently got in touch with his ex wife, who still loves him and keeps track of him...she told me this...

*"He's super duper sick Caleb. no longer wants to get clean...at all...no desire.*

*He went to jail for a month or so in November...and it made him super bitter...he spun out*

*completely when he got out.*

*He has an artery in his heart that needs replacing due to dirty dope water, but he won't*

*stay in the hospital long enough to get it fixed.*

*He's been in the hospital 6 times since January.*

*He went in the hospital septic and dying in January...spent a week in icu...got moved to a*

*step down room and that check hit, he was gone!*

*He came back to the hospital 10 days later...left after less than a week again.*

*About 2-3 weeks later he went in a different hospital, twice in a month...left again within a*

*week, both times.*

"*Then within the month he went to yet another hospital and stayed less than a week two*

*different times.*

*He'll die soon without this surgery.*

*He's a shell of a human.*

*He still does some Heroin, but fentanyl is his drug of choice...combine that with the*

*occasional coke and meth...and he's the worst he's ever been.*

*I love him dearly, and I'll always be there for him, but I feel hopeless at this point.*

*He doesn't keep a phone number. So I hear from him randomly.*

*When he calls next, I'll tell him to reach out to you."*

&#x200B;

Ive been talking to him the last 2 weeks, we had a video chat over facebook. He told me this:

"*Bro u have always been there for me. The one real friend have. It's crazy I've thought*

*about calling u a thousand times*

*I just felt stupid and ashamed for the way I've been living.*

*And that dirty whore left me 3 days ago*

*Jen is the most amazing woman have ever had in my life and loves the shit out of me and*

*I ignore her*

*I'm an idiot*

*Bro I've been so up and down the whore got me justed with 10 grams of fent and a juice*

*of ice"*

I send him pics of us in the Army, reminding him who he is. I told him i was ordering him some ibogaine for him, but his heart is so fucked up i think it would kill him. I told him i would fly down the memphis to get him. I dont know what to do guys, ive been sick to my stomach, cant sleep, i dont know what to do guys. Please help, i dont want him to die this way. I wish i could post pics on here of what he looked like then vs now. I dont know what to do.

&#x200B;It all started freshmen year of highscool 09. He proposed a plan that piqued my interest at first. I had the period before him and would write down all the answers

&#x200B;

So far so good. The test was fairly easy and I received my long awaited bag. Upon closer inspection the frosty green chronic I was expecting was a turd brown and had clearly been thoroughly vaped. Not only that but he had written nigger poop in sharpie on the bag. Now here is the silver lining. The teacher had actually released two versions of the test one for each period thereby delivering a fatal blow to his exam.

&#x200B;

Drew if your reading this sorry braw but you probably deserved it.Pls no hate for the title, but I was diagnosed as autistic 5 years ago. I would engage in repetitive actions for hours at a time, did not know how to engage socially,  had no idea why people did the things they did.

A year ago I started taking shrooms every weekend starting at 2 grams, then 1uickly increasing up to 6 to 10, depending on how I felt. Because of this dedication to every weekend, I sometimes had bad trips due to bad set and setting, and life getting me down. I think that the "autistic" need to follow a routine forced me to continue, and I'm glad it did. 

During these trips I began to understand why people did things, I realised how social interactions worked and what I should do when people did certain things. I think that the bad trips I had were by far the most helpful, despite how horrible they were; replaying every social fuckup I've ever made, for 6 hours in my head, analysing their thoughts and emotions, seeing their body language, and playing different scenarios through helped me find ways in real life to approach situations

As time went by I slowly grew more and more social, and more understanding of social circles, and well... less autistic 

It's like my brain had swallowed all the information I needed to be a "normal" human being and hidden it at the back, and taking shrooms regularly formed pathways in my mind that allowed me to access these corners, and in doing so, shrug off the weight of autism, or at least suppress it from every person I met knowing immediately, to now some of my closest friends being shocked when they found out

I just thought I'd share with you guys, and maybe inspire a few others to try this out, it's been life changing for me and I'm so happy I did it, and want to help others live a more normal lifePissing when you really have to go is just the best thing ever. Sure the high is brief maybe a minute at most usually thirty seconds but god damn is it satisfying. I’m telling you guys it’s pure bliss. The euphoria is just unrivaled for the price. But keep it on the dl because once Jeff sessions learns about this it’s all over.Just remembered a funny/dumb moment I had after smoking a zoot (before Covid 19)

Was heading to Mcdonalds after smoking a fatty and got to the double door and one side of it had a piece of paper that said "door broken please use other door" Of course my high ass walked around this building 3 times looking for another door. I was so stoned I thought I'd missed it so just went round this building over and over wondering where the fuck this other door is and why I couldn't find it. Finally clocked that the sign meant the other door right beside it when I saw someone use it .Took me a good 5 minutes to compose myself after realising how fucking stupid I was being.

What's some dumb shit you guys have done while stoned?I dont show it but I call him up and all i hear is

"WHO IS THIS"

"Can you deliver some tabs"

"WHO IS IT LIKE?"

"[Name] gave me your number"

And from there it was smooth sailing but guy scares the fuck out of me

agressive but he's a nice guy in person though

Edit: lemme clear some things up. The dealer is chill as fuck and I understand why someone would be paranoid about it. Maybe his not paranoid and I'm paranoid who tf knows or maybe both, who knows. I have nothing against the guy, I'm glad i have an acid dealer and he sells great shit. This post wasnt to diss him it was just to say how he kinda scared me because of the aggressive tone, I get scared very easily lmao. As again he is a great dealer and is very patient with me even though I can be annoying as fuckTomorrow is obviously bicycle day and tons of people will be tripping.  Just a reminder to not feel like you have to take some LSD just to be included. It’s a powerful substance and will play on your mind set and surrounding.  For all those dosing have fun :) i’ll be joining around 8am PST.I started doing meth at 16 because my mom was a meth addict. She overdosed two years later, that got me in deep since I was so sad and busy trying desperately to support myself while still going to school. I had 0 sleep most days.

Fast forward to the present, my friend and I begin smoking a ton of meth. After about 45 minutes, my friend remembers he brought LSD as well. So being stupid and bored we decide to take it as well.

I honestly can’t remember everything, but basically my friend is rummaging in the kitchen. Like pulling shit out, smashing stuff, etc. I was getting kinda concerned so I yell out. He screams back “The devil is outside OP, he’s gonna take us.” 

I was freaked out, and tripping hard. I was already seeing scary shit but that tipped me off the edge. I run up to see what he was seeing, I slowly peered through the window and saw the massive horns peering from the darkness.

I was convinced 100% that we had died or something while taking this massive amount of drugs and we were being taken to the devil for our sins.

So we armed ourselves with the shotguns. (It was common for farmers to have shotguns to kill raccoons who might potentially have rabies and would infect/kill their animals.)

We went outside in the pitch black darkness. What some people don’t realize about country life is there is absolutely no lights. The only light source comes from the house, there’s no street lights since the nearest road is 10 acres away.

I could hear voices, whispering from my skull telling me to kill everyone. I was seeing people move in the shadows lurching towards me. We eventually made it around the house to the window we looked out of.

We saw him. A giant horned beast staring right at us. I don’t wanna go in depth on this part, but I was so freaked at this point I began going back around to hide in the house, but my friend decided to shoot at it multiple times then run with me.

Fast forward to the present, it was my cow. It had huge horns and I couldn’t make the connection because I was so high.

This experience has made me chuck the rest of my meth, it wasn’t much but I would never waste it as it’s expensive for me. But it’s the motivation to quit because I don’t want to end up in the killing of a real person. I’m extremely conflicted about this whole situation as I feel I can’t blame my friend as he was tripping hard too. I’m sorry for what I did.

Edit: Wow! This post really blew up, I never expected more than 100 people to ever see it. Maybe I’ll do another post if anyone cares to read it, I have had other crazy experiences mixing hard substances. Thanks so much for all the good wishes, and I take full responsibility for my part in my cows death, I feel incredibly guilty about the whole thing.[Here is a picture that shows them, but I'll also list them below.](https://i.imgur.com/4SaYHBU.jpg)

* Unresponsiveness/unconsciousness: Watch their nods. Watch the fucking nods. If they stop nodding and you can't wake them up its a problem.

* Feeling cold/clammy to the touch especially in the face

* Blue/gray lips and/or fingernails

* Shallow breathing/gurgling sounds: This may be the first thing you notice because your boy always passes out. When you start hearing this you need to move quick. They could stop breathing at any time.

* Pin-point pupils

We all know what its like out there. Hot doses happen. Don't trust your dealer and don't trust your friends. People lie about how much they take and letting them sleep it off could kill them. Don't be afraid to call 911. They're not going to arrest you. Just stash the shit after you call. Also, make sure to get them in the [recovery position](https://i.imgur.com/mRZxkPv.png).

I saved my friends life with this information. It can happen to anyone. Also, you can buy Narcan in most states so if you're into this shit then just keep one around. You still need to get the person to the hospital though. My buddy took four shots.I got my GED Friday and I decided to go pretty hard Monday in celebration, popped 4 mg in the morning and smoked all day before another 2mg when I got home.

I sat down on the couch and noticed my dog chilling across the room, so I grab his bag of treats and he gets up and looks at me all excited.

I see the piece I grabbed was broken and go to get him the full treat a good boy deserves, about 10 minutes go by and I’m now fully absorbed in Hulu with my hand in this bag of dog treats, and my innocent Lil man is still just waiting patiently across the room. 

Once I notice the dog looking at me funny I remember what I’m supposed to be doing, grab a treat, and In full bartard fashion just chuck it limply in his general direction (he usually catches it in his mouth), it slides under the bed but his little paws can not reach it. 

I fight the effects of all the bars and drag myself to the bed where I fall face first and begin moving my arm around underneath the bed while he waits eagerly. 

I woke up in bed 10 hours later, I’m sorry Chief

Edit- Picture from this morning, he forgives me 

https://imgur.com/a/GSBlEIf you are a teenager, be warned when i tell you this and this goes out to all of you younglings who might have had some kind of escapism already from a young age. People with and addictive personality and or complications with social interactions will in most cases fall in absolute love with drugs.

It might take a while before you realize that recreational drug use is about to be atleast 50% of everything you think of, and it will from personal experrience turn into self medication.

Now you selfmedicate, this strife to addiction. You might have found your drug of choice, maybe you just do em' all. It feels good now. You have something to rely on. You dont need no relationships, you are a social akward person anyway right?

Now you will use the drug more and more until you might lose a couple friends here and there, so what. You still have your family. Wait you didn't call any of your relationships (family members, friend) for a couple weeks? whatever they are probably busy anyway, or are they? they called me a couple times, but i had a good time being high so everything is probably fine. I check up on things later, ill smoke some weed and do some benzos.

Suddenly you are broke.

Suddenly your relationships are hanging in a thin thread.

Suddenly you will have to get more drugs

Suddenly you hang out with dangerous people with bad values and no moral code

Suddenly you are truly addicted & your world revolves around 1 thing, getting high.

And it takes a real hardcore motherfucker to get your life back on track, once youre addictive personality have found something that your mind things beats anything else in life.

I'm in rehab and i just wanted to share some thoughts if you guys don't mind.

Stay save everyone. I love you guys.Last night I finished off my weed and told myself it was time for a break. Then this morning I said "fuck it, let me cop some bud". But then I said nah, let me just take some Valium instead. 

So I pull out the pill and immediately feel more relaxed just staring at it. It's like this little yellow pill was whispering to me "Don't worry bro, I'm about to take care of all your anxiety".

I'm on the Valium right now and I just feel like I am in heaven. My anxiety levels have been through the roof lately, and now I actually feel relaxed. 

Fuck, I feel like I can't function sober. This is the result of 7 years of using drugs to fix my negative emotions. You end up like me. 

I kind of wish I never even started smoking weed to be honest, because it all lead to where I am now: a polydrug addict.

I'm waiting for this SSRI to kick in so that I can hopefully need less benzos; trying to avoid that addiction ya feel? But of course this shit has its own horrible side effects.

Shoutout to my anxious homies and shoutout to all who are struggling. You are NOT alone <3Speed is way cheaper and just feels better. It's also a bit healthier than coke so it's a win-win for me.I get this question a lot.

I’m a drug nerd at heart.

I’m obsessed with drugs.

To me, they are one of the most fascinating things ever. I’ve been fascinated with them from a *very* young age. I new about DMT by the time I was 12, when the only video on youtube about DMT was a 2 minute audio clip from the Joe Rogan podcast.

I’ve easily spent a good 10% of my life either reading about, thinking about, or researching drugs. Seriously. It’s the main place my mind goes when I get bored and need something to think about.

I’ve never really asked myself why I’m interested in drugs. To me it was an extremely natural obsession. It seemed tied in to all of the other things I’ve been fascinated by; the paranormal, dreams, the extraterrestrial, and fairy tales. These are all things that I consider to be extra-reality. They don’t really have any concrete standing in normal reality. I consider drug-induced experiences to be in the same family as these things. 

**Answer:** To me drugs are the cheat codes to human perception and consciousness. Any experience of reality that you can imagine can be chemically induced. The only way you have ever perceived and interacted with reality is through chemical and electrical impulses in your brain. Drugs allow you tweak this to your choosing.

I consider MDMA to be a good example of this.

Choosing to take MDMA gives you the choice to change a generally bland and slightly ugly reality into one that is unbelievably beautiful. If that isn’t a cheat code to human perception, then I don’t know what is.

Why are people obsessed with God?

Because he is the creator of the universe. He controls everything about the way that reality functions.

Drugs, in a way, allow you to be *your own* god. They allow you to be the creator of your own universe. They allow you to control the way that reality functions.

Drugs allow you to wield great power. And with great power comes great responsibility.

**Edit:** I don’t want to end up on /r/awardspeechedits but I’m very honored to receive platinum. Thank you anonymous dawg or dawgetteI took approximately 1,280ug of LSD, with the intention of taking 300ug. 

Usually don’t have too many stories about these endeavours, but I have to share this one. So where I live you can get high quality psychedelics online pretty easily. So I’m like great, I’ll get a vial of some LSD-25.

I shop around and find a place that has microdose LSD vials. So I DM them and ask for a custom strength vial - what can $200 get me? They say of course! The vial had something around 1,980ug from what I remember. The vial arrives, I see it has 12 paper tabs submerged in what I assume is just purified water. 

So I’m emailing back and forth with the vendor, super nice. Have any questions, let us know!

I email the vendor a week before, “hey, how much is one dropper full worth?” They reply, “18ug.” In my head I’m like, okay that sounds wrong, but okay.

Next Saturday arrives. I want to try some. I’m not new to acid, but I want to go at just 300ug because I’ve never done liquid like this. So I do the math, 300 divided by 18 is 16. So I put 16 droppers full of solution into a shot glass. Half the fucking vial is now empty! What the hell!? 

So I email the vendor back and go, “hey, uh, are you sure you weren’t talking about the micodose vials when you told me the dosage for my custom strength vial?” Half an hour goes by. No response. Another half an hour goes by. No response.

Now here’s the interactive part of the story! What do you think I did next? Do you think I was responsible and waited out for the email reply? 

Of course not. I just fucking took the shot.

As soon as I go sit back at my laptop after downing the acid I look at my inbox and the vendor replies; “I’M SO SORRY. THE INFORMATION I GAVE YOU LAST WEEK WAS INCORRECT. IT’S 80UG PER DROPPER, NOT 18UG. THAT’S x3 THE STRENGTH.”

😐

I remember the feeling of my stomach dropping into my balls. I got [Tommy Chong’d](https://youtu.be/FAaTp_WCREw?t=322).

Fear, anxiety, and anger - all the emotions you need to make for great set and setting! Even better, it's only 45 minutes until the come up.
 
Most of the evening was spent on the carpet. At one point I was on the ground in my living room staring at my kitchen wall - I could see the silhouette of my own face reflected from the casted shadow on the wall from the tree branches outside. 

I saw grids made of the light that stretched out for what seemed like the size of a planet. I remember thinking to myself, “this is too much.” Good thing that was only at minute 55.

Anyway, the moral of the story is that I’m basically The Lizard King.As an avid pinterest user and recovering crack addict its hilariously dark when when a recipe states its "like crack". Cuz I been there. I'm sure a few other people in this sub have been there. The emotional turmoil of crack. The physical withdrawals. The insane highs and even deeper lows. It was definitely a trip i dont wanna go down again. 

I'm sorry Karen. Your vegan low carb paleo keto sugar free coconut crack bars just ain't the same.When it comes to drugs, it's easy to be taken advantage of.

I just got a notification on FB that it was an old friend's birthday today but fuck that guy. This guy used to be my friend, he has never, ever worked and has been unemployed since we left school but was still cool.

Anyway, I moved away and anytime I would come back, I would invite this guy out with the rest of our friends and basically pay for his whole night. I've given him countless smokes for free, shared joints and bags of coke with him for nothing in return, I'm just a guy who doesn't want to be on a buzz alone. I really liked kicking it with this dude so I didn't mind, until one night about three months ago.

I came home and met up with the guys, I text this dude and tell him we are going into the city for food and drinks and that I'll cover him if he's short cash. So I pay for his taxi into the city, his food and drink in the restaurant, his drinks in a bar and then his entrance into a club, his drinks and his share of the taxi fare home.

We get out and he immediately pulls out a joint, sparks it and smokes it. I'm pretty drunk at this stage and trying not to be rude, just waiting to see if he'll pass it around to me and the guys, he nearly smokes the entire thing so I just say fuck it and ask for a hit, a single hit is all I wanted and he flips, telling me to get my own and to pay for my own shit...

I just smirked, the other guys looked at me as if to say "Is this cunt for real?" but didn't say anything outright. I call it a night and head home, from that point on, I decided to stop being cool and say fuck that. Turns out, the guys don't hang with him much anymore because of shit like this, asking for bumps of coke while secretly having his own bag etc. I used to ask for smokes a lot of the times from my friends but I would always get them back with drinks, drugs or food or taxi fare or whatever - If you give me something, I'll get you back somehow. Fuck being a doormat though.After the first like month, the only “high” you get from it is the feeling of satisfying your addiction for a little bit.We dropped 100mg each before we left our AirBnB to go to a nightclub downtown. The roll didn’t kick in until about an hour in, but when it did, wow. We danced for hours together on a crowded dance floor in our own little world. I held her in my arms and moved to the music. We would go from fast moving dancing, to her resting her head on my shoulders. When we got warm, we would share a cigarette and embrace each other in the cool air. Around 12:30am, we dropped another 50mg at the club and the roll continued. Every minute that passed felt like an hour. The night seemed to last forever. 

When we called our Lyft around 2am, we dropped another 50mg. The whole car ride was spent holding each other’s hands and her resting in my arms. When we got back, the last redose was starting to hit, and man the teeth started to chatter. We laid down on the bed and just kissed and cuddled with each other for a little bit. We got undressed and made love to each other. 

The whole night we were just silly and in-tune with each other. We dropped another 50mg around 3am to wrap up the night. The time we spent together that night felt like it lasted forever and it’s something I won’t ever forget. When we were dancing, it felt like the two of use were one. When we were in the bath, her laying on top of me, I could feel her emotions. And when we fell asleep in each other’s arms, I didn’t want the moment to end. We didn’t fall asleep until the sun came up. 

We grew closer to each other more that night more than the  whole year we’ve known each other. I wouldn’t trade our experience for the world. My friend, glock, was murdered last night. I can’t fucking believe this shit. 
2 dudes went to his place to buy, they went and shot him 7 fucking times. My dude passed away. This hurts man. They fucking robbed him while he was dying. 
My dude had a 3 month baby and was taking care of his family.
He was a a good man. He was the best. He checked up on me. He never ever fucked me over. 

I’m so sorry that shit ended this way. I’m sorry. I hope you rest easy. They will find those shooters. I swear. 

Edit: I really didn’t expect this post to really get a lot of attention! thank you for gold and all of the prayers/good vibes. I hope you guys have a great day and get home safe and sound to your loved ones. 
Rest easy, Glock

Edit2: theres just been a good bit of negative energy around this. Some just because of his nickname saying that just says something about him, but no it doesn’t. It doesn’t matter whether he was a plug or not for this or that, a life is lost. I’m just a mourning person so let me do so without the negative comments. I mean, I’ll reply, but you’ll only look stupid. In middle school I was very depressed and grieving. When I ran out of weed there was not much else for me to abuse, my parents didn't drink, I just wanted to feel numb. So I huffed wood glue. When wood glue wasn't enough I huffed spray paint. Then, paint thinner. Let me tell you something, that is one of my biggest regrets. I killed off so many of my braincells, I never knew that I was messing up my brain so bad. I felt it immediately. At school my grades dropped even lower than they already were. I was constantly derealizing, sometimes I couldn't think at all. I still have trouble remembering basic words and phrases, my heart skips beats and sometimes I need to wear a monitor (rare, but still sucks). No matter how bad it feels now, I have it so good compared to other inhalant users. It's so often that people die from duster and other inhalants. If it doesn't kill you itll cause permanent brain damage, impair your cognitive abilities, and definitely could damage your lungs and cause heart problems. I hope this reaches kids looking up what to huff and side effects of huffing, please, I know it doesn't matter to you right know how it effects you in the future but if you continue, there may not be a future.

edit: thank you for your own cautionary tales and supporting this post, but please don't ask me if you have brain damage or is it bad that you huffed twice, I am not a damage calculator!Before you be the person this post is about, I haven't touched heroin in like a year 🔫 sit your ass down

Like I get it. Addiction is very common with harder drugs but it is not very nice mentioning my drug use to someone and they immediately assume I must be addicted. Then when I explain that I am not the type to get addicted, they think it's just a matter of time or that I am lying to myself. Sometimes it really is a matter of being able to stop any time.

Edit: I'm not saying I am doing it again after a year. I'm saying I used it briefly then stopped without issue.[This policy](https://www.politico.com/story/2018/03/15/exclusive-trump-finalizing-opioid-plan-death-penalty-418488) will continue to protect and line the pockets of the execs who peddle pills by the millions into poor communities, which is how the addiction begins. They will never get executed. Because money buys power. 

The guys getting executed will be the dealer who sells someone smack who OD's. 

How is that justice? Samwise - weed (munchie time)

Gandalf (the grey) - LSD (how else do you think he came up with those amazing fireworks)

Gandalf (the white) - doesn't use psychedelics anymore, meditation does the trick

Radagast the brown - definitely Mushrooms

Gimli/dwarves in general - Beer (obviously)

Elves - their architecture looks like something straight out of a DMT trip (minus the rainbow colors), fits their whole spiritual vibe pretty well too

Gollum - IV meth (holds the world record for the longest binge at 478 years)

Saruman - I don't feel like he'd get high on anything himself, fucking asshat probably sells K2 to little children though

The Nazgûl - Dissociatives (how to dissappear completely)

Sauron - Salvia personified

If you have any more ideas/any other ideas feel free to post them!Because we use different terminology (drunk vs high) when talking about alcohol, and because it’s legal, people don’t view alcohol abuse the same way they view the abuse of other drugs.

I’ve recreationally used a lot of drugs.  I haven’t touched the big 3 no-no drugs (heroin, meth, crack), but I’ve done pretty much everything else.  Alcohol is the only one I got addicted to.  And people seem way more sympathetic towards me than they do to other addicts just because my doc is socially acceptable.

One of the times I had to go to the hospital for withdrawals I noticed that the people behind the desk were incredibly wary of me while I waited in line, and after a short time a security guard started hovering around.  I was pacing, I was shaking, I know that I must have looked like I was withdrawing or messed up on something.  The staff behind the desk were immediately very hostile toward me until I told them “I’m beginning to go through alcohol withdrawal” and then their tone completely changed and everyone was suddenly very compassionate and idk, I’m drunk and rambling but I think there’s a very unfair double standard.  I mean alcohol is more harmful than cocaine ffs.Today is my 17th birthday. This is a birthday that I never thought I would reach. But I’m still here and I’m clean. 

I started smoking weed at about 13. Things took off pretty quickly. At 14 I did dxm, acid, shrooms, mdma, and codeine. At 15 I stuck a needle in my arm for the first time and completely unknown to everyone around me, I spiraled. 

I would shoot up before school, go to class, then shoot up when I got home. I was also heavily depressed and suppressing my sexuality. 

A month before I turned 16 I od for the first time.  My parents finally found out and sent me to rehab. I honestly tried but a few months after hanging out with the people from before I od, I started up again. 

About eight months ago I od again. Rather than put me in rehab again I got sent to this new school is my district for fellow degenerates. Many of the kids there were also in recovery. We helped each other and helped keep each other clean. 

I’ve been totally clean from h and every other drug except acid because on bad days it has helped me stay clean. 

I honestly thought I would be dead. Thank fuck I’m not. I’m still here kicking. 17 is a number I didn’t think I would get to in the worse if things. I hope I reach many more birthdays. 

I just wanted to say thank you to everyone in this community. Your funny stories have been keeping me sane. Thanks. Anyways....

Tldr: I was a degenerate 15 year old junkie and surprisingly I’m not dead.This was 2016 I believe. I was dating a girl named Taylor. We weren’t officially together but I had just moved from Florida and was staying with her until I got my life together. She was pretty much inexperienced with drugs at all but would always be very interested when I did them. She would ask a lot of questions and show interest. While telling her a few of my acid stories she expressed that she wanted to do it with me for the first time. 

I bought a few tabs from a guy I knew. I was skeptical because I’ve never done acid with a female before. Always with my boys or by myself(I don’t recommend doing acid by yourself) so instead of doing tabs with her I told her I’ll watch her as she takes her tabs one day and the next day I’ll take mine as she watched me. Looking back I wish we had taken them together. The experience would have been way more amazing.

First day comes and she takes her tab. I take her around the city to a few parks and some of my favorite trip spots. Just like most LSD first timers she starts talking shit saying it’s not working. I tell her give it some time. It finally kicks in for her. She’s laughing & in awe of everything manipulating in front of her. It was a beautiful warm summer day and I took her to a pier. She was amazed by the water during the sunset. She loved it.

The next day it was my turn. Because I had done a lot of acid at this point of my life I decided to take 2 tabs instead of one this time around. I didn’t need to see any sights or be out for my trip. I told her I wanted to stay home. So we did. While tripping I made a playlist of really dark ambient sexual music such as FKA Twigs & Spaceghostpurrps “Blackland Radio” mixtape. This put me in a certain mood I never felt. The acid is kicking in heavily.

I’m at the computer listening to the songs with my eyes closed in a trance. I feel like I can see the music. Taylor came over to check on me. I had almost forgotten she was in the room. We we’re at her house so she was dressed very comfortably. She mostly remained nude when at home and would wear this burgundy robe made of a silk kind of material. I opened my eyes to see her in this robe, it’s untied and I can see her body peeking through the center. She had this tattoo in the center of her chest that looked so amazing to me and she was smoking a blunt. With the smoke drifting from her mouth in that moment she looked like a sexual deviant to me.

We start messing around in her bed. Touching a person never felt like this before. Her skin felt holographic in my hands. The acid had my blood boiling. Fast forward to us having intercourse. I have my eyes closed the whole time. I never have sex with my eyes closed or with the lights off. The visual of a woman is what keeps me aroused, Not so much the physical feeling... if I get too caught up in the physical feeling I’ll cum fast and fuck that. But this time I was melting in the feeling. Nearly the entire time my eyes were closed and the LSD made the sounds of her moans give me chills. No molly or ecstasy has given me an experience like this.

I open my eyes to try to change into a position where I’m standing at the edge of the bed and she’s laying on the edge of the bed face up with her legs towards me. Her bed was kind of low so I had to put my hands under her waist and lift her body up a bit for her to reach me. I look down at her and the acid gave me a visual I never could imagine. The room was dark but her bathroom door was cracked open slightly and the light was on inside of it. The beam of light coming into her dark room was directly over her pussy and when I looked at it about to eat her out it gave me the illusion that her pussy was glowing. 

Her pussy was so pretty on a regular day but mixed with this acid , the music & the lighting in the room looking at it made my jaw drop. As we continued I literally got lost in her and my mind put her body on the highest pedestal possible. I feel like the acid showed me the real beauty of a woman’s body on a scale I can’t explain. I didn’t express my experience to her until the next day when I was sober and she couldn’t believe it. She’d never felt so appreciated sexually. I wish we had took the tabs together instead of separately.

If you are a LSD user I highly recommend trying sex with a partner on acid but someone you trust and love. Sometimes on LSD i can’t have certain people around me so sexually I feel like it wouldn’t have been a good experience if it wasn’t someone I really cared about. Hopefully someone has had a similar experience and can relate.First and foremost, RIP Andrew. I met Andrew my Sophmore year of high school. We both drank and smoked weed, and occasionally did LSD. We tried Benzos together, and I started taking those a lot. When college started, we were at different colleges and drifted a little. My junior year summer, I found some hydros that my mom had from surgery a year prior. We took some together, and he loved them. i knew how destructive they can be, and stayed away but he started doing them. We graduated and lived about 30 minutes away from each other. We hang out on weekends for about 2 years. Flash forward to 2 months ago. I hear from a mutual friend, that he's been doing percs. I call him and ask about it, and he says it's only on the weekends to have fun. I started to worry about him though and heard about 3 weeks ago, that he was on opiates daily, and had started drinking heavily. About a week ago, he overdosed on fentanyl sold to him as percs. I would give everything I have just to have never found those hydros. Andrew, you were like a brother to me and I will never forget you. I'm getting a tattoo in your honor next monday. RIP Andrew



I want this post to be a warning for those of you who do opiates. Please, if you think you have a problem REACH OUT. I would never have judged him, and if he had gotten the help he needed, he probably would still be alive.

EDIT: I found who sold him the pills. There's a reckoning coming for him tonightLately I have been smoking up to deal with the pain but most of the time I just get really high and forget about my problems. I need to deal with everything sober then focus on everything else. If anyone out there needs someone to talk to please reach out. Please do not depend on substances to feel numb, sometimes it's better to work on it. Take care my friendsMore often than not, recreational drug use is a *symptom* of mental illness, rather than a *cause*.

So many people mistakenly assume recreational drugs are the root cause of an individual's mental condition, but that's rarely the case. People aren't crazy because of the drugs they take. They take drugs because they are crazy, and are actually practicing some wild manifestation of reason and logic.

It doesn't matter the flavour. Maybe you liked opiates because everything was too hard. Maybe you liked stimulants because your brain never let you fire on all cylinders, or you couldn't focus. Maybe you liked a drink because you had trouble socialising. Maybe you liked psychedelics because you had an identity problem, or a curiosity problem. Maybe you liked benzos because you were packed rigid like a brick. It doesn't matter. We're all messed up in some way, and self-medicating is a natural response.

I remember having episodes relating to my mental condition years before ever using recreational drugs. The same condition that has followed me around since I was 10, or younger. I honestly don't remember the start. I won't get into the gritty but to those who know all too well...it's pure (hell). There's some Asperger's in there too apparently. I'm a real brain stew of shithouse genetics. Escapism is the game for me. Perhaps not true for everyone, but certainly for me. And it worked quite well in some scenarios! It was only ever temporary; my curse did not relent. But temporary does not equal worthless. A break from reality is A-OK. Embrace it.

I feel like I would have become a total mess or a victim of suicide a long time ago if recreational drugs didn't keep me distracted, or simply keep me continually fascinated with the human mind. I feel fortunate for all my experiences: the glorious, the good, the bad, the ugly...and the straight hellish.

I don't want to turn this into a long post. I think it's already there. Be kind. Follow your intuition. Spend some time with people and spend some time alone. Practice occasional altruism. Start on a low dose and test your drugs. Don't hurt others intentionally. Drink water. Quit your shitty job. Wander around.

Peace.So a few weeks ago I told my counselor how in the past I used to smoke weed to help cope with my anxiety and depression I had at the time.

He gave me the whole drugs are bad talk and all. At one point He looks at me and ask me "do you know what is the most dangerous thing about weed" I said idk, he says "you never know what your actually getting" and he proceeds to tell me how a former kid that he worked with smoked weed laced with LSD, went crazy , stabbed his mom , and is serving prison time for murder. I told him it isn't possible to lace weed with LSD and he went off,telling me how smoking weed gives you lung cancer, Kills brain cells, blah blah all that dumb bullshit you always hear about weed. According to him even weed alone can make you do things so irrational that you will kill people for it also.

Be careful kids cause if smoke one Marjuanna u will stab your mum.

Edit: these comments have me dying, thank you everyone.Okay hear me out:  


i am on the search for the ultimate orgasm through masturbation and drugs and by far the best one i had yet was on:

Speed (any amphetamines i guess will do - dosage: as much as you can take), Weed and lyrica (i'm on 300mg for GAD) and a healthy amount of sleep deprevation. plus if you wanna enhance it even more, dont masturbate for a week or so.  

i almost passed out, nothing could have prepared me for an experience like this. doesn't even come close to masturbating on 2cb, mdma, lsd etc.. and i'm not sure if thats from the speed but i literally came behind me, like over my shoulder, so like half a meter trajectory. 

&#x200B;

thanks for coming to my ted talkI heard a loud scream come from outside by garage, walked outside to see my sons car windows fogged up and him and his friend inside. I knocked on the window to which they came out, jaws grinding and pupils huge, they also smelled heavily of cigarettes. Any help? I also think my sons gay, and the windows being fogged leads me to believe that they were clapping the cheeks. 

Edit- Trap Money Bitch 
Edit 2 - Trap Mommy Bitch Growing up I was told how awful and dangerous cannabis is. After trying it and realizing the exact opposite, I began to think the same of all other drugs- that they were as friendly as weed.

Misinformation is dangerous, not cannabis. 

EDIT: The way you have to access weed will open the doors to other hard drugs because of its illegality. Wanting a "safe" drug like weed, you may now have a dealer pushing other substances on you and now have access to them. Cannabis doesn't make you do hard drugs, the way you have to buy it opens you to the world of dangerous drugs.Where my lonely stoners at? Shiiit we all got potential though family! Stay bettering yourselves, this whole new year new me is corny let’s jus keep improving our lives one step at a time huh what do y’all say? Let’s get this money and let’s get these drugsThe other day I decided to bring some [Cocaine](https://www.reddit.com/r/cocaine/comments/ryxdw6/a_beautiful_batch_i_got_last_summer_just_wanted/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app&utm_name=iossmf) with me to Florida. It was quite easy to sneak through TSA after doing research on reddit. (Had to repost the pic for this post)

So I’m on my flight, and the idea comes to me. Why not do some cocaine in the plane bathroom? Cloud 9 baby, mile high club, bucket list shit. So I got my stuff and walked over to the bathroom.

I get in there and start prepping lines, feeling like an absolute god. As I finish my last one, I look in the mirror and see a blonde face staring back at me. My dumbass didn’t even lock the door closed... 

Looking back, me peeing with the door cracked open (before busting down my lines) is probably what got her attention.

In an absolute rush, I grab everything and walk out. The flight attendant immedietly confronts me angrily and says “Don’t do drugs on my airplane!”.

I was feeling embarrassed so I said sorry, and told her I wouldn’t do it again. She told me she wasn’t the cops, she just didn’t want me to OD on her plane. She also told me she hoped it would be my wake up call, and I told her it was. But you all know what tf is going down in Florida.

So for the rest of my flight I sat there in defeat, eating chips and watching some Black Mirror. Got to FL and did some more lines in the airport bathroom.

I’m sitting here by the pool, doing lines. Might go to gator land or ride jet skis tomorrow. It’s paradise at the resort where I’m at. 

Overall this experience was a 6/10. If you guys are going to do coke on the plane, PLEASE dear god make sure the door is locked. This was embarrassing.

Edit: Smuggling method redacted, do your own research.

Edit 2: I did not expect this to be my most popular post! Thanks for all the awards and great responses.Well, the sun came up today, and so did my penis, because today’s the day I’ll be dropping a delicious tab of LSD to commemorate 4/19; Bicycle Day!

I’m sure most of ya’ll already know this, but on this date in 1943, Dr. Albert Hofmann first took LSD intentionally, and three days earlier had absorbed a small amount of the drug (either through his fingertips or) by accidentally ingesting it. Having feared that he had made himself ill from ingesting 250µg, he cycled home from his lab. During his bicycle ride, he experienced the effects of LSD, making this the date of the first ever acid trip. He wrote about his experiments and experience on April 22, which was later put into his book, titled *”LSD: My Problem Child”*.Hi folks,

First time ever posting on reddit, this isn't a fun drug story, likely one I will never tell to someone who knows me. I'm a diagnosed paranoid schizophrenic (it came on when I around 17-18), for the last four years I've been on *heavy anti psychotics.*

Last week I decided I was done taking this cocktail of pills and went cold turkey for the week, I'm on 8 different medications a day from the psychiatrist. Anyways, I had enough of living in everyone's reality (participating in "normal life") and decided I'd rather go back to inside my own head. It was bad enough on it's own, my self care and quality of work declined severely, I couldn't sleep and wouldn't eat.

Que, the worst decision someone in my position could possibly make, I went straight back to hearing constant whispering, people whispering about me even if they weren't. Here is another example: I walked out of my home to grab a book out of my car the other night, my driveway isn't lit and my car is about 25 yards from the door. So I open the door, step outside, make it halfway there when I was struck by a feeling of terror I've never felt in life, I knew there were people hiding behind my car waiting on me to get my book. I would have bet my life on it, I turned around and ran for my life as I genuinely was terrified. I believed everyone was plotting to harm me, even my family.

Cut to a few days into the week when I decide to take adderall (Roughly 90mg, I've barely ever used it, no clue why I took so much.)  to see how it would effect me. Full blown psychosis on a level I've never reached before, I was even up for nearly four days due to a 50/50 mix of no sedative psych meds and speed. I saw a swat team in the woods across from my house, I turned around and there were multiple people in my home but they would only speak with my back to them. I kept looking over to an empty chair and having conversations with non-existent people. At one point, a little blonde boy, looked around 5-6 and a golden retriever suddenly appeared at my front door, which didn't scare me, until I watched them fade into nothing as they walked off my lawn. Oh, I also live in a rural area, nobody within 2 or 3 miles even has children, that's what really made it scary.

Please, **PLEASE**, if you are like me, if you know you have issues like these, **DO NOT STOP TAKING YOUR MEDICATION**. **DO NOT TRY RECREATIONAL DRUGS**.

Please stay strong, I know what the meds do, I know the stigma attached to our conditions but you can do this, you don't have to be tortured by your own mind.

I know this may seem seem a bit incoherent but I I've only been back on my meds for a couple days and they are quite powerful.

Thank you all for reading.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

EDIT 4 Days later: Thank you for the kind words, I am back to routine life now. Also, as some brought up, if your medication isn't helping or causing issues, please speak to your doctor. To those who call me an idiot, etc, I accept that, I went off my medication and it caused me to make poor decisions, I plan to learn from lesson and not let it repeat. I would have replied earlier but it's create cohesive sentences jumping back on high doses of anti-psychotic medication.well today is my first day of stopping, all my money is gone and my girlfriend left me wont get back unless I’m clean yadda yadda, I’ve been taking meth non-stop for the past month and a half or so almost daily. I used to binge out on cocaine a few times a week for years on and off and it was problematic. I wanted to try meth once but nah that wasn’t the case. After my first time I just wanted more “just one more time” and it’s all I thought about. 

Kept telling myself just one more, bags started getting bigger and I started bingeing for 3-4 days at a time without food or sleep, I completely forgot cannabis even exists which has always been my cup of tea. snorting stopped working and turned my nose to raw fuckin meat so I started smoking it. Stopped talking to friends and only communicated with people to get more meth. Tolerance sky rocketed smoking stopped working started boofing with a syringe and taking orally..Tolerance is at a point where it’s practically not working unless I dose 200mg+ I saw what was happening but didn’t see it at all. Meth makes you forget who the fuck you are. I’ve dropped substantial weight, I can see my ribs much more. My life is going down the fucking drain yet I’m still thinking about how I’m gonna get my next bag. The person I love the most has left and it seems like I don’t give a fuck. I know I do but I really can’t even feel it all that’s on my mind is more meth.

Well. This is gonna be tough. Just wanted to share this somewhere because the only one who knows is my (ex) girlfriend 


Edit: Thank you guys so much for all of the support I wasn’t expecting it at all. It seems posting this is the best decision I’ve made in a while. Recently I was caught with drugs and I need to vent:

I was struggled with depression for years, had done few suicide plans though I didn't commit it eventually. Medicines from mental clinic lead me into brain fog and fatigue and constant negative thoughts. I was alcoholism,  have a chronic back pain problem and using painkillers everyday.

One day I read some articles about psychedelics may cure depression.  I didn't have any underground connections (not until I finally found a street weed dealer in my town) , so I ordered from DNMs internationally, RCs and blotters.

I used them to treat myself for about 2 years, really helpful. I become more energetic, start jogging, hanging out with friends more often. I quit drinking and abusing painkillers, everything just goes better and better.

That day I went to the public mailbox as usual. As soon as I pickup my package, 6 cops suddenly surrounded and arrested me. Later I was informed that they already targeted me a year ago. Perhaps they just want me to stock more drugs so they can get better "scores".

Now I'm waiting for the court. More likely to be sent into jail for years than probation.

I came back to mental clinic, the fu**ing SSRIs make my body feel really bad. It's like I was sentenced to death by government.

So many harmful "real" criminals are still at large, and I, a man who just want to being "normal", was treated like a murderer. Do drugs really ruin my life ? Fu*k no, DRUG WAR ruins my life!

Before you ask, I live in Asia. The region hates drug most in the world.Ok so this was my first time doing xans. So last night i met up with my dealer and picked up some weed but then he said he had xanax 5 bucks a bar if i wanted to try it, i asked him what would be the best first time dose and he said 2 bars (4mg) so i get home and am extremely hyped to do them. so i put some water in my mouth, drop the bars in and gulp it down. so abt 30 mins later i start feeling it, at first i felt super chill but then i got horny, i began to wonder if i could suck my own dick (lol) so i pull down my pants, yank back my forskin and try bending my back so my dick gets in my mouth. it really worked and i had no idea i was this flexible, i began to start moving my head up and down until i y'know. cum. i felt violated the morning after but damn did it feel good lmaoooAh man, I'm somehow classified as an essential worker so while the whole country is in lockdown im working six days a week. I found like a gram and a half of coke while I was cleaning my room and instead of sleeping I accidentally just snorted it all. I have to work now in less than an hour and I wish I had kept some for throughout the day or better again not done it at all.

There's absolutely no point to this rant I just broke almost 2 years without doing class A's and I needed to scream it into the void because i cant tell anyone i know in real life.Last night I took some Molly with a dislocated shoulder and I remember feeling great taking my sling off and using my arm to do certain things, on the down side I woke up this morning in the worst pain of my life. Just warning you all to be careful with injuries because this is awful.Since so many of you fuckers hate cocaine so much let me give you some tips to actually have a good time

Tip #1: You must drink. Yes I know it’s more toxic for your heart, but at this point you’re snorting coke so do you really care?

Tip #2: it’s been said to death but yea quality does matter A LOT. Having actual high grade coke that isn’t cut to shit with caffeine makes such a difference it’s as if they are two different substances. Good coke lasts longer, feels better, has less side effects, and is obviously stronger. If you need a whole gram in a night with a low tolerance you have bad coke. No I don’t care if your friend said it’s “fire” or “fishscale.” Everything can be faked so unless you’re sure a bad high can be attributed to quality a lot of time. 

Tip #3: STOP SNORTING SO DAMN HARD. I swear seeing some people do coke it’s as if they are trying to imitate a vacuum cleaner. Coke needs to be absorbed by the nasal membrane so hold your straw at an angle and inhale enough to hit your nose but not hard like a snort, otherwise it’ll just hit the back of your throat and be a total waste. 

Tip #4: Environment is key. Coke isn’t magically going to make something amazing you have to actually be doing something like at a fun party or even playing certain video games skiing is enjoyable. 

Tip #5: Less is often more. Coke is more fun with a couple bumps or lines of some high quality matched with a couple beers than going insane off shit and getting hammered off vodka. Control yourself, stay hydrated and remember not to overdo it and you might actually understand why so many people enjoy it.

EDIT

Thought I’d add some more good tips for the hell of it.

Tip #6: If you’re worried about purity learn what an acetone wash is.

Tip #7: Benzos are great landing gear, especially combined with weed. Benzos and coke are a good but potentially unsafe combo in general so don’t be stupid.

Tip #8: Speedballing does feel pretty amazing but again you are really stepping up in the big leagues in terms of danger so do your damn research. Also opiates in my opinion are better on their own, or with Benzos and weed. 

Tip #9: Don’t give out coke in general. People will fiend and become assholes. It’s just better to keep your use private and discrete. Even your best friends can be fucking dick heads when they are drunk and coming down. 

Tip # 10: Nicotine, especially cigarettes is fantastic so I always recommend grabbing a disposable vape (puff, eon stiks are my favorites) as I find darts gross now.I went on a camping trip with a bunch of friends and my bf and I decided to take acid one night. We’re both experienced trippers and had planned ahead to dose on this trip. We offered everyone else but only one other person decided to join us. I questioned him on his preparedness. He told me that he was experienced with acid and that he knew the effects. I’ve trip sit for plenty of first timers and I pay close attention and take good care of them. But if someone tells me they know what they’re doing, I’m not going to mom them so much and just let them direct their own trip. He also conveniently failed to mention that he was on antidepressants and antipsychotics for severe mental health issues. We all took one roughly 200 mic tab and were off! My bf and I had an awesome trip. So many laughs and amazing views. Our friend? Not so much. 

(TW SA this paragraph) About half way through, he started getting really paranoid. He walked around asking everyone why they were trying to kill him and steal his stuff. He became belligerent with me and was demanding why I had poisoned him. He also started coming on to anyone that moved and made all of us really uncomfortable. I tried all my trusted strategies for calming him down, but nothing was working. He was clearly freaking out and aggressively dissociated. To try to soothe him, I held his hand and he clung to it like a lifeline. But then he got handsy and started trying to grope me. I had to work pretty hard to push him off. I was just about come down by this point, so I excused myself and went to bed. 

The next morning, he was still tripping balls and in worse condition than the night before. He didn’t recognize us and thought we had kidnapped him. We called his sister who drove 6 hours to pick him up. She told us that he was on a bunch of meds and that to her knowledge he had never taken drugs of any kind before, let alone acid. We later heard that he had continued tripping and being dissociated for a further 23 hours, so just over 32 hours total. Afterwards, he was apparently a nervous wreck and completely depersonalized. I haven’t seen him since he assaulted me, but I felt so angry and guilty that I had given him this awful experience and that he had lied to me. I would never have given him the tab if I’d known. 

You don’t have to be embarrassed if you’ve never tried drugs before. Everyone has a first time and if you’re lucky enough to be with people who care and want to make your experience the best it can be, don’t fucking lie to them and nearly get yourself killed.

Edit: y’all have pointed out that the phrase double dipped is meaningless which, if I thought about it more than five seconds I should’ve realized lmao. My biochem degree is shaking it’s headAs we endure through different phases of drug experimentation with all sorts of different opiates, psychedelics, Benzo’s and all the wild street drugs out there, We usually tend to forget the vital role the liver plays in processing and letting our body handle the capacity of drugs we have taken, thank you liver... I LOVE YOUThat ten minutes have changed my life. It was beautiful. I was (and still am) rolling on MDMA, but I think it allowed me to let go easier. I just blasted off and felt my soul leaving my body into this realm of colours, bliss, perfection and spirituality. A woman who was laying back formed and told me that she loves me, and everything that I have ever done and will ever do is perfect. I then was in tears of joy when I felt my soul re enter my body. I am forever changed. This world and beyond is just BEAUTIFUL and full of love. Love and peace out you wonderful people ❤️

Edit 1: Had no idea this post would blow up as it has done. So grateful to have this community, and thank you for all your support!Your body awareness is significantly heightened when you are baked, so don't take all the sensations too seriously.Title is awkwardly phrased ... but anyone else go through their liked songs in chronological order and remember different “periods”?

I.e. there’s like 10 songs I listened to over and over when I first did weed. Now, I listen to those songs I vividly remember the moment I ate my first edible and felt that euphoria rush lol. Then like 15 songs later I remember the period when I tried acid. Whenever I listen to those songs I remember tripping and almost feel at peace. Then like another 10 songs later it’s the “stuck alone due to quarantine” songs. 

I don’t remove songs once I “like” then on Spotify and usually don’t listen to them after a certain period which I guess makes my brain compartmentalize songs to certain time periods/experiences. 

Going through my liked songs is like going down memory lane hahaMy boy took 5 tabs and was screaming his lungs out in the middle of the night saying “existence is water. I am existing and I’m not sorry.” His dad caught him and made him sit in the dark listening to rain sounds at 3am til he fell asleep. He’s still knocked. Think he’s gonna be ok? He said it was 750ug

Update: he’s fine. He can’t find his OneWheel but other than that no issues. He doesn’t remember much and said he thought it was a dream. Unclear what his dad is gonna do.

Final update: he left his OneWheel and his comforter out front and they got picked up.175 mg of mdma and 100 mg of ket had me fucking cheesing. I couldn’t even smoke weed i was wonked out of my fucking mind. This combo is nuts and i did another 150mg Ketamine on the comedown and dude  i gotta go to church and apologize to god for being that high. Imma be sober for a week or two and give my brain a chance to chill.I’m a pretty laid back guy.  I like psychedelics like shrooms, LSD and I’ve tried MDMA a few times but I haven’t really ever messed around with anything else.  Before this date I probably haven’t tried any stimulant harder than caffeine from a coffee.  I just never really felt up to trying cocaine.  So if you like first experience stories then this may be interesting.     

I matched with this hipster girl on tinder and we decided to meet up at a bar near her and at first things were going really well.  She was buying me drinks and shots which was really nice of her and I was getting pretty drunk.  We ended up talking about drugs a little bit and I mentioned that I smoke pot every now and then and she replied with "Oh I'm on coke right now, want some?"  I was hoping that the conversation would be guided more towards psychedelics but I told her I never tried cocaine before so…fine Ill give it a go.  She brought me into the bathroom and gave me a few bumps off of a car key (which was odd because she didn't own a car) and from what I remember, it was pretty enjoyable.  At first I wasn’t really sure what had changed because I felt the same for the most part.  Maybe there was a little surge or something but it wasn’t anything that caused me to notice it too much.  My date proceeded to take a piss in front of me which was weird for a first date but I just rolled with it.  Coming out of the bathroom I started to notice the effects more.  I was definitely more sociable and energetic.  I felt like I was more into my date because of it too.        

A few of her friends showed up to the bar randomly and they seemed really cool.  None of them were on anything but we were all laughing and having a really good time.  So far it seemed like a pretty great night.  

Right around midnight or 1am my date gets a call from someone and suggests meeting up with another friend who works with her.  We leave the bar just her and myself and we drive a few blocks down to meet up with her co-worker.  This guy seemed a little strange to me right off the bat but he’s a nice guy so I overlook it.  

She then asks me to drive the three of us a few blocks away which I assumed was the location of another bar or something for us to hang out.  No problem, I drive us there and park the car.  I see about four other guys all hunched over in a shady looking group across the street from where I parked but, surely that’s not who we’re here to see, I mean, there’s not even a bar or somewhere for us to hang out around here.  So, all of a sudden there are 7 people in my car.  That group of four are her friends apparently.  I don’t usually care about picking people up to hang out but this is the first time I met this girl and I don’t know any of these friends of hers and I own a sedan that seats 5 if you squish.  

I’m supposedly on a date with this girl and now there’s like 6 guys in this group not including her and I’m starting to get a bad feeling about this.  Everyone’s talking about locations without mentioning where they actually are and it’s just really weird.  I end up driving all of them somewhere else close by and they all tell me and my date to stay in the car after I park.  This was probably my first major red flag because what the hell could be going on?  No one has told me yet.  They come back with a bunch of tiny baggys and now I realize they’re all there to buy cocaine.  I’m now involved in a drug deal.  A drug deal where I might not be getting any drugs.  This sucks.  My tinder date and the Co-worker get a bunch and they start talking about getting even more from someone else.  At this point I’m not sure where this night is going so I tell them I’m done driving and we should grab an uber and just go back to the bar or something.  

The group splits up and it’s back to just me, my tinder date and the co-worker.  Co-worker says we should all go to this guys house that’s closer in the city so they can do all this coke that they just bought or something.  I should have left at this point…but I didn’t and the Co-worker’s uber arrived really quick so I go with them.  Somewhere along the 5th or 6th turn I lose track of where I parked my car and what area of the city I was in.  It’s hard to write in all the details but while in some ways I was really done with the night and just wanted to go home, I was also still excited and I really wanted this date to turn out well even if there was a shady speed bump or two.  My date seemed to be happy and we were talking a lot which made me think we could possibly get on the same page very soon but for now I was stuck in this car, going to some strange guys place.


We go to this guys barren apartment and besides a couch, a coffee table and a stupid canvas painting of 100 dollar bills there’s nothing there.  Their friend that I finally get to meet answered the door just wearing a stained t-shirt and basketball shorts.  He’s really doughy looking but he’s acting like he’s a tough guy.  This guy starts talking like he thinks he’s a rapper or something and he just starts off the conversation by saying how much coke he’s got and how many girls he’s had sex with and about how he’s done with younger girls because only girls over 40 can do it for him now, whatever that means.  He gives us all wine which was nice I guess but I couldn’t get over the fact that he’s acting like an asshole.  He’s gesturing with his hands a lot while he speaks and his hands get way too close to my face.  Everything he says to me feels like a backhanded compliment or something and this is all literally within the first 10 minutes or so of meeting him.  

At this point I start thinking about leaving, maybe even just going straight home.  I ask the girl I’m with where I parked my car since I’m not really sure where we are at this point and she just tells me to hang out for a little while.  I don’t know why but I figured I’d stay a little longer and see what happens.  They start pouring some of their cocaine into a pile and begin to separate it into lines.  I agreed to do one or maybe two…I don’t really remember and then it REALLY starts getting to me.  I get spurts of being really talkative and then really quiet, everyone seems to be acting similarly but I’m definitely the only one wondering if I’m doing too much.  We’re all just kind of talking and the mood is getting kind of, uh, I would describe it as sort of anxiety ridden but with an overarching desire to accomplish something that never seems to happen.  We start talking about what we should do and during this conversation they’re doing more lines of coke then we're trying to figure out what music we should put on, they go back to doing more lines of coke then the rapper guy starts talking about how many girls he’s been with and starts showing me pictures of his son or something and how the mom is apparently a bitch because he got her pregnant and she’s trying to get child support.  And then, at some point in the middle of all of this I just see the rapper guy fucking slap the co-worker guy, in the face, for no reason.  It wasn’t an insanely hard slap or anything but it wasn’t soft either.  Besides, how softly can you slap someone and it seem acceptable anyway?  If that’s even possible to do all you need to know is that this wasn’t an acceptable slap.  I’m wired as hell and I’m looking at everyone waiting for someone to freak out about this guy slapping the co-worker but everyone’s not even really acknowledging it.  Actually everyone’s eyes are pretty much always fixed on the coke pile.  My date is just flat out ignoring all this and the Co-worker looks a little offended but he’s mostly acting like it didn’t happen.  I can’t take how weird everything is and I just blurt out “Why are you being so mean to this guy?!” The rapper guy says that’s not mean and the co-worker just looks to the floor and my date just shrugs it off.  

So the Co-worker gets slapped a few more times, usually after saying something the rapper guy didn’t like and at this point I’m thinking I’m not this rapper guys friend and I just need to work on getting out of here.  Meanwhile, this may come as a surprise to you but, they’re still doing cocaine.  The rapper guy pulls out a suitcase with cards and playing chips in it and starts trying to get us all to play poker.  No one really seemed to want to play.  I flat out say that I’m not playing and that I really hate card games but there we are 10 minutes later with poker chips and cards in everyone’s hand and everyone’s starting to throw real money in for bets.  I say that there’s no way I’m playing for money all hopped up like this for the first time and after some arguing with the rapper guy, he says I can use his money to play with.  I can’t believe what’s happening.  It’s like 4am, I’m still here hoping something is going to change, I’m re-evaluating my life and wondering wtf happened.  While this is all going on co-worker keeps losing over and over again and he always puts up more money to play another round.  The rapper guy says that co-worker has to pay double in order to buy himself back in.  I’m thinking that this is practically stealing but the co-worker guy just agrees to it and lost somewhere around a hundred dollars easily by the time I stopped keeping track.  At one point I’m looking at the cards a little closely and I notice almost all of them have some kind of little cut or mark or something in them.  I’m obviously no expert when it comes to poker but I’m pretty sure the cards aren’t supposed to have marks in them if you’re playing for money.  I tell the rapper guy that his cards are all cut up and I ask him what happened and my date says “yea all these cards look like they’re marked” The rapper guy goes on to explain that he plays with his friend a lot and his friend must have marked them which was weird to him since he always beats his friend at poker anyway.  My date and this rapper guy get into an argument but they just decide to keep playing anyway.  I’m just sitting there in disbelief that everyone’s continuing to play with marked cards and I kind of want to die.  

I feel horrible.  I really just wanted to go on a normal date, have a few drinks, maybe find someone I can connect with and feel good about for a little while but, here I am, doing cocaine and playing poker with a bunch of idiots that think slapping people is a good time and all these marks in these cards are a coincidence.  

I keep refusing to play rounds of poker and the rapper guy starts getting angry at me.  Due to the situation I start getting really angry back at him and I start losing my cool a little bit.  I feel like I’ve had enough.  I stand up and I’m basically lunged towards him and I’m really thinking about tackling this guy and choking him out.  The last thing I remember is the rapper guy says something really stupid about how I’m not “dominant” enough around my date or something like that and then I just freak out.  I flip the table with the cocaine pile completely over I yell at the rapper guy to do something about it if he doesn’t like it and I take the last of their cocaine baggys and I storm out of there before anything else happened.  I start a futile search in my phone thinking I can maybe trace my steps to get me back to my car but I didn’t know where it was parked.  I figured I was just out of luck but then, I noticed something.  My GPS apparently lets me know where I last parked my car automatically!  And it keeps pretty good track of it because I called an uber to take me over to the location that was saved in my phone and there it was!  I was so happy to see my car I can’t describe the feeling.  It meant so much to me.  It meant this night was finally over and I would finally be able to drive home.  I literally ran to my car, floored the gas, stopped once to get the most ridiculous sandwich I’ve ever ordered and then when I got home, I put the TV on and just tried to go to sleep.  The End.   Not sure if I handled this situation well but hopefully it was at least a little entertaining.  

TL;DR – Went on a tinder date with a girl that gave me coke for the first time.  Ended up at her friends place who was a horrible person.  I flipped over his table and took the last of his stash and left.                    
So I’ve been talking to this woman for about a month and we’ve had sex 3 times and after the third time I thought that I should tell her the drug about my prior heroin addiction. I was afraid that she’d walk away like most other women but she told me she would stay with me as long as I keep making progress in my recovery. I’m 7 months clean from H but I still dabble in other things. She told me that if I wanted to stay with her I’d have to wind down off the weed and benzos because she comes from a family of drug dealers and she’s seen the pain addicts go through. 

I’m smoking my last bowl now and then I will ween off the cigarettes. 

The feelings I’ve stupidly developed for this woman are insane. She made me believe that i actually don’t need drugs to function and how selfish I was every time I stuck needle in my arm months ago. I hope I don’t end up back here but for now this is goodbye friend.  Stay saffe

Edit she doesn’t care if I smoke weedSo its gonna be kind of hard to describe exactly what this looked like thru text but these two guys were fuckin hilarious just hear me out. 

&#x200B;

This was in the living room where both of them were on the couch, and behind the couch was a wood railing that went like 2 feet above the couch that kind of separated the dining room from the living room. Both of them were candyflipping that night and one guy was rolling and tripping so hard that the only thing keeping him grounded was to hang on to the railing while being fully stretched out, he was basically in the position like he was hanging from monkey bars all while having the biggest grin on his face. Literally stayed like that for the whole night, and his buddy beside him would counsel people on their life problems and offer advice, going up to random people and asking "whats holding you back?" and just having the deepest conversations about peoples lives. The hanging dude would blurt out some random comment every once in a while as he was hanging on for dear life and it was comedy gold.Took 200ug of 1P-LSD 6 hours ago, it was really fun. But an hour ago decided to smoke salvia as I've not smoked it for like 5 years.


It was wtf, blink only manual now.


How to stop that?

*11 hour mark update:* I was still tripping balls and not smart, everything is fine nowSo I may get downvoted for this but whatever. To preface I’m agnostic. I think religion causes more harm than good but hey if you are peaceful and it helps you out you do you. In the psychedelic community I have heard it’s a common theme of “religion is brainwashing” and to be honest I don’t necessarily disagree but what I find fascinating is that Many of these people will do things like collect crystals and astrology and just believe in them without the lack of evidence that they criticize others for. 

The other thing I’ve realized is that if you tell people that religion is bullshit but you also tell them you have spiritual experience by ingesting a substance they will think you are crazy. Again, I have had spiritual experiences that I believe are valid but if you dive headstrong into that argument with someone who has no understanding of these things they will think you are crazy.Edit: Heroin is not cool. It will kill you and take everything in your life from you, if you get addicted or mess up on your dosage even just once. Many, many of my friends are dead. This is a fictional part of a larger piece about the pain and suffering and loss that almost ALWAYS comes with heroin but goes through the whole journey. The character here is going through the part of his addiction where he still loves it. That being said. I'm not judging anyone who struggles or uses it. I've used it plenty and am sober for years.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

44

My apartment is on the corner of the second floor in my building.

It overlooks the intersection below. If you’ve ever had a second-floor apartment like that or spent much time in one, then you know how close it puts you to the street. Every passing conversation or set of lonely footsteps comes right in through the open window. It’s always like I am right on top of everything happening in the city. Certain sounds give me an idea of what time it is. Waking up at four in the morning before I go to reup with Old Man, the streets are quiet in a way that is unmistakable. And when I wake up after my afternoon nod, there are kids coming home from school walking to catch the bus on the corner and joking with each other.

And when I get bored after things slow down again toward evening, I look out of my window. A homeless man is almost always standing on the corner. He looks like a statue and holds his cardboard sign. I have passed by him a few times since I moved in here. The bearded giant never speaks. Never smiles. Just stands there, even though it’s not a good place to fly a sign, like some vagrant monk praying in the temple of this city with its walls made of pissed against brick and smog stained cement, like a strange, hollow-eyed Baba in his sleepless and transcendental meditation. But two or three times a month, the cops come take him away. There’s never any good reason for it as far as I can tell. It’s like they come get him for not having anywhere else to go, but to be honest, he doesn’t seem to mind.

Like right now, I’m looking out my window. Layers of blue and red flashing light cover the concrete outside. It’s Friday night, and they’re arresting him. His face has the same calm expression it always does. There is no protest. He’s doing what we used to jokingly call the ‘junkie macarena.’ That’s putting one hand on the wall. Then the other hand. After that, one hand goes behind the head. The other follows. Finally, they both go behind the back, one at a time, so that the cop can put handcuffs around his wrists.

The scene is sad to watch. I feel like I know him just from seeing him so much and knowing that he’s practically always there, just outside of my window standing and silent like he’s keeping watch over me or something, and jail is no fun, besides. Others have done way more time than myself, but I’ve spent enough time there to know. It sucks. Last time I was in jail was in Portland, and this guy in there kept going on and on about how he was losing his hair from wearing his hat too much. Really, though, he just hadn’t seen himself without a hat on in a long time. His hair had fallen out regardless of the hat, but the only reason I ever heard him was because the pink, bubble gum shaped earplugs they gave me were miserable rocks that hurt my ears so bad I couldn’t use them.

Anyway. Now, the cops have turned off their lights. The streets are dark again. Those patrol cars pull away. My silent, giant friend has been taken away, and I’m left in my apartment to think about it all. Leticia hasn’t called or texted, just as I thought she wouldn’t. It makes me sad. I look down at my phone. There’s a text from Eddie. It says he’s out and asks me to bring him more, and there’s a missed call from Cowboy, so I call him up. Cowboy gives me a ride to the Lindell Motel and Motor Lodge. Eddie pays me for what I gave him earlier this morning. Cowboy gets two quarter ounces from me and a break in price for giving me a ride. Before we get back to my place, I have him drop me off at a place that sells gyros and walk back.

So, I’m back at my place and eating the gyro and some French fries out of white Styrofoam to go tray and making that obnoxious slurping sound by sucking the last of the liquid out of the ice in my drink through my straw. You know the noise I’m talking about. My mom used to hate it when I made it. Anyway, there’s a knock. I get up and ask who it is through the door.

“Me. Charlie.”

“Okay. Come in.”

I unlock it and open to see him.

“Hey, man.” The kid looks clean.

“Sup, yo?”

“Not much. Thanks for letting me in.”

“Yeah. No problem.”

I shut the door, lock it and walk back to the couch to sit down and finish the gyro.

“I got 15 bucks. Can you help me out.”

“Keep your money, bro. Yeah. I can help you out. Just let me finish this bad boy right here.” I like to call things bad boys. A cigarette can be a bad boy. Cookies can be bad boys. In this case, it’s the gyro I’m about to finish eating.

“Awesome.”

“Where you been?” I ask through a mouth full of pita and lettuce and meat.

“My mom’s.”

“How long were you there?”

“I think a couple of nights.”

“That’s good. What’d you do after you left with Sal and Sharky the other night?”

“You know. Hung out at some guy’s hotel room for a day or two, until he got all crazy and kicked me out.”

“Where were they?”

“Sharky and Sal? Sharky was with me. Sal had taken off before that, but I didn’t have anywhere to go, so I went to my mom’s house. She let me stay. Just tried to get me to go to rehab as like part of me staying there or whatever. I talked her into giving me a few bucks before I took off. Ya know?”

“Yeah?”

“Yeah.”

“Well, I mean you can always try me. I’m not sure I can always have you over or whatever, but it’s worth a shot. I don’t mind having you around.”

“Cool.”

Now, I’m just finishing up the food and walking over to throw my trash away.

“I’m gonna go get my stuff. You have works?”

“Yeah. But I could use a freshy.”

“Okay. I got you.”

When I come back, I break him off some and give him a fresh syringe. The dope doesn’t need to be heated, but I like to do it, just a little bit anyway. It’s the ritual that I’m used to from so many years of the black tar. That stuff has to be cooked. Anyway, the kid does his. I do mine. We put our chins on our chests. Our only communication is the slow, blissful breathing of a heroin high.I'm telling you guys, if your having a solo trip on your own stick some classical on, Chopin is my favorite and lay back and close your eyes, beautiful. I feel like a lot of people write it off or it wouldn't even enter their mind to listen too it.Alright you fuckin' druggos, mans got a story to tell, so recently me and my lady friend have been experimenting with drugs and fucking. Like doing drugs and then doing each other. Started with a lil mdma. The next drug fuck sesh we moved onto cocaine, ketamine and nitrous. Which was a fun little escapade but yesterday ohhhh yesterday.

Started of with some 2cb fucking. It hit me wayyyy harder than i thought it would, first time i ever fucked while having actual visuals. Started banging some nangs after banging each other and lemme tell you my fucking god is that one crazy combo. Like literal god mode. Then we brought out the special K had another cheeky lil fuck job then i begin to wonder about 2cb, ket and nitrous combo...

So I get my lady friend to start jerking me off while i load up the cracker, apprehensive about the effects of the elusive little gas in my hand. Then, exhale inhale exhale inhale... Fuck me, i look around, still getting my meat massaged, feeling like im in absolute fucking bliss... I was everything and nothing all at once, a holy mix of handjob pleasure and complete psych/disso euphoria. I vowed that this most basic sexual act has became the first truly unforgettable sexual experience of my life. 

I dubbed that this handjob shall hence forth be known as "The Cosmic Handjob".

10/10, would do again.So about a week ago i relapsed,  and ive been using heroin and cocaine daily. Anyway yesterday at work i got about .3 of some heroin from a coworker. i did a couple lines and felt no euphoria even though i was nodding pretty hard. Anyway when i got home me and my family had a big fight so around 9 o clock i went to the bathroom and did the last line i had. i remember going outside to vape and thats it. I came to with paramedics around me asking me questions about my birthday where i was etc i had no idea how i gotten there and had no idea what happened. apparently my family found me passed out on the back deck. by the tine the paramedics arrived my family had tried to smack me awake force me to vomit give cpr etc because i wasnt breathing. the ambulance came and my heat rate was 4 beats a minute and i wasn't breathing apparently they gave me oxygen in that bag thing and hit me with narcan. When they loaded me into tye back of the ambulance and the most horrifying feeling ive ever felt took over me. it literally felt like death itself was strangeling me. my whole body was hot i couldnt breath my vision was doubled and blurry. i asked to the paramedic if i was gonna die and they kept reassuring me i was gonna be okay long story short 10 more minutes and i would not be typing this today the most insane part is im still craving drugs. It feels like im doomed to die a horrible death this way


Edit: this got alot of attention. This was by far the most terrifying experience of my life. It was definitely a wake up call for me. I have a consultation set up for an outpatient program in monday. Thank you everyone for the kind and encouraging words and please learn from my experienceSo I have been a heroin addict ever since I got out of prison the first time. Because of my addiction I have over dosed, missed the birth of my son, went back to prison when he was 13 months and all the other trap that goes along with the drug.

I finally decided I had enough and started my search to find a Doctor that took medical and would help me out. Not a single doctor in my county takes my insurance and wants $300 a month for a visit. I searched for 2 months before I finally found a organization that was willing to work around my insurance issues and help. They have been a god send. I couldn't have asked for a better treatment or group of people who actually care about what they are doing.

It's not easy getting to where I need to go. Once a week my wife has to drive to the other county and drop me off at the bus before she has to drive to work. I then continue my trip on the bus and walk the rest of the way for my weekly group to get my week supply of medication. I have also started personal therapy. My first session was today. After my group I take a bus to the pharmacy to get my meds which included my suboxone, nicotine patches and blood pressure medication that they are covering out of there own pockets until my insurance transfer to their county. I finally take another bus to wait for my wife to get off work and comes to get me. It's an all day adventure.

I have been off heroin 2 months now. I just got a job and ill be getting of probation in a few short months. I would never have been able to do any of this without suboxone.

Today my mom tried to minimize what I'm doing for myself and my family and tried to make me feel guilty for spending all day once a week going out in search of my "feel good" drug. I was dumb founded. I know she isn't educated on what I am doing for myself but to hear her to express her feelings to what im doing and not see the benefits that have come in just 2 short months after 6 years of heroin addiction was just crazy. I couldn't help but laugh as I imagine she will yo home and take a valium and narco with her rum and coke tonight. 

Sorry for the rant im on my last bus to meet my wife with my weeks supply of medicine and it's going to be a good week. Thank you to whoever read this whole thing.

EDIT: thank you to all who have been so supportive and understanding. I have a pretty good understanding of the situation that I'm in and have no disillusionment that this will be a short easy path but for the first time in my life I have been given the gift of seeing things from the outside and can continue to grow from where I'm at currently. 

Thank you for the silver kind stranger. That's a first for me.

Thanks for the gold kind stranger.Weed - makes sex better if it’s with someone you actually like. Doesn’t really do much if you’re not actually into the person though, in my experience

Alcohol - you already know, makes everyone horny and makes sex more loose and fun. also makes it easier to fuck ppl youre not into. Just don’t get shitfaced or you won’t be able to keep it up

Phenibut - similar to alcohol but way more intense. You will probably want to fuck anything that moves, and sex will be godly, but if you don’t already have a girlfriend you will regret your choices the next day lol

Cocaine - very easy to overdo it and get stim dick. Then you’ll only be able to stay hard for like minutes at a time. But with just a little coke you’ll be wicked fueled and have fun. Plus you can bump lines off all sorts of places, pussy asscrack titties everything. It’s really great for threesomes/orgies etc just don’t overdo it, or you’ll be no fun

Adderall - you’ll get super horny, like max level horny. Might be tricky to get hard but once you’re there you’re there and you can fuck for hours, your girl will love it, plus oral and fingering becomes a lot more fun. Just like phenibut though be careful cus you’ll be super horny so you will wake up with regrets or aids. try and use your noggin

MDMA - difficult to get hard because you’ll be distracted by all the good feelings. But if you do manage to fuck you’ll love it. Also makes oral and fingering very fucking fun

Kratom - low key fucking awesome. Doesn’t affect your ability to get hard much, but makes it difficult to cum, so you can go for days. Just don’t take too much or you won’t wanna fuck at all

Real opiates - usually not as fun for me. If I can actually feel the opiate, I probably won’t wanna fuck anyone

Xanax/benzos - can definitely motivate you to get laid, maybe useful if you struggle with girls, but makes you kind of an asshole . Whenever I get laid on bars I forget it even happened so it’s not my favorite

Acid - harder to focus on sex, because there could be a lot going on in your head. But when you get horny on a low to medium dose sex is fucking SICK. Super primal. You feel like an animal

Candyflipping - hands down **THE** best sex you will ever have.....if you can actually manage it. To me it felt easy though and I didn’t even plan it. Acid and molly play on each other nicely, the loveyness of the molly made it easier to focus on sex instead of other acid thoughts, and the primalness of acid kept me fueled and able to fuck for hours even though I was rolling ass

Ketamine - pretty great, it doesn’t actually do all that much for the sex itself but it makes the whole experience (foreplay etc) fun. Easy to get distracted though, and not like acid where you get distracted by your own thoughts, more like in a goofy childish way. Also don’t bump too much or you’ll get nauseous

Whippets - for me personally nitrous doesn’t actually enhance sex or orgasms, but it’s *so* fucking fun to have for foreplay and just for making people wanna bang. Especially if you have a canister. Plus as a bonus you can shotgun whippets back and forth 

Poppers - not my thing during sex, they give me a nice head rush but it makes me focus on the wrong head ya feel. Maybe it’s nice if you’re taking it up the ass though idk man

Fucking on things like DMT and salvia is not worth the effort I promise

Yet to try 2CB while fucking but I will report backPhase 1 - You learn that you have been lied to about drugs.    They aren't these terrible things, they're awesome!     Also, nobody is giving them away for free like you've been led to expect.     Lies, lies, and more lies.



Phase 2 - Legalization.    It's ridiculous these substances are illegal when they cause no harm!     Alcohol is worse, lets ban alcohol instead!    Tell everyone who will listen.


Phase 3 - The intelligent drug user.    You know you can sustainably do drugs because unlike those stupid junkies, you are an intelligent drug user.    You do proper research.    You space your drug use so as not to succumb to addiction or mental degradation.



Phase 4 - Fuck it.    You just don't care anymore.    Could be a lot of things, maybe you're depressed or maybe your girlfriend decided she liked your sister more.     Bring it!     Drug binge here you come and it's a whole lot of fun.



At first.



Phase 5 - Congratulations, you're a junkie.    Consider upgrading to a needle, otherwise you're really just wasting drugs in an inefficient manner.    You did your research, this makes sense.



Phase 6 - Meeeh, life is soooo horrible I want to quit.    Nobody wants anything to do with me.    Wallow in self misery at this phase.



Phase 7 - Quit, die, or continue.




_______________
^(sturgeon general's warning: not entirely applicable to all drugs)"If the words 'life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness' don't include the right to experiment with your own consciousness, then the Declaration of Independence isn't worth the hemp it was written on" - Terrence McKennaIf any of those drunk sorority girls from last night are reading this behold my awkward Reddit skills. Went out last night and wound up wandering around town when I walked up to this group of three trashed chicks who started hanging out with me for like, 20ish minutes. I was trying to get them to buy vape liquid from me but they were too drunk to write down my phone number. Very early on in the interaction I hand one of the girls my vape with mango 1mg so they can taste it and one girl who is about to hit it says "I really hope he drugs me". I was laughing really hard but for some reason it really cheered me up. They were super chill the rest of the time, we smoked a bowl and I went home. I'm not one to socialize and they definitely picked up on that, but it was nice to have a positive interaction with anyone, let alone three super hot sorority girls. To start this off, I don’t have any experience with these drugs, but I know they are incredibly powerful and dangerous. Watching a movie last night when my wife takes off to the bathroom after coming back from the store. She came out and 5 minutes later was nodding off beside me. After several attempts to wake her up, I noticed her breathing becoming strained and her lips turning blue. Oh fuck. I immediately drag her to the floor and call 911. I’m walked through how to administer CPR and there I am doing the chest compressions praying to whatever god would hear me for her not to die. Ambulance arrived and got her revived, breathing stable and took her to the hospital. Police stayed with me helping look for the drugs, which we found in her makeup bag in our bathroom. I’m absolutely devastated and angry at the same time. My children almost lost their mother last night.

Edit: I live in Canada so the law actually protects her and I from any drug possession charges. She also has a past history with opioid abuse.

Edit 2: She’s home now, she’s got some counseling scheduled and we are working on moving forward from this. I’ve overcome my anger and just want to do everything I can to help.Things can go wrong on that first try, sure. You could get a bad batch. You could go bat shit crazy. You could have an awful trip. Those are risks that come with the territory.

My encouragement is to be VERY selective with what you do twice. Twice creates a history... a trend. Twice means that the one dot on your experience graph turns into a line. Twice means repeating, cementing... reminding. 

This is not me being anti-drug or anti-experiment. Just treat that second attempt with respect. One time may be all it takes to wreck your life. Twice increases those odds immeasurably. Remember that. Twice.

- A homie trying to convince himself not to give opiates one more try tonight

Edit: Speechless at all the great dialogue down here. I texted a girl I've been into instead and we watched Seinfeld. Now we're up to more... adult activites 😃 Goodnight everyone!Here i do sit. Alone in my room on NYE coz no one got time for u. Tripping on mdma , acid, weed and booze. Listening to all kinds of music. Having a good time with the boy,  my best friend called myself. Shoutout to everyone whos alone today.  Happy new year! Sending positive vibes to all of u.

Edit: thanks for all the response didnt expect that.  Much love for everyone . Hope u guys are having a good time !So this all starts when I pulled up to my dudes house to buy acid the other day and my friends Zack and Robert were there too. I talked to them for a min and they said they were tripping at Zacks house that night with another friend of ours named Dave cause zacks parents were in Hawaii.
I agreed to come and I showed up to zacks house at 8:00PM, and took my acid then. Zack, Dave, and Robert all took their acid at 7:30 before I got there. 

So we all chill for a while and after like an hour we realize this is some strong shit. Me and Zack both took 2 hits, while Dave and Robert took one and a half. We start tripping balls and Dave starts acting weird af. It's his first time taking acid and he was tripping pretty hard. 

We try to help him and talk to him but he just kept getting worse. He gets stuck in these thought loops where he'd talk about the same shit over and over and then repeat everything. He wasn't very responsive to anything we said and we couldn't really get through to him he just kept on repeating the same shit. 

Me and Robert decide to go out to my car and smoke a bowl. We do that and when we come back Zack is yelling for us to come inside. We get inside and what I saw still disturbs me to this very moment. Dave was laying on the couch without any pants on jerking the absolute FUCK out of his dick and still yelling random thought loop shit. And it wasn't just like walking in on your friend beatin' it jerking off, it was some primal, animalistic shit. I was tripping nuts too. I was so repulsed, I almost threw up. 

We started screaming at him to fucking stop and to put his pants back on and he gets up, takes his shirt off too so he's butt ass naked and starts chasing us, still beating the fuck out of his erect penis. It was fucking terrifying. We booked it and he stops in the kitchen and starts fucking shit up, breaking bowls and vases and walking around on it barefoot, slamming shit and throwing shit still jerking his dick. 

I call my sober friend Casey to come out cause he's a big guy and we were all tripping balls, he goes in there and tells him to stop jerking off and shit and he won't, he just sits there tuggin' it and yelling CECILIAAAAAA (I think he was talking about some girl) and my friend also tells me that he farted on his hand, smelled it, then fingered his bhole and started trying to touch my friend Casey's face, so Casey's slaps his arms away and comes outside with us. Dave is still jerking his dick like a crazy person and breaking shit inside. He was acting like a crazy person. He also pissed all over Zacks kitchen, it was fucking disgusting. 

He'd been doing this shit for like 3 hours at this point and Casey and Zack are sitting in Casey's car. I'm standing there telling Zack to call the fucking cops cause that's the best thing to do. All of a sudden Zack goes into thought loop mode just like Dave and starts talking about random shit! I say fuck it, I'm calling the cops. Casey boots Zack out of his car and takes off, Zack goes walking inside still talking about random shit. I half excepted to go in there and see Dave and Zack buttfucking each other or something. 

Robert and I jump in our cars and take off, still tripping balls. I called the cops and said I was the neighbor (lol) and that the neighbor kid had taken some acid and was fucking up the house and was jerking his dick and shit and gave them Zacks address. 

After that I booked it into town to my gfs house and hid out. We listened to the police scanner and they had to call for backup and 2 ambulances. I wish I could find out how they took Dave down, I'm sure he was still jerking his dick when the cops got there. Both Zack and Dave get taken to the hospital. 

The cops ended up coming to my house and I talked to them for a few mins before hey started asking shit about drugs so I told them I wasn't answering any more questions and to leave, which they did. This just happened the other day so I hope I'm in the clear. They had some officer with them who said he was trained to recognize what drugs people were on and he told me I was tripping. I just kinda stared at him. 

Anyway yeah that's my story, I still can't get the image of Dave sitting on the couch jerking his dick like it was the last day he could ever do it out of my head. 

Edit: I talked to Zack and he said he was beside Dave in the hospital and that he was throwing up and still trying to jerk his dick
 
Edit 2: fuck anyone who thinks I shouldn't have called the cops, I probably saved Dave's life 

Edit3: again fuck anyone who's giving me shit for calling the cops! You weren't there, you don't know what was going on. Fuck you idiots! I hope none of you have friends cause I sure as hell wouldn't wanna do drugs with any of you if you would just ditch as soon as somebody starts doing fucked up shit. I sat there for over 3 hours trying to calm Dave down and he was only getting worse so fuck you  As the title says stop taking drugs in your parents house. At least once a week I see a post here saying something along the lines of "I have some acid, dxm, xanax would I be fine taking them while my parents are asleep?"

  Just don't please. The last thing a parent wants to see when they walk into their kids room is them geeked off drugs. It will freak them out and make them worry and that will ruin your high. 

  Be respectful if you're still living at home. Please take it from me, there's no bigger shame then your parents seeing you fucked up off some hard shit.Took mushrooms for the first time tonight and I completely forgot to drink water till like now basically so yeah don't forget it's important and shit.


Edit: dabs in higher conciousness and hydrationIt happened to me 2 weeks ago. 

I was going to get some booze from a local 7/11 for the coming night. I had this 8ball that I have bought couple hours before in my wallet. 

It’s my turn to pay, there is a solid lineup behind me, couple were blabbing, others nodding. 
So I reach for a quarter and accidentally dropp the baggy on the counter. 

The worst part is that I didn’t spot it until an old lady behind me pointed at it and said: “You have dropped your drugs, Sir”, making the whole 7/11 stare at me, in silence. 

I picked it up, thanked her, wished a nice day, and left calmly. 

Edit: happy spooktober everyone! 💀💀💀The more fucked up I get in life aka the more rad the more I realize how nice someone sending you heart emojis is sometimes. Like yeah maybe this is a shell of real human interaction or something but when someone just fills your screens with heart emojis or sends you one you can kinda feel the love sometimes, Maybe if ur lit enough 

So here you go my lit friends ❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️
❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️ ❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️❤️I buy Coke off this one dude every now and then, but I just crack up when dealers send out a mass text. This is what my dealer sent me on a snow day:

❄☃️❄☃️❄☃️🌨🌨☃️❄☃️❄☃️❄

🌨☃️ ❄SNOWY DAY SPECIALS❄ ☃️🌨


❄1 SNOW FLAKE < 55 ( 1.0 ) 
❄❄2 SNOWFLAKES < 100 ( 2.0 )


☃️1 SNOWBALL < 150 ( 3.5 )
☃️☃️2 SNOWBALLS < 280 ( 7.0 )
☃️☃️☃️3 SNOWBALLS < 420 ( 10.5 )
☃️☃️☃️☃️4 SNOWBALLS < 560 ( 14.0 )


🌨❄❄❄❄❄❄❄❄❄❄
10 SNOWFLAKES < 400 ( 10.0 )
 🌨❄❄❄❄❄
5 SNOWFLAKES < 225 ( 5.0 )


🎅 8 SNOWBALLS < 1,000 ( 28.0 )🤶


☃️❄☃️❄☃️❄🌨🌨❄☃️❄☃️❄☃️
 
I'll never need adblock for texts like these lol

Edit: wow I didn't think my post was that interesting, I was just shit posting at 4 am. For everyone wondering where I am that I get these "good deals," I live in New England where we don't ever see meth. For those wondering about the quality, it's definitely re-rocked, but it's decent enough, not speedy so I know it's not cut with amps. It's interesting reading about all the differnet markets, I just have to say I feel sorry for the people down under, you guys really got it tough lmao.My friend (Z) and I took mushrooms, and started riding our bikes to the forest. On our way there, we passed right next to a group of people in tracksuits with the German logo in front. I thought nothing of it, as I don't watch football, but Z, who is a huge football fan, recognised them; the German national football team! And, as it turns out, they are his favourites! Imagine the scene, riding your bike, coming up on mushrooms and seeing your childhood idols up close. That encounter made his trip much more pleasant and enjoyable :)

EDIT: Holy shit, this post blew up! Thanks for sharing your stories, really like them :)My BF and i went to New Hampshire for memorial day weekend and we met a guy around the same age as us. We were talking and all of the sudden he says " hey you party"? So we said yes and he said" you guys should chill with me for the weekend" so we said ok. We made it to his house and he is throwing a big old pig roast. People were just sitting around drinking beer,smoking weed and taking shrooms. They treated my BF and i like we were long lost friends they offeded us some beer and weed so we all smoked massive doobies and ate the pig.  This dude showed us all the cool  back roads and cemeteries all weekend.When we left the dude gave us like a quarter of weed for the road for free.Sorry if this isn't well worded. Im pretty dissociated and doing my best. Lol

Erowid is the holy haven of information for drug users in regards to learning about various substances. Having an app where you can easily find a substance, its effects, safety, dosage, etc... and be able to talk with others about them and their experiences with them, would be awesome. 

I cant believe this hasn't already been done to be honest. Its a great harm prevention tool and educational website that would be awesome to have organized into a user friendly app with solid info and a discussion platform similar to reddit for easy use. 

Someone please please please make this happen. Im dexed out and hoping my vision comes to fruition. 

Everyone’s flipping out over the obvious. 

My window is across from my neighbors.

Our lights were on all night. 

Neither of us slept clearly. 

I go out to decimate some Brussel sprouts and he comes out to smoke a cigarette. He sees me and then shrugs asking if he could hit that. 

Then we watched the sun rise and traded some small resources. 

It’s the little things.When I say "really" I mean someone you can speak to at that deep level. The drug, the thing you are addicted too is a getaway. It doesn't tell you are wrong until a bit later down the line. In the meantime it tells you everything is fine. If it's an addiction that brings chemicals then all seems fine. If it's another addiction I.e gambling, then yeah that catches you out later down the line. In the meantime, all fine right?

I'm saying this as someone who has has various addiction problems and somehow didn't associate gambling later down the line as one of them. I spent £120k last year. I'm  not rich. Im in serious debt and wanted to just post to say gambling is quite related to drug addiction.

Sorry for the long post. TLDR , gambling is not a safer addiction than the drugs known to ruin your body

*edit -if this helps at least one more person than me then to be fair, my jobs still not done. But don't get into a horrible place. Just speak out, you are important otherwise you wouldn't have been selected to be human , to read this. Sorry gone all sci fi. Thanks thought

TLDR the edit, if you have read this. Nice. Cheer up ❤

Edit 2: as a few quite rightly pointed out, I dont mean my wording of "most people" to be misleading. Having people to speak with isn't a one size suits all and not the simple answer for everything. But I still stand by it being a worthwhile part of recovery, support or not even becoming dangerously addicted in the 1st place, all depends on who them people are obviously as well though.

 As many others have pointed out too, addiction comes in many forms and one shouldn't feel embarrassed about it (theres probably more scientific reasons for an individual likely to have an addictive personality?) Plus addiction isn't just to be related to obvious drugs and chemicals, it's a reaction from the brain that can  be for many things, not bad to be addicted in some cases but even those addicted to work it can be an issue. I tend to bounce around different addictions and I guess that's something to balance. I.e if I stop the getting high ones I tend to find myself getting way overly engrossed in something not particularly drug related. Gambling was definitely a new one for me. A short one in the grand scheme of things that absolutely changed my life, mainly for the financial implications. Followed by the embarrassment and issues I'd caused trying to put my shit back together.

Thirdly thanks (not to sound cheesy) for the comments and likes etc. I don't know what I do with them but I guess those that sent them the message meant something or they wanted to make me feel better.

Been nice to Express some of this to random people. So thank you and as below speak up as it seems like a nice community with no trolls as such 😊🥰Don't forget that by using edibles you can consume much more weed than your smoking limit! This way you can consume pretty crazy amount of weed. I have consumed to much weed.My buddy dropped a couple tabs and tried to make grilled cheese while he was peaking. His mom asked him for one too so he made one for her and two for himself. But he spread soap on the bread thinking it was butter. His mom was like wtf is wrong with this grilled cheese and he was like idk and proceeded to eat his two soap grilled cheeses and was so high he didn't even notice the taste was off. He then puked all over himself. 

Another thing that happened in the same trip was he got stuck in a loop of walking his dog. He would take his dog for a walk and then come back and forget he walked his dog and go for another one. He did this like 4 times.I took three grams of phenibut and two of these Chinese boner pills called Black Ant King, and started furiously scrolling through tinder matches. One girl responded as definitely wanting to fuck, which was perfect because my dick was grossly over-erect and it was draining life-force from the rest of my body. 

I got to the park where we decided to meet, and holy Christ, it was like she was nine ladies stuffed into one lady. Her neck looked nine necks stuffed into one neck. I'd describe her snatch, but y'all get the picture. At least two people walked by with their dogs, but something about the phenibut high made me immune to shame and all-round good judgement, and I barebacked this girl in a goddamn park. 

I've been staring at my dick keeping an eye out for bumps, lumps, or rashes.

Keep your phenibut doses light and don't mix it with Chinese boner pills or else you might end up getting your dick wet in all the wrong places. 

It was hot as fuck though. 

At the time. 

Now it's gross. Inspired by a recent story of /u/trameyes I decided to describe Russian drug market system in more detail. I've been wanting to do that for a while, I hope it'll be an interesting read. I also apologize for any possible grammar errors and poor writing style, as you may've guessed English is not my native language.  
  
## Introduction and History Lesson  
  
Russia is a pretty dangerous place to buy drugs. Laws are strict, mail privacy is non-existent and cops can violate all your rights and get away with it. Anti-drug propaganda was huge in 2000-2010, it was not uncommon to stumble upon some "vigilant" assholes who'll beat you up for being "a fucking druggie". It's not like that anymore, in the later years drugs have become more and more mainstream, especially among younger people. But the dangers are still there.  
  
But of course strict laws and propaganda aren't very effective in decreasing cosumption. In earlier days, the government was still recovering from the collapse of Soviet Union and didn't have enough resourses to enforce strict drug control. That was the golden age of street drug dealers. Everybody knew their local plugs and didn't have problems buying stuff. The only difference was that import wasn't as big in those days, many drugs that were popular everywhere else were not available here. Opioids were the most notable exception. Heroin was imported from Afganistan, and codeine was unprecedentedly easy to get, which led to invention of krokodil and countrywide opioid epidemic. Anti-drug propaganda and harsher enforcement of drug laws was a reaction to that epidemic. It was Russian version of the War on Drugs. And it was somewhat effective, opioid use did drop. But that also meant that ALL drugs became significantly harder to aquire.  
  
Fast forward to 2010. Bitcoin launch in 2009 became a groundwork of a system that will later control 90% of Russian drug market. Drugs were sold over darknet even before that, but cryptocurrency offered one thing that was unheard before - anonymous transactions. At the time, many people recognized that combination of cryptocurrency and TOR could be used to easily distribute drugs even in a sctrictly controlled country. Now that they had both anonymous transactions and anonymous chat/order system, the only thing missing was an anonymous method of delivery. There were two solutions, and at the time both were widely used - mail and geocaching. However, as the drug market continued to grow, mail became less and less safe. Over time geocaching proved to be more effective and safe and completely overshadowed mail.  
  
The demand was there, so naturally there were multiple competing marketplaces at first. But pretty quickly one of them came on top. I'm not sure if Reddit's rules allow to drop DNM names, so I'll nickname it **DNM-1**. **DNM-1** was launched in 2012 and dominated the market until it was terminated in 2017 by police. The marketplace massively contributed to the development of the system as we know it today and popularizing it.  
  
However, DNM-1's death also contributed a lot. Market vaccum was very quickly filled by a different marketplace which I'll name **DNM-2**. It featured a lot of improvements over DNM-1 with a lot of focus on accessability and ease of use. Previously the main obstacle for darknet markets was complexity of order process. DNM-2 was determined to fix that. They wanted to expand their user base to every drug user, even those without understand of cryptocurrencies, encryption and other tech stuff. Today, DNM-2 is probably the most convinient darknet marketplace in the whole world. It was a clever move and it worked. I estimate that roughly 90% of all drugs in Russia are sold at DNM-2 and that would've never been possible it wasn't so accessible.  
  
Nowadays they're so popular that they even had, I shit you not, youtube ads for some time! A lot of the stuff I'll talk about is specific to DNM-2, so keep that in mind.  
  
## Geocaching
  
I'll need to invent some new vocabulary here, because I don't know how to translate these Russian words to English.  
**A drop/A cache** (zakladka) - a hidden package of drugs. Usually it's ziplocks wrapped in a waterproof duct tape, but it could be anything really. When you buy a drop you basically buy instructions on how to find that drop.  
**A courier/A cacheman** - a person who makes drops and gets paid for it by vendor.  
**An instant** - pre-planted drop with all information ready to be sent to the customer as soon as he/she buys it. It's was a unique feature of DNM-2 that contributed a lot to it's popularity. Doesn't require communication with vendor. The alternative option is pre-orders that involve discussing the deal with vendor before their cacheman makes a drop just for you. Instants are more popular because they're obviously more convinient.  
**A quest** - 1) a process of searching for a drop. 2) an instruction on how to find a drop.
  
The process of buying instants is quite simple. You can browse all available offers, you can also filter them by proximity to your preffered place, amount and cost and drop type. All deals must be closed with a review from customer, so most offers have a lot of reviews to help you decide. The most common method of payment is BTC, but several simplier (but more expensive) alternatives are available. Once you've paid the required amount, you instantly get access to all information about your drop.  
  
There are 3 main types of caches:  
1) A cache burried in the ground, usually 3-5 cm deep. They are the most reliable, because it's almost impossible for people to find them randomly. But they're also not very convinient. They're harder to find and require digging, which is suspicious as fuck if you're observed.  
2) A magnet attached to something metallic. It could be a fence, a street pipe, anything really. They're very easy to find and pick up, but are vulnerable to people that try to find stuff randomly. A good well-hidden magnet is the superior type of caches in my opinion.  
3) A cache hidden by other methods. For example, a cache disguised to look like a stone laying in the grass/bushes.  
  
Drop description usually contains geolocation coordinates and/or an address, a few pictures of the place with pointers (an arrow or a dot) to the spot where the cache is hidden and short instructions for additional clarification if needed. Descriptions vary in quality. Some quests are very clear and easy to find even when high af. Some are more complicated. It all depends on professionalism of the cacheman. If your quest doesn't meet minimum standards (as in it's practically impossible to identify the exact location of the drop with data at hand) you can start a dispute and the vendor will be forced to either give additional clarifications or return the money. That rarely happens though. Quests are often shitty and confusing but rarely to that degree.  
  
If you've understood the description well enough, you go to the place. Normally you have 24 hours to pick up the drop. Of course you can pick it up later, but in that case you won't be able to start a dispute if anything goes wrong. This is also the time when you're most vulnerable as a customer. Your goal is to find your drop while attracting the least possible amount of attention to yourself. There are a lot of safety measures that can decrease the chance of getting caught. For example, it's recommended to keep your phone clean and memorize the quest instead, otherwise you may get some help finding your cache. From a police officer.  
  
If everything goes well and you're home with your purchase, you must write a review to close the deal. Vendors get your money only when the deal is closed. They're also automatically closed in 24 hours UNLESS a dispute has been started.  
  
## Disputes  
  
You can start a dispute for various reasons: the cache wasn't there, the amount was lower than advertised, the quality was lower than advertised... I'll talk about the first and the most common reason of all disputes - a missing cache. You have to provide pictures of the place. They don't prove that there wasn't anything there, but they prove that at the very least you indeed went to a correct place. You're also required to describe what happened, how did you try to find it, did the hiding place look disturbed, etc. Then you work out a deal with the vendor. Possible solutions are a complete refund, a 50% refund, a replacement quest or a refusal. If you can't find common ground, both sides have the option to invite a marketplace moderator to the dispute who'll make the ultimate decision based things like freshness of the drop, specifics of the quest, reputation of the customer, reputation of the vendor and reputation of the cacheman responsible for the drop.  
  
Most people think that mods are generally biased in favor of vendors, but I don't think that's true. Customers make a lot of mistakes when searching for their drops. Some of them also go on a quest high, which is a massive no-no.  

## Vermins of the geocaching
  
There are two types of scumbags who are despised by everyone.  
**A skin** - a person who goes around rummaging for free drugs.  
**A seagull** - a person who starts a dispute and claims that he didn't find the cache when he in fact did. There are a lot of them and they're the reason why it's hard to convince vendors/mods that you genuinely didn't find anything.  
  
&nbsp;  
  
Whew, this post is getting long. I wanted to go into more detail about things like cacheman job or what's currently popular on the market. Maybe I'll expand on that in the comments. I'll also be glad to answer any questions. Hope that this was interesting for someone.Everybody knows the situation that's going on. Psyched substance, the Drug Classroom, Your mate Tom, and other drug related channels are all getting their videos striked. 

Less talked about are the WeedTubers who are getting hit as, if not more hard. Already LeaferBag and GroovyMac have had their channels banned. LeaferBag exclusively featured weed and weed related content only. And YouTube bans his channel presumably for glorifying drug use. LeaferBag is less defendable than The Drug Classroom, who is 100% education, But that's not the point

The point is, for YouTube to ban channels for displaying weed, while doing nothing to channels who focus solely on making and enjoying cocktails, is BULLSHIT!!!

Everybody here is aware alcohol's a drug, and we're even more aware of other people's urge to ignore that fact. YouTube's recent actions just go to show how fucking far society still has to go. Forget legalization, I think an equally important issue is convincing people to recognize that the drugs that are legal are still drugs. 

I'm not saying Alcohol channels should get hit, I'm glad they're not. But the fact that they aren't, while channels about any other drug are, is fucking bullshit. 

Edit: Confused "DrugsLab" with "The Drug Classroom". Meant to write the ladderMy ugly ass got really horny. So I thought that it would be a good idea to hire a hooker. I found this girl and we got to messaging, and I’m not sure how the topic got bought up but she said she can suss me some meth and then we can have sex. I’ve never done meth before but I’m open minded. So I agreed to meet her and oh boy, she was not attractive at all, but I was horny enough to not care. I was dumb enough to give her 200 dollars so she could go and score, and the magical beast disappeared in the sunset with my money never to be seen again. FFS I’m so stupid...So I just moved to CA for work. I'm a pretty big pothead but work a semi-serious job. The type where I'd be too sketched to ask around at work for a new dealer. So fuck it, let's see how hard it is to get a script for legal weed.

Fire up the old internet machine...beep bop. 'Get a prescription online'. Ok that sounds fucking sketchy let's do a side search about this. Low and behold it's completely legit. You put in a few details and a fucking doctor calls you in 5 minutes, talks for 30 seconds and sends you a script. Then you can literally order on the site and the shit showed up in 30 min.

Honestly the fact that it's that easy to get a script blows my fucking mind. I didn't leave my couch until the stoned ass delivery guy got lost at the front door. The fucking future boys, it's here. And it's here to get you high af in 30 minutes or less.

TLDR: Online weed scripts are fully legit in CA and I got a script + vape pen delivered within 30 min of opening my computer. Shit's tightMDMA at a funeral 

Heroin at the gym 

LSD at a thanksgiving dinner

Cocaine at a Buddhist meditation ceremony 

DMT at a boxing match 

Xanax at a landmark you might never see again 

Weed anywhere in Kentucky 

Shrooms at a hospital 

Meth in a gay bar if you’re straight (you won’t be for long) 

Alcohol while driving 

Ketamine at a lecture 

Feel free to add your own I started taking drugs at 13, my first experience being a hit of pink champagne blotter, I moved on to smoking weed, snorting speed, in 1998 I graduated to meth addiction, I went though rehab in 2002,  started using ecstasy and acid heavily, became a coke addict for a few years, in 2006 I discovered mushrooms and used them regularly until 2008 when a 20g dry dose blew my mind and I never touched a drug again. Its some years later now and here's some realisation I have now.

1.  Drugs can take you to some dark places, but in the darkest places, you can also see beauty. I remember once being in this absolutely scummy toilet, filthy it was  but the mushrooms I was on hit me hard, and in the tiled floor I saw canyons and ravines that went on endlessly...

2. Educate yourself. Even in my younger days I was obsessed with researching the drugs I was taking. The shroomery taught me how to weigh out doses of shrooms to get the desired effect, erowid taught me the effects of different chemicals...just read up on what you need to know. Ignorance has straight up killed more people than drugs alone..

3. The most intelligent thing you can know about drugs, is when to stop, for me it was at 28, I'd used heavily for 15 years and a mind blowing shroom trip literally told me I had to change. I did!

4. There is next to no point trying to explain why drugs are cool to you, to someone that has never and will never try them. You know the doors of perception? Some peoples are locked and bolted shut.

5. People can be as important as a substance to your experience. You can have the best drugs, but with shit company you still wont have a great time. Choose your friends wisely.

6. Know that every time you score you risk criminal charges. Weigh up if its worth it to you. People far smarter than you have had their entire lives fucked up by a drugs charge..

7. There's no shame in saying no to drugs, also no shame in saying yes!

8. I've said it before and I'll say it again, meth: not even once. I was addicted for 4 years, literally the first few months were great, the rest was pure psychosis 

9. All that you experience and learn and see and feel  it will always be with you.  All these years later I can hear a certain song and remember my first E, or look at things sometimes and remember how acid was, but mostly I remember meth from my addiction, I remember the good and bad times.

10. People that drink and smoke cigarettes but are anti drugs, those people are the biggest assholes ever.

Peace, love and respect to you all!I have a massive stoner buddy, who _refuses_ to drink and drive. That's fair, but he takes a little extreme. He had _a_ shot of liquor an hour before he had to leave somewhere and refused to leave because of it. Again, nothing wrong with that.

However, he has no issue with texting while driving, veering into the middle of the lane while doing so, filling a bong with water, packing a bowl, and smoking it all while driving. Like, I'm not the only one who sees an issue with this, right? Please validate me.

*Edit: ~~super baked~~ why did this post blow up so much holy o:WOW. I’m in disbelief. I may dabble in some drugs now, but when I was 13 I was reading Harry Potter and learning HTML. 

I’m 23, and I got into electronic music a little over 18 months ago. In the last year or so, I’ve started trying a few substances. (Beyond weed—I’ve been a regular stoner for a bit.) I semi-regularly do LSD (every couple of months) at concerts, in nature, at home, etc. I love tripping and I think it’s truly helped me overcome my depression. (This fact is just in here to help demonstrate the irony.)

BUT JESUS, my 13 year old sister is THIRTEEN and lives in a pretty small,  conservative town. How did she get it? Plus, I can’t even imagine tripping balls in the middle of 7th grade angst. Nor can I imagine the bad trip that would ensue once my mom caught me and my two friends in the middle of our peak. I feel so bad for my sister and mildly worried about how she’s feeling (mentally/emotionally) after having her brain turned inside out. 

The other horrible thing is that my mom called me like 15 minutes after we got home from a concert, where I took molly for the 5th time in my life. OH MY GOD. The irony lmao. My mom calling her older daughter to consult about her younger daughter doing drugs, WHILE THE OLDER DAUGHTER WAS ON A BUNCH OF DRUGS. 

Just so glad we didn’t trip last night. I was considering it because mdma felt like a little overkill for the small concert we were going to. But I don’t love doing LSD at concerts all the time, so we rolled tits instead. THANK GOD. I can’t imagine being in the middle of tripping... while my mom called to tell me my baby sister was also tripping. I would have maybe just hung up the phone lmao. At least the molly kept my anxiety at bay, I was relatively cogent, and ultra-empathetic for my mom and my sister. And I was past my peak, thankfully. 

Anyway, wow. Just had to share that with some people that might appreciate. 

Edit: Forgot to mention that baby sister did not like it. She was saying to my mom that she just wanted it to stop. I’m sure getting busted could really send you down a rabbit hole. She’s also been messing up school lately, even though she’s brilliant. I think that was part of the conversation she had with my mom in the middle of tripping balls. 

Edit2: Her 15 yo boyfriend got it from his cousin, maybe. And that boyfriend will never be in our house again. Sad because he’s a good kid with a tough life, but this is too far. And we’ve been stressed about their age gap, since he’s moved to high school.

Other punishments pending. But my mom isn’t unreasonable or mean, and she thinks natural consequences are the world’s best teacher. You’re uncomfortable in a crowd. 

Maybe someone rubbed against your shoulder, and you spun around to face them. 

Maybe the words didn’t surface, and they’re asking you a question. They're asking why you're standing there staring them down, somehow slack jawed and grinding your teeth at the same time. They're asking something like: "Hey, bro. What’s your fucking problem?"

But of course you don’t know what your fucking problem is, so you stumble past him and into the bathroom. This isn’t a family gathering or a work event, you don’t know anyone here. If you get embarrassingly drunk, the worst you’ll have to contend with is a shiner in the morning and the same shame you wake up to every day. So you slam your cash on the bar harder than you meant to and you ask for a beer, like a kid on his first trip to the liquor store with a fake ID. One beer, well, we’ve got about a hundred different types. And now you’re reeling backwards, face red, because the guys laughing, "Why did you ask for Bud Ice, bro?" And you remember that bars don’t serve beverages that would fall into the category of homeless beer, not unless they’re under some overpass in a movie about growing up in the hood. What are you doing, stuttering at him? Are you seriously trying to explain to him that you usually just buy whatever has the highest alcohol content at the cheapest price, because you absolutely loathe everything you’ve become? He’s about to turn away from you, but he has your cash in his hand, this guy’s committing a robbery! Hey, man, I’ll call the fucking cops, although that’s probably a bad idea because they’d find the baggie of coke in your- COKE! How did you forget, but you’ve remembered now, thrusting your torso through a gaggle of girls who look like they’re celebrating their first period, to get to the bathroom. Not that girls being too young has ever been a problem for you. Of course, this is all hypothetical, you can’t fuck them unless they let you, right? And to do that you’d have to talk to them first, right? And you’ve proven yourself to be more abysmal at that than at making it through the day without contemplating suicide, which is saying something. And your leg is going like some kind of sick fucking jackhammer as you try to balance your mirror on your knee, break out a line, snort it, and survive.

And this is where the stall door opens and you're staring at a guy you haven't seen since Bill's graduation party, post-Senior Year. He's ogling you like you're roadkill and somebody just handed him a mop and asked him to scrape you off the asphalt. Why can't you remember his name? He clearly remembers your name, because he's just spoken it- with the prefix "Jesus Christ" added in there. Was that your old nickname? Or was that an expression of shock? Disgust? Repulsion- Paul! That's the guy! Paul! You aren't sure if you just yelled it aloud or not. Maybe you just thought it?  At this point your coke is on the ground, on your jeans, on the wall of the stall next to a crudely drawn penis and the beginnings of a small gloryhole. 

"Jesus Christ." You definitely heard him saying that again. Didn't you just hear this part? You're not sure if he's so in awe that he's repeating himself or if that last line made time start getting fucky again. He does a kind of shrug, looks in both directions, and shuts the stall door back. There are a lot of questions popping up in your head in the wake of this unexpected interruption- and they aren't the questions you should be asking. You should be asking if he was there at the behest of one of your many "family and friends" who have in the past attempted to intervene, not asking yourself if you've got one last benzo in the vial in your pocket. But you did, and you do, and you pop it. The door is closed and you're alone. It's all going to be okay.

And that moment of lucidity eye of the storm self reflection hits you as you begin to spin into the void- 

And you conclude that you're a piece of shit. 
Don't. Just. Don't. You have absolutely no idea what you are getting into. I remember when I first started and I was so fucking naive it was untrue. I actually asked another user how would I know I was hooked. I asked how would I know if I was ill, dopesick. Ha ha like I need to ask now!! I'm serious here - it's a roll of the dice. That's  what your life will become, a game of pure chance. You wanna play? Well c'mon then. Queue up, pay ya dues and buckle up cos this is gonna one fucking harsh ride. If you have read this and are thinking, yeah but maybe just once....? Good fucking luck and God's speed. You're gonna need it!From [this thread](https://www.reddit.com/r/AskReddit/comments/kapx65/z/gfdfze7). 

[ For those who don't know, clobazam is a benzodiazepene with a half life of about 30-42 hours. However, clobazam metabolizes into *N*-desmethylclobazam, also active, which has a half life of up to 82 hours. That's almost 125 hours for 50% of the substance to leave your system, and that's not counting differences in metabolism, brain chemistry, liver function etc. ]

[ The following is in response to me suggesting that even a common dose of 5mg clobazam is enough to fuck your shit up. I've never done clobazam personally but I base this on personal experience with clonazepam/alprazolam/etizolam/diazepam, as well as thousands of different experiences across seventy-five other psychoactives ]

>Is 5mg an exceptionally higher dose than therapeutic, or is there something else off-label you'd do that makes it less helpful and more road-trip? 


I should have elaborated. 

You can take 5mg- it's a starting dose. You might feel good, relaxed. Your anxiety may melt away, leaving you feeling indifferent about your problems, about everything, really. It won't be an issue to you;  you'll feel indifferent about that as well. 

You will probably have a great time, you'll be nice and loose, your thoughts will drift farther apart and there will be only quiet in between.


And then----


You realize you're not feeling that high at all. It's already kicked in full, and yet, you're suprisingly lucid. Sure, you knocked a glass of water over, but it was an accident and you're basically sober already.  

You feel kinda disappointed, kinda hollow and yet you don't really care about it either way. It's just lame- you're basically sober. Not even high... so why not do 10mg more? It's not high of a dose, you're in no danger of blacking out. This was a tester, anyway. Allergy test. That's something that people do, right?

So, you measure out another dose. If you have a modicum of sense you'll dose volumetrically; 50mg is considered a heavy dose, and you'll want to be as accurate as possible. Most cheap headshop/gas station scales have an error range of approximately ±.01g or ±.1g, less often ±.001g (you can buy them online but only nerds buy paraphernalia over the internet). It doesn't matter anyway; if you're dosing a powdered drug that lowers inhibitions in the milligram range, regardless of your measurement method used, you're playing with fire and it will end *badly*.

You, being a responsible, intellgent and smart psychonaut, dissolved the entire gram in a known quantity of water and dosed with a 1mL pipette. It's nearly impossible to fuck that shit up. You'd need to be a fucking dumbass to do that shit. You giggle at your lack of articulation and repeat the word "fuck" out loud a few times.  It felt freeing, like you can say or do whatever the fuck you please, without consequence. That's a cool and totally normal thought to have.

So, dose 2 kicks in and you're feeling less indifferent,  just content being king of the world, your world of drawn curtains and hours of EDM left on repeat in the other room- whoops. Your thoughts, feeling ever wider apart, seem to disappear sometimes, so you put a note on the fridge, written in large block letters: **DO NOT REDOSE; YOU'RE ON 15MG ALREADY DUDE**. 4-D chess. You smile, feeling confident in your methods, regardless of your shoddy work. It's okay. Everything is okay. You feel very very okay.

You also feel quite a bit ~~wooblier.~~ ~~wobbilrrgl.~~ __WOBBLIER__. You're being extra careful while walking around even though your limbs move in ways you don't intend; you're just a high but responsible person who knows their limits. You're basically sober. 

That reminds you, what happened with that second dose? Did you just forget to take it? It's kinda fuzzy, but the answer was probably.... Maybe? Do you even want another dose? You don't care either way. You think about your problems, waiting for you at the end of this experience. Luckily you have a week off from work.

Ah, fuck it. You probably didn't take dose 2 anyway, you would have been sure, and there's so much left. A full gram is pretty cheap, hundreds of doses, very economical. 

You once again take the flask out, ignoring your warning displayed on the fridge in the other room, completely unaware it exists, and proceed to measure a dose. You stop, noticing most of the gram has settled on the bottom of the glass. It seems to be only partially soluble in the clear liquid, you must have reached a limit while the rest sunk right to the bottom. You think that means you took a smaller dose than intended. 

That's probably why you feel so sober and barely high and all, like just mostly sober and feeling barely high at all. 

You stir the mixture until it is cloudy and measure out 2mL, 10mg. Simple dimple. You spill a couple drops on the counter while putting it away, and, without a care in the world, swipe it with your finger and suck it down without hesitation. Shouldn't go to waste. You're economical and brilliant, you'll probably save a lot of money with this drug, xanax is pretty pricey and this does the trick. 

Heading back to the living room, you realize you're feeling quite hungry, and your mouth is like sandpaper. You had gotten yourself some chips and a soda earlier, but you really want a meal. Like, a steak or something. Is it dinnertime yet? You look at the clock.

That can't be right. It's been 8 hours since you dosed? Time sure flies. Is that because you dosed a second time? You think you did but you feel kinda disconnected, your mind carefree and blank, your body moving on its own, and very poorly. It probably doesn't matter. 

You order food, a pizza. It is pretty difficult, and you thank the good Lord for your foresight to save your payment methods for ease of use. Still, it takes you a while to complete. You have to keep one of your eyes closed to see the words right, like there's two of everything. It's probably nothing, you'll make an eye doctor's appointment soon. That's tomorrow you's problem. 

Wait, what was tomorrow you's problem? You don't remember, but you feel *hungry*. Maybe you'll order a pizza---

Things become blurry. You're still perfectly content where you are. It's probably nothing. You get flashes of things every now and then, like a movie you're skipping through at random intervals. You remember dancing in your living room with someone, but you had just been alone. Was it a friend? There was a song playing, what was the song? It was really good.

You snap back, and the song had ended. There was no one there except for you. You are *fuuuucked up* and your dreams are mixing with your conscious experience.... or you invited some rando into your home and danced with them? You don't think it's that important, and you feel better now, practically sober-----

Another blur. This time, you remember feeling cold. This is fine, it's probably the A/C. Except you don't have an air conditioner, and it's February. Well, shit. 

This time around, things stay quiet for a while. To you, it'll be like you blinked and went somewhere else completely,  your mind groggy as your eyes scan the foreign environment for answers. 

If you're lucky, you'll wake up five days later, under a highway overpass, wearing someone else's pants on backwards. At least you were wearing pants, dignity preserved. The walk home takes a while and your feet hurt; one of your shoes was missing but it felt too weird to only walk with one, and you're not even sure you were wearing socks to begin with, so barefoot it is. You ignore the seven pizza boxes on your doorstep, as well as the numerous Amazon packages in and around your mailbox. You didn't stop to count them. You no longer like saved payment methods but you're otherwise unharmed.  

If you're unlucky, you'll keep compulsively redosing while blacked out. That's how you lose months of your life in an instant, wake up in prison, in a psychiatric ward, dead (most often from mixing alcohol or other drugs), comatose, paraplegic, kidnapped. Anything goes when you're no longer in control and fully disinhibited. Rob a grave, fight a cop, strangle an otter because the little fuck stole your wallet. 

You realize it was not the otter that slighted you, but the night is still young.

Days later, the story of the Great Otter Massacre of 2020 is born. You later find your wallet between the cushions of the living room couch. You might live, but the otter screams that wake you up in a cold sweat every night seem to grow ever louder with each passing day.....

#𝒇𝒊𝒏You. Yes you. The one who gets their friends water. The one who helps the guy who's rolling way too hard. The one who always has gum. The one with the soft onesie and an even softer smile. 

You guys make raves safe for everyone else by doing the things you do. Keep it up❤️

Edit: responsible use is easy guys. Stay hydrated. I'm just talking personal experience here. There's always one person in our group who offers when they go and just generally knows all the tricks. Sometimes it's me and sometimes it's friends. :)So I was sipping on the tussin a few days ago, and i had to use a napkin to clean the measuring jug I had a pretty good time, then I came back to where I'd drank the syrup to see that I'd left the DXM-stained napkin on the table, and that there was a wasp right next to it rolling around like there was no tomorrow. I watched it roll near the edge and fall off, and it still just kept doing infinite barrel-rolls. Then it died, I think :P. Just thought it was pretty interesting to see a wasp hit that 4th plateau and go mentalI need to shit at this club/bar, so I go down to the bathrooms and take the open stall. I lock the door and as I turn around I see a drug baggie laying on top of the toilet. I thought it was weed but it was brown with a plastic bag inside another plastic bag. 

Meh it’s garbage, I thought.

I start preparing for my shit. Then I get curious. I poked the baggy. There’s a rock. A huge fucking rock. My jaw drops and heart races. I look. It looks like mdma. Like over 3 grams of the stuff.

Unsure of what to do next, I proceed with my shit, until my delayed instinct told me to get the fuck out if I value my life. 

I never got to shit that night.

I didn’t need to anymore. I got home, tested it, weighed it. 4 grams of pure MDMA. I never needed that much, but I ain’t complaining...Im posting this because a story by u/OGnastyOTS reminded me of this adventure.

So I was staying in the bay area for a few months and had to fly home to Colorado to renew my license and pick up a car I had just bought. My roomate was supposed to drive me to the airport after we had breakfast at his favorite breakfast place. My flight was fairly early like 8am, I believe, and my mom was going to pick me up from the airport and drive straight to the DMV. I only had a limited amount of time off work so I had to get this done in one day so I could be on the road, headed back to Cali by 6am the next day.

The day before my flight left I woke up sick. All I wanted to do was sleep but I had work so I went and came home and went straight to sleep. The following day my roommate is waking me up in a panic saying "were late!" I had overslept, but not enough to miss my flight but just enough to avoid buying my friend breakfast in exchange for driving me. So we get in the car and I apologize profusely and tell him I will buy him his breakfast as soon as possible, after my trip.

Now a moment to explain my relationship with my friend. We did drugs together. Lots and lots of drugs. Now we also had a game where we would dose each other with lsd at different times. It was consensual and fun and we understood there were boundaries considering work, family ect. 

DISCLAIMER: DO NOT EVER ASSUME ITS OK TO GIVE PEOPLE DRUGS WITHOUT THEIR PERMISSION 

We had previously given mutual permission to do this and fully acknowledged the chaos that it would cause. We were doing so many different hallucinogens already a couple doses wasnt a big deal.

So back to the car. I fall asleep waking up several times with a weird taste in my mouth I attributed to being sick and went back to sleep. When I wake up my friend was in the drop off lane and he was rushing me. Hurry hurry. I was confused and couldn't seem to wake up. I get the trunk open, get my bags out and head inside while my friend tears out of there. I thought that was strange but ignored it because I still felt the need to hurry hurry! 

So I go inside and I'm standing there trying to form a game plan. Ok tickets. Get to the counter. But there's rope boundaries set up so you have to zig zag to the counter. Ok where does the line start? Hey I never thought about how silly people look when they are zig zagging and empty rope line. I'm laughing now. The ropes are waving up and down and I'm laughing at the rope. I cant find the beginning of this moving maze that's making me laugh so hard.
FUCKMESIDEWAYSTHATMOTHERFUCKER.
It hit me like a truck when I realized what was going on. I run to the bathroom and look at my pupils. Black. Not a spec of color I could make out trying to see through the haze that was caused by toilets flushing. Fuck. There's my first marker. Seeing sounds. I've been here before but not with shit to do! I'm scared of planes! I'm claustrophobic! Security!? Fuuuuuuuck.

I got my shit and left the intense bathroom. Eventually I gave up on finding the beginning to the line and just duck under every boundary which caused some states but fuck it I'm at the counter.
Getting my ticket was like watching a puppet try to  and be professional. I wasn't even aware of the words coming out of my mouth but she wasn't giving me that wtf look so I must be good. I walk away with tickets! Cool!

But now security. I get to the gate and hear the clinking of keys. Chirps of radios. It's all serious and unnatural. Stern faces. People sighing and looking miserable. This is not right. My stomach turns. I cant do this. What in the actual fuck is going on? Someone is waving at me. I put my backpack in a bucket and rush through the detector shoes and belt on, phone and wallet still in pocket. Someone puts their hand on my chest. He reaches into my body and makes a face. I don't know what he is saying but I want him to stop touching my soul so I turn around walk away. Someone else is smiling and waving me over. The first smile I had seen since this nightmare started. She is so kind, patient. I can see the good will shining  from her soul. I make out the words belt phone ect. Oh ya! Duh! I know now! So I put all my stuff in the bin and make it through security. The sense of terror starts to fade. I made it! 

I get to my gate and the sun is shining through the big window and it's such a beautiful day out! I start daydreaming about concerts and remember my ipod! I have music! I put on Pretty Lights and fucking jammed. For the next couple hours I moved when everyone moved and enjoyed my window seat and the beautiful sun in the meantime. I never once was scared. I never had a negative or scary thought on the plane. I was greeted by my smiling loving mother. She had the same aura as the security lady who's patience,understanding, and love became a life raft to me when I needed it the most. 

So jokes on my friend. I had one of the most amazing trips of my life, I'm no longer claustrophobic or afraid of planes. And I also learned how a little patience, understanding, and love can go a long way.

EDIT: I IN NO WAY,SHAPE OR FORM RECCOMEND OR CONDONE DOING THIS. It's not a good idea. It took a lot of experience to be comfortable enough to push forward that day. This was about 9 years ago and I would never do anything like this today. LSD is a drug to respect and learn from, it is definitely not a shitty in flight movie you only pay half attention to.Have you ever been at a party or at work and somebody starts talking about how they’ve taken LSD or mushrooms and as they’re describing their experiences it becomes painfully obvious that they have never taken them and are just trying to sound cool?

“ dude I ate like 5 tabs of acid and bugs bunny climbed out of the TV and came and sat on the couch with me” shit really bugs me lol

Edit: I understand that some unbelievable visuals can be achieved, especially with combos and the right set and setting. I’ve seen some unbelievable stuff too, mostly faces and eyes and sacred geometry, time distortion, blending of the senses and at higher doses CEVs and OEVs become the same. I’m just mainly talking about those people you can tell are obviously lying and just talking about it to sound cool. You know the people I’m talking about lolIn their latest video Drugslab covered DXM and clearly didn't do ANY research. The syrup they used contained acetaminophen among other active ingredients besides DXM. They did not ~~tell~~ stress and make it clear to the viewers that it is potentially lethal to consume that much acetaminophen and that they should look for products where the only active ingredient is DXM.

Bastiaan (one of the drugslab hosts) drank the DXM syrup and then complained about a headache, feeling sick and dizzy. He then then said the drug was shit and blamed it on DXM even though the side effects were most likely due to the other active ingredients. Even though they knew the dangers of consuming the syrup, Bastiaan still went ahead, did it and blamed DXM.

This is just one of the many times they have fucked up and spread false information. They could have easily gotten DXM only containing pills or syrups and told their viewers to do so as well.

They do barely any research for most of their videos and this needs to stop.

Please stop spreading their content as harm reduction advice. Leave comments on their videos and email them about their misinformation. Ask them to take down their videos containing dangerous information and urge them to do more research.

[Here is the video for those who have not seen it. Turn on captions for English subtitles.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-GvsNdiknw0)

Edit: Send your complaints here: https://bnn.nl/pagina/zeg-het-maar 

Edit: a sentence and a word.I did not provide him with said edibles- don't know where he got them. Personally don't care much for delta 8.

But jesus christ did it fuck him up. His aunt wanted me to watch him for the night while she went out- I went and took a shower, assuming that he would be playing video games or something. About 20 minutes into said shower (I was taking my time.) He knocks on the bathroom door-  and mans looks like Casper the ghost, I ask if he is okay- he can barely talk but eventually mumbles something like "can you walk me to the kitchen" I ask him why he would need me to walk him to the kitchen, he doesn't respond but by this point- even with just me poking my head around the shower curtain,  I can tell he has taken something.

I tell him to go outside and sit down while I get decent- once I'm out of the bathroom I find him sitting in the hallway- barely able to hold his head up. At this point I'm starting to panic a little bit. I start asking him what he has taken- because honestly it looked like he might be on some sort of downer. I.e: xanax is what came to mind. His speech is slurred and he is just out of it. 


I finally get him to tell me- by assuring him that I won't tell his mother, but it is imperative that I know what he has taken so I can help him. He finally tells me that someone gave him a pack of delta 8 edibles. I don't believe him because honestly I've consumed delta 8 multiple times in the past- and I'll just say: *It has never put me in that state.*

So I ask him where the bag is so I can see exactly what he took- I go into his room and shit just gets worse. There is throw up on the floor- and his comforter has been ripped off the bed- no where to be found. I find the bag- and sure enough, it is delta 8, which put me at ease somewhat but I was still on edge. 

I go back to where he is and walk him to the kitchen- pretty much drag- he could barely walk. I sit him down at the table and he slumps down. I stick something in the microwave and tell him he needs to eat so he can come down. I then ask what he did with his comforter.  


This is where it gets fucking lovely. He said that he got really paranoid after he threw up on his bed and decided that the best course of action was to rip the blanket off his bed and go throw it in the backyard... He starts begging me not to tell his mom and of course I don't because honestly I felt bad for the kid. So what is my only option? I go and clean his puke up off the floor and go outside to retrieve the vomit blanket that was also soggy now from mud and rain. I come back and make sure he is eating- he got about halfway through the food and proceed to throw that up. Then he says he wants to go to bed, so I basically carry him to the bed and put him on his side. He passes out immediately. I of course, being paranoid- came and checked on him regularly. 

The rest of my night consisted of me cleaning puke off the floor and washing puke blankets extensively. His mother never found out. That little shit owes me.I know this sounds obvious but please be careful when you’re dealing with someone for the first time. I just got out of the hospital a few days ago after my lung collapsed from getting stabbed in the chest twice after a couple fuckers tried to jump me for a couple hundred bucks. This wasn’t normal at all cuz i live in a pretty good neighborhood and I actually grew up with one of them, knew him since middle school. I was literally a couple blocks away from my house waiting in the car with my girl when they came up to the window and asked me to hop out so they could do the deal in another spot. I should’ve fucking known it was sus but I did it anyway and instead of getting an ounce i got a fucking knife in my chest and a concussion. luckily i wouldn’t let go and people noticed us fighting so they called the cops. There were at least 5 cruisers there before they even made it out of the parking lot so i was really, really lucky. I was also really lucky that i live so close to a hospital because the wound was a lot more serious than it seemed. 

Please, even if you live in a gated community and you’re just picking up an 8th make sure you’re not getting involved with sketchy people. just play it safe. I never would’ve expected this to happen and it was a pretty fucked up experience to say the least. 

It seems like people are getting more and more desperate and caring less and less about each other. whoever reads this please take my advice and follow your gut if it tells you somethings off, you’re not a pussy for avoiding dangerous situations you’re just being smart. Don’t think i’m posting this seeking attention, i could care fucking less i just don’t want this shit happening to good people.I've known this since I met him, but today while I was buying some Molly was the first time I'd ever seen her in uniform getting ready for work and it really sank in. Fucking weird, but I guess not that surprising of a relationship for small town rural AmericaSo, my university finally started a harm reduction team for drugs (better late than never I guess). At first I was excited and was even going to apply! I imagined they could do lots of initiatives such as providing reduced rate/free test kits, fentanyl strips and naloxone along with naloxone training. In addition they could also provide real education on harm reduction strategies.

NOPE.

Instead, the team's only main responsibility is to host drug/alcohol free events as alternatives. I think this is really stupid as I don't know anyone who currently parties who is going to opt out because some group is hosting a board game night. There are already hundreds of clubs/activities around campus that don't involve drugs, people are doing them because they are fun and feel good, not because they have nothing else to do.

I feel like they had a really good opportunity to improve the drug culture at the university and make it safer but they blew it by pursing this boneheaded abstinence-only strategy.If you are that guy to make food when everyone else is very high, thank you very much. You are a gift to this world. 

Thank you also to actual pizza delivery guys and thank you to Jimi Hendrix and the guy who gets water also 

Have a nice night guys I'm staring at the four hundred dollar pair of pants I just bought, shocked and offended at their presence in my hotel room.

In my head, I tried to do the math, tried to find the exact origin point of these pants presence in my life. They'd snuck in, that much was certain. I didn't wake up this morning thinking "what I really need is some exorbitantly expensive but otherwise unremarkable pants." But the fact of the matter is that I didn't wake up today at all.

I had been in dubai roughly three hours when the pants came into my life. I had wanted to get a belt. Flying into Dubai is psychedelic experience i've written about before, wherein the cocaine dream the city was built on suddenly seems remarkably obvious, and the absurdity of its existence is spelled out in five hundred foot tall letters for the world to see.

HEY, YOU KNOW HOW THERES NOTHING BUT DESERT FOR HUNDREDS OF MILES? WE PUT A HUGE FUCK OFF CITY HERE LOL WANNA RIDE A MONORAIL

This was my fifth trip to the city, and there was absolutely nothing to say I hadn't said in a hundred statuses and a million tweets. Dubai is the teenage hot topic goth of metropolises: it shows up to the party expecting you to make fun of it. It doesn't care, it KNOWS it's cool.

It's a city with more cranes than sidewalks, where a futuristic public transportation system almost kind of works. It's everything people say it is. It's a big shiny belly button piercing on the navel of the middle east, concealed by a long hijab.

Or sometimes not.

But due to some tactical errors in pharmacology, I had taken an ambien way too late until my flight. When I was awoken for landing, I was still in a stupor, unable to process why I was on an airplane, where I'd come from and where I was going. For reasons undoubtedly deeply subconscious and tragic, I had become convinced I was going to meet "my girlfriend" whose name escaped me entirely; my images of her were glimmery and confused, and I had to play off asking the stewardess where the plane was landing by saying "is it nice this time of year?" three times until she clarified what place I was talking about.

The amount of Captain America shirts in the airport alone was suffocating. The ride to the hotel was as fraught with near collisions and road rage as it is every year. Whatever profundities for profauxndities could be made about Dubai had been made, and I was deliriously happy to be back.

Notably though, the delirium and happiness were utterly separate states, the ambien still lingering. I asked the drive if he knew how to "romv."

I don't know what "romv" is.

But I needed a belt.

I'm staying at the Sofitel next to the burj this year. The burj, which is familiar to most people as Tom Cruise's abusive boyfriend from Mission Impossible: Ghost Protocol, and in person, is only impressive from far away or right up next to it. At its base is the massive Dubai Mall, one of five or so such megabehemoths, conveniently linked by skyway to my hotel, a long but pleasantly air-conditioned walk in a glass tunnel over construction site after construction site, and finally through a delightful rainbow section into the mall itself.

Like all the malls in Dubai, the main weapon the Mal has at its disposal is shock and awe. You repeatedly enter vast atriums the size of hockey rinks where you can gaze down all five levels, crisscrossed by bridges and every single type of store with every single type of product imaginable.

Water porn is everywhere in Dubai, and the malls are no exception. It's the bikini of the city: everything has a pool, or a waterfall, or some such aquafetishized component. No lie, a store that sells jeans shows people in jeans dipping their denim clad legs in a pool. The water porn is strong.

The effect of the mall is two fold: firstly, you suddenly want a bazillion things, and secondly, by hitting this breaking point, you enter a state of consumerist nirvana wherein you no longer want anything at all.

The idea of buying a belt here seemed ridiculous: surely I needed ten belts, or a hundred belts, or what was the point of having one belt at all? That was the instant mental state achieved: either I never wanted to own a belt again, or I wanted to simultaneously own every belt to ever have existed.

Having a single new belt felt unambitious, puny and ridiculous.

Snap out of it, I thought. Snap out of it. You can buy a belt, but maybe let's also buy pants okay these pants okay done wait where did I buy these pants? I was walking out of the mall, holding an unmarked white bag with a belt and a pair of four hundred dollar pants in it.

I could not for the life of me remember the name of the store I'd bought them in, and I could not even really remember the act of buying them beyond raising my eyebrows at the four hundred dollar price tag and muttering "that seems like an awful lot for these pants" before paying and immediately leaving from the store.

I felt weirdly tricked: I hadn't wanted pants, much less $400 pants that looked and felt like any normal slim fit from Topman. These pants had been hypnotized into my life.

I had been hijacked. Dubai had played a game on me I'd long ago dismissed myself as being impervious to via my endless cynicism. I had become something I rarely am in America. I had become a shopper.

Tomorrow, I embark on an epic middle eastern quest, not unlike Indiana Jones. But unlike Jones, I do not intend to retrieve an artifact: I hope to return one.

These traitor thief pants are going back the shelf.

EDIT:
the pants in question http://imgur.com/20fblTQ
they're just fucking pants.What's important to keep in mind, especially for addicts, is that drug dependency is only an extreme version of what all humans face. Our lives are a constant flow of satisfaction and dissatisfaction, and even when we are satisfied we still worry that our happiness will not last - think of a food addict who enjoys himself while eating but even then is aware that he will eventually become hungry. The only way to escape this cycle is to realize that no amount of indulgence will make you feel complete, that no matter how much meth you smoke you will eventually crash. No matter how many screens you look at or people you meet, you are inevitably on your own in this life. Once you stop running from that feeling you will find yourself without fear - without the need to take one more hit or read one more post.

It's a scary thought to know that no amount of pleasure will truly satisfy you, but we can overcome that fear. I believe in your ability to put down the pipe, bottle, needle, screen, whatever, and look at yourself in the mirror for one minute. Realize that the present is all that matters, and that you have no logical reason to chase fleeting feelings.

Edit: For those who don't know, "chasing the dragon" is a term that refers to the  constant chasing of an unobtainable high; e.g. heroin addicts trying desperately to achieve a high which their body can no longer provide.Hittin up all your friends on social media “yo for real I love you like a brother. I miss kicking it with you dude, lets meet up soon”

Hittin up exes like “hey yo let’s try this just friends thing, I miss being around you” 

Positive exchanges with family members “hey so I guess it really wasn’t that big of a deal you flaked on thanksgiving”


COMPLETELY forget about it and then a few days later they start hittin you back up and you’re just like:


Fuck. I was reading about the history of LSD this morning and realized that today is the 78th anniversary of the creation of acid. I thought y'all would be interested. Here's his description of his first trip: 

"...affected by a remarkable restlessness, combined with a slight dizziness. At home I lay down and sank into a not unpleasant intoxicated[-]like condition, characterized by an extremely stimulated imagination. In a dreamlike state, with eyes closed (I found the daylight to be unpleasantly glaring), I perceived an uninterrupted stream of fantastic pictures, extraordinary shapes with intense, kaleidoscopic play of colors. After some two hours this condition faded away."

Check out the Wikipedia link for more information. It's crazy to me how such an amazing drug was made and ingested completely on accident while researching a respiratory and circulatory stimulant. Happy LSD birthday!

Edit: [I wanted to add this link to his personal account of the events leading up to his discovery](http://www.psychedelic-library.org/child1.htm). It is a very interesting and thorough write up. I highly recommend reading it if you have the time.I’ve had extreme Anosmia for the last 6 months as a side effect of having had COVID. It’s something that I severely underestimated when I first got infected, but man…. Life sucks without taste and smell… You don’t realise till it’s gone how much you miss it. 

For months I’ve not been able to get any satisfaction out of food, everything tastes like flavourless mush and it makes eating a chore rather than one of life’s best pleasures. 

Then something profound happened a couple of days ago. A friend of mine mentioned to me he had cracker dry Liberty Caps (a delicacy in the south east of England that comes round once a year), I did my usual and bought a bunch to last me a while. 

I ate a few at the weekend and went to see that new Disney Movie, Encanto (which is incredible by the way). But when in there I was eating popcorn…. I could actually taste it… I thought maybe I was just tripping really hard and my mind was just putting tastes there; like everything tastes weird when you’re tripping right? But this was different… I could actually physically taste it for the first time in I don’t know how long.

I went out after the movie to a chinese all you can eat restaurant and ate… and ate.. and aaaaate. I was literally welling up with tears the whole time, I could actually SMELL the food again, and it tasted amazing!! It was one of the most beautiful days of my life and even now afterwards my taste and smell are back to normal. It fixed something in my brain and now I can eat like a normal person again and it fills me with such intense relief that I’m actually tearing up whilst typing. Life is good :)

TLDR; shrooms cured my anosmia and now my life feels good again.Many years ago in my 20s I lived on a housing estate that backed on some fields.

I used to keep 2 ducks that both lay an egg a day every day.. I saved them up.

Every now and then my bro and I would eat some acid. Wait until we were tripping balls, usually in the early hours past midnight. gather up as many eggs as we had and head out to the field to have an egg fight.

It was almost impossible to hit each other bit when we did we both found it hilarious with no thought of what the neibours must think....

Good times indeed.For me it would go:

**Weed**: Take a step back and appreciate what you've got

**Psychedelics**: Understand your place in the universe, and strive to be better

**Alcohol**: Who gives a fuck, like actually

**Nicotine**: Life is boring, that's why we inhale delicious carcinogens

**Opiates**: Everything is going to be ok. Until withdrawals I mean. Keep feeding me, I am all you've got <3

**Salvia**: You are a cog in the machine that is the universe. It is indifferent. It is absurd. Don't you dare try to make sense of any of it.I grew up in poverty, was a straight A student who did nothing but study, went to University and literally survived by eating popcorn 3 times a day (so no money for drugs but very curious). Since graduation over 20 years ago, I've had too much to lose professionally plus I have no connections. However, this is my favourite sub on reddit, the stories/trip reports are fascinating and thought provoking. I've learned so much. Edit: I do drink alcohol.Around the shy age of 12 I was in 6th grade and I had my first drink. Not unheard of, but as you can tell by the title, it was alcohol I brewed myself. I had no intention of drinking it in fact. I saw it as a money making scheme. 

I did some research and found the easiest way to brew up what can only be called a mildly better version of prison hooch. A simple combination of yeast and sugar, which is essentially the Finnish beverage Kilju. I took 4 gallon jugs out of the family recycle bin on trash day and started planning. I didn't have money to buy the ingredients so I got a friend onboard to do the dirty work in exchange for money I'd get from selling this god awful butthole brew. 

He stole large amounts of sugar and baker's yeast from the nearby store, stuffing his entire backpack full of it. I got to work. I barely measured it and simply put it all together in 4, gallon sized milk jugs with tiny holes poked in the lid to let the pressure out. I hid it in my closet and let it brew for about 6 weeks, adding more yeast and sugar in random intervals. I was constantly asked by my parents "What the hell is that smell?" but they never found it or caught on.

Finally it came time to drink it, but there was far too much yeast floating around so I needed to filter it out. I had my friend steal a Brita water filter, but he got caught. Thankfully no repercussions as he was so young.  Not my proudest moment having someone else do my dirty work, though I can only imagine the confusion the workers felt catching a 12 year old trying to steal a Brita water filter. I opted to use coffee filters instead and to give it some flavor I used Kool-Aid powder and sugar.

I decided to finally test it and to my surprise, it was not half bad. I decided to keep 1 of the 4 gallons for myself. After only a few sips I was FUCKED UP. The Finnish drink, Kilju afformentioned is often between 15 and 17% alcohol content and that's essentially what I brewed, so this was pretty strong stuff. Maybe not that strong, but way stronger than beer 🍺, that's for sure. 

Through my high school brother I managed to sell the remaining 3 and made $80. Desperate high school students will buy ANYTHING. It's almost pitiful that they would buy that, but they did!  $80 goes a long ways when you're 12. I kept on sipping that gallon for a few weeks until it was gone. 

EDIT: The alcohol sold to the high schoolers did NOT have Kool-Aid in it, nor was it filtered. They were given a sample first but we're still interested, despite the "pulp" from all of the yeast  They still bought it 

I don't know if it's pride I feel from brewing alcohol at such a young age, but it is definitely gave me an interesting story to share with people being that my first drink was self brewed. I put in the work and it paid off!



TLDR: I brewed 4 gallons pretty strong alcohol at the shy age of 12 in my closet, hidden from my parents using only stolen yeast and sugar. Flavored with Kool-Aid and sugar. Kept 1 for myself and sold 3 of them to high schoolers for $80. Check this shit out I have yet to test it but I dont see why it wouldnt work it's so perfect you can do it right in the comfort of your own home here's the jist sand paper makes things smooth right remember that so if you take two pieces of sand paper and rub them together like rub the shit out of them together they would continually sand each other until you reach infinite smoothness after like a day or so of solid sanding I havent crunched the numbers but that's a solid guess so you've got a sand paper that is infinitely smooth so like grit one billion or higher or something then you go find a wheel I think any wheel will work but the bigger the better as they say so you take your infinite sand paper and sand down the part of the wheel that connects to the axel rod thing and then you have a wheel with no friction let that baby loose just spin it and it will spin forever so that's basically it free energy I dont want to patent this idea I want everybody to have access to free unlimited energy unlimitless energy is the future please share this for the sake of mankind get this in the newspapersIt's like if after ww2 instead of hanging nazi's we forgave jews

The entire war on drugs was a lie, those who extended were lying, the entire fucking thing is a travesty that has destroyed countless lives, and NO ONE is going to have to answer for it. And while I know many of the original people to blame are long gone, there are *plenty* of living people who have some responsibilityThrowaway of course. I am posting this because I have nothing else to do right now.

I like to fap for 2-8 hours on cocaine. I am 31 and got a 19 yo roomate with his gf staying with us too. I don't know long they know but the past 2 days I have been doing my thing and they keep throwing mentions around it like posting the kiss emoji on messages, ring the bell before coming home etc. Also they spread it to all their friends which I know too. We are 5 people here now and they just told me I look super weird and I won't be able to get my dick up in a couple of years.

The thing is I don't really wanna talk about it, although I would do it right now but I am high and can't talk shit.

Again, no reason I post this.

Guys make me a favor and upvote this to 10, I hate it when I get less than 10.

Edit: mandatory edit to say "I didn't expect this to explode". Also, of course I have the door locked and not make noise but if you have this planted over your head ie. "he is probably masturbating/masturbated", you could be very right about it. To be honest I don't know if they were sure about it or speculating.Choose Life. Choose a job. Choose a career. Choose a family. Choose a fucking big television, choose washing machines, cars, compact disc players and electrical tin openers. Choose good health, low cholesterol, and dental insurance. Choose fixed interest mortgage repayments. Choose a starter home. Choose your friends. Choose leisurewear and matching luggage. Choose a three-piece suit on hire purchase in a range of fucking fabrics. Choose DIY and wondering who the fuck you are on Sunday morning. Choose sitting on that couch watching mind-numbing, spirit-crushing game shows, stuffing fucking junk food into your mouth. Choose rotting away at the end of it all, pissing your last in a miserable home, nothing more than an embarrassment to the selfish, fucked up brats you spawned to replace yourselves. Choose your future. Choose life.Today is my 5 year anniversary for quitting heroin. Its crazy how far things have come since then. I went from being a junkie to being happily married and thinking about starting a family. It is also my 3 week anniversary of quitting nicotine. Life is good, just wanted to share the stoke!


Edit: Thanks for all of the kind words everyone! I am trying to answer your questions as best as possible, I apologise if I miss anyone. Hope you are all having a great day! I possibly did the best and worst thing in my life. 

So, recently I graduated from college. My master program was incredibly unorganized, which actually made it easy and kind of relaxed. For my master thesis I did a research that I was kind of interested in, but for appearances sake I pretended to love every second of it and my committee was very pleased with my work. I even managed to publish a few papers which were apparently pretty well written and researched. NOW the important part is that ALL the good work I did in college, all the hard exams I studied for, and basically anything of ANY essence was done with a LOT of help provided by my dear friend: amphetamine (speed). It was the only thing that help me focus enough to write those long papers, study enough to get through the research, stay awake and study instead of smoking weed and watching LOTR. 

Now, after graduation I took a break off it for a few months, I was incredibly unmotivated to do anything for that time. I haven’t found a job in the field because it would take effort. I did travel a bit and try to find something of essence but didn’t really care. 

Then recently I got some amphetamines from a friend, did a couple of lines, and all the motivation to study and excel was back! I finally checked my college emails and saw I got one from a college professor who sent me a link to apply for a PhD opening on a Swedish university. I applied without thinking, sent all my documents, was esthetic thinking about how hard I will work, how awesome it will be to study again! When I came down I kind of regretted it because I know I would have a very hard time at a proper college without any chemical help, also Sweden is pretty hard with drug laws, and I don’t even know if I can take a few more years of that kind of heavy use. I was however pretty sure they won’t respond or offer me anything because my grades were shit (even though the coursework was EASY).

Well I was WRONG, I have an interview soon-ish and I AM FUCKING TERRIFIED! 

I should be studying right now instead of writing this, I should be esthetic I even got a chance at an interview; instead I spent the last few days anxious as fuck.

On one hand; I am a gay girl living in Eastern Europe, a chance for a life and career in Sweden is everything I could ever dream off. It would mean breaking out of this close-minded corrupt society and offer a real chance for success, maybe I’d even have a chance to eventually financially help my parents.

On the other; I am too scared I’ll get it, and when I start realize I am too stupid to finish it and that my success before was all thanks to those few hours of hyper focus provided by fucking amph! If I dropped out because of that I would never forgive myself, also if I had to pay back scholarship money I’d never get out of financial dept. 

Sorry for the rant, I usually love reading through this subreddit, everyone is so supporting and helpful. 

I was kinda hoping for any advice.

Any of you guys from Sweden? Is it possible to get any amphetamines or stimulants there? Also, are your universities incredibly hard?They are meant to enhance your experience and perception, dont ruin it. All good things come with a cost. People take drugs for a ton of different reasons, but make sure youre staying safe with whatever you use.

Edit: this post is for harm reduction purposes and for those of you who feel "trapped." Im not trying to tell anyone what to do, but rather trying to point out the obvious that drugs shouldnt control your life, you should control it!I think that's what describes me. But I'm not sure if that's an actual thing. I love getting high, drunk, etc. 

Or maybe I just hate being sober. I feel like my mind is always racing, and getting fucked up clears my head so to speak.

If I'm sitting down playing an FPS sober, I can do alright, but it's almost like I can never give the game 100% of my attention. Not that I lose focus on the game, but while I'm playing other shit goes through my head. I don't even know what, as much as I'm sure that doesn't make sense. It's like I'm just thinking about random shit but my brain isn't actually letting me know what.

Even just a beer helps turn it off, and I can really focus on the game, and just honestly play leaps and bounds better than sober me.

I always go to weed first, is stick with that for the rest of my life if I was in a legal state. But if no weed I'll go booze, or then pills as a last resort. (History of addiction on both sides of my family so I severely limit substances known to often be super addictvie.

Anyways, anybody else feel the same? I don't think it'd be ADD/ADHD or some form, because I don't really lose focus on anything. When I'm working I don't get distracted or anything. 


**EDIT: Holy fuck, I created a throwaway to ask what I thought would have been perceived a stupid question, didn't think it would take off. I'm glad it generated all this discussion, I've taken in quite a bit here.**it just makes me really sad how people can be so scared of drugs. they have reason to be afraid tho, it’s not their fault they were taught to be afraid of them. it just makes people like these more difficult for them to accept who YOU are, even tho they go out and get plastered by alcohol or vape or smoke weed, which is totally fine with me. but when i tell you that i dropped a couple of tabs of acid, or popped a xan, or an addy, oxy IDGAF what it is, they give you that look of disappointment and confusion. like no one asked you to judge me, i don’t judge you. i feel like if people were educated, rather than scared away, society would be a lot happier. i know this because i know YOU. YOU are like ME, WE are all the same. we just want to experience something different and there shouldn’t be anything wrong that and we should be able coexist with people who don’t want to. we are not harmful you, we will never do anything to intentionally hurt you, but why must you shame us and punish us for OUR choices. anyways, as i have always said, it’s the punishment behind the drugs than actual drug useThis happened around March last year. I have been pretty busy with University so I haven't been able to make a post about it since then. While I was on LSD, I exposed that I was bisexual, for the first time ever.


A couple years before this, I had already felt a firm grasp that I was attracted to men. I have a loving family and friends but still didn't want to admit it. A mix of embarrassment, confusion, and social paranoia refrained me from consulting these feels, let alone telling someone I had them. I was in a lot of denial. The denial caused a lot of emotional pain that made me feel like my attraction was a curse.


Fast forward, I have the house to myself for a week, and decide to take some LSD. This was not my first trip at all, but it was my first time taking it alone. Other than the chance of being attracted to men, I was pretty comfortable with myself and my psyche so I wasn't too scared. I took it early in the morning, and my two best friends were going to come over later in the day to hangout with me and observe me lose my mind.


After 4 hours of laughing my ass off alone like a lunatic, my two best buds knock and walk in. They were sober before and were the entire time at my home. We are laying around talking, and I am trying to communicate as best I can. I sat up to use the restroom where I looked myself in the mirror. It was a surreal hallucination of seeing my own thoughts as I looked quite literally 'in myself' and then bam! The male attraction came up. It is quite hard to describe (as are most things with psychedelic drugs) but I felt a tug of war between wanting to be sexually active with an attractive man right then and there to another side that just kept screaming "that's wrong! you're wrong! stop!"


When I came back to the room, my friends noticed my demeanor changed. One of my friends who is a season psychedelic user joked "what? look at yourself in the mirror?" I slowly sat down and began breathing heavily. My two friends and I have done many LSD trips together, and I'm the one that usually keeps their shit together the most, so they knew I would be fine but were still worried about how I was reacting to whatever the fuck happened between being in front of them laughing to hyperventilating on the floor.


At this point, my brain is exploding in polarized thoughts. It felt *painful.* I felt like I had to tell someone, not even really for acceptance but just to avoid the chaos happening in my head. I felt like a bubble about to pop. I slowly got up and said, "Guys, I think I am bisexual and I don't know what to do about it." Both of them were obviously taken aback because I have only dated and slept with women thus far. My mind was racing through ridiculous possible events that would happen in the next ten seconds. Would they hate me and never speak to me? Would they tell my dad? Would they physically harm me? Obviously, in a sober mind and even in an LSD mind, none of these events would ever happen. The drug makes you think crazy things.


My friends looked at each other and began laughing. At first I felt very hurt by this. Here I am delivering a big revelation and they think I'm joking. Then one of my buddies says, "Thanks for telling me man, but it's not like it's going to matter. We love you regardless, whether you're gay, straight, or a little in between." Then my other friend chimes in and says, "Yeah dude I appreciate you trusting us with this shit. We don't think any different of you, because we like you for you."

Let me tell you folks. Wanna know what the best fucking feeling in the world feels like? That. Being able to not only embrace very closeted feelings, but to also have people you love accept it. I jumped over my coffee table and gave those kids the biggest hug I have ever given. From that moment forth, I was extremely comfortable about being bisexual, and I didn't give two fucks who didn't like it. That event gave me enough courage to tell my dad the next week, and he came in with open arms and has never treated me differently because of it. We went on a drive later that day and I even joked about male classmates I find attractive, and they both joked and chimed in. I didn't feel paranoid about saying any of these things. I felt like I was able to express myself sexually. 


Since then, I have had girlfriends and open boyfriends. LSD and great loving friends gave me the push to do this, and overall has made my life a lot easier. I would've missed on really loving and important relationships had it not happened. As there are many questions in life, drugs are not always the answer, and in my case even LSD wasn't the answer to my questions of paranoia and pain. It pushed me. It helped me do what I had always wanted to do, with the warm soft landing of great people around me.

 That day will forever be a beautiful moment in my psychedelic scrapbook.





EDIT:  For those curious, the dosage was around 350-400ug

EDIT 2: Holy shit! My first ever gold after being on Reddit for 5 years. I’m sorry I haven’t been able to respond to all your comments, I have been in class all day. I seriously cannot believe the response this got. I was expecting maybe 20 upvotes and a couple comments. You all said such amazing and impactful things. I’m in tears writing this now! You all are kickass amazing people. I love you all and hope your days are great!!!!!!!!

EDIT 3: Silver!!! This goes out to the kind u/jake5499 ! Love you brother! From one heart to another ❤️Edit: Wow thanks for the rewards, I never expected this post to blow up like this!

I've tried about 65 different compounds. I'll be rating them out of ten in their own category. Most of them I've only done one or a couple of times so don't take my experience as the absolute truth. If you have more specific questions about any of them feel free to ask! I'm going to keep it brief for every one of them because there are a lot. Do research yourself every time you try a new substance and stay safe! :)

If you want to skip to a specific drug this is the order : **Gaba's, Cannabinoids, Psychedelics, Dissociatives, Stimulants, Benzos, Deliriants, Opiates**

# Gaba's:

**Alcohol ( 7/10 )** : Everyone knows alcohol, some like it more than others. I really like the high it gives me but the hangovers are the worst of all drugs I've tried. I like liquor more because it doesn't really fuck up my stomach.

**GHB ( 8/10 )** : It's like the perfect version of alcohol but it's a little bit too "clean". I like the blurry vision of alcohol and that's not really present here. I like the horny feeling it gives you though.

# Cannabinoids:

**Weed ( 6/10 )** : When you would ask me 3 years ago it would be a 10/10 but it just isn't really fun anymore. Solo smoking might still me fun but when I'm out with friends I just get to tired and asocial and it's just a waste of a night for me.

**Spice (3/10)** : I was at a party and a friend of a friend had a weedvape. I was excited to try it and had the worst experience ever, I had so much anxiety when I was heading home and just went to sleep to get it over with. At first I thought I had a bad reaction to weed but only a year later I found out that guy is a regular spice smoker. Wouldn't recommend this at all. I have no idea which compound it is exactly sadly.

# Psychedelics:

**Pilocybin truffels ( 6/10 )** : EDIT: These are truffels not shrooms, there is a difference folks. 

I've done them two times now, once at 7 grams and once at 15 grams. I felt like both times it hasn't reached it's full potential. The second time I had some visuals but there was also some nausea present during the whole trip. It has a good potential for introspection though.

**1P-LSD ( ?/10 )** : I've only tried this once impulsive during a 6-apb bender and took a lot of clonazepam. I blacked out for two days so I can't remember any of it. I think the visuals were nice but it isn't really a good representation of the compound.

**1cP-LSD ( 7/10 )** : I'd like to give it more but I've only tried 50ug combined with some HXE. Is was way more visual than expected for such a low dose but that could be because of the potentiation of the HXE. I think it's a good chemical though, introspective and recreational at the same time.

**AL-LAD ( 6/10 )** : I tried this two days after the 15 gram truffel trip. I felt nothing from it even though I took 150ug. I thought it was supposed to be more visual but my tolerance might have screwed the trip up. I took some aMT 2 hours after dosing and it only brought on some minor visuals.

**αMT ( 3/10)** : I took it to potentiate the above AL-LAD experience. After 40 minutes I got extreme nausea and it only went a little away after throwing up. The rest of the day I just layed in bed, feeling miserable and tried eating and drinking stuff without throwing up. Never going to try this one again. I threw away my remaining pellets.

**DPT ( 6,5/10 )** : The only ROA I tried it with is nasal. It might not be the best but I had some pleasant trips on it. It's not so strong but great to combine with dissos. If I try this one again in the future I'll try vaping it.

**4-AcO-DET ( 5/10 )** : Nothing special about this one. Barely any visuals or headspace. I wouldn't say the bodyload is bad but in comparison to the other effects it's not worth it imo.

**4-AcO-MET ( 8/10 )** : I really like this compound. It's very visual, has a gentle headspace and is great to combine with other psychs or dissos. The greatest trip I had was when I combined it with 4-HO-MET and 4-HO-MiPT. It had a gradual come-up but the peak was magnificent. I was literally floating through the stars. If I opened my eyes or not it was still the same space I was in. Will surely do this again!

**4-HO-MET ( 8/10)** : Only tried it in above mentioned combination but from what I've heard it's better than 4-AcO-MET.

**4-HO-MiPT ( ?/10 )** : Only tried it in above mentioned combination, can't say anything else about the compound.

**5-MeO-MiPT ( 7,5/10 )** : I feel like this is almost more of an empathogen than a psychedlic. It has almost no headspace or visuals but gets really rolly and sensual. It's great to combine with other substances though. The first time I tried it it was in a bender with ketamine, 2c-b, and MDMA; one of the most intense experiences I've had.

**5-MeO-DiPT ( 4/10 )** : I really don't like this one, it has barely any visuals or headspace and an awfull bodyload. I tried it a couple of times and had to puke twice. Wouldn't recommend it.

**5-MeO-DMT ( 5/10 )** : Like DPT I only snorted it. It's not really the best ROA for it so I didn't really have desirable effects. It has a strange bodyload and no visuals. I think I had an egodeath on 100mg, because I felt like I was physically dying but not really sure if that's an ego death.

**2c-b ( 9/10 )** : I love 2c-b, it's not really an introspective psych unless you do really high doses but it's very recreational. Have done this a dozen of times and can't get tired of it, it's amazing combined with dissos, empathogens and other psychedelics.

**2c-c ( 7/10 )** : This is like a 2c-b light but it's better than what people give it credit for. I'd say a good dose starts from 60mg. It's less stimulating but overall pretty comparable to 2c-b. The only downside is the high dosage therefore the high cost.

**2c-d ( 6/10 )** : I can't say anything bad about it but on it's own it just doesn't do much. Only in combination with other substances is it good. It's a "psychedelic tofu" like Shulgin said.

**2c-b-fly ( 8/10 )** : This is the substance that comes closest to regular 2c-b. It's a little bit less strong but still enjoyable.

**βoh-2c-b ( 8/10 )** : This is like 2c-b but 10-12 hours long, the day afterwards I still had some aftereffects and big pupils which is not something I want. Nonetheless it's a great substance though.

# Dissociatives:

**3-MeO-PCP ( 7/10 )** : Well this one is hard to rate. I did it three times and two of them I took way to much and had a manic experience. It's probably my fault of redosing to much but or it's just really fiendisch, it has some delusion of sobriety so be carefull. The other experience was really enjoyable though, I didn't do to much and combined it with oxycodone and it felt heavenly, it complements opiates really good because I think opiates on their own are pretty boring.

**Ketamine ( 8,5/10 )** : After my manic 3-MeO-PCP experience I waited a long time before trying another dissociative. When I did ketamine I immediately fell in love, I tried it a dozen of times afterwards and started exploring more dissos because of this. It's the perfect drug to combine with psychs and empathogens too.

**2f-dck ( 6/10 )** : It's jus a really weak ket, I can go through half a gram of this without holing even though I only need 100-150mg of ket.

**dck ( 7/10 )** : It's stronger and longer lasting than 2f-dck but still hasn't the "magical" feel of regular ket. I also like shorter acting dissos more.

**DMXE ( 9/10** ) : This is the best disso I've ever tried. Strong, magical, warm, good to hole on, etc. I've done a couple of grams of it and I love it. I've never tried MXE but if it's better than this I understand the hype behind it.

**HXE ( 7,5/10 )** : I recently got this thinking it would be similar to DMXE but it's not as good, I feel like it's less strong and more ket-like but not as good. 

**MXPR ( 7/10 ) :** It's not bad but compared to other dissos it's not really worth it. It's more cold, not as strong and it's to powdery to snort good.

**DXM ( 6,5/10 ) :** It has an interesting high, I'd rate it higher if I didn't have to jug a bottle of cough syrup and have to shit all day. The music appreciation on it is amazing though, if I could get my hands on robotablets I'd give it another try and probably rate it way higher.

# Stimulants:

**Caffeïne ( 8/10 )** : Let's start with the basic one, the reason why I rate it this high is because it's just perfectly balanced. It does what it needs to do, no hangover, no side-effects. 

**Nicotine ( 5/10 )** : I've been a smoker for about four years and I love it. The reason why I rate it this low is because the nicotine "high" isn't really that enjoyable. The only reason I like it this much is just the act of smoking something and I like the taste too. Snuss for example makes me way to dizzy and it's not really enjoyable for me.

**Methylphenidate ( 7/10 )** : The effects of ritalin are barely noticable for me but it's good for keeping you awake, it doesn't really enhance my focus.

**4f-MPH ( 8/10 )** : It's a better version of methylphenidate, this one is really good for studying and has less side-effects than amphetamines.

**Speed ( 8/10 )** : Just to clarify, I mean amphetamine, not meth. I think it's a good slightly euphoric stim. Not really recreational on it's own but very functional.

**2-FMA ( 8/10 )** : This is in between 4f-MPH and speed for me. The reason why all three substances got the same score is because they're all useful for different things and depending on your purpose.

**4-FMA ( 7/10 )** : I feel like this walks the line between recreational and functional, that's why I don't really like it. Studying on it works but I'd rather do something fun but on it's own it's not really recreational enough.

**Cocaïne ( 8/10 )** : I like shorter acting stims so this one is nice. It's a great social drug and has some decent euphoria. The only downside is the cost, 50 a gram is just too much.

**Dimethocaïne ( 5/10 )** : Did half a gram and then I started noticing coke-like effects. Not worth it.

**Hexen ( 6/10 )** : It's a good short acting stim but the high is too "cold". I get a lot of vasoconstriction on it too so that's a big downside. It's the only drug where I notice it enough that it starts to bother me.

**MDMA ( 9,5/10 )** : I love MD, it's the first drug I've tried and did it many times afterwards. I'm a little bit introverted and I like the way I can just talk for hours to people. The rushes of euphoria are amazing too.

**3-MMC ( 8/10 )** : It's nice, it's like a mix between MDMA and Coke. Very fiendsisch though, but great for parties. 

**4-MMC ( 7/10 )** : For some reason this felt like a 3-MMC light, it probably wasn't really mephedrone or just cut with too much stuff.

**4-CMC ( 7,5/10 )** : It feels like 3-MMC but the euphoria is shorter lasting, the stimulation stays for a while. you get a bad strain on you heart though so I don't think it's very healthy.

**5-MAPB ( 8,5/10 )** : It's like the downer version of MDMA, little stimulation and a LOT of serotonin release. It's a good drug to chill with some friends in couches and have some good convos.

**6-APB ( 7/10 )** : It was less good than anticipated. I did half a gram once, mostly nasal but that didn't do a lot, you defenitly need to take it oral. It's a decent role, later I candy flipped it but took some benzos for the stimulation and blacked out so can't remember a lot from the end.

# Benzos:

**( 7/10 )** I'll list them all here because I don't really feel a lot from them, once it starts getting recreational I black out for at least a day. I'm still willing to give it a seven because it's a great tripkiller and helps you sleep after using stims.

**Alprazolam, Flualprazolam, Diazepam, Diclazepam, Etizolam, Deschloroetizolam, Clonazepam, Clonazolam, Bromazepam, Flubromazepam, Pyrazolam**

I'll include **Pagoclone** in this section too because it's basically the same deal, no noticable effects until you black out.

# Deliriants:

**Nutmeg (3/10)** : It's not really a deliriant but I didn't know where to place it. I tried it once, as every drug enthousiastic teenager, before all other drugs because it was easy to get. I ate a couple of grams and it was the worst. It was like a bad weed high that lasted about 2 days, my eyes were the reddest they've ever been and I was extremely dried out the whole time. Fuck this this.

**Diphenydramine ( 6/10 )** : Well it was interesting to say the least. It wasn't really scary, but rather obscure. The room I was in turned dark, there were spiders crawling everywhere and I hallucinated a conversation with my mother which never hapend. Throughout the whole experience I had a bloodtaste in my mouth, I checked like 10 times but there was never real blood. And even though this sounds like a terrible experience, I kinda enjoyed it. Probably not going to do it again but it was very interesting to experience.

# Opiates:

**Dihydrocodeïne ( 5/10 )** : As I said before, I think opiates are pretty boring. This one just made me sleepy and brought on a small amount of euphoria, barely noticable.

**Kratom ( 6,5/10 )** : I have a naturally high tollerance for most drugs but it's the opposite for kratom. I really like the opiate-like effects it gives. I'd rate it higher if it didn't taste so bad and you have to eat so much.

**Tramadol ( 7/10 )** : I like this one, it's more serotogenic compared to other opiates. I've done it a couple of times but wouldn't go out of my way to get it.

**O-DSMT ( 7/10 )** : I don't really feel much from it, it's supposed to be the metabolite from tramadol so I thought it would be better. Maybe I just got a bad batch.

**Oxycodone ( 8/10 )** : I get why persons with addictive personalities get addicted to it but it's nothing for me. It feels nice but it's not "special", as you already might have noticed I'm more for the strange compounds like empahtogens, psychedelics and dissos. Speaking of dissos, combining oxy with 3-MeO-PCP feels absolutely amazing.

Ok, that's all of them. I've some other compounds laying around and on the way to try out so I'll probably update this post later or post a new one. The compounds I'm going to try next are : DOC, NEP and bromazolam. After that I'll probably stop exploring most compounds except psychedelics. The ones I really want to give a shot that are available are 2c-e, MAL, Mescaline, Yoppo seed and HBWR seeds.

Thanks for reading!Hello all my fellow crackheads! Title explains itself let’s get right into it 

S tier :

LSD - 10/10. Ultimate psychedelic. More predictable and easier headspace to control over shrooms. Life changing experiences and is my favorite drug of all time . Lasts forever and perfect to smoke weed with 

Shrooms - 10/10. The only thing about shrooms is the trips are so unpredictable and there’s more anxiety then acid. Still a godly drug. S tier for the same reason lsd is 

MDMA - 10/10. Most euphoric drug ever. Harsh comedowns but the high is like no other. And who doesn’t like candy flipping 

A tier: 

Weed- 9/10. For some people it makes them paranoid but for a lot of people it relaxes them and relieves stress. Great music enhancement. It’s not S tier because you develop a tolerance fast and before you know it half your money goes Towards it. Low risk high reward drug

Cocaine - 9/10. Coke is awesome but it’s taxed asf and doesn’t last long. Very euphoric tho especially with alcohol and nicotine. Easy to for a habit of 

DXM- 9/10. Psychedelic heroin. It makes you nauseous but music sounds sooop good after the comeup. The Disassociation effect is amazing great body high. People call it a kids drug which it kinda is but it gets you really fucked up and I still use it from time to time 


B tier :

Alcohol- 7/10. Cheap asf and easy to get but you can really do some stupid shit and it’s literally a poison. Highest chance of any substance for getting a DUI. I drink but only when I don’t have any other drugs, honestly I look down on it but it’s so popular and u can have a good time so I give it a solid 7

Adderall/ amphetamines- 7.5/10. You can really get some shit done on these. If done right very euphoric. It’s just basically speed and can lead u to meth . Definitely a “hard drug” IMO. I’m on 2 rn 😂😂

Ketamine- 8/10. Great high but the K hole is no joke. I like it but some people freak out when In it. Probably the most therapeutic drug for me I just think about my life probation the whole time and can be my own therapist analyzing everything 


C tier :

Benzos- 7/10. Benzos are great if you need them but it’s so easy to black out and fuck up. Good for coming down on uppers. Good for killing bad trips. 

Hydros / percs / opioid pills - 7/10. Again, great if you need them. The high is absolutely great but leads you straight to heroin and easy to OD on. 

Nicotine - 6/10. It’s an expensive addiction that really doesn’t do shit for you but cigarettes hit on drugs and vaping is fun sober

Lean- 6/10 . It’s DUMMY taxed and the only thing that’s good about it is you can flex and walk around with 2 styrofoam cups thinking your badass. In reality it’s a week opioid and your just gonna end up pawning your 2001 Honda Civic trying to support the habit 


D tier : 

Crack- 4/ 10. I smoked this once, felt like Superman for 10 minutes and then felt depressed for hours. Really no point in ever using this but it’s better than the F tiers 


F tier : 

Meth - 6/10. Gets a 6 because it’s probably the best high and gets you GEEKED but it’s the one drug that can take anyone’s soul and turn u into a rage monster. In moderation you can be super productive tho it’s just extremely addictive 

Heroin - 2/10. Fuck heroin. Yeah the high is amazing and the Dope junkies thinking rn bro U gotta try this it’s amazing bro . Yeah I bet it is. Everyone has a family member/loved one or knows someone that’s died from this shit . Always cut with fentanyl. Needles contain HIV. At least with meth your up getting shit done but your just slumped nodding out on this shit never try this period 

Hope u enjoyed my list. Comment what you think should be changed, what you agreed with and what your favorite drug ever isOriginal post: https://www.reddit.com/r/Drugs/comments/asirlv/heroin_got_me/

When I read that post now I can't believe how naive I was. That wasn't the end of my journey, it was the very beginning. Suffice to say, I didn't quit that day, and over the next year and a bit, I spiraled into a $150/day habit. I estimate I spent 30k USD on heroin in that time. 

Slowly, I stopped working, and put my education on hold. I woke up every day at 5pm and went to bed at 7am. I sat in front of my laptop watching youtube videos all day, drinking beer and sniffing lines. 

There was no problem that couldn't be solved with a handful of valium, or a couple of lines. Sure, the drugs weren't making me feel happy anymore, but they prevented me from feeling bad, which seemed like a good deal at the time. And sure, I know I needed to quit, but every night I'd promise myself that I'd get clean the next day, and when morning came, and I started getting sick, I was back at my desk sniffing heroin again.

Eventually, my mates kicked me out of the house, and I went crying to my parents with the truth. I went to rehab 9 months ago, and I've been clean since. I'm constantly bothered by the fact that I don't know why I started using - I know I'm lonely and I know that I don't understand my identity, but those things never seemed like good enough reasons to start using heroin over. 

What I do know is that I need to stay the fuck away from drugs, because even though I might not understand why I want them, I do know that I'll never stop at just one. I stay clean because I stay accountable to Narcotics Anonymous. I don't work the steps, and I think that some people just swap a drug addiction for an NA addiction, but I don't deny that it's an amazing place to find kinship, support, and accountability.

I've got a full-time job and a side business now, and I'm about to start a degree that I'm actually looking forward to. I've thought many times about posting an update, but up until now, I haven't been inclined to, and I'm not sure why. This subreddit gave me incredible support last time I posted, and for months afterward, I received PM's from people asking how I was doing. Even though I didn't quit that day two years ago, this subreddits kindness always stuck in my mind. I am saddened however at how the tone of this sub has changed. When I first started browsing ~4 years ago, the sub was full of funny stories and anecdotes. Now, it seems that every post has sinister undertones. I don't think it's anything wrong with the sub itself, rather I think it's a sad reflection of the way society is changing - people are using drugs at younger and younger ages, without realizing the severity of it - like myself.

Edit: What lovely responses everyone has given, and thanks for all the awards! It's really great to see other people being given support in the comments as well. Love this sub.Today is my cake day, 

Which is also the birthday of my ex, who overdosed 11 years ago on a combo of sleeping pills and painkillers. 

The day before she wanted to see me, and I was sick as a dog and could not. I woke up around noon to a phone call from her mother saying she had passed and the paramedics wanted to talk to me to see if I knew anything.

I then saw the tons of text messages about her saying how scared she was and how she was sorry. Fucked me up pretty good for a long time. 

I slept as much as I could because I would see her in my dreams. I'm not one to dream often or remember them ever. I had dreams about her for weeks, maybe a few months. The last dream I had of her I was at her wedding. 

I held it together until her memorial service. I then asked to go inpatient. I didn't want to miss it, I didn't want to hurt myself, I was just in so much pain I didn't want to live anymore.

I've stayed in contact with her sister over the years, just a quick hello thinking about you hope you're doing well. She has deactivated her Facebook so I won't be able to reach her now. 

I've also met someone who I love dearly, and yesterday I asked for her father's blessing to ask her to marry me. Life does go on, it was painful for a long time. 

I wanted to write this to remind you all to be safe, I blamed myself for a long time. I only think, if she had called xxx instead of text me maybe she'd still be here. I'm sure the fear of being busted or dealing with anger from family is what kept her and many others from doing that. 

I won't tell you not to do this drug or that drug. I just ask that you take steps to reduce your risk. Have narcan on standby, use clean needles, don't drive, call an uber, call ems if you need to. You matter, your life matters, and someone would be sad if you weren't here anymore.

Anyway I tend to ramble so I'll cut this short, thanks for reading and stay safe.
Intro:

So I thought I had good self control and thought that I could buy 250mg of heroin once, do it and never do it again.

Note that I’m in a location where you can still get pure uncut heroin. So this was not cut with fent and was bought from trusted vendors not crappy street dealers if you know what I mean. I also only snorted the heroin.

I’ve had real extended release oxys before and they honestly didn’t do much for me. And the real instant release oxys where just too expensive for me to justify when heroin was so much cheaper and stronger.

The first time trying heroin:

So I did some heroin the first day I received it and was honestly quite underwhelmed. Sure I felt good but it wasn’t crazy rushes of euphoria that made me feel like I was in another world.

So on this first use I kept doing lines until I started nodding out. Here I started to nod out into a dream like state and then nod back into reality. Eventually I fell asleep and woke up with a horrible headache and felt like shit. I have been told that this is from me doing too much heroin in my first go.

I still had quite a bit left over and did this over the following weekend because for some reason I was just drawn to it even though I didn’t think it was anything that special. Here I should’ve realised that my mind was starting to crave heroin and put a stop it.

But from here I started buying heroin on a more frequent basis and eventually started doing heroin on weekends. That was my rule. Heroin was only allowed on weekends.

For some reason I thought I hadn’t truly experience what heroin as to offer, and kept telling myself that this time was the last time.

4-6 weeks in:

Around 6 weeks from my first use I started doing it every other day. Soon the highlight of my day was coming home from work and doing my first line. In fact all I could think about at work was the heroin I would soon be doing.

Around here I also started to take a Dexedrine (amphetamine) tablet before snorting the heroin, which I imagine is mimicking what’s called a “speedball”. I loved this combo. I felt great and had the energy to do anything. I did this during the day.

At night I would take a Xanax before doing the heroin. This is a very deadly combo, but I felt so good and I had no anxiety or worries about ODing. Some of my most euphoric moments where produced via this combo.


I then started doing it multiple days in row before taking a day off. In my silly mind this was ok as I was still taking days off. And yep you guessed it, not long after this I started doing it daily.

2 months from my first use / today:

Right now, just over 2 months after my first time using heroin, I have been sober for a week and have just made it through some of the worst withdrawals I have ever experienced.

Final thoughts:

The thing is with heroin, for me atleast, is that it will trick your mind into thinking that life without heroin sucks. You will slowly starting thinking how your sober life sucks and how your so lucky to have found heroin. And the cravings get so intense, in fact satisfying the craving feels better than the actual effects of the heroin. 

I had some really sick thoughts towards the end of this period. I was thinking that I should kill myself as my life wasn’t worth living without heroin. I also started fantasising about IVing heroin with a needle as the rush is suppose to be so much better.

Stay away from heroin guys, it’s really not worth it. Like the effects aren’t even that good. But it really does change your brain and pretty much steals so your soul so that your life purpose becomes doing heroin.

The only real positive is that I can relate to other addicts and I really feel sorry for them. I can’t imagine what it must be like when you’ve been addicted to this poison for years.

And I’m not promising that I won’t ever use again. I’ll try not to but I know myself and probably end up justifying it somehow.I work for a place that does pre-employment drug testing. These tips will obviously only be helpful for UN-OBSERVED collections, but they will help keep from arousing the suspicion of the person administering the test. 

1 - Don’t be overly chatty. Most people come in, do the damn thing, and get out. Most of the people we catch trying to cheat their test will make small talk, asking about our day, talking about the latest sports game, the weather, etc. The vast majority of people who aren’t trying to cheat will only ask questions directly related to the test (when will they get the results, will they get a copy of the results, do they need to sign anything, etc).

2 - Substitute, don’t pollute. You are far more likely to pass without getting caught if you substitute your sample with a clean one than you are by using some kind of adulterant. Most adulterants work by altering the pH or causing oxidation of the metabolites being tested and rendering them invalid. Most modern tests check the pH level as well as testing for the presence of oxidants. If either of those come back abnormal, you’re going to fail. There are plenty of products on the market that are designed to make you pass without needing to add anything to them. No product endorsements here; just do your homework. 

3 - Check the temp. The single most common reason why people get caught trying to cheat is their specimen is either too hot or too cold. Most of the good products available have a temperature strip that lets you know if it’s going to be in range. Keep it close to body temperature and you’re good to go. Don’t forget to account for the fact that you might have to wait when you get to the testing site. This is a big variable that you don’t have a lot of control over. Best advice is to get it a little warmer than you need it, and if they’re ready to take you as soon as you get there, tell them you need to drink some water first. That will give it a little time to cool down before you provide it to them. 

4 - Actually pee in the toilet. When you go into the bathroom, the tech is most likely right outside the door. They can hear the splash (or lack thereof) of urine hitting the water in the toilet. If you come out with a specimen in hand and they didn’t hear a drop hit the bowl, it raises suspicion. Those of you who generally have to wipe after urinating should toss some TP in the toilet as well. 

5 - Don't make a big production about how badly you have to pee. A lot of times people will be nervous about the specimen they brought in cooling off too much while they wait, so they make a big spectacle about how badly they have to go in the hope that it will hurry things along. It won’t. All that does is draw attention to yourself before you even get called back. Sit quietly, be patient, and try to stay under the radar. If you check in and have to wait a while and you’re worried that it cooled off too much, make an excuse to step out and check it (need to run to your car for a moment, make a phone call, whatever - just don’t say you need to use the bathroom).

6 - Beware of shaky hands. This one is usually a dead giveaway. Nervous people have shaky hands. When have you bring your specimen out, they’ll show you where to put it. Walk over to the area where they want you to put it and set it down in front of you. Don’t stand off to the side and reach over. They’ll see your hands shaking. Since this is something you really don’t have much control over, the best thing you can do is try to make it less obvious. 

7 - I really feel like I shouldn’t have to mention this, but because I’ve seen this happen, I’m including it. If you’re in a state where drug testing for cannabis is still permissible by law (which is most of them), showing up for a drug test smelling like you just stepped off Willie Nelson’s tour bus with a half-smoked blunt in your pocket is probably not the best way to prevent suspicion. Save the smoke sesh for afterward. 

Obviously this is not a comprehensive list, but these tips should help you stay under the radar if you have to take a drug test and you’re trying to beat it. Hope this helps.Hey, I moved to the UK and go clubbing sometimes. The problem is, that I'm not really attracted to the girls there so it's a bit of a waste of time. I've heard of beer goggles, any other drugs exist that can lower your standards heavily? Pretty sure I'm not gayFDA and WHO gonna try to make Kratom (and other substances) illegal.For you who dont know, Kratom is a substitute for opiates.It basically mimicks opiates and gives the same effect. Just weaker.

Since kratom mimicks opiates on the brain, it can be used to get clean from opiates.Over 15 million americans use kratom!**Nr1**: It can help you get clean from opiates.**Nr2**: It can help treating pain, for example arthritis (I had arthritis inflammation 5 days a week, now on kratom, I rarely get inflammations, maybe once each 3 months if even that).**Nr3**: It can help with anxiety, PTSD and panic attacks (and more) psychological issues as it is very calming and has effect on the serotonin.**Nr4**: No human deaths has been recorded by kratom **aloneNr5**: It's an immunostimulant, it boosts the immunesystem.

This is a crime against humanity if they really do this.Just like when they banned Cannabis, same reasons:Big pharma loses money.You cannot patent Kratom as it is a plant

**Here is the document about FDA gonna push WHO to ban Kratom Internationally**

[https://www.regulations.gov/document/FDA-2021-N-0739-0001](https://www.regulations.gov/document/FDA-2021-N-0739-0001) \- Official Document, "Posted by the Food and Drug Administration on Jul 22, 2021"

"International Drug Scheduling; Convention on Psychotropic Substances; Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs; 4F-MDMB-BICA (4FMDMB-BUTICA); Brorphine; Metonitazene; Eutylone (bk-EBDB); BMDP (3,4-Methylenedioxy-Nbenzylcathinone); Kratom (mitragynine, 7-hydroxymitragynine); Phenibut; Request for Comments)"

  
 \[MAJOR EDIT!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!\]

# About the FDA pushing WHO to ban Kratom and several other drugs internationally!!! READ PLEASE: The FDA has pulled a fast one and any comments submitted to them will NOT GO TO THE WHO, they will be VOIDED! You have to resubmit your comments through the AKA! Just an FYI!

📷

So as the title says, all the testimonials and comments are useless now because the FDA did a sneaky on us.

You can leave your comment / testimonial on what help kratom has done you or loved ones:  
[https://www.protectkratom.org/whocomments](https://www.protectkratom.org/whocomments)

Please, try to make loved ones also sign the testimonial.  
We need to fight these corrupt industrialists and politicians.

If they ban Kratom during this raging opioid crisis in USA, alot of people will die.  
Also people living in pain will have to go use street drugs too.

Sorry about this but it's the FDA that pulled a sneaky on us.