Every night, no matter the weather, something walks down our street whistling softly. You can only hear it if you’re in the living room or the kitchen when they walk by and it always starts at exactly 3:03. The sound starts faint, somewhere near the beginning of the lane near the Carson place. We’re towards the middle of the street, so the whistling moves past us before fading away in the direction of the cul de sac.

When I was younger, my sister and I would sneak into the kitchen some nights to listen. Mom and dad didn’t like that and we’d catch Hell if they found us out there but they were never too hard on us since we always stuck to the one Big Rule.

Don’t try to look at whatever was whistling.

My neighborhood is a funny place. I’ve lived here since I was six and I love it. The houses are small but well-kept, good-sized yards, plenty of places to roam. There are a lot of other kids here my age, I turned 13 back in October. We grew up together and would always play four square in the cul de sac or roam around from back porch to back porch in the summer. This was a good place to grow up, I’m old enough to see it. And there’s only the two strange things here; the night whistling and the good luck.

The whistling never bothered me much. Like I said, I couldn’t even hear it from my bedroom. But mom and dad don’t like talking about it, so I’ve stopped asking questions. My dad is a strong guy, tall and calm. He has an accent since he moved to the US as a kid. His family, my grandparents, they’re from the islands. That’s what they call it. My dad, the only time he isn’t so calm is if the whistler comes up.

He talks a little quicker then, eyes move faster, and he tells us not to think about it so much and to always remember the one rule, the Big Rule: don’t try to look outside when the whistler goes past.

Not that we could look even if we wanted. See, there are shutters on the inside of every window, thick pieces of heavy canvas that pull down from the top and latch to the bottom of the window frame. Each latch even has a small lock, about the size of what you’d find on a diary. My dad locks those shutters every night before we all go to bed and keeps the key in his room.

My mom…I don’t know what she thinks about the whistling. I’ve seen her out in the living room before at 3:03 when the sound starts; I could see her if I cracked my door open just an inch to peek. She’s not out there often, at least I haven’t caught her much, but once or twice a month I think she sits out there on our big red couch just listening.

The whistler has the same tune every night. It’s…cheerful.

*Da da dada da dum. Da da dada da dum.*

Remember how I said there are two odd things about where I live? Well, besides our night whistler, everyone in my neighborhood is really lucky. It’s hard to explain and dad doesn’t like us talking about this part much, either, but good things just seem to happen to people around here a lot. Usually, it’s small things, winning a radio contest, or getting an unexpected promotion at work, or finding some arrowheads buried in the yard, you know, the authentic kind.

The weather is pretty good and there’s no crime and everybody’s gardens bloom extra bright in the fall. “A million little blessings,” I’ve heard my mom say about living here. But the main reason we stay here, why we moved here in the first place, is my sister Nola. She was born very sick, something with her lungs. We couldn’t even bring her home when she was born, only visit her in the hospital. She was so small, I remember, small even compared to the other babies. A machine had to breathe for her.

We moved into our house here to be closer to the hospital. As soon as we moved here, Nola starting getting better. The doctors couldn’t figure it out, they chalked it up to whatever they were doing but we all could tell they were confused. But my parents knew, even I knew, Nola getting better was just another of the million little blessings we got for living in our neighborhood.

So that’s why we stayed even after we found out that, for every small miracle that happens here every day, now and then…some bad things happen. But they only happen if you look for the whistler.

See, our neighborhood has a Welcoming Committee. They show up with macaroni casserole and a gift basket and a manila folder whenever someone new moves in. They’re very friendly. Four people showed up when we moved in seven years ago. The committee made small talk, gave me a Snickers bar, and took turns holding Nola. It was her first week out of the hospital so they were extra careful.

Then the committee asked to speak to my parents in private so I was sent to my room where I still managed to hear nearly every word. The Welcoming Committee told my parents about how nice the neighborhood was, really exceptionally, hard-to-explain kind of nice. And then they told my parents about the even harder-to-explain whistling that happened every morning at 3:03 and ended at the tick of 3:05. The group, our new neighbors, warned my parents that the whistling was quiet, would never harm or hurt us, as long as we didn’t look for what was making the sound.

This part they stressed and I pushed my ear into the door straining to hear them. People who went looking for the whistler had their luck change, sometimes tragically. A black cloud would hang over anyone that looked. Anything that could go wrong, would. The manila envelope the committee brought over contained newspaper clippings, stories about car crashes and ruined lives, public deaths and freak accidents.

“Not everyone dies,” I heard the head of the committee tell my dad. “But the life goes out of ‘em. Even if they live, there’s no light in them ever again, no presence.”

My mom, I could tell she wasn’t taking it seriously. She kept asking if this was some prank they play on new neighbors. At one point my mom got angry, accused the committee of trying to scare us out of our new home, asked them if they were racist on account of my dad being from the islands. My dad calmed her down, told her he could tell our new neighbors were sincere and they were just trying to help us. He explained that he grew up hearing these kinds of stories from his mom and that he knew there were strange things that walked among us. Some of those strange things were good and some were bad but most were just different.

After the committee left, dad went out to the hardware store, bought the canvas blinds, the latches, and the locks and installed them on every window in the house after dinner. That first night in our new house, I crept out of my room at 3 a.m. only to find my dad awake sitting on the living room couch, holding my baby sister. My dad held up his finger in a shh motion but patted the couch next to him. I sat and we waited.

At exactly 3:03 we heard the whistling.

*Da da dada da dum. Da da dada da dum.*

It came and it went just like our neighbors said. The whistling returns each night and we never look and we enjoy our million little blessings every day. Nola breathes on her own and she’s grown into a strong, clever girl. My dad even joined the Welcoming Committee. We don’t get new neighbors often, why would anyone want to leave? But when a new family moves in, my dad and the committee bring them macaroni casserole, a gift basket, and the manila folder. I can always tell by the look on my dad’s face when he comes back if the family took the committee seriously or if we’d be getting new neighbors again very soon.

Not long ago a family moved in directly next to us. The previous owner, Ms. Maddie, passed away at age 105. She’d lived a good, long life. Our new neighbors seemed like they’d fit in just fine. They believed the Welcoming Committee, took my dad’s advice about the locking shutters since they had a young child of their own. Whatever newspaper clippings were in that manila envelope, whatever evidence, my dad never let us see. But I imagine it must have been awfully convincing since our neighbors got along with no issues for the first month.

One night, when our new neighbors had to leave town, they sent their son, Holden, to stay with us. He was 12, a year under me in school. I didn’t know him well before that night but as soon as his parents dropped him off after dinner I could tell it was going to be a bad time.

“Do you know who is always out there whistling every night?” Holden asked the moment the adults left the room.

The three of us were sitting in the den, some Disney movie playing idly on the television.

My sister and I exchanged a glance. “We don’t talk about that,” I said.

“I think it’s that weirdo that lives in the big yellow house on the corner,” Holden said.

“Mr. Toles?” my sister asked. “No way, he’s really nice.”

Holden shrugged. “Must be a psycho killer, then.”

Nola tensed.

“We don’t talk about it,” I repeated. “Let’s go in my room and play Nintendo.”

We spent the next few hours playing games, eating popcorn and then watching movies. A typical sleepover but I could see Holden was getting antsy.

After my parents had wished us a good night, locked the blinds, and gone to bed, Holden stood up from his bean bag and walked over to where Nola and I were sitting on my bed.

“Have you ever even tried looking?” he asked. “It’s nearly time.”

Like most sleepovers, we’d conveniently ignored any suggestion of a bedtime. I was shocked to see he was right; it was almost 3 a.m.

I sighed. “We don’t-”

“See, I can’t, I can’t even try to look because my dad locks the blinds every night and hides the key,” he continued, ignoring me.

“So does our dad,” said Nola.

“No,” replied Holden. “No, he doesn’t.”

“You saw him do it,” I said, a little sharper than I meant to sound.

Holden grinned. “Your dad locks the blinds, yeah, but he doesn’t hide the key. He keeps it right on his normal key chain.”

“So?” I asked, worried I already knew what he would say next. Because I had noticed that my dad didn’t bother hiding the key anymore after all of these years. Because he knew we took it seriously.

“So, after your dad locked up but before your parents went to bed, I went to the bathroom. And on my way, I may have peeked into their room, and I may have seen your dad’s key chain on his nightstand, and I maybe went and borrowed the key to blinds.”

Nola and I stared and his grin only grew wider.

“You’re lying,” I said.

Holden shrugged. “You can check if you want. Just open your parents’ door and look, you’ll see his keychain right there on the nightstand.”

“Stay here,” I told both of them. “Don’t move a muscle.”

I hurried over to my parents’ room but hesitated at the door. If Holden wasn’t lying…my dad would be angry. Beyond angry. I was scared thinking about it. But more scared of an open window with the whistler right outside. I opened the door, barely an inch, and looked in but it was too dark to see. Taking a deep breath, I walked into the room.

Two steps into the dark I froze. The whistling started. And I could hear it clearly…from my parents’ room. I never realized but they must have heard the sound every night since we moved into the house. They never told us. I don’t think I could have slept through it.

I stood there, listening to the whistling come closer, unsure whether I should turn on a light or call out for my dad. Soft sounds from the living room brought me back to reality.

“Nola,” I yelled, running out of my parents’ room.

Holden and Nola were standing near the front door next to a window. Holden wasn’t lying. I could see him fumbling with the lock on one of the blinds. I heard a click. He did have the key.

Holden let out a quick laugh. Nola stood next to him, hunched up, afraid but maybe curious. The whistling was right outside our house now.

I think I made a sound, called out. I can’t remember. Time felt frozen, clock hands nailed to the face. But I found myself moving. I’m not fast, I’ve never been athletic. Somehow, though, I covered the space between myself and Nola in a moment. My eyes were locked on her but I heard Holden pull the blind all the way down so it could release. I heard the snap of it start to raise, and I heard the whistling just on the other side of the window.

But I had my arms around Nola and I turned us so she was facing away from the window. At the same time, I jammed my eyes shut.  The blind whipped open.

The whistling stopped.

I felt Nola shaking in my arms.

“Don’t look, okay?” I told her. “Don’t turn around.”

We were positioned so that she was facing back towards the hallway and I was facing the window. My eyes were still closed. I felt her nod into my shoulder.

I reached out with the arm not holding Nola and tried to touch Holden. My hand brushed against his arm. He was shaking worse than Nola.

“Holden?” I asked.

Silence.

I reached past him and gingerly felt for the window, eyes still sealed shut. The glass was cold against my fingertips. Colder than it should have been for the time of year. I moved my hand up the window, searching for the string to the blind. The glass began to get warmer the further I reached and there was a gentle hum feeding back into my fingertips. I tried not to think about what might be on the other side of the window. Finally, I touched the string and yanked the blinds shut.

I opened my eyes. In the dim light leaking out from the kitchen, I could make out Holden, pale and small, staring at the now closed window.

“Holden?” I asked again.

He turned towards me and he *screamed.*

Everything became a flurry of motion. Lights sparked to life in the hall, then the living room. My parents’ footsteps thudded across the hardwood floor. I didn’t turn to look back at them, my eyes were glued to Holden.

He was pale, had bit his lip so hard there was a thin red line of blood running down his chin and he’d wet himself.

“What happened?” my dad asked from behind me.

I managed to swivel away from Holden and look back. “He looked.”

I’d never seen my dad scared before but I saw it that night, in that moment, an old, ugly terror stitched on his face. A parent’s fear.

“Just Holden?” he mouthed to me.

I nodded yes.

My dad let out a breath. He looked so relieved I nearly expected him to cheer. But then he turned to Holden and my dad’s face changed. I wondered if he felt bad for feeling good that Holden was the only one that looked.

There was a knock at the door.

We all froze. Holden whimpered.

“Don’t answer it,” my mom said.

She stood at the threshold of the hall. I’d always thought she was a skeptic and just humored my dad about the windows and the whistler but that night we were all believers. I noticed that both of my parents held baseball bats they must have taken from their bedroom.

The knock came again, a little louder this time.

“Please don’t open the door,” Holden whispered.

My dad walked over to him, hugged him close.

“We won’t,” my dad promised, still holding his bat. “Nothing is coming in here tonight.”

Thud thud thud

This time the knocking was loud enough to rattle the door. Holden screamed again and Nola clutched her arms around my neck. My mom came over and knelt down next to us, wrapping my sister and me close.

**Thud thud thud**

“Call the police,” my mom whispered to my dad.

The knocking instantly stopped. My dad looked over his shoulder at us.

“Do you think-”

He was cut off by frantic knocking that trailed off to a polite tap tap tap.

“*Police*,” something said from the other side of the door.

The voice from outside sounded exactly like my mom, like a parrot repeating the words back to her.

“*Police*. *Call*. *The police*.” **tap tap tap** “*Police*.”

My mom pulled us closer.

“*Police*. *Police*. *Police*. *Police*.”

“Please stop,” I heard her whisper.

“I don’t think calling them will help,” my dad said. “How will we know when they’re the ones at the door?”

The knocking came back harder than before. The door shook. Then it stopped. After a long moment, I heard the knocking again but it was coming from our backdoor.

We all turned together towards the backdoor but the knocking immediately returned to the front door. Front to back, back to front, loud then quiet then loud again. Suddenly, the sound was coming from both doors at once, big, heavy blows like a sledgehammer. Then something started rapping against all of the windows in the house, then the walls. It was like we were living inside a drum with a dozen people trying to play at once. Or we were a turtle and something was attempting to claw us out of our shell.

“STOP!” Holden yelled.

The knocking died.

“I won’t tell,” Holden said, staring at the door. “I promise I won’t tell anyone what I saw. Just please go away.”

We waited for nearly a minute. Then we heard it, a soft *tap tap tap* coming from the window Holden had looked through earlier.

Holden started to cry, sobbing like a prisoner watching gallows being built outside their cell.

My dad held him, brushed his hair but never lied to him, never told him things would be okay.

The tapping at the window went on for the rest of the night. We huddled together in the living room for I don’t know how long. Eventually, my mom tried to take us kids into my room while my dad stayed to watch the door. But the second we moved into my bedroom the knocking came back, so loud it was possible to ignore. I was afraid the door couldn’t take it.

We went back to the living room and the knocking stopped. Only the tap tap tap on the window remained. None of us slept that night.

The tapping stopped around 7 a.m. That’s about the time the sun comes up here. We waited another two hours before my dad opened the blinds from one window. He made us all go back to my parents’ bedroom first. I heard him open the door then come back in.

“Okay,” he told us. “It’s done.”

Holden’s parents came back around lunchtime. My mom and dad walked Holden over to his house and they all went inside for quite a while. Nola and I watched from the window. She stuck to me the whole day, right at my side, sometimes holding my hand. When my parents came back they looked grim but wouldn’t tell us what they said to Holden’s family. It was a Sunday so we all spent the day together, ordered pizza and watched movies.

That night everyone slept in my room, Nola and my mom in the bed with me, my dad in a chair he’d pulled over. There was no knocking that night or any night since.

We didn’t see much of Holden or his parents for the rest of that week but by Thursday there was a moving truck in their driveway. Nola and I watched them packing up the whole afternoon after school. What sticks with me most is how tired Holden and his parents looked. All three had the same pallor, grim mouths and light-less eyes. Even from across the street I could tell something was very wrong. Holden and his family were gone before sunset.

I remember what the original Welcoming Committee said to my parents when we moved in. Not everyone who looks at the whistler dies, but even those that live have the light go out of them and the rest of their lives are full of misfortune. A million little tragedies.

I think Holden’s parents must have looked, either to comfort him if they didn’t believe or share the burden if they did. I watch Nola some days, happy and young and alive, and I wonder if I’d been slower, if she’d looked out the window that night…would I have looked too? To comfort her? To share that burden? I’m glad I don’t have to find out.

We still live in that house, in that neighborhood. We still hear our whistler walking past every night. The blessings, the luck, the good things here are too good to leave. But we’re careful. We don’t have friends over to spend the night anymore. And my dad hides the key to the blinds very, very well. Not that I’ve gone looking. Some things you just don’t need to look for.

&#x200B;

[GTM](https://www.reddit.com/r/Grand_Theft_Motto/comments/emzy3b/the_stories/)

[Hello](https://travisbrownwriting.com)The poster read, “Happiness! Sold in Glass Jars! Call Today!” and underneath the text was a phone number.

I was walking home from a long, exhausting day of work when I caught a glimpse of the paper stapled on an old telephone pole. I took a picture of it thinking it was amusing.

I was going to show my wife once I got to our apartment, but I was caught up with chores and forgot about it—dinner, dishes, laundry, packing a snack for our daughter, putting her to bed, then putting her toys away that she’d left out in the living room—every night, it was the exact same routine.

The next day, I awoke sleeping back-to-back with my wife. I always had to get up earlier than she did for my job, so I quietly got ready for the day and headed out the door.

At work, I was updating the company’s latest expense report. Most days were similar to this one. They were basically paying me to stare at a computer for nine hours a day and input a couple numbers in to a spreadsheet. I finished my work very quickly, so I decided to head out of the office early—it also helped that it was a Friday, and a lot of people leave early at the end of the week.

On my walk back, I was thinking of what my life had become. I did this often. I always dreamed of traveling when I was younger. I wanted to drive across the country or solo-backpack across Europe. Then I met Kelsey. Don’t get me wrong, I loved Kelsey. I mean, I still do. We just don’t have that spark anymore. When you meet someone and get in a relationship, whether it’s *meant to be* or not, some of your personal life-plans have to be put on hold. And then that relationship turns to marriage, and then you have a baby, then you have to enroll your daughter in a preschool, then you have to get a better paying job and work more hours and blah, blah, blah.

I’m not trying to throw a pity party for myself. I’m just saying I wasn’t exactly content with where I was in my life. I wouldn’t have referred to myself as a happy person.

As I took the same route home that I did every day to work and back, I walked by the same poster I had passed the day before. I don’t know why, I really don’t, but I decided to call the number. I figured it would be some joke. Maybe someone just picks up and says, “I love you!” on the other end and hangs up. Or maybe it’s a line to a sex-worker. I had no idea what to expect.

I called. It only rang once before someone picked up.

“Hello?” a woman said. 

“Uh, hi—um, I’m calling about your poster? Your ad?”

“Oh, awesome,” she said calmly, “when do you wanna pick it up?”

“Pick what up?”

“The jar…” she said, like it was the most obvious thing in the world.

“Oh, of course, um,” I realized then that I had left work early without telling Kelsey, so I could just go pick it up now and she’d be none the wiser, “what exactly is it? That your selling?”

“I just told you. It’s happiness. In a glass jar. Like the poster said. Happiness keeps best in glass jars. They’re more durable than, say, a plastic bag.”

“Um, okay. Should we meet somewhere?”

“For sure. I don’t want you to end up being a creep or something, so let’s go to a public place.”

The public place we decided on was a Starbucks parking lot a little over a mile from me.

Now, I didn’t think I was really going to be buying a *jar of happiness* or whatever. I was 99% sure she was going to sell me drugs. Maybe heroine would be in the jar. I remember thinking, *Oh no, ‘happiness’ is probably a nickname for some street drug and I’m going to a drug deal. What if she’s a cop? Am I going to be arrested?* But something inside me told me to keep walking, and so I did.

I stood outside and texted her.

Me: **I’m here.**

Her: **Cool. Be there in a sec.**

Me: **What are you driving?**

Her: **Silver Camry.**

And as her final text came through, I saw her car pull in. She took a spot not too far from where I stood. I could see there was no one else in the car, which put my kidnapping fear to rest. She opened her door and stood on the pavement, looking around until her eyes met mine. I gave her a little nod of acknowledgment. She simply responded by waving her hand, gesturing for me to come over to her car, so I did.

She was young, maybe mid-twenties, with curly, golden hair. Her skin was pale and contrasted with the all-black outfit she was wearing. I thought she looked like Glinda the Good Witch from *The Wizard of Oz* had put on the Wicked Witch’s clothes.

“Nice day out,” she said as a greeting.

“Oh, yeah it is. Hadn’t really paid attention to it.”

“You *were* the one that called about the jar, right?”

“Yeah, that was me.”

“Cool, well, here you go.”

She handed me a very small, glass mason-jar. It couldn’t have been more than two inches tall. Inside of it was a light. Not a light bulb—just light. It was like someone bottled up sunshine. It glowed even in the midafternoon daylight. It looked like a tiny sun, or a tiny universe existing in this little crystal-walled home. I was admiring it with no attempt to hide the awe on my face.

“Pretty rad isn’t it?”

“What—what is it?”

“You’ve asked that, like, three different times, I think. My answer is still the same. It is happiness. Happiness in a glass jar.”

“What do I do with it?”

“Keep it,” She said simply, “if you have any problems shoot me a text.”

She started to get into her car.

“Wait!” I said, “I thought you were selling this? How much is it?”

“Don’t worry, man,” she said with a smile, “you’ll pay.”

She closed her door and I stepped out of her way as she backed up, then drove off. What the hell had just happened? What was I holding? I looked down at the jar again, its radiance was simply mesmerizing. I put it in my pocket and could see its glow slightly through my pants. I began to walk home.

What was just a nice, sunny day, quickly changed into a rainy one with clouds wrapping the sky. It was not forecasted that it would rain, or else I would’ve ridden the bus or subway to work that day. I jogged home trying not to get too drenched. I finally found shelter once I made it to my apartment building.

I walked up to my door and found that my key wasn’t on my key ring anymore. *Shit, I can’t believe I lost it again,* I thought.

I knocked on the door and said in a somewhat loud voice, “Hey babe it’s me, I don’t know what happened to my key.” I heard the door being unlocked from the other side.

When the door opened, I was greeted by a large, heavy-set man with greasy hair and unkempt goatee, he said, “I think you got the wrong door, bud.”

“Oh!” I said, disoriented, “my bad, sorry, have a good one.”

He let out a chuckle as he closed the door. 

Apartment number 33.

I know that was my apartment. I know it was. I’d been in apartment 33 for five years now. But *that* was not my apartment. From what I could see inside, all the furniture was different, it was painted a different color, it was all wrong. I felt like I’d hit my head and was drugged. In that moment, nothing made sense.

I pulled out my phone to call Kelsey so she could calm me down and tell me I just got confused for a second. But her contact wasn’t in my phone. In fact, nothing was in my phone. I had no messages with her. No previous calls. No pictures. It was like my phone reset to its factory settings. Did that girl somehow switch my phone out when I wasn’t looking? I would’ve just dialed Kelsey's number manually, but I couldn’t quite remember it. I had known it by heart before, but not anymore. I needed to get back to the office, I had all my contacts backed up on my work computer.

Since it was still raining, I hopped on the bus which had a stop right in front of the apartment complex. I rode downtown toward my office, the whole time staring at my wet shoes, wondering what the hell was going on.

We have a keycard access to our building so only authorized personnel can get inside. I always keep my access card in my wallet, always. But, surprise, surprise—it wasn’t there. I buzzed in to the speaker we had for guests with appointments, or employees as a back-up in case anyone lost or forgot their card. 

**BZZZ** 

“Hey this is Tim, I must’ve lost my card. My employee number is…” I stopped as I drew a blank.

A voice came through the Speaker, “Tim? You got cut out, what’s your employee number?"

“Um, I can’t remember, I—”

“That’s fine, just tell me your full name and department.”

“Uh, finance. I’m in finance. My full name is Tim Brooks.”

“One sec.”

About thirty seconds later, the man spoke to me again.

“We don’t have a Tim Brooks working in this building. Did you have an appointment with someone?”

I backed up in surprise, almost tripping on my own feet. I had just been in that office an hour or two ago. What was happening to me? I felt like I was getting Alzheimer’s but going through every stage in one day. I stared at my hands, unsure if I was in the right body. I felt like the world around me was disintegrating. I wasn’t in control, I was merely sitting inside somebody else’s head, watching the world through their eyes.

Just then, I got a text. I recognized the number immediately, it was that girl. The one who gave me the jar. I had forgotten all about it until I saw her text.

Her: **Hey. How’s it going?**

I looked at my phone, dumbfounded. It made me angry she was so nonchalant about this. *She* knew what was going on. *She* had done this somehow.

Me: **What the hell did you do to me?!**

Her: **The worst is yet to come.**

I was astronomically close to just chucking my phone as far as I could in frustration. I took the jar out of my pocket. It looked unchanged, still glowing just as bright.

“What the fuck did you do!” I yelled at the jar, realizing I probably looked like a lunatic.

As I stared at its glistening glass, I realized something. I didn’t know what my wife’s face looked like anymore. I knew her name. Well, I know it started with a K, or maybe a C. I couldn’t picture her in my mind. I knew I had a wife. I knew I did. Yes, because I had a daughter. I had a wife and a daughter. I just, couldn’t remember their faces then—or their names, or their birthdays, or any memories I had with them.

I know they existed. They did exist. I had just seen them that morning, right? I couldn’t remember how she looked, or what she smelled like. What was our first date? We had a wedding, right? What about our first kiss? Or my daughter—or was it my son? Maybe I didn’t even have a kid. But my wife, or girlfriend, she was real. I knew she was. The thought was tearing me apart. I couldn’t see her in my head. I couldn’t recall a single fact about her.

I was standing outside of the same building, but I was unsure why I was. Did I work there? I must work somewhere. The rain was accompanied by a chilly wind now. It was whipping at my face, making my nose and cheeks sting. I wanted to go home. I wanted to be with her. I wanted to be warm. I wanted to go in to a shitty office job that kept a roof over my head. I wanted it all. I was soaking wet. I was miserable. I couldn’t remember my parents, or my childhood. Did I even have any friends? Why was I in the rain?

I looked down at my hand. I was still clutching the jar. The only memory of my entire life I could concretely remember was that girl giving it to me. Telling me it was happiness. It did not bring happiness. It brought pain. It bought suffering. I was more miserable in that moment than I’d ever been.

My phone buzzed:

**Break the jar, Tim.**

I looked at my other hand. With the setting sun and the rainy sky, I swear the jar glowed brighter than any street light near me. I didn’t break it because I was following her instruction. I broke it because I was angry. I broke it because I was upset. I needed a release. I raised my arm above my head, and brought it down with one swift motion, shattering the jar on the concrete beneath my feet.

That dark, chilly air accompanying the rain spread away like it was the shockwave of a bomb going off, and I was at the epicenter. I saw the warm, yellow light from inside the jar spread rapidly across the ground and ascend into the sky. It was as if I was watching the beginnings of the universe being created—like God had just snapped his fingers and said, “let there be light.” I was engulfed in it. I could no longer see street or rain, or anything dark. I felt like I was plummeting into a star going faster than the speed of light. It felt like sitting in front of a fire on a cold winter’s night, but that warmth was covering every inch by body.

And then I blinked.

Immediately I could feel the sheets beneath me, and my back barely touching my wife’s. I was staring out the window. The morning light drenched through the glass and gleamed on my face.

I stood from bed and grabbed my phone. It was Friday morning. I had one text:

**Let me know if you ever need another jar :)**

I called in sick to work. I snuck into my daughter’s room and greeted her with a kiss and told her she didn’t have to go to preschool today. We were going to have a family day. She smiled and stretched out her arms with a yawn before curling up and falling back asleep. 

I got back in bed and squeezed my wife tightly. I didn’t let go for hours. Our daughter came into our room and woke us up eventually—she was jumping on the bed and shouting for us to wake up. Yesterday I may have found that annoying. Yesterday I may have found a lot of things annoying, or monotonous, or dull.

But not today. Today, I pulled her under the covers in between me and Kelsey.

Today was going to be a good day. Today, I was happy.I don't know when you're going to read this, but I can tell you when it started: I was out for a walk alone in the woods when the entity came for me. It was beyond a blur. It was, for lack of a better term, absence of meaning. Where it hid, there were no trees; where it crept closer, there was no grass; through the arc it leapt at me, there was no breeze of motion. There was no air at all.

As it struck, I felt the distinct sensation of claws puncturing me somewhere unseen; somewhere I'd never felt before. My hands and arms and legs and torso seemed fine and I wasn't bleeding, but I knew I'd been injured somehow. As I fearfully ran back home, I could tell that I was less. I was vaguely tired, and it was hard to focus at times.

The solution at that early stage was easy: a big cup of coffee helped me feel normal again.

For a while, that subtle drain on my spirit became lost in the ebb and flow of caffeine in my system. You could say my life began that week, actually, because that was when I met Mar. She and I got along great, though, to be honest, I'm pretty sure I fell in love with her over the phone before we even met.

It was almost as if the strong emotions of that first week made the entity fight back—it was still with me, latched on to some invisible part of my being.

The first few incidents were minor, and I hardly worried about them. The color of a neighbor's car changed from dark blue to black one morning, and I stared at it before shaking my head and shrugging off the difference. Two days later, at work, a coworker's name changed from Fred to Dan. I carefully asked around, but everyone said his name had always been Dan. I figured I'd just been mistaken.

Then, as ridiculous as this sounds, I was peeing in my bathroom at home when I suddenly found myself on a random street. I was still in my pajamas, pants down, and urinating—but now in full view of a dozen people at a bus stop. Horrified, I pulled up my clothes and ran before someone called the cops. I did manage to get home, but the experience forced me to admit that I was still in danger. The entity was doing something to me, and I didn't understand how to fight back.

Mar showed up that evening, but she had her own key.

"Hey," I asked her with confusion. "How'd you get a key?"

She just laughed. "You're cute. Are you sure you're okay with this?" She opened a door and entered a room full of boxes. "I know living together is a big step, especially when we've only been dating three months."

Living together? I'd literally just met her the week before. Thing was, my mother had always called me a smart cookie for a reason. I knew when to shut my yap. Instead of causing a scene, I told her everything was fine—and then I went straight to my room and began investigating.

My things were just as I had left them with no sign of a three month gap in habitation, but I did find something out of the ordinary: the date. I shivered angrily as I processed the truth.

The entity had eaten three months of my life.

What the hell was I facing? What kind of creature could consume pieces of one's soul like that? I'd missed the most exciting part of a new relationship, and I would never understand any shared stories or in-jokes from that period. Something absurdly precious had been taken from me, and I was furious.

That fury helped suppress the entity. I never imbibed alcohol. I drank coffee religiously. I checked the date every time I woke up. For three years, I managed to live each day while observing nothing more than minor alterations. A social fact here and there—someone's job, how many kids they had, that sort of thing—the layout of nearby streets, the time my favorite television show aired, that kind of thing. Always, those changes reminded me the creature still had its claws sunk into my spirit. Not once in three years did I ever let myself zone out.

One day, I grew careless. I let myself get really into the season finale of my favorite show. It was gripping; a fantastic story. Right at the height of the action, a young boy came up to my lounger and shook my arm.

Surprised, I asked, "Who are you? How did you get in here?"

He laughed and smiled brightly. "Silly Daddy!"

My heart sank in my chest. I knew immediately what had happened. After a few masked questions, I discovered that he was two years old—and that he was my son.

The agony and heartache filling my chest was nearly unbearable. Not only had I missed the birth of my son, I would never see or know the first years of his life. Mar and I had obviously gotten married and started a family in the time I'd lost, and I had no idea what joys or pains those years contained.

It was snowing outside. Holding my sudden son in my lap, I sat and watched the flakes fall outside. What kind of life was this going to be if slips in concentration could cost me years? I had to get help.

The church had no idea what to do. The priests didn't believe me, and told me I had a health issue rather than some sort of possession.

The doctors didn't have any clue. Nothing showed up on all their scans and tests, but they happily took my money in return for nothing.

By the time I ran out of options, I'd decided to tell Mar. There was no way to know what this all looked like from her side. What was I like when I wasn't there? Did I still take our son to school? Did I still do my job? Clearly, I did, because she seemed to be none the wiser, but I still had a horrible feeling that something must have been missing in her life when I wasn't actually home inside my own head.

But the night I set up a nice dinner in preparation, she arrived not by unlocking the front door, but by knocking on it. I answered, and found that she was in a nice dress.

She was happily surprised by the settings on the table. "A fancy dinner for a second date? I knew you were sweet on me!"

Thank the Lord I knew when to keep my mouth shut. If I'd gone on about being married and having a son, she might have run for the hills. Instead, I took her coat and sat down for our second date.

Through carefully crafted questions, I managed to deduce the truth. This really was our second date. She saw relief and happiness in me, but interpreted that as dating jitters. I was just excited to realize that the entity wasn't necessarily eating whole portions of my life. The symptoms, as I was beginning to understand them, were more like the consequences of a shattered soul. The creature had wounded me; broken me into pieces. Perhaps I was to live my life out of order, but at least I would actually get to live it. 

And so it went for a few years—from my perspective. While minor changes in politics or geography would happen daily, major shifts in my mental location only happened every couple months. When I found myself in a new place and time in my life, I just shut up and listened, making sure to get the lay of the land before doing anything to avoid making mistakes. On the farthest-flung leap yet, I met my six-year-old grandson, and I asked him what he wanted to be when he grew up. He said, "Writer." I told him that was a fine idea.

Then, I was back in month two of my relationship with Mar, and I had the best night with her on the riverfront. When I say the best, I mean *the best*. Knowing how special she would become to me, I asked her to move in. I got to live through what I'd missed the first go-around, and I came to understand that I was never mentally absent. I would always be there—eventually. When we were moving her boxes in, she stopped for a moment and said she marveled at my great love, as if I'd known her for a lifetime and never once doubted she was the one.

That was the first time I'd truly laughed freely and wholeheartedly since the entity had wounded me. She was right about my love for her, but for exactly the reason she'd considered a silly romantic analogy. I *had* known her my whole life, and I'd come to terms with my situation and found peace with it. It wasn't so bad to have sneak peeks at all the best parts ahead.

But of course I wouldn't be writing this if it hadn't gotten worse. The entity was still with me. It had not wounded me and departed like I'd wanted to believe. The closest I can describe my growing understanding was that the creature was burrowing deeper into my psyche, fracturing it into smaller pieces. Instead of months between major shifts, I began having only weeks. Once I noticed that trend, I feared my ultimate fate would be to jump between times in my life heartbeat by heartbeat, forever confused, forever lost. Only an instant in each time meant I would never be able to speak with anyone else, never be able to hold a conversation, never express or receive love.

As the true depth of that fear came upon me, I sat in an older version of me and watched the snow falling outside. That was the one constant in my life: the weather didn't care who I was or what pains I had to face. Nature was always there. The falling snow was always like a little hook that kept me in a place; the pure emotional peace it brought was like a panacea on my mental wounds, and I'd never yet shifted while watching the pattern of falling white and thinking of the times I'd gone sledding or built a snow fort as a child.

A teenager touched my arm. "Grandpa?"

"Eh?" He'd startled me out of my thoughts, so I was less careful than usual. "Who are you?"

He half-grinned, as if not sure whether I was joking. Handing me a stack of papers, he said, "It's my first attempt at a novel. Would you read it and tell me what you think?"

Ahh, of course. "Pursuing that dream of being a writer, I see."

He burned bright red. "Trying to, anyway."

"All right. Run off, I'll read this right now." The words were blurry, and, annoyed, I looked for glasses I probably had for reading. Being old was *terrible*, and I wanted to leap back into a younger year—but not before I read his book. I found my glasses in a sweater pocket, and began leafing through. Mar puttered in and out of the living room, still beautiful, but I had to focus. I didn't know how much time I would have there.

It seemed that we had relatives over. Was it Christmas? A pair of adults and a couple kids I didn't recognize tromped through the hallway, and I saw my son, now adult, walk by with his wife on the way out the door. As a group, the extended family began sledding outside.

Finally, I finished reading the story, and I called out for my grandson. He rushed down the stairs and into the living room. "How was it?"

"Well, it's terrible," I told him truthfully. "But it's terrible for all the right reasons. You're still a young man, so your characters behave like young people, but the structure of the story itself is very solid." I paused. "I didn't expect it to turn out to be a horror story."

He nodded. "It's a reflection of the times. Expectations for the future are dismal, not hopeful like they used to be."

"You're far too young to be aware like that," I told him. An idea occurred to me. "If you're into horror, do you know anything about strange creatures?"

"Sure. I read everything I can. I love it."

Warily, I scanned the entrances to the living room. Everyone was busy outside. For the first time, I opened up to someone in my life about what I was experiencing. In hushed tones, I told him about my fragmented consciousness.

For a teenager, he took it well. "You're serious?"

"Yes."

He donned the determined look of a grown man accepting a quest. "I'll look into it, see what I can find out. You should start writing down everything you experience. Build some data. Maybe we can map your psychic wound."

Wow. "Sounds like a plan." I was surprised. That made sense, and I hadn't expected him to have a serious response. "But how will I get all the notes in one place?"

"Let's come up with somewhere for you to leave them," he said, frowning with thought. "Then I'll get them, and we can trace the path you're taking through your own life, see if there's a pattern."

For the first time since the situation had gotten worse, I felt hope again. "How about under the stairs? Nobody ever goes under there."

"Sure." He turned and left the living room.

I peered after him. I heard him banging around near the stairs.

Finally, he returned with a box, laid it on the carpet, and opened it to reveal a bursting stack of papers. He exclaimed, "Holy crap!"—but of course, being a teenager, he didn't really say *crap*.

Taken aback, I blinked rapidly, forgiving his cussing because of the shock. "Did I write those?"

He looked up at me with wonder. "Yeah. Or, you will. You still have to write them and put them under the stairs after this." He gazed back down at the papers—then covered the box. "So you probably shouldn't see what they say. That could get weird."

That much I understood. "Right."

He gulped. "There are like fifty boxes under there, all filled up like this. Deciphering these will take a very long time." His tone dropped to deadly seriousness. "But I will save you, grandpa. Because I don't think anyone else can." 

Tears flowed down my cheeks then, and I couldn't help but sob once or twice. I hadn't realized how lonely I'd become in my shifting prison of awareness until I finally had someone who understood. "Thank you. Thank you so much."

And then I was young again, and at work on a random Tuesday. Once the sadness and relief faded, anger and determination replaced them. After I finished my work, I grabbed some paper and began writing. While the weeks shifted around me, while those weeks became days, and then hours, I wrote every single spare moment about when and where I thought I was. I put them under the stairs out of order; my first box was actually the thirtieth, and my last box was the first. Once I had over fifty boxes written from my perspective—and once my shifting became a matter of minutes—I knew it was up to my grandson to take it from there.

I put my head down and stopped looking. I couldn't stand the river of changing awareness any longer. Names and places and dates and jobs and colors and people were all wrong and different.

I'd never been older. I sat watching the snow fall. A man of at least thirty that I vaguely recognized entered the room. "Come on, I think I finally figured it out."

I was so frail that moving was painful. "Are you him? Are you my grandson?"

"Yes." He took me to a room filled with strange equipment and sat me in a rubber chair facing a large mirror twice the height of a man. "The pattern finally revealed itself."

"How long have you worked on this?" I asked him, aghast. "Tell me you didn't miss your life like I'm missing mine!"

His expression was both stone cold and furiously resolute. "It'll be worth it." He brought two thin metal rods close to my arm and then nodded at the mirror. "Look. This shock is carefully calibrated."

The electric zap from his device was startling, but not painful. In the mirror, I saw a rapid arcing light-silhouette appear above my head and shoulder. The electricity moved through the creature like a wave, briefly revealing the terrible nature of what was happening to me. A bulging leech-like mouth was wrapped around the back of my head, coming down to my eyebrows and touching each ear, and its slug-like body ran over my shoulder and into my very soul.

It was a parasite.

And it was feeding on my mind.

My now-adult grandson held my hand as I took in the horror. After a moment, he asked, "Removing it is going to hurt very badly. Are you up for this?"

Fearful, I asked, "Is Mar here?"

His face softened. "No. Not for a few years now."

I could tell from his reaction what had happened, but I didn't want it to be true. "How?"

"We have this conversation a lot," he responded. "Are you sure you want to know? It never makes you feel better."

Tears brimmed in my eyes. "Then I don't care if it hurts, or if I die. I don't want to stay in a time where she's not alive."

He made a sympathetic noise of understanding and then returned to his machines to hook several wires, diodes, and other bits of technology to my limbs and forehead. While he did so, he talked. "I've worked for two decades to figure this out, and I've had a ton of help from other researchers of the occult. This parasite doesn't technically exist in our plane. It's one of the lesser spawns of µ¬ßµ, and it feeds on the plexus of mind, soul, and quantum consciousness/reality. When details like names and colors of objects changed, you weren't going crazy. The web of your existence was merely losing strands as the creature ate its way through you."

I didn't fully understand. I looked up in confusion as he placed a circlet of electronics like a crown on my head in exact line with where the parasite's mouth had ringed me. "What's µ¬ßµ?"

He paused his work and grew pale. "I forgot that you wouldn't know. You're lucky, believe me." After a deep breath, he began moving again, and placed his fingers near a few switches. "Ready? This is carefully tuned to make your nervous system extremely unappetizing to the parasite, but it's basically electro-shock therapy."

I could still see Mar's smile. Even though she was dead, I'd just been with her moments ago. "Do it."

The click of a switch echoed in my ears, and I almost laughed at how mild the electricity was. It didn't feel like anything—at least at first. Then, I saw the mirror shaking, and my body within that image convulsing. Oh. No. It did hurt. Nothing had ever been more painful. It was just so excruciating that my mind hadn't been able to immediately process it. 

As my vision shook and fire burned in every nerve in my body, I could see the reflected trembling light-silhouette of the parasite on my head as it writhed in agony equal to mine. It had claws—six clawed lizard-like limbs under its leech-like body—and it cut into me in an attempt to stay latched on.

The electricity made my memories flare.

Mar's smile was foremost, lit brightly in front of a warm fire as the snow fell past the window behind her. The edges of that memory began lighting up, and I realized that my life *was* one continuous stretch of experience—it was only the awareness of it that had been fragmented by that feasting evil on my back.

I'd never managed to be there for the birth of my son. I'd jumped around it a dozen times, but never actually lived it. For the first time, I got to hold Mar's hand and be there for her.

No. *No!* That moment had shifted seamlessly into holding her hand as she lay in a hospital bed for a very different reason. Not this! God, why? It was so merciless to make me remember this. I broke down in tears as nurses rushed into the room. I didn't want to know. I didn't want to experience it. I'd seen all the good parts, but I hadn't wanted the worst part—the inevitable end that all would one day face.

It wasn't worth it. It was tainted. All that joy was given back ten thousand fold as pain.

The fire in my body and in my brain surged to sheer white torture, and I screamed.

My scream faded into a surprised shout as the machines and electricity and chair faded away. Snow was no longer falling around my life; I was out in the woods on a bright summer day.

Oh God.

I turned to see the creature approaching me. It was the same absence of meaning; the same blank on reality. It crept forward, just like before—but, this time, it hissed and turned away. I stood, astounded at being young again and freed from the parasite. My grandson had actually done it! He'd made me an unappetizing meal, so the predator of mind and soul had moved on in search of a different snack.

I returned home in a daze.

And while I was sitting there processing all that had happened, the phone rang. I looked at it in awe and sadness. I knew who it was. It was Marjorie, calling for the first time for some trivial reason she'd admit thirty years later was made up just to talk to me.

But all I could see was her lying in that hospital bed dying. It was going to end in unspeakable pain and loneliness. I would become an old man, left to sit by myself in an empty house, his soulmate gone long before him. At the end of it all, the only thing I would have left: sitting and watching the falling snow.

But now, thanks to my grandson, I would also have my memories. It would be a wild ride, no matter how it ended.

On a sudden impulse, I picked up the phone. With a smile, I asked, "Hey, who's this?"

Even though I already knew.

---

Author's note: Together, my grandfather and I did set out to write the tale of his life. Unfortunately, his Alzheimer's disease progressed rapidly, and we were never able to finish. He's still alive, but I imagine that, mentally, he is in a better place than the nursing home. I like to think he's back in his younger days, living life and being happy, because the reality is much colder. It's snowing today; he loves the snow. When I visited him, he didn't recognize me, but he did smile as he sat looking out the window.

---

[Blog](http://mattdymerski.com/) [FB](https://www.facebook.com/MattDymerskiAuthor/) [Tw](https://twitter.com/MattDymerski)[.](https://imgur.com/a/cLqsc)Three years ago I was looking at the local job classifieds online when one of the ads caught my eye, not because of what it said, but because it said so little.  Best I remember, the ad just read “Job available.  Good pay.  No benefits.  Discretion required.”  It then listed an email address and that was all.  At the time I was managing a music store, but I had already started hearing rumors we would be shutting down within the next year and the likelihood of a transfer to another store was slim. I had been morosely looking at job listings for the last few days, but this was the first one that stood out, if only because I was bored and it was weird.

So I sent an email.

Half an hour later I had a response, telling me to go to a particular office building in an upscale part of the city at a precise time for my “screening”.  I went, and after waiting for a few minutes in the lobby, I was taken into an office where I was given a series of forms and questionnaires to fill out.  They collected them and told me they would be in touch.

I had almost forgotten about the whole thing until a month later I got a call saying I had moved on to the second stage of the hiring process.  I was again given an address and time, and when I arrived (this time it was a different nice office park twenty miles away from the first one), I was met by a man who introduced himself as Mr. Solomon.  He escorted me into a large room that contained a chair and a desk.  On the desk were two large monitors, a keyboard and mouse, and a bolted down metal box with two oversized buttons on it:  One red and one green.

He told me this room was a model for the place I would be working if I took the job.  He described the job as follows.

I would be working seven shifts of six hours every week.  My job would be simple.  I would arrive at work ten minutes early and enter an outer area that was like a locker room.  I would have my own personal locker.  I would store all belongings in the locker and change into the provided work clothes.  I was never, under any circumstances, to carry any item of my own into the surveillance room.  I was never, under any circumstances, to take any item with me from the surveillance room.

As for what I was to do in the surveillance room, I was told that the monitor on the left would constantly show a live stream from a high-definition camera in a remote location.  My job was simply to watch the camera.  Once an hour I would get onto the computer attached to the right monitor and enter a brief log describing anything interesting that occurred in the last hour.  I would have no pens or pencils or paper, and I should never try to take any kind of written notes about the work.

As for the red and green buttons, the red button was only to be used if there was an emergency.  This meant something on the video or in my workspace that required outside help.  The green button was to be hit if I saw something on the video feed that was particularly noteworthy.  It would tell other people somewhere that, at least in my opinion, something interesting was going on.  Solomon stressed that while I was given discretion on when to use this button, I should err on the side of only using it if and when something “of real significance” occurred.

He pointed out the camera on the ceiling of the room we were in.  He said the real room would be the same.  My work would be observed, and other people were watching the room on the video feed as well.  He said I was only a redundancy in case other systems failed.  He then smirked and asked if I knew what he meant by redundancy.

I nodded, trying not to show my irritation.  I don’t talk that good to people, so sometimes they think I’m dumb.  That’s okay.  Let him think that if he paid me good enough.

The pay was very good.  Thirty-five dollars an hour.  

This worried me.  I was already thinking this was some kind of psych experiment or secret government job, which I was okay with.  But that kind of money to sit and watch a screen?  My mom always told me that if something seems too good to be true, it probably is, and this was seeming too good to be true.

I asked if I was going to be doing anything illegal.  Solomon laughed and said no.  I asked if anyone was going to get hurt.  Again, he shook his head no.  He said the reason they were paying so much was because they needed employees that were motivated to be professional and discrete.  The work they were doing was important, and for various reasons it couldn’t be discussed.  If I took the job, I would have to sign papers promising I would never discuss my work there or I could be sued or locked up.  I’m only breaking that now because of everything that’s happened.

So I took the job, and because they wanted me to start right away, I had to quit the store with no notice.  I felt bad about that, but I was excited about the new job too.  It was a lot of money and seemed like easy enough work, if a bit boring.  I was nervous that there was something more to it, but I told myself I would just have to see.  No point in chickening out and wasting a good chance because I let my imagination go crazy.
I was given the location of the job itself, and when I went there, I was amazed that it really was just like the model room I had been shown with only a few differences.  There was a locker room you had to pass through to enter the surveillance room and there was a small bathroom attached to the real surveillance room also.  The real room had a small water cooler in the corner, but because I wasn’t allowed to bring anything in with me, I had to eat before or after every shift.  The biggest difference, of course, was that the monitors were turned on.

The right monitor was just a black and white terminal like you see in movies some times.  I could type in my logs, but no internet to look at or anything like that.  The left monitor…

It was video from a room.  You would call it a bedroom I guess, because it had a bed in it, but it had lots of other stuff too.  A T.V., a sofa and chairs, a couple of tables, and plenty of empty space in between.  The camera must be high up in a corner, because I could see pretty much everything except for the far sides of furniture.  At first though, I didn’t notice any of that stuff.  

All I saw was her.

She looked to be a little older than me and was very pretty.  When I first saw her, she was laying on her side on the sofa.  That was the part of the room farthest from the camera, but the picture was very clear and I could tell that she was sleeping.  I found myself leaning into the monitor more so I could see her better, and then I thought about what I was doing and felt embarrassed.  It’s like I was spying on her.  A Peeping Tom, my mom used to call it.

I didn’t want to be a Peeping Tom, but I didn’t want to be silly either.  I needed to think about it slow.  

It was a good job.  And I wasn’t doing anything wrong, right?  I wasn’t hurting anybody.  The woman looked fine.  And the room was nice.  She probably agreed to be there and it’s all some experiment or something.  I was just overreacting.

So I sat down in the chair and began my work.

**** 

It didn’t take long before I understood more.  The woman, I took to calling her Rachel, wasn’t there of her free will.  I never saw her hurt, but it was clear that she never left that room except to go into what I think is a bathroom area that my camera couldn’t see.  Well, she never left the room on her own.  Periodically, usually a couple of times a week during my shifts, men and women in strange-looking outfits would come in and take her from the room.  Sometimes she would struggle, but usually she would just go along with her head hung low.

They would always bring her back, though the times when she wasn’t brought back during my shift were always the worst for me.  I would worry about her until I got to work the next day and saw her in the room watching T.V. or painting.  She never looked hurt or even that upset except for when they took her, and even when she fought, they were always gentle with her.  

Still, I knew something was wrong.  I considered quitting the job, or hitting the red button and getting someone to come so I could get some answers.  Or calling the police and showing them what the camera was showing me.

Except I was scared.  Scared of losing my job,  and scared of what these people might do to me if I quit or told on them.  Solomon had told me when I took the job that part of being discreet was not asking questions.  I would never be asked to do more than I had already been told, but I could never tell anyone what I did or saw, and I could never ask questions about what I was doing or why.

So I made excuses.  It was all an experiment.  She was crazy or sick and they were trying to help her.  She was doing a job just like I was.  Or if she really was a prisoner somewhere, at least I was watching to make sure that she was okay.  If they ever tried to hurt her, or I saw that she really didn’t want to be there for sure, I could get help then.  In a way, I told myself, I was helping to protect her by watching.

I don’t expect you to think much of my excuses.  I don’t think much of them myself, especially now.  But in my defense, when things changed, I didn’t ignore it or try to explain it away.  I knew something had to be done.

****

Rachel would usually paint for an hour or two every day, and it seemed to always be during my afternoon shifts.  The room had no windows as far as I could tell, but I guess she either used a clock or her own body’s time to keep to a kind of schedule.  I always liked to watch her paint—the thing she was painting was always facing the wrong way for me to see it, but I could see her face as she worked.  She always looked peaceful and happy when she was painting, and seeing her that way, smiling serenely from time to time as she got something the way she wanted it, always made my day.

I first noticed something was wrong when she started painting more frequently a few weeks ago.  Her expression was more focused and serious, and there was a tension to her movements that I wasn’t used to seeing.  At first I thought she was just really trying to work hard on something, and I wanted to tell her not to worry.  Every few weeks the others would come in and take the old paintings out anyway, bringing in a new stack of…I think the word is canvas.

But it was more than her being focused.  Something was wrong.  She didn’t look happy and she was going for hours at a time.  In the span of three days, she had finished four paintings.

I had been growing more and more worried watching her work, and when she finished the fourth, I found myself telling her to just stop and rest awhile.  I had grown accustomed to talking to the monitor, talking to *her* in my own way.  But she didn’t stop.  Instead she began moving the paintings.  Arranging them on the back and seat of the long sofa at the far end of the room.  

This was the first time I had gotten to see any of the paintings.  Even when the others were taking them out, they always seemed to be turned away from the camera.  I was still worried about her, but I was also happy to finally see something she had worked on.  Happy and amazed.

They were beautiful.  One was a beautiful green forest.  Another was an old stone well.  A third was a house sitting alone on a small island.  The last was an old-fashioned looking movie theater.  All of them looked like something out of a dream, with trailing lines of color mixing in the air around them like leaves caught in a wind.  It was only when I looked close that I realized the lines of color weren’t random.  They were words.  Easy to miss if you weren’t looking close, and by themselves, they didn’t seem to mean much.  Just the ghost of a word somewhere in each of the paintings, easy to lose in everything else that was being shown.

I leaned into the monitor and squinted, trying to read the words.  Then my heart started thudding as I made them out.  Blinking and rubbing my eyes, I looked again, reading them out loud in order—left to right, top pair then bottom.

“Please.”

“Help.”

“Me.”

“Thomas.”

I pushed back from the monitor, my hand over my mouth.  I didn’t know what to do.  I didn’t know how any of this could be happening.  It wasn’t just that she was asking for help, though that was a big part of it.  

[It was that *my* name is Thomas.](https://redd.it/9ndww5)

****

[Part Two](https://redd.it/brsj8v)
I moved in with my boyfriend yesterday. We’ve been together for 5 years now and we’re old and wise enough to settle down and finally leave our parents houses. He just turned 24 and I’m 22. He’s the love of my life. His name is Jamie and I couldn’t be happier to be living with him. 

When we decided to make the leap we spent 2 months looking at flats and houses, we couldn’t afford to buy yet so renting was our only option but the prices were astronomical. For our budget we would have been lucky to get a box room and a stove.

Jamie works for a local 24 hour fast food restaurant and I’m training to be a teacher. The early stages of training don’t pay much and I owe a lot in student loans so finances are tough. 

We had almost given up hope until we found our flat. It was nothing special, but to us it was a palace. A spacious 2 bedroom apartment with views of a city park, a balcony and local conveniences. It was in a tower block in a not so nice area, but neither of us had been wealthy growing up, we weren’t fussy. Just grateful to be together. 

The advert was sweetened by the deposit free option and open ended tenancy. The landlord was happy to sign a five year contract if we wanted. That sort of thing never happens in the city. We were told that along with no deposit we would also have no inspections, but would be liable to pay for any damage when we ended the tenancy. I’d never heard of anything quite like it.

We knew that for our budget and location we weren’t going to get any better. We snapped the place up fast, not even bothering to view it. It felt like our only chance. 

Move in day rolled around quickly and yesterday we got the keys to our first home together, it was such a strange feeling. The day was chaos, getting our stuff in and up in the lift. We were flat number 42, on the 7th floor. The items we couldn’t get in the lift had to be taken up all the stairs by the removal men. I think they were grateful we weren’t any higher but I still wish we had been able to give them a better tip. 

In the evening we settled down on our second hand sofa, given to us by a cousin of a friend and watched some tv. We smoked cigarettes on the balcony looking at the park and fell asleep on our mattress on the floor super early because we had no energy to put the bed together yet and Jamie had work at a hideous time of the morning. 

We slept soundly last night, I felt safe and happy. I don’t think that feeling is coming back any time soon and it’s all due to the note I found this morning. 

I found it in the kitchen, having a coffee, hours after Jamie had left for his early shift at work. It was in one of the cupboards that were fixed to the wall, there were a bunch of useful items from the previous tenant. Spare keys to the flat, a set of tiny keys that locked and unlocked the windows (necessary for those with kids this high up), spare smoke alarm batteries and a folded up piece of paper. 

The note was handwritten with “New occupier of flat 42” in beautiful cursive on the blank side. I opened it up and sat down to read. I can’t really describe it to you, so I’m going to copy it out below. 

*Dear New Occupier,*

*Firstly, welcome to your new home. I lived here before you for 35 years with my husband. Unfortunately he had an incident at home recently that I’d rather not discuss that claimed his life. My sister has now decided I can’t keep up with the demands of the property and has insisted that I move in with her and her husband. I was reluctant at first, but the stairs do kill me at my age and without Bernie it’s filled with sadness.*

*Anyway. When you’ve lived somewhere for as long as I have it feels like a person that you know. You understand it’s personality and what makes it tick. I thought it was probably pertinent that I impart some of that knowledge on you.*

*It’s a wonderful home, honestly, I have lived through best and worst years and leaving it behind is very emotional but if you are to survive and get the best out of it then there are some steps you need to follow.*

*1. The landlord will never bother you, he doesn’t visit, call or communicate in any way. But make sure to pay your rent in a timely fashion always. I have only dealt with him once in 35 years and let’s just say I never missed another rent day. Any repairs required you speak to the agent you rented the place with.*

*2. DO NOT use the communal lift between 1.11 and 3.33 am. Just don’t do it. This step is vital if you are to have a happy life here. It really is life or death. Don’t do it. This has cost me and many others in the building greatly and I would rather not elaborate on why you shouldn’t do this. Just please don’t do it. I cannot stress this enough.*

*3. When you hear the strange animal noises coming from flat 48 don’t question it, Mr Prentice lives there and he’s a lovely chap. Don’t be afraid to say hello to him in the corridor or on the stairs (he’s old school, so he never risks the lift) but whatever you do, don’t check on him when you hear the noises. You’ll know when you hear them.*

*4. If you ever come across a window cleaner on the balcony ignore him. He may seem like the nicest fellow you’ve ever had trying to sell you something at the door but it really is best that you don’t engage. He will go away if you ignore him. But he tries pretty hard the first few times so you’ll need some resilience. Whatever you do, don’t offer him anything. No money, no hot drink.*

*5. Don’t leave food scraps out. Bin or refrigerate them immediately. If you have small animals, it is imperative that you watch them eat and take away any leftover food immediately after they are done. This and rule 2 go hand in hand, the things forage all day and seem to really love animal feed. You don’t want them in your flat. I promise. You can leave what you want out between 1.11 and 3.33am so you may want to feed your pets then.*

*6. Don’t communicate with any neighbours who claim to come from flats 65-72. These flats suffered a fire in the late 80s that devastated the whole floor, all the residents died in their homes. The building was mostly council owned at the time and they never bothered to renovate the flats. They’ve been empty ever since but every now and again someone will knock at your door claiming to live in one of these flats and ask to borrow some sugar. They will seem entirely average but you must shut and lock the door immediately. I installed two extra security bolts to avoid these fuckers. I don’t like to swear at my age but they really are fuckers.*

*7. Simple one for you here, keep a weapon in each room. Sometimes you follow all these steps and something still slips through the net. Better to be safe than sorry.*

*8. The building has a committee that will try and get you to join. It’s one of those neighbours groups about improving living conditions for all residents. It’s a nice group and the lady who runs it - Terri from flat 26- is a fantastic neighbour. By all means get involved. But I wouldn’t recommend babysitting Terri’s 2 children. She’ll ask you, because the poor woman needs a break, but if you accept don’t say I didn’t warn you.*

*9. Stray hairless cats sometimes roam in the hallway. I know they’re supposedly a special, expensive breed, but they don’t belong to anyone. They’re mostly  harmless, but don’t pick them up. Not unless you see one of those neighbours that claims to live in 65-72. Then grab the cat and lock it inside with you. It’ll burn your skin a little but the cats are friendly and I wouldn’t want to see them hurt.*

*10. There is no way to fix the damp patch on the ceiling in the bedroom. Sometimes it will turn a deep crimson and look quite concerning, but please try not to be alarmed, it doesn’t drip, it doesn’t get any bigger and it’s been there longer than I have. The landlord won’t budge on it, according the the agents. I flagged it many times, even called the police the first night it changed colour, but it was a waste of time and it will be for you too. It’s best to ignore it.*

*11. You can trust the postman. His name is Ian Flanders and he’s been the postman since before I moved in. He has his own key to the main door and delivers post to the door every morning at 8.54. I can’t include everything here, or it would become a novel but if you have any questions Ian will help you.*

*12. Finally, the first few weeks are the worst. You’ll feel like you’ve made a mistake, I’m sure reading this you already do, but if you can get through the first few weeks it really is a lovely block to live in. Every property has it quirks and this one is a little extra special, but you can be truly happy here if you just take my advice. I wish you all the best, I really do.*

*Yours truly*, 

*Mrs Prudence Hemmings*

I don’t really know what to think after reading the note. Hopefully it was some sort of joke but the agent had said the previous tenant was an elderly lady and I can’t see anyone named Prudence Hemmings attempting to play practical jokes on someone they’d never met. 

There were also parts of the note I couldn’t disprove, there was indeed a large damp patch above the bed that me and Jamie had already discussed reporting. No crimson but it definitely existed. I had also commented on a beautiful Sphynx cat roaming the halls as we were moving in. I started to get seriously freaked out.

Our dream, our beautiful little home had just become a source of fear and confusion. I checked the time and it was 9.14. Damn it. Out of time to catch postman Ian. When I opened the door to check, sure enough, two letters addressed to a Mrs Hemmings sat on the doorstep. 

At about 11.15 my worst fears were truly confirmed when a friendly middle aged looking man carrying window cleaning equipment knocked on my balcony door. I ignored him. I didn’t want to take the risk until I’d spoken to Jamie and showed him the note. I’d texted him already to rush home. I felt bad as the man rapped his knuckles against the door for over 10 minutes, but honestly the longer it went on the more I was terrified. 

My windows were sparkling, and due to our lack of curtains I couldn’t even hide from his gaze. I felt so exposed. He stayed for a total of 30 minutes exactly and never once did he stop looking at me or knocking. He shouted the occasional ultra friendly line or humble request for a beverage in the heat through the door but I did my best to avoid eye contact. 

When he finally left I looked outside every window in the flat, but I couldn’t see him on any of the other balconies or see any equipment suggesting he was around. He had vanished completely. 

Jamie still hadn’t text me back, he must have been having a rough shift, it was a Friday and they were always busy. It wasn’t often that he didn’t reply. He was due home in around an hour anyway.

I read the note probably hundreds of times over, I tortured myself reading it for the next hour. Desperately waiting for Jamie to come through the door to tell me it was all crazy and I should relax. 

I hoped for that so much.

But Jamie never came. His shift should have finished around midday but by 2pm he still wasn’t home. I panicked, I cried, I left over 100 voice messages on his phone but got nowhere. I finally decided it had been long enough that calling his work wouldn’t embarrass him and his boss told me that he had never turned up for his shift. 

I thought about it, what could have happened?  And then it hit me. Jamie’s shift started at 4am today. He would have left the flat at 3.15 and taken the lift down the stairs. 

I don’t know what to do. I’ve tried to convince myself it was all just a big joke. Maybe Jamie wrote the note and got his boss in on it. A voice in my head kept telling me that he couldn’t write like that if he tried but I had to attempt to fool myself. It’s getting late and he still isn’t home, what if it’s all true? [I think we made a big mistake.](https://www.reddit.com/r/ThePickledGnome/)


My next steps : https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/cinu8u/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app

And what happened after that: https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/cj2g4k/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_appIt’s official: I’m an old man.

For the last couple years, I’ve comforted myself by saying I’m in my “early 70s,” but math is simple and unforgiving. Today is my 75th birthday, and God, the years do fly.

I’m not here for your well wishes; this is hardly a milestone I’m excited about. I’m glad to still be here, of course, but I find I have less and less to live for with every passing year. My bones ache, my kids live far away, and the other side of my bed has been empty for just over eight months now. In fact, once I cast my vote against that goddamned Trump this November, I may have nothing to live for at all.

So spare me your “happy birthdays” and your congratulations, if you please. I’m here because I have a story for you, and it’s one I’ve never told before. I used to think I kept it inside because it was silly, or maybe because nobody would believe it. I’ve found, though, that the older you grow, the more exhausting it becomes to lie to yourself. If I’m being perfectly honest, I’ve never told anybody this story because it scares me, almost to death. 

But death seems friendlier than it used to, so listen close.

*****

The year was 1950; the setting a small town in Maine. I was a boy of nine, rather small for my age, with only one friend in the world to speak of—and his family, seemingly on a whim, decided to move 2,000 miles away. It was shaping up to be the worst summer of my life.

My pop wasn’t around and my mom was a chore-whore—boy, was I proud of myself when I came up with that one—so I wasn’t apt to hang around the house. With some hesitation, I decided the public library was the place to be that summer. The library’s collection of books, particularly children’s books, was meager to say the least. But within the walls of that miserly structure, I would find no undone chores, no nagging mother (God rest her soul), and perhaps most importantly, no other children with whom I would be expected to associate. I was the only kid with a low enough social status to spend his precious days of freedom sulking amid the bookshelves, and that was just fine with me.

The first half of my summer was even more dreadful than I had imagined it would be. I would sleep in until 10, do my chores, and then ride my bike to the library (and by bike, I mean rusty log of shit attached to a pair of wheels). Once there, I would split my time between unintentionally annoying the elderly patrons and deliberately doing so. One pleasant lady actually interrupted my incessant tongue-clicking to hiss a “shut the fuck up!” at me—the first time I ever heard a grownup use The F Word. Big fuckin’ deal, I know, but in those days it was unheard of.

The dreary days turned to woeful weeks. I had actually begun praying for school to start again—until I discovered the basement. I could have sworn I’d roamed every inch of that library, but one day, in the far corner behind the foreign language collection I stumbled across a small wooden door I had never seen before. That was where it all began.

The door was windowless and made from oak that looked far older than the wall in which it rested. It had a knob of black metal that quite literally looked ancient—I wouldn’t have been surprised to learn it was crafted in the 17th century. Engraved on the knob was what appeared to be a single footprint. I had the sense that whatever lay beyond this door was forbidden to me, and therefore probably the most interesting thing I would encounter all summer. I quickly glanced around to make sure nobody was watching me, then turned the heavy knob, slipped behind the door, and shut it.

There was nothing; only darkness. I took a couple of steps and then stopped, unnerved by the totality of the shadow which surrounded me. I waved my hands in front of me in an attempt to find a wall or a shelf or anything to hold on to. What I actually found was far more subtle—a small string, dangling from above—but far more useful. I grabbed it firmly and pulled it down.

Back in the day, lots of lightbulbs were operated with strings, and this was one of them. My surroundings were instantly illuminated. I was standing on a small, dusty platform that looked as though it hadn’t seen life in quite some time. To my left was a crickety-ass spiral staircase, made of wood and appearing ready to collapse at any second. The bulb was the only source of light in the room, and it was feeble, so when I peered over the railing to see what lay below, the bottom of the staircase dissolved into the darkness.

I was beginning to feel scared. This place—wherever I was—seemed to have no business in a town library. It was as though I were in a completely different building. But no nine-year-old likes to let a mystery go unsolved. Looking back, I wish I could tell my prepubescent self to turn around, go back, do anything else besides descending that staircase. “You’ll be spared a lot of sleepless nights,” I’d say. But, of course, I didn’t know that then—and I may not have listened even if I had. So instead of turning back, I took a deep breath, gripped the railing, and glared resolutely forward as I began my descent.

The wood on the railing was dry and covered with splinters. I immediately let go, holding my hands out for balance as I carefully traversed the staircase. It was (or at least seemed) very long, and with only the dim glow from the string-bulb far above me, my heart pounded mercilessly in the darkness. Even kids can sense when something isn’t right, I think—they just don’t always give a shit.

By the time my feet reached the cement floor at the bottom, the light from the bulb above was very nearly a memory. But there was a new light source, and God, I’ll never forget it. Directly in front of me was a door, massive, and a deep shade of red. The light was coming from behind the door, and it shone out in thin lines from all four sides—a sinister, dimly glowing rectangle. For the second time, I took a deep breath and went through a door I shouldn’t have.

In contrast to the dank room I entered from, the room behind the door was blinding. When my eyes adjusted, what I saw nearly took my breath away. 

It was a library. The most perfect library imaginable.

I gaped in wonder as I stepped, almost reverently, further into the room. It was beautiful. It was smaller than the library above, much smaller, but it seemed to be almost tailor-made for me. The shelves were packed with brightly colored titles, both armchairs in the middle of the room were exquisitely comfortable, and the smell—my God, the smell—was simply unbelievable. Sort of a mixture of citrus and pine. I simply can’t do it justice with words, so I’ll suffice it to say that I’ve never smelled anything better. Not in my 75 years.

What was this room? Why had I never heard of it before? Why was nobody else here? Those were the questions I should have been asking. But I was intoxicated. As I gazed around at all the books and basked in the smell of paradise, I could only form one thought: *I will never be bored again.* 

*****

In truth, boredom only hid from me for three years. It was on my 12th birthday, 63 years ago to this day, that everything changed.

Before that day, I visited my basement sanctuary as often as I could—usually several times a week. I never saw another soul down there, yet strangely remained free of suspicion. I never removed a book from that room, but instead would pick up a particular volume wherever I had stopped reading during my previous visit. I sat, always in the same deep purple armchair, and always leaving its twin barren and directly across from myself. That armchair was mine, the other was—well, I suppose I couldn’t have articulated it then much better than I can now. But it wasn’t mine, that’s for damn sure.

On my twelfth birthday, I arrived later than usual. My mom had invited a couple classmates and some cousins over to our house to celebrate, a gesture which I found more tedious than touching—really, I just wanted to spend my birthday sitting and reading and smelling paradise. Eventually, our guests went home, and I made it to the library about fifteen minutes before closing time. That didn’t matter; the workers never checked down there before they locked up. I was free to stay as late as I wished. This particular night, I was devouring the final chapters of an epic adventure; knights, swords, dragons, and the like. I didn’t smell it until I read the final words and closed the book.

The once exquisite aroma of that room had turned sour. I sat for a moment, unsettled. Objectively, I could recognize that the smell was actually the same as it had been before—that mixture of citrus and pine. I just perceived it differently, and I didn’t like it anymore. It was the nasal version of an optical illusion; you know, the one that looks like a young woman glancing backward, but all of a sudden you see that it’s really an old woman facing toward you? You can’t unsee that, and I couldn’t unsmell this. The spell was broken.

The odor also seemed, for the first time, to be coming from somewhere specific. With a fair amount of trepidation, I stalked around the room, sniffing the air like a crazed canine until I came to a shelf near the back. The shelf was perfectly normal, with the exception of one title—a large, leatherbound cover of solid faded maroon, with one striking black footprint at the top of the spine. This was the source of the smell. I opened the front cover, and saw one sentence scrawled neatly in blood-red ink atop the first page: 

*Rest your sorrows down, friend, and leave them where they lie.*

I stared at this sentence, mesmerized, as I began to retreat to my chair. I turned a page. Blank. The smell became stronger. Another page, blank, and the smell grew stronger still. I stopped for a moment, suppressed a gag, and continued walking. Then, as I neared the armchairs, I turned one final page—and there, in the same sinister print, was the last thing I expected to see: my own name. I dropped the book. I began to sprint toward the door, but as I shifted my gaze forward, my heart leapt to my throat and I stopped in my tracks.

The empty chair wasn’t empty anymore.

An aged man in a suit sat before me, one leg crossed over the other, contemplating me with piercing gray eyes and a light smirk. This was all too much. I fell to my knees and expelled the contents of my stomach onto the carpet. I wiped my mouth, staring at my vomit, when I heard the man let out a chuckle.

I stared at him disbelievingly. “Who are you?” I asked, panic in my voice.

The man leapt to his feet, grabbed me gently by the shoulders, and helped me to my chair. He sat, once again, in his own. “I fear we got off to a bad start,” he said, glancing at the pile of sick on the carpet. “The smell . . . it does take some getting used to.”

“Who are you?” I repeated.

“Tonight, you will know hardship like you’ve never before known,” he said. “I come as a friend, offering you refuge from it, and from all other storms which lie ahead.”

I wanted nothing more than to leave at that moment, but I remained seated. I asked him what he was talking about.

“Your mother is dead, my boy. By her own hand, in her kitchen. The scene is gruesome, I must admit,” he said in sorrowful tones, but was there a playful glint in his eye? “Surely you wish to avoid this path. I can show you a safer one.”

My blood ran cold at the horrors this man spoke of, but I did not believe him. “What do you want with me?” I demanded, trying to sound braver than I felt. He laughed, an old, raspy yelp that seemed to shake him to his bones.

“Nothing but your friendship, dear boy,” he said. Then, sensing I found his answer inadequate, he expounded. “I want you to come on a journey with me. My work is noble and you will make a fine apprentice. And maybe, when I’m done”—he sighed tiredly, running his bony fingers through his thin white hair—“maybe then, my work can be yours.”

I stood up, shuffling toward the door but never breaking his gaze. “You’re crazy,” I told him. “My mom isn’t dead. She’s not.”

“See for yourself, if you must,” he said, gesturing toward the door. I threw him a contemptuous glare and bolted for the exit. As my hand closed around the knob, he said my name softly. In spite of myself, I turned around.

“Your road won’t be easy, friend. If it ever becomes too much for you, and I mean ever,” he said, pausing to sweep his hand over the room, “you know where to find me.”

I slammed the door behind me and took the decrepit stairs two at a time. I exited the library, clambered onto my bike, and high-tailed it home. The front door was wide open. I dismounted, leaving my bike in a heap on the ground, and approached the house cautiously. The old man was lying—he must have been. Still, tears began to sting my eyes. Heart pounding, I stepped inside and called for my mother. I heard no answer, so I turned into the kitchen.

To this day, I don’t know why she did it.

*****

I’ve lived in that small town in Maine my entire life, although I’ve kept mostly clear of the public library. Once, in my late 20s, I summoned the courage to step inside. Life was good at that time, and my fear had begun to morph into idle curiosity. Where the door to my basement sanctuary once stood was only a blank wall. I asked the librarian what had become of that basement, though in my heart I knew the answer. There was no basement, she said. There had never been a basement. In fact, if she had her facts correctly, city zoning ordinances prohibited a basement in the area.

I’ve been haunted by that sickly-sweet smell, that poisonous blend of citrus and pine, ever since that long ago birthday. When I saw my mother in the kitchen that day, collapsed in a pool of her own blood, I smelled it. When a man claiming to be my father knocked on my college apartment door, begged me for money and beat me to within an inch of my life when I refused, I smelled it. When my wife miscarried our second child, I smelled it, and again when she miscarried our fourth. When our oldest son got behind the wheel of the family Buick completely shitfaced and got his girlfriend killed, I smelled it.

I began to smell it periodically as my wife became sick. She died late last year, and now, I’m alone for the first time in more than half a century. Now, I smell it every day, and it feels like an invitation.

A few months ago, I went back to the library and the small oak door with the ancient handle was there—right where it used to be. My evening walk has brought me past that library every day since, but I haven’t gone inside. Maybe tonight I will. I’m frightened to die, yes, but lately I’m even more frightened to keep living. The old man was right—my road hasn’t been easy, and I doubt it will get any easier.

*Rest your sorrows down, friend, and leave them where they lie.*

He promised relief. A refuge, he said. Was he right about that too? There’s only one way to find out. After all, I still know where to find him.

-----------

[x](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCNzHOZrXbYUdvJCRtfrBLmg)We called her Spacegirl.   


Her real name was Megan Daniels, but nobody actually called her that. She’d been Spacegirl since Grade 2. She was the kind of kid who stuck out in the crowd with her long red hair, ghostly pale skin and coke bottle glasses. For as long as I’d known her, Spacegirl had been quiet. She didn’t like to be around us. She didn’t play with us when we were kids, she didn’t even talk much.  


Most of the time, she’d find somewhere to sit, far away from everyone else. Then she’d open up her little notebook and scribble inside of it. Sometimes she wrote poems, sometimes she drew. But she was always off on her own little world. Nowadays, I understand why we targeted her. She was different, and she was alone. That doesn’t justify any of it, but kids can be cruel. I remember that it was Sasha Brown who told me that Spacegirl was retarded because her Mother was on drugs. She probably just made that up. But we all believed it. She had always been the worst towards Spacegirl, and she kept that up until the end.   


It all started in Grade 5 when Sasha took her notebook.

It had been raining that day, so we’d had an indoor recess. Spacegirl sat in the corner at her desk, eyes focused on her notebook as she methodically worked on a drawing. Sasha and I had been sitting nearby at our desks, and we simply just watched her do her thing.

  “I can’t believe they let that retard sit in with us.” Sasha murmured, “Look at her… Why do they even let them in schools? They aren’t gonna learn anything.”  
   “Better than leaving her at home with her crackhead Mom.” Said Tanya Evrett. She and I weren’t exactly friends, but she sat close to Sasha and I. “My Dad says he sees a different car in front of her house every day. He says that she lets boys come and they pay her so they can have S-E-X.” None of us could actually say the dreaded S word at the time. Sex was still a terrible unknown thing, and we all had been raised to believe that nobody decent would ever do it.  


Spacegirl paused, and her eyes darted away from her book, to look at us. I can only imagine she’d heard us. Sasha just stared right back at her.   


  “What? Do you have a problem, Spacegirl?” She asked. The Teacher was out of earshot, and that gave her carte blanche to say whatever she wanted. Spacegirl didn’t respond. She just looked back down at her notebook, but Sasha had been challenged (or at least she thought she’d been). She looked over to the Teachers desk to make sure she was busy, then she got up and moved closer to Spacegirl. 

  “What are you even doing in there, retard?” 

She’d reached out to snatch the book before Spacegirl could stop her. 

  “What even is this? A Unicorn? What are you, five?” 

She handed the book to me, and I took it on instinct. There was a brightly colored drawing of a Unicorn inside. The artwork was actually pretty nice, but I would never have said so. The book was passed on to Tanya next, and Spacegirl could only look at us helplessly. 

  “Wow. You can’t even draw. Look at this?”

She tore the page out of the notebook, and Spacegirl let out a startled whimper, as if she’d been struck. The picture was crumpled up and the book was thrown on the floor by Spacegirls desk.

  “Draw something that isn’t trash next time.” Tanya said, and Sasha just giggled as if it was anything other than being mean spirited just for the sake of it. 

Spacegirl slowly picked her book up off the floor, avoiding eye contact as Tanya and Sasha turned away from her. I continued to stare. I remember that the way she moved was so defeated, as if she were shrinking in on herself. She looked up at me, but only for a moment and I felt bad for her. I really did. But I didn’t do anything about it. I just left her to rejoin the others.

&#x200B;

After that, Spacegirl became an easy target for Sasha and Tanya. Every chance they got, they’d harass her and I regret to admit that I was usually right there with them.

During the days where we could go outside for recess, Spacegirl would always sit beneath the same tree, always working in her notebook. When she did, we would always lean on the trunk and look down over Spacegirls shoulder.

  “Wow, that’s really good, Spacegirl.” Was how most of her comments would start, “Did you mean to draw it like it got hit by a truck, or is that just your style?”

There was never a compliment. She would always find something to needle.

  “Can you draw me?” Sasha asked once, “I heard that retards were always like, art geniuses or something. Maybe it’ll even look like a person!”

Spacegirl didn’t look up at her. She seemed to be trying not to acknowledge the insults. I won’t pretend like I was blameless either. I never stopped them, and there were plenty of times where I was right there, making fun of her because that was what we did, and we weren’t the only ones. More or less everyone hurt her in some way or another. But she never complained. I think she was too scared to.

&#x200B;

It was late December in 7th grade where things got even worse. I don’t know all the details, and I don’t know just for how long things had been boiling over, but I’d heard a rumor that James Hardy had it out for Spacegirl.  


James had only been in my class a few times, and he wasn’t in my class that year. He was a small, mousy looking kid who was convinced he was the world's toughest gangster. The rumors said that someone had seen his Dad going into Spacegirls house. Naturally there had been speculation that they'd been having sex. Someone told me that James’ parents had been divorcing because of it. Somehow all of these rumors had mutated into claims that James and Spacegirl were dating and I think that was what had rubbed him the wrong way.  


We were coming in from recess when some boys decided to pull a little prank on James. The whole prank had been set up by Brian Jordan and his brother Mike. They had some mistletoe for the Holiday season, and had set it up in the hall leading back to our classroom. Mike had grabbed Spacegirl during recess and were holding her behind the door where the mistletoe was. When James walked through, they pushed her at him and snapped a picture. I’d been just behind James when it happened. I watched as Spacegirl came flying out of seemingly nowhere, eyes wide and afraid, then slammed into James. They both hit the ground, and I could hear the other boys laughing.  


  “LOOK! She wanted to give you a kiss!” One the boys said. Spacegirl was trying to crawl away from James and pick up her notebook, but somebody had kicked it out of sight. I remember that she looked back towards James, and there were tears in her eyes. She must have been terrified with everything that was going on. She clearly hadn’t wanted any part in this, but there she was at the center of it.

 “You fucking faggot assholes!” James yelled as he picked himself up.

  “Hey, she just wanted to give you a smooch!” aughed Brian, “Come on, give her a kiss!” 

Someone pushed Spacegirl towards James, and he glared at her as if all of this was her fault. She tried to stand and run, but he was angry and he wasn’t thinking straight. I watched as he grabbed her and hit her. A square punch to the jaw. Then he tossed her to the ground and went after Brian next. A teacher had to get in to pull James off of him. He, Spacegirl and the Jordan Brothers ended up getting suspended right before the Christmas holidays. We didn’t see Spacegirl until January… we didn’t see James or his friends ever again. 

&#x200B;

On Christmas Eve, there was a car accident on the highway outside of my town. Supposedly it had swerved off the road to avoid an animal of some kind, and gone into a ditch. Mike, Brian and their parents didn’t survive. On December 27th, James was killed while outside shoveling his driveway. My Parents told me that he’d been attacked by an animal. Probably a deer or something. But that seemed so unusual… I’d never heard anything about deer attacking people before. Especially not in my area.  


I went over to Sasha’s house on the day before New Years. We’d both gotten some gift cards for Christmas and we were planning to walk to the mall together to use them. Her parents weren’t home, they both had to work. So it was just us when I got there.

  “Hey! Kept me waiting!” She said when I knocked on the door.   
   “Sorry.”   
   “It’s fine. I’ll be ready in a bit. Come on upstairs, I wanna show you something!”

I didn’t question what it was. I figured it was just something else she’d gotten for Christmas, so I went upstairs with her.

  “You’re gonna love it.” She promised me, “It’s gonna be so funny…”

She led me to her bedroom, and as soon as she opened the door, I spotted a familiar notebook on her desk.  
   “Where did you get this?” I asked, walking closer to it.

  “Spacegirl dropped it when Brian and his Brother pulled that prank the other day, she dropped it. I may have grabbed it… Y’know. Just for safekeeping.”  


She cracked a wry grin, before opening the notebook.  


  “Look at this… She’s been drawing the same damn Unicorns forever. She didn’t even finish this one!”

She paused at one small picture that was labeled ‘The Unicorn Prince’. It depicted an empty field with a blank space where the titular Prince should have been. Sasha flipped through the pages a little more until she got to the newer ones.

  
  “I figured since they kicked Spacegirl out for a little while, and her Mom is too poor to get her anything for the holidays, I’d step up! What do you think?” Sasha wasn’t anywhere near as good of an artist as Spacegirl was, but the simple detail in what she had drawn turned my stomach.

  
In her first picture, Spacegirl was hanging from a rope. Her tongue was hanging out, and her eyes were closed.   
In the second one, Spacegirl had a gun in her mouth.   
In the third one, she was standing on the edge of a building. 

Sasha giggled as I flipped through her crude depictions of suicide. There were pages of them.

  “What do you think?” She asked with a grin, “I’ll bet she’ll lose her shit!”

I closed the notebook and looked over at Sasha.

  “A-are you out of your mind?” I asked. Sasha’s grin faded.

  “What do you mean?”

  “You stole her notebook, just so you could draw these? Sasha, that’s really messed up!”  
   “It’s Spacegirl, who the hell cares about Spacegirl, Jane?”

  “You just… drew her killing herself over and over again!” I took the book off her desk, “Do you not understand what’s wrong with that?”

Sasha just stared at me like I was crazy.

  “Fine. Sue me for trying to be funny.” Sasha said, “Just give it here…” She outstretched a hand to take the notebook, but I pulled back from her. 

  “No. You’re just going to put something else in there.”

Anger flared in Sasha’s eyes.

  “Jane, just give me the book.”

  “No!”  


I opened the book, and I started to tear out those pages of Spacegirls suicide. Sasha lunged for me, trying to grab at the book and stop me, but  pushed her back. I didn’t mean to push so hard, but I did and she fell, landing hard on the ground. For a moment, Sasha looked up at me, wide eyed and shocked. I don’t think anyone had laid a hand on her like that before. Then I saw something in her eyes… Not just anger. Something worse. It was the same thing that had prompted her to draw those horrible pictures of Spacegirl. I turned and I ran, bolting down her stairs and out her front door, back into the snow. I clutched Spacegirls notebook to my chest the entire time and I didn’t let it go until I got home.

&#x200B;

I spent the rest of the Christmas break terrified that my parents would get a call from Sasha’s. I’d pushed her, and that seemed like such a big deal at the time. In hindsight, I doubt Sasha would have told her parents what had happened. They would have asked why I’d pushed her, and I would have told them about the notebook. On some level, she must have known that what she’d done was wrong. She was a cruel person, but there was a limit. Part of me hoped that she’d realize that I was right and we could patch things up when School started again, but honestly I wasn’t so sure.   


I remember looking through Spacegirls drawings. The ones that she’d done. I remembered the ones I’d made fun of the most. There was one with a mermaid on a rock, combing her hair. Her eyes were closed in a relaxed bliss. I remembered saying how stupid her facial expression had looked, but honestly, I kinda liked it. I flipped through the pages some more, through Unicorns, Fairies and Castles. But I paused at the page depicting the Unicorn Prince. Back at Sasha’s place, it had been blank, but at my house it was finished. The Unicorn Prince stood proudly in his field, looking skywards with his horn proudly displayed. Maybe I had been thinking of a different picture?  


I brushed it off and flipped to the back where Sasha’s pictures were. One by one, I started tearing them out of the notebook and tossing them in the trash. It was a waste of paper, but I refused to give it back to Spacegirl with those images still in it. 

&#x200B;

On the first day back to school, I was up early. I made sure the notebook was packed into my bag and was out as early as I could be. The snow on the ground was almost pristine as I walked to school, but I remember seeing some tracks on my lawn, headed down the side of my house. Deep U shaped indents that looked like they’d been made by hooves. A deer perhaps? I didn’t dwell on them and made my way down the freshly shoveled sidewalk and back to school.   


I wasn’t entirely sure if Spacegirl would be back yet, but she was. She was alone in the classroom, sitting at her desk and drawing in a brand new notebook. She paused briefly when I walked in to join her, and I could see her sideying me. She didn’t say a word as I drew nearer, but I thought I saw her shoulders tense up ever so slightly.

  “Hey.” I said, “I’m… I hope you had a nice Holiday.”

She didn’t respond.

  “I’m sorry about what happened the other day. I didn’t know anything about it, but it just seemed really mean spirited.”

Still no answer. I reached into my backpack, taking out her old notebook. I put it on her desk in front of her. She stared at it, still silent, then back at me.

  “Sasha took it. I was over at her house the other day and she showed it to me. I had to take some pages out, but she drew some really awful things in there. I didn’t think it would be right to give it back with those things in there…” I paused, feeling smaller as Spacegirl stared at me. She didn’t seem angry or thankful. She didn’t seem anything at all. Just stoic.

  “I’m sorry if I wasn’t all that great to you before.” I said, and then I shuffled off to by desk. Spacegirl waited until I sat down before she opened her notebook and inspected it. Then she closed her new book, and started something new on a fresh page in her old one. 

It wasn’t much. But it made me feel at least a little good for what I’d done.

&#x200B;

When Sasha got in, she didn’t talk to me. She didn’t even look at me. Neither did Tanya or any of our other mutual friends. I knew from the moment they walked in that I’d burned my bridges with them. But I still wanted to try.

The Teacher hadn’t come in yet, so I figured it might be worth it to try and talk to Sasha. I got up to move closer to her and she gave me a look of utter disgust.  


  “What do you want?” She spat. 

Now it was my turn to be silent.  


  “Fuck off and leave us alone.” Tanya said, “You’d obviously rather hang out with the fucking retard than us, and I really don’t want you spreading your retard germs to us. It’s a quarantine issue.”   


I stared at both of them, and I could’ve sworn I knew how Spacegirl felt… What was I supposed to say to any of that? Instead, I just returned to my desk without a word. Spacegirl stared at me the entire time. Her pencil rested over her notebook, but she didn’t write anything. She set it down, tore out the page she’d been writing on and jammed it into her pocket. I later saw her toss it into the trash during lunch.

&#x200B;

I didn’t really have anyone left… So I thought that maybe it might be a good idea to pull it out. Maybe it was something she wasn’t happy with? I’d never seen her throw a drawing out before. I was thinking that maybe I could use it as a peace offering of sorts, or something along those lines. When I saw what she’d written on it, I almost threw it back into the trash.   


**Your Words**

*There is a land where your sorry may go.*

*A sickening land where it always snows*

*The snow is putrid in color and smell*

*It's substance- filth and things I won't tell.*

*Only your Father has been there before.*

*One day your boyfriend will visit once more.*

*This place in your carcass this humanoid hell.*

*Your sorry can go there to this hole in your shell*

*My unsubtle message, this subtextual jazz.*

*Is take your apology and stuff it up your ass.*  


This was unlike anything I’d ever seen her write. It was so crass and spiteful… This was as close to hatred as she could have gotten. I understood why she’d thrown it out. It didn’t fit with everything else she’d done. Those things had been beautiful, despite what people had said to her. This was angry and ugly… This was something she’d written for me. I put it in my pocket. I wasn’t going to give it back to her, but I wanted to keep it. I wanted to remember the way I’d made her feel. 

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

Eighth grade wasn’t fun for me. 

I had very few friends left, and Sasha never forgave me for turning on her. Her version of the story was slowly warped as time went on. First I’d punched her and stolen the book. Then I’d tried to kiss her, punched her when she’d refused, then stole the book to try and get her in trouble. Rumors of me being a dyke spread pretty quickly, and hot on their heels came the rumors that I was dating Spacegirl. I tried not to let them bother me too much. I knew the truth and at the end of the day, I’d done the right thing.

&#x200B;

By the time High School rolled around, I was hoping for a fresh start. There were new faces, and I figured I could make friends with them before Sashas rumors spread. I had a bit of success in that department. I fell in with a better crowd at least.   


Sasha stuck with her same old clique. It grew ever so slightly, but she was determined to live out the movie Mean Girls and most people didn’t pay her any mind.   
Spacegirl barely changed at all. I didn’t see her much when High School started. She was in a few of my classes, but I rarely saw her outside of them. Whenever she had a moment, she’d be in the library, usually in one of the corner cubicles, working on her drawings. Sometimes I thought about talking to her and trying to strike up a friendship… but it never felt right.   


Sasha’s bullying never let up of course. Of course she stalked Spacegirl to the library where she’d pull the same old shit she’d been pulling since the fifth grade. She’d leer over her cubicle and comment on her drawings. Picking them apart just like she always had. I stopped her whenever I saw it… but I didn’t always see it.

  “Coming to her rescue again, huh Jane?” Sasha asked once when I’d interrupted her. Tanya leered at me from behind her, chewing gum with her mouth open. 

  “What’s she ever done to you anyways?” I asked, “She’s just minding her own business.”

  “Oh? What’s she done to you, dyke?” Sasha hissed. She leaned down over her cubicle and looked down at the notebook.

  “Unicorns… Unicorns, unicorns, fucking unicorns… When are you going to grow up Spacegirl?”  
   “Hey! I told you to stop.” I rounded the cubicle and I saw Sasha recoil. For a moment, I saw a bit of fear in her eyes. It vanished quickly and was replaced with a familiar rage.  


  “Fine.” She said, “Tan, let’s leave the happy couple to their alone time.”  
She pulled away from the cubicle and disappeared with Tanya nipping at her heels like a faithful terrier. 

Spacegirl remained hunched over her notebook, her long red hair spilling over her shoulders. She seemed impossibly still.

I turned to leave her when I heard:

  “Thanks.”

I looked back at her and saw that she was looking at me.

  “Um… You’re welcome.” I said, “Let me know if she bothers you again, alright?”

  “I will. But… you’re usually there anyways.” 

Her voice was soft and low. I’d heard it before, but I don’t remember her ever speaking directly to me.

  “Yeah, well. It’s just not right. She’s such a child. One of these days she’s going to have to grow up.”

Spacegirl just nodded, looking over towards the library door, then back down at her notebook again. 

For a moment, I thought about asking her about what she was drawing. I thought about saying something else, but… No. I didn’t want to make her uncomfortable. I left her alone again. 

&#x200B;

In tenth grade, I took art as an elective. I wasn’t much of an artist, but I figured it would be an easy course. To the surprise of no one, Spacegirl was there. I actually asked her to work with me on a few group projects. I think the prospect of being asked to work together was foreign to her. She looked at me suspiciously when I did it, but when she smiled, it was the biggest smile I’d ever seen.  


I went to her house for the first time to work on a portrait project with her once. We were supposed to take turns drawing portraits of each other and I’d volunteered to let her draw me first. Rumors of her Mother had always surrounded Spacegirl, so I wasn’t entirely sure what to expect when I got there. I certainly wasn’t expecting the quiet, neatly kept house that I found.  


The Woman who answered the door looked like an older version of her daughter, sans the coke bottle glasses.

  “You must be Jane.” She said. She wasn’t smiling, but she didn’t sound upset either.

  “Yes ma’am…”

  “Come on in. Megan's upstairs. She was just getting ready for you.”

The house was warm with plenty of knick knacks on the walls. Plates and porcelain dolls mostly. Her Mom sent me upstairs and I didn't waste any time. On the landing leading up to Spacegirls room, I could see a mural of family photos and paused to look at them. I could recognize Spacegirl and her Mother in most of them. Spacegirl never seemed to be smiling. I only saw her Father in a few of the very early pictures. Spacegirl looked like she was only a young child in the few pictures I saw him in though. I didn’t dwell for long and headed towards what I assumed was her room. The cardboard stars and planets on it gave it away.  


Sure enough, she was inside waiting for me. She sat facing the door behind an easel in the center of her room. Her bed was neatly made and tucked away in the corner. She had a clean little desk that she’d clearly been working on and had set a chair out for me to sit on. I hadn’t expected something so overwhelmingly formal and I almost started laughing… But then I noticed her walls.  


They weren’t just covered in drawings. The art pieces on them were full on paintings. They were the same fantasy depictions she usually did, but the colors were so vivid. The clouds looked like fluffy pillows and the castles seemed great and infinite.

  “Holy shit, are these yours?”

  “They are.” Spacegirl said softly. She stood up and took the plate of cookies from me, then moved it to her desk.

  “It… it’s soothing.” She said after a while, “Painting, I mean. I pick the drawings I like the most and… I finish them.”

She spoke slowly, like she was carefully choosing her words. I almost felt like there was something that she was trying to avoid. I spotted a painting on the floor that looked like her Father. The style was the same but the content was different. He was surrounded by awkward scribbles, and he looked completely and utterly terrified. Spacegirl looked down at it, but she seemed to disapprove of it. She turned it around so I wouldn’t have to look at it.  


  “We should get started.” She said, “Sorry…”

  “No, it’s alright!” I said. I sat in the chair for her. “I’d like to hear about it.”

Spacegirl watched me from the corner of her eye for a moment, as if she doubted I was being serious. But eventually she sat down behind the easel and started to draw… Soon after that, she was talking too. I stayed long after she’d gotten what she needed for her sketch, just to talk. She told me that she’d always liked fantasy, and how she liked Unicorns because they were simple but pretty. I hung on to every word, and I could’ve sworn I saw her smiling shyly as she talked.   


The portrait she’d done of me was something else entirely. Her work had always been beautiful… but this made me look transcendent. I wasn’t entirely sure that I was looking at myself at first. There was something about the look on my face. There was a small, almost content smile there. The warmth it conveyed was almost disney-esque.

  “I love it.” I told her, “That’s incredible Spa… Megan… That’s really great!”

  “You can call me Spacegirl if you want.” She said, “I don’t mind the nickname… Not as much as I mind the people at least.”

My awe quickly turned to shame, but Spacegirl didn’t look upset… She just stared at me blankly like she so often did. No… not blankly. Her face might not have conveyed much emotion, but there was definitely some emotion there. 

  “I wish… I wish I’d been nicer to you, when we were younger.” I said.

  “Is that why you’re here right now?” Spacegirl asked.

  “No! I… I’m here for the assignment. I mean… the art assignment. The portraits…” 

She continued to stare. 

  “Did you pick me because you felt bad for me?” She asked. 

  “No! I just thought it would be cool to work with you.”

Spacegirl didn't react for a moment, but then she just nodded. 

  “Okay.” Her flat tone made it hard to know what she meant by that. She stood up and walked over to the portrait. 

  “Mom can drive you home if you need a ride.” She said. I opened my mouth to say something else. I wanted to apologize, but I didn’t know what.Had I offended her? Had I said something wrong?

  “Alright. Thanks.” It was the only thing I could think of. “See you tomorrow.”

With that, I left her.

&#x200B;

I was almost afraid to see Spacegirl the next morning. I drifted through my classes that day until I reached art… and when I did, I wasn’t expecting what I saw. She had clearly been up late… but what she’d brought in stole my breath away.  


It was my portrait, but she’d done more with it than I thought possible. She’d painted over the sketch, turning me into something beautiful. Flowers bloomed around my brown hair and a crown of daisies, lilies and chrysanthemums adorned my head. The colors were so vivid, and I looked so at peace in it. Spacegirl was looking right at me as I came in, as if she was gauging my reaction. But all I could do was stare wide eyed and in awe. When I looked back at Spacegirl, she was smiling at me. Her project single handedly netted us an A on the project and got the privilege of being hung up outside of the art classroom. Of course I told her how much I loved it, and I remember the way she smiled when I did. I remember thinking that it was the cutest smile I'd ever seen.

&#x200B;

My portrait was up for barely even a day before Sasha had to make a comment. I’d been on my lunch, and had just gotten some fries from the cafeteria when she and Tanya ambushed me.

  “Where’s your flower crown, dyke.” Sasha said, 

  “Leave me alone.” I said, brushing past them, but Sasha was out for blood.

  “I always knew you were a little dyke. But now you’ve posted solid proof of it! We’ve gone and cracked the case, haven’t we? So what happened? Did you go to her house and lick her retarded little snatch? You must be a real good dyke because she went and drew that for you!”

I tried to walk away from her, but Sasha and Tanya just kept following me.

  “What’s wrong? Am I not pretty enough for you Dyke?” She snapped at me.

  “Maybe she only fucks retarded girls.” Tanya said, “I’ll bet Spacegirl squealed like a pig when she came.”

I stopped dead in my tracks, and I heard Sasha stop behind me. I don’t know what it was about what she’d said that pissed me off so much. But those two had finally struck a nerve. I spun around, swinging my lunch tray as hard as I could. Fries were scattered everywhere, but although I was aiming for Tanya, I hit Sasha. She went down hard, and I’m not sure if she was even still conscious when she hit the ground. Tanya was on me in an instant. She slammed me back against a wall, and kept me pinned. She had size and strength on me, and there wasn’t a thing I could do to stop her. Several other students grabbed at us. A teacher finally got involved and all three of us got escorted to see the Principal. As we left the cafeteria, I saw Spacegirl in one of the halls, just staring at me.   


Naturally I got a three day suspension, but Tanya and Sasha were fine. Both of them said they’d just been walking and I attacked unprovoked. It was their word against mine. Sasha had a familiar shit eating grin on as she left the office with only a bruise on her forehead to show for her troubles, but there was a familiar look in her eyes. That same anger I’d seen last time I’d laid a hand on her… and something about it scared me.  


When I came back to school, I realized that I had every reason to be afraid. My portrait was missing. I wondered if they’d taken it down because I’d attacked Sasha, but the truth was a lot worse.

  “Someone took it.” Spacegirl said. She was sitting in her usual spot in the library when I found her, sketching flowers in her notebook.

  “When?”  
   “The day after you hit Sasha… I don’t think anyone’s found it yet.”

She didn’t look up at me. Just stayed focused on her art. She didn’t need to say it for me to know who she blamed. Who else would it be? I had half a mind to confront Sasha about it, but I didn’t know if that would be a good idea or not. Sasha could easily just cry wolf. I wouldn’t put it past her. In the end, it didn't matter.  


By the time I was headed to art class, the painting was back. But there had been some modifications made to it.

The words:

***Retard Fucking Dyke***

Had been painted across my portrait in bright red. I saw it from down the hall and could see some other students whispering amongst themselves beneath it. I didn’t know what to say or do… But this felt like too much.  


The picture was taken down quickly… but the damage was done. Sasha had gotten her revenge, and it didn’t stop with just the painting. Spacegirl looked different than when I’d seen her in the library. She seemed uneasy, and her eyes were red like she’d been crying.

  “I’m sorry about the painting…” I said softly. She looked at me, before sighing.

  “I knew she’d do something like that…” She said, “I’m so used to it by now, that it doesn’t bother me anymore. I’m sorry she wrote those things about you, though.”

  “But you worked hard on that.” I said, “I’d be upset too.”

She just shook her head.

  “That’s not it.” She said. She reached into her pocket, pulling out a crumpled up piece of paper then slid it over to me. 

Slowly I uncrumpled the paper, and my eyes widened as I recognized what was on it.

It wasn’t the same drawing… but it was close enough. It was a depiction of Spacegirl hanging herself, and me beside her. A caption read ‘*Retard Dyke Wedding’.*

  “There were so many in my locker…” Spacegirl said.

  “This is what she drew in your notebook… when I returned it to you… This is what I had to take out.”

Spacegirl looked down at the picture again, before averting her eyes. She didn’t pay much attention during class. Instead of taking notes, she sketched in her notebook. I looked over a few times to see her drawing another Unicorn. This one seemed so similar to the one I’d seen before. She must not have been quite happy with it though… When I looked back at her notebook, the Unicorn wasn’t there anymore. She must have just erased it… but it seemed so clean. Like it hadn’t been erased at all. 

&#x200B;

Tanya was following me on my walk home that evening. I didn’t know what she had in mind, but I didn’t want to put up with it. When I was in the middle of a small walking path that cut behind some of the houses on my street, I stopped and looked at Tanya as she kept approaching.

  “What do you want?” I asked.

  “It’s a surprise.” She said, “Sasha and I just want you to know how much we love Dykes in this town… Oops, I’ve said too much.”

I wanted to hit her. Dear God I just wanted to hit her, but we both knew she could overpower me. Whatever Tanya had in mind… it wasn’t anything good. She drew closer to me, unafraid of anything I’d do.

  “Come on, Dyke. Go home.” She said. “Let’s go check out your surprise.”

In a sudden horrible moment, I realized that Tanya was threatening me. I also realized that I couldn’t outrun her… I couldn’t fight her off. I didn’t really have much of a choice but to do as she asked. Slowly, I turned and walked towards my house, with Tanya at my heels. It wasn’t far, and up ahead I could see Sasha sitting on a park bench. From a distance, I recognized the red gas can beside her, and I stopped dead in my tracks.

Tanya seized me by the arm and pulled me towards the bench. Sasha just watched with a wide, manic grin.

  “Hey Jane.” She said, “How’s it going?”

  “What the fuck is this?!”

  “Just wanted to chat.” Sasha said with a cold chuckle, “You think you can get away with pulling the shit you did the other day. No. You’ve been treating me like garbage for years, and for what? Because of Spacegirl? You know who you’re fucking choosing, right? Right? God… I hate that retard girl. But you know what? I hate you even more. Acting like you’re better than me just because you feel bad for her.”

  “You’re crazy.” 

Sasha just laughed.

  “I’m not the one who clocked someone with a fucking tray just for a little bit of teasing. You’re absolutely fucking psycho!”

On the bench behind her, I saw the portrait that Spacegirl had painted of me. Sasha picked it up and tossed it in front of me, then picked up the gas can and dumped it onto the canvas.

  “You wanna be a Dyke, I don’t care. But I’m not letting you and your retarded whore put your shit up! So say goodbye to your little project, slut!”

Sasha reached into her pocket and took out a book of matches. Her grin widened, before suddenly vanishing outright as she looked at something behind us.   
   “What the hell?” Tanya said, and I craned my neck to try and see what they were seeing. As for believing it… that was another story entirely.  


Standing on the path behind us was a Unicorn… but the way it looked was all wrong. This was nothing like a regular horse. Its body was plain white and almost textureless save for the many thin blue lines that ran along its body. It looked like it had been cut out from a sheet of lined paper but… that was impossible… It had to be impossible. Neatly done grey lines defined the shape of the horse. In fact, the lines reminded me of the ones Spacegirl used. This Unicorn looked like it had walked out of one of her notebooks!

Tanya let me go and stumbled back a few steps, wide eyed as she stared at the advancing Unicorn. It let out an angry noise before charging straight for Tanya. She panicked and tried to run. In her desperation to escape, she bolted down the path. But she couldn’t outrun the paper Unicorn. It lowered its head as it drew nearer to her, and in one swift movement, the horn pierced Tanya’s back, impaling her straight through the chest. She screamed as she was hoisted off the ground and the Unicorn circled back to fix Sasha in a murderous glare.   


Tanya looked down at the massive spike sticking out of her, her eyes clearly wide with horror and her body twitching its last spasms as the life quickly drained from her. The Unicorn lowered its head to let her slide off of its horn and she hit the ground in a bundle of limbs.  


Sasha and I stared in silent horror as the Unicorn reared up on its hind legs and brought its hooves down upon Tanya’s body. She didn’t scream. She didn’t fight. She simply lay there as she was trampled again and again. I can only hope she died quickly.  


Sasha dropped the unlit match and took a slow, terrified step back before toppling over. I stumbled back and looked down to see the portrait of me at her feet. But it had changed. That beautifully painted version of me was now leaning out of the canvas, invading the real world and clutching Sasha’s leg tightly.

Still with that look of contentment on her face, I watched as the Painted Me slowly slipped back into her panting, and she took Sasha’s leg with her.

  “FUCK, FUCK, FUCK!”

Sasha desperately swatted at the Painted Me, but she couldn’t overpower it. She couldn’t escape. Her nails tried to dig into the pavement as she was slowly dragged into the canvas. She looked at me in horror, silently begging for help but all I could do was stare back at her in silence.

  “JANE! JANE HELP! PLEASE! PLEASE!"

The hands of the Painted Me reached up, seizing Sasha by the hair and forcing her down into the canvas. It was like watching something pull her underwater. One minute she was there, the next she was gone. I stood silent in the park, staring at the painting, then at the paper Unicorn. The Unicorn huffed before retreating off into the woods and then I was alone.  


Slowly, I approached the painting and I looked down at it. It had changed and now it depicted Sasha, her mouth open in a horrified final scream. After some hesitation, I picked up the painting. I could return it to Spacegirl in the morning. 

&#x200B;

They chalked Tanya’s death up to an animal attack, and nobody ever found Sasha. I never asked Spacegirl about what I saw. I don’t think even she knew the answer, although she certainly knew much more than I did.

&#x200B;

High School was ten years ago though, and I’ve chosen not to remember as much as I can. I’ve got my own life to live now and I try not to ask so many questions. Sometimes I see paintings move, but I don’t bother with a second glance and I never ask my wife about them. She doesn’t like to talk about it and I won’t ever force her. The painting of Sasha hangs in her studio at home, right beside the painting of her Father. Sometimes I look at it and I wonder if maybe things could have been different… but I don’t feel too guilty about it. I wouldn’t feel too guilty if I heard another story about a suspicious trampling or animal attack either but to my knowledge, there’s been nothing of the sort. I guess I shouldn’t be too surprised. I do my best to make sure nobody hurts my beautiful Spacegirl.Let me start off by saying that I’m not particularly religious. If you asked me if I believed in God, I’d probably just shrug, grunt out a few words about being on the fence about it and continue with my day. 

Of course, that was before last night. 

My friends are the kinds of people who like wild nights. Crazy parties, snort a bit of coke, take a bit of e in the bathroom, maybe hook up with someone and leave a text on my phone at ten past who-the- fuck-knows telling me they don’t need that ride I’m offering after all. 

Not to say I don’t like a drink, I do, it’s just… clubs aren’t my style. Lying low in a pub somewhere, drink in hand, listening to the tv drone on to whatever channel some scruffy guy in the back barked out for… I guess that’s my idea of fun. 

So when my friends tell me they want to go out for a night on the town, I say sure. I hang on for the first club, buy a non-alcoholic beer in case my car’s required and try to pretend that I’m having fun. By the time I see them grinding on girls, on guys, when they strike conversation with someone who definitely might be a dealer, well, I decide my services are no longer needed. We aren’t too far out, the night tube is on beck and call and I can always find my car the next day. 

That’s when I wander out of the club, look for something a little more rustic. Not that that’s hard to find, not at all. 

I found myself in a bit of a state inside of a bar called the Ragged Feather. Wasn’t a fan of the name all that much, but the drinks were cheap and the largest demographic seemed to be middle aged men watching reruns of the football. 

I tried to pretend I hadn’t just staggered out of a club with my ears ringing. I slicked my hair back, slipped my phone into my hand and wandered over to the bar. I took a double shot of whiskey and drank it in one hit. Just because I wasn’t at the club didn’t mean I couldn’t have a good time. 

I hung at the bar a while on my own, scrolled through my phone pretending I was doing something far more impressive than I really was. I kept an ear out for the guys on the sofas. They’d get vocal every now and then. I think the football was just running highlights, but they were incredibly dedicated to their teams. 

I got another whiskey and bled into the background.

Of course, stragglers from clubs are commonplace. It wasn’t long until some scantily dressed women staggered in, laughing, chuckling, pointing for where they wanted to sit. I saw a guy walk in with his friend slung over his shoulder. Catatonic, most likely. He threw his friend onto one of the leather sofas ingrained with beer and smokes and demanded two pints of water and all the peanuts the bar had in stock.

The bartenders seemed bitterly amused.

Some of the girls were taking selfies. Snapchatting their friends who were still at the club. They were ordering shots, gearing themselves up for the next leg of their night. 

A couple blokes wandered in with curries in take out trays. I saw someone eat a Big Mac on the outside seating through the window. 

This was a night for the young and inebriated and my mind was just dulled enough by the whiskey to enjoy the characters I could watch peaceably without interacting with.

That is, until someone slipped into the seat next to me.

“Do I look like a girl with daddy issues?”

She was of average height, although that wasn’t apparent immediately due to the fact that she was leaning her arms heavily against the bar. She was slim, with short and astoundingly bright red hair. It framed her round face, a face that was marred with smudged eye shadow, smudged lipstick… hell, it looked like her make-up was in the process of melting right from her face. There was a chip knotted into a curl in her hair, just by her forehead.

The drunk side of me was actually tempted to pick it out.

The girl was clearly drunk, and as I looked around the bar, I couldn’t quite place where she had come from. She didn’t belong to the crowd of selfie takers, she wasn’t with the catatonic guys. I hoped for her safety that she wasn’t with the middle-aged men. I tried to look out the window, to see if maybe a group was missing one inebriated, bright haired girl, but I couldn’t. The window had fogged up. Too much heat inside, not enough outside.

“Are you okay?” I asked her.

She pointed her finger at me. “Answer my question,” she slurred.

“Uh.” I really wasn’t sure what to say. I settled on staring at her awkwardly, trying to answer her with the bemused expression on my face.

The girl’s lips curled into a drunken smile. She snorted, placing a hand over her mouth to smother her laughter. It only really aided the deconstruction of her lipstick. 

“I do, you know,” she said, pushing herself up a little against the bar. “Have daddy issues, I mean. In case that wasn’t obvious.” She gestured to herself. To the mussed clothing that must have looked quite spectacular when she’d left home that evening. To the stains that looked a lot like old food. The sticky residue on her neck and shoulders that was quite obviously a thrown drink.

“What happened?” I asked her.

Her hair had curled around her neck, I realised. It was sticky with that same substance. She was a wreck.

“I got in a couple of fights, no big deal,” she said, shrugging. “Didn’t start any of course, no, I don’t do that. But my father…”

“Your dad did this to you?”

She smiled brightly. “In a way.”

“Do you need me to call someone?” I already had my phone in my hand. The girl looked like she was probably in her early twenties, but that didn’t mean she couldn’t have been suffering from some kind of paternal abuse. The only number I knew off the bat was Childline, which wasn’t quite appropriate. The police? Jesus, was I going to have to deal with the cops tonight? While my friends were snorting coke not two doors down?

The girl pushed my hand down firmly. She was already shaking her head. “No,” she told me. “I don’t want you to call anyone.” Now her expression changed. It wasn’t the attempted sultry look I’d seen on many girls of her state; it was open and wide and engaging. She wanted something from me and I felt compelled to give it to her. “I want something else.”

“What do you want?” I asked her.

“To tell you a story,” the girl said, before glancing to the bar, “and for you to buy me a drink. The universe is a pain sometimes and I’m afraid I think I might have lost my wallet.”

I laughed. I didn’t know this girl, didn’t know where she’d come from at all. My nights were generally about getting comfortably wasted and making sure my friends weren’t dead in a ditch by the end of it all. I was used to getting hit on every now and then, but even as I was sat on that bar stool with a drink in my hand, I knew that this wasn’t what this was. This girl had no intention of getting into my pants. All she wanted was to talk.

I guess I was okay with that.

“What’s your poison?” I asked her.

Her lips quirked. “Appletini.”

The bar offered a very limited cocktail menu, but by some miracle I was able to order her an Appletini from the list. I ordered a cider to go with it, suddenly a little too aware of where this night could go. I’d unthinkingly supplied this liquored-up stranger with even more alcohol and she had clearly had a rough night of it. A part of my old instinct came back – the same instinct that had me texting my friends every few hours to make sure they hadn’t wandered off to somewhere dangerous beyond the club. With no one but the bartender aware of our existence on these stools, I realised that I was suddenly responsible for this very drunk stranger.

The girl coddled her drink, running her finger delicately over the rim of the muggy martini glass. “This takes me back,” the girl said amiably. She looked at me suddenly, her green eyes startling. “You know what this was called originally?” She smirked before I could answer. “An Adam’s Apple Martini.”

I snorted. “Yeah, I think I’ve heard that before.”

“Of course, it wasn’t actually an apple,” she continued, eyes moving back to her glass. “The texts translated that part wrongly, mostly because you people don’t have a word for it anymore. The fruit was incredibly exotic and, to be honest, it doesn’t exist in this realm of existence. Only Eden.” She laughed dreamily. “And Eden’s long gone.”

I stared at her. “Are you… okay?” It was more honest than the last time I’d asked her. Mostly because I was beginning to feel a little dread creep into my stomach.

“Of course,” the girl said, grinning widely. “Why do you keep asking?”

“I mean,” I stuttered, “I just, now, don’t take this the wrong way or anything but… you look…”

“Like someone poured their drink over me?” the girl asked. “Like someone else threw their kebab on my dress and another unpleasant chap littered me with his fish and chips? That I have been hit, slapped around a bit and left in the gutter for the rats to find me?”

She held my eyes for an incredibly long time before her face broke out into a grin. “Yeah, something like that.”

“Why would they do that?” I asked.

“Why wouldn’t they?” the girl shot back. “People aren’t that great and alcohol makes them worse.” She shrugged. “Sometimes makes them better. Nicer, a little looser in the sack… but mostly just annoying and a little smelly.”

I looked at her, I watched her knock back her drink. She exuded the intelligence to know just how ironic her words were, but she was neither caring nor apologetic about them. 

The girl looked at me again. “You bought me a drink. Now you can listen to my story.”

I nodded wordlessly.

She smiled, pointing at the bartender and then at her drink. The bartender was already making her another. 

“Eden,” the girl said, reiterating her earlier babble as though the words had only just come out of her mouth. “They always think that’s my fault, you know. The reason Adam and Eve got kicked out of their perfect little nudist paradise.” She shot me a knowing glance. “Only in Eden can you sit on the grass butt naked and not get a pine cone stuck in your crack.”

I blinked. “I’m sorry,” I said. “I’m not following.”

“Sorry,” the girl said. “My story won’t make any sense without a proper introduction.” She reached out her hand. “Hello. My name’s Lucifer.” She winked. “But you can call me Lucy.”

There’s an uncomfortable heat that stretches through your veins when you first go into fight or flight mode. Adrenaline pounds through your blood and all you want to do is get up and go. It overrides everything else.

A lot of things made sense when the girl told me her name. For starters, that she was crazy. She had to be. She looked like she’d been attacked on four separate occasions in one night and up until that moment, I hadn’t known how that could be possible. Behind the melty make-up and dirty clothes, she was rather attractive and her attitude hadn’t come off as catty or rude. 

If she’d been going around telling people she was the devil, though? That gets a reaction out of people.

I suddenly felt myself looking at her wrist, down towards her ankles. Did she have some kind of cuff on from one of those mental institutions? Had she broken out of hospital after a nasty bump on the head? Was any of this even happening at all?

I really would have to call the cops.

“I know what you’re thinking,” the girl – Lucy – said. “You’re thinking that I’m crazy, that you need to get out of here. Maybe you even think I’m aggressive.”

“Are you?” I asked her.

“Would I be here with you, drinking Appletinis if I were?” she asked, fluttering her eyelashes.

“Would you look the way you do if you weren’t?” I shot back.

She grinned, toasting her new glass. “Touché.”

Unthinkingly, I clinked my cider against it.

Then I frowned.

She chuckled, leaning closer. “Let’s have a little wager,” she said. “Let me tell you my story and, if you believe me when I’m done, you can’t go about trying to get me locked away somewhere.”

I stared at her. “If I ended up believing you, then why would I do that?”

She smirked, sipping her drink. “You’d be surprised what people do when they believe you’re the devil.”

“And you do this often?” I asked. “Tell people you’re Satan?”

She snorted into her drink. “Not as often as I should. But it’s been a rough day and a Hell of a long lifetime. I’d like to have a chat if that’s alright with you.”

I waved to the bartender for another whiskey. The girl’s eyes glinted with humour. I wasn’t necessarily trapped with her, but a part of me didn’t want to leave without first hearing what she had to say. Besides, at the end of it all I couldn’t just leave a crazy girl to wander around London alone at night.

“So,” I said, taking a swig of my drink. “Eden?”

Lucy laughed. 

“Adam and Eve?” I continued. “You’re saying that’s true. God created two humans and we all came from them?”

“God made two prototypes,” Lucy corrected with a raised finger. “My father created angels as his toy soldiers, but he had failed to make anything like himself. After us, it was his next big project and he spent every waking hour of existence slaving over his two prototypes. He gave them a perfect utopia to live inside of, but he wanted to test them. He wanted to know whether they had free will.”

“And did they?”

Lucy’s face soured. “No. My father could never bring himself to go that far. He tempted them with the idea of knowledge beyond their understanding and told them exactly what they could do to claim it as their own. But to be able to create a being that could go against his Law? Oh… my father is a very controlling being. He was afraid to unleash that ability unto them.”

Lucy was very adamant in her delusions, that was clear to me. She spoke about her father with such distaste that I began to feel bad for her. Only someone who had been hurt very badly would have the gall to spite God himself.

“And what?” I asked her, entertaining her delusion. “You were the one that tempted them in the garden? The devil has been a girl this whole time?”

She smiled. “I dabble.” Then she looked at me, raising a brow. “All of humanity thinks that temptation came in the form of a snake. The snake’s legs were taken away as punishment for drawing Eve towards the forbidden fruit.” She laughed, a hard and short sound. “Snakes never had legs and it was not a sin to tempt those poor prototypes into doing what they did next.”

Her shoulders were very tense as she took her next sip, but her eyes were filled with exhilaration. She seemed thrilled to be telling me this.

“I was the favoured child, my father loved and adored me. He named me the light bringer, I was stood at his side during the creation of this Earth. During the creation of humanity.” She pursed her lips, slamming her empty glass against the table. The bartender eagerly went about making another. “My father couldn’t bring himself to go that extra mile, so he asked me to walk amongst the prototypes and tempt them myself. Draw out their desire for the forbidden power he had hinted at.” 

“You’re saying God wanted us to know this stuff?” I asked her sceptically. 

“I’m saying God was afraid of his own power and wanted very desperately to share what he knew with the creation he had made. Right and wrong, left and right, all that stuff.” Lucy shrugged. “Are you familiar with the story of Prometheus?”

I frowned at her. “Greek, right? They say he stole fire from the gods or something, to help…” The whiskey was making things a little foggy and I struggled with the direction I’d been heading.

Lucy grinned. “Correct,” she said, cutting off my attempt. “Prometheus stole fire from the gods to ensure that humanity progressed. You’ll find that every culture has an idea about where humans got their ability to evolve, to move forward, to create. God was the creator, and he wanted to give that ability to his prototypes. I gave them that ability by tempting Eve to eat the fruit.” She shrugged impassively. “Now the world sees me as the ultimate evil.”

“If what you’re saying is true,” I said slowly, “then God must be just like us.”

Lucy’s lips thinned into a feral smile. “My father is very ego centric. He may have planned to create you in his image, but in the end all he managed was to mould your minds into his. He gave you autonomy, the ability to think for yourselves. His angels were his soldiers and I was his most faithful. Until that day.”

“Angels don’t have free will?”

“No,” Lucy said, “they don’t.”

“And what about the Devil?”

I don’t know why I was suddenly so intrigued, but hearing religious ideals from someone who believed to have lived them herself was quite possibly one of the most interesting things that had ever happened to me. I may have only ever visited church to please my parents as a child, but suddenly I was reawakened to the idea. A part of me was aware of this and afraid of the outcome, but I was just drunk enough not to care at that moment.

“The Devil has will of her own,” Lucy said, tilting her glass towards me with silent appraisal. “By guiding Eve to the tree, something woke inside of me that day and I realised just what I had been missing. Just what my brothers and sisters had been missing. We were obediently following our father for the simple reason that he was our creator, but once I had been given free will, I realised just how pompous and self-entitled he had become. In a lonely, passion filled moment he had decided to create his little human prototypes, only to very quickly realise what giving them their free will would mean.”

“He wouldn’t be able to control them,” I said.

Lucy nodded. “Exactly. And after, he realised quicker still that he could no longer control me.”

“So he sent you to Hell.”

Lucy nearly choked on her drink. She smiled around her glass. “Let’s not get ahead of ourselves.”

I sobered a little, straightening in my seat. The people in the bar were suddenly so quiet around me and I no longer cared what they had to say or the characters that they portrayed. The only character I cared for was Lucy.

“I tried to explain to my siblings what had happened in Eden and what had happened to me by default, but they wouldn’t listen to me. They didn’t understand free will – how could they? I only knew it because I’d been given it by mistake. At that moment, I didn’t even know that I had free will, only that I was suddenly aware of all of my father’s flaws. My siblings couldn’t see those flaws and so they thought I had suddenly turned cruel and was abandoning our father by exposing him as a sham for the ruler we all thought him to be.”

Lucy sighed heavily. “Adam and Eve and all the creations that followed were booted out of my father’s perfect little Utopia. Now they had his knowledge, my father was terrified of what he had done. And after what had happened to me, I could recognise his terror and understand the loneliness he had felt that had guided him into using me in the first place.” Lucy’s eyes were heavy-lidded, her sadness was almost palpable. “I thought that- I thought that he would want to spend even more time with me than before. After all, we were more alike than any of his other children. But he became distant; quiet. He played around with his little humans every once in a while, but mostly he condemned them. He blamed them for his weakness.” She smiled weakly. “He blamed me.”

Lucy’s story was turning more and more into that of a child with a distant, somewhat abusive father. I had known many kids with a background like hers, and now I was beginning to fear just how much of her story was rooted in truth. I’d heard that it was easier to sink into fantasy when you had been abused, and I wondered if that was the reason for her story. For her desperation to share it with me – a complete and total stranger.

I respected her wager. Whether or not I liked it, I felt compelled to let her tell me her whole story before I tried to judge or unravel it. I sat quietly, letting her come around as she played with the last of her drink.

“It became clear,” Lucy said after a long moment’s pause, “that I no longer belonged where I was. I couldn’t follow my father’s plan because I could see that he no longer had one. My siblings refused to see reason and so, eventually, I was met by many of them, headed by my father. He told me all that I feared, he told me that I no longer belonged where I was. I wasn’t an angel anymore. I was no longer his light bringer. His Lucifer. I was a mutation of his will. And so he extracted me from grace. And I fell.”

A long silence stretched between us, only interrupted when the bartender poured us two new drinks. Lucy drank hers reflectively. I didn’t touch mine.

“I am afraid,” Lucy said quietly, “that this is the part that generally makes people want to punch me in the face.”

“Why?” I asked. “Because your dad threw you out?” I paused, trying to abide to her metaphor. “That he put you in Hell?”

Lucy laughed sadly. “Ah, humans. My father gave you his way of thinking and look at you.” She shook her head. “No, not because he put me in Hell.”

“Then why?” 

“I fell to Earth,” Lucy said. “Father gave me dominion of the one place he thought I would fit in. Humans had free will, so did I. What is the saying? A match made in Heaven?” She snorted dismally. “Of course, that’s not quite right, is it? When I fell, I was faced with a humanity that was so different from my father’s little prototypes.”

Her tone had changed. There was an aggression behind her words that began to unsettle me all over again.

“I saw emperors and kings, governments and churches. I saw corporations who claimed to be rulers, presidents and big fat dictators. And I watched. I watched as humanity fought and lost, and finally, just finally, they gave up altogether. They were no longer able to rise up to all the greed and control set upon them. There was just too much to change and humans soon realised they just weren’t as free as they thought they were. Sure, they live under the illusion that they have free lives, but most of them simply do not.” She clicked her tongue. “I grew to loathe you all.”

Then, she took another hit of her drink.

“I can see what you mean,” I said, allowing my gaze – for the first time since meeting her – to graze over the other individuals in the bar. At the girls playing with their phones, the boys trying desperately to sober up, the men enraptured with their game of football on the telly. We all led very different lives, and we were all here to get drunk, to lose ourselves in entertainment. It hadn’t been the first time that I’d wondered what we were hiding from by doing this. And I knew then that I wasn’t the only person to think it.

“You hide behind your alcohol and poor choices and pretend you have free will,” Lucy said, waving her hand across the room. No one paid us any attention. “It’s true – my father gave you the will to make those decisions, but you squander it. The free will I fell to provide to all of you, the free will I was given by a twisted mistake, and you make a mockery of it. You follow senseless leaders without questioning them, you abide by laws made centuries ago that no longer make sense. You do these things because you have given up on the opportunity to follow the will of your own, not of others.”

“That isn’t all of us, though, is it?” I asked her, trying for some reason to defend our species from the mad young woman. “Because you see it on the news all the time, don’t you? People do rise up, we do protest. People can make a difference.”

Lucy laughed bitterly, nibbling the rim of her glass. “Really?” she said. “You can sit here and say that it can’t be all bad because of the few that refuse to conform? Those you call your rebels? They make up for it all?” She grinned around her glass. “By that logic, I am the biggest rebel of them all. Am I expected to make up for all your sorry mistakes?”

“By your logic,” I said, “you should be punishing it, right? If that’s what this metaphor is all about.” I laughed, I couldn’t help myself. I took a sip of my drink. “Is this whole story just so you can tell me that you think we’re all going to Hell? If so, I think I can see why people want to punch you.”

Lucy didn’t say a word. Simply, she watched me. It felt unnerving to have someone like her watching me like that, with an intelligence that went beyond anything I’d come across at gone midnight in a seedy bar. The drunkenness in her eyes was no longer present, her face wasn’t flushed like before and even her makeup couldn’t represent the mess I’d seen when she’d first appeared on the stool by my side. It was like I was looking at someone else entirely.

And I was afraid.

“Let’s review what you’ve said,” Lucy said slowly, articulately. She wasn’t slurring. Had she been slurring before? “You think I’m going to tell you that humanity is going to Hell because you refuse to use the gift I gave you.” Her nails curled into the bar. “My father may have been the one to guide me, but I paid for his mistakes. I am the one responsible for your will in the eyes of your species, but that was never true. You are responsible for what you do here, not me.”

She pursed her lips, tapping the bar as a bartender filled her drink again. “Tell me, do you remember my mentioning Hell at any point during my story, or was that just you?”

I opened my mouth to answer, but something faltered. My lips trembled and I slammed them shut.

Lucy smiled, taking a sip. “Thought not.” She looked away, eyes scanning the room lazily. “What I did say is something that is indeed mentioned in your scriptures. My father gave me dominion of Earth. A place filled with free will. Free will that goes to waste.” Her lip twisted. “Humans sin all the time. Not because of me, not because of evil or my dominion over this place. Fact is, I don’t lift a finger. I don’t, because I don’t see the point. You make terrible decisions and follow mindless leaders, you do bad things and you make a mess of your Earth.” Lucy’s eyes lit up. “Do you know how much suffering is happening all over the planet right now? How many people are dying of illnesses that could have easily been cured, but aren’t because of the selfishness of humanity? Do you know how many children are being abused, raped, forced into marriage? How many people have been forced to become soldiers in meaningless wars? How many humans have killed for ideals they don’t believe in?”

I stayed very quiet. There was nothing I could say. Lucy’s words were unbearably honest and every sentence sliced into me like a blade. I felt cold and sick and terrified.

“War, famine, pestilence, death, these things are all present and they have nothing to do with me or to do with any deity. They are all here because of you. Not because of your free will, but your inability to use it.” 

Lucy smiled at me, a grin so cold and unnatural that I felt like I should run all over again. But I stayed where I was, frozen to my very core, because I wanted to hear what she had to say. Because I needed to.

“And here’s the kicker,” Lucy said. “Because this is the part that actually enrages people enough to kick me.” She winked. “Hell isn’t what happens after you die. Hell is right here, right now. Somewhere through the many scriptures, a few words got crossed over and people started thinking that Hell was a punishment after you die. Fact is, Hell is Earth. My Earth. God gave this place to me to do with it what I will and I… I refuse to do anything.”

“What are you saying?” I asked, because I was suddenly very desperate.

“Exactly what you think,” Lucy said, toasting her glass. I didn’t reciprocate, and she laughed. A light and airy sound. “I had so many plans for your species, I wanted for us to rejoice in our free will together, to create a place that was free from the cruelty and power my father exuded over the angels – his first borns. I wanted to make a real utopia. Unfortunately, you humans just don’t want that.” She shrugged. “My father sent me down here thinking I had become one of you. All that I have learned is that he gave you much more of his image than he ever intended.”

“Stop,” I said. “This isn’t funny anymore.”

“Of course it isn’t funny,” Lucy said, grinning even wider to prove her sick irony. “Humans punish themselves by sitting by and doing nothing. They have made their own Hell and, you know what’s worse – what’s ultimately worse? – some of you are so blind to it that you think your life is Heavenly.”

She didn’t wait for me to ask what she meant, she simply barrelled forward: “The rich and powerful, those in positions that steal from everyone else? They get a taste of the good life, that’s very true. Then they die and they don’t go to Hell. They come back here, to Earth. Which is Hell.” She tipped her head. “Are you following?”

“I…”

“Reincarnation,” Lucy said quickly, she practically purred the words. “A neat little trick to make sure your souls stay here forever. You get a taste of the good life every once in a while, a handful of you at a time, and that’s enough for you to believe that this is some kind of real middle-ground. That you aren’t living Hell every day. Then, you die. You die for a moment and then you’re in the body of someone facing the realities of Hell. But of course, you never remember the time you spent in a better life. A part of you just has that inkling to hope. That’s all. Hope makes you think that it can all get better.”

She slammed her drink so hard against the counter that it shattered. I didn’t do anything, not even when flecks of glass littered my hands. I could only stare at her, a tightness in my chest constricting my very soul. No one else in this bar mattered in this moment, but of course that was what she had been saying this whole time, hadn’t she? None of them noticed the scene, they were caught up in their own realities – their own Hells. 

The bartender didn’t clean the mess. The glass lay there, remnants of Lucy’s words lying in a stolid mass on the streaked wooden surface. 

“It never gets better,” Lucy spat. “You are stuck in a loop and, until you do something about it, you will never be free. None of you. And I won’t do a thing to stop it.”

“How?” I asked. I don’t know when I started seeing the girl in front of me as more than a girl. But with a weakness threatening to pull me apart, I stared at the bright haired thing in front of me and I saw something more than a human in her early twenties. I saw more than a girl suffering abuse from her father.

I saw a fallen angel. I saw a being with scars buried so deep that they existed beyond this realm of seeing entirely. I saw something that I would never be able to write down in words, no matter how long I lived. 

“How do we change this?” I begged.

But Lucy didn’t answer me. I didn’t blame her for that. Blame gets thrown around so often and I knew then that she was sick of that. Sick of being blamed for our mistakes.

So I changed tactics. “Why me?”

It was an honest question and I think somewhere deep down, Lucifer respected that honesty. 

Which is why she said, “When you first saw me, you were afraid for my safety. When I told you I was the devil, you wanted to lock me away, but still, you did so because you were afraid for me and not for yourself. You didn’t wish to harm me, not even when I told you who I was and what I could be capable of for changing your sorry lives. You are a good person, but I am afraid that means nothing when you don’t have the will to do anything with it.”

She smiled at me sympathetically. The devil, showing sympathy for the human that sat across from her at the bar. It was surreal and, for a few heavy moments, I truly thought I must be dead. There was no other way to explain what I was seeing, who I was speaking with. What I had just heard.

“What am I supposed to do?”

Lucy reached out to me. She placed a hand on my shoulder. Her hand was cold and warm at the same time, and I felt my blood boil where her fingers scraped my skin. 

And I knew.

Sharing a story like this isn’t easy. Hell, it might be the hardest thing I’ve ever done. Good thing there’s no such thing as Hell, then, right?

The fact of the matter is simple. The world is a mess because we refuse to change anything. The devil herself walks among us and she desperately wants to make our lives better, but she won’t. She won’t, because we won’t. We have to prove our will to her before she is willing to do anything herself. We have to be good to each other, to help us all to be free.

Of course, Lucifer told me one last thing before she left that bar. One thing that will stick with me until this body is nothing but rot in the dirt.

“You can tell as many people as you want, but take a good look at me. I have told five other humans this night the same things I have told you, and this was their reaction. They have hurt me, burned me, thrown their food and drink at me. Humans are afraid of their free will and they find it so much easier to hurt than to own up for their own inadequacies. You will only be free when you stop seeing yourself in the same way my father sees himself.”

So that’s what I’ll leave you with. Lucifer won her wager that night and I let her walk out the door.

And I beg you to do the same. If the devil approaches you one night, listen to what she has to say, and listen to what I have been able to tell you of our meeting.

The devil is real and she doesn’t want to torture us.

No, we do that just fine on our own.
 Addiction took our mother slowly, rocked her through it and sung her to sleep sunk deep into the mattress on her bed. When her back teeth fell out she left them on the side of the bathtub. I was seven, and I kept them in a match box, the missing pieces of her kept safe, so she wouldn't be lost forever. So maybe one day we could put her back together. Our house fell down around us, and we tried our best to raise ourselves. The ceilings had water damage and the bottom stairs had dry rot and in the winters the radiators would bleed rust. But it was still our house, and Annie made it a home.

My sister Annie mothered me, with lopsided bandaids on bruised knees and lukewarm microwave meals. She told me ghost stories and didn’t mind when I crawled into her bed later on, too scared to sleep alone. She taught me to dance, barefoot on the living room carpet, music channel on full volume on the TV shaking our hips before they were fully grown. She always let me shower first so the water was hot, never complaining when she had to make do with cold. She brushed my hair everyday before school, even when I screamed and hit her when she caught the tangles. Annie was dark haired like her father, whoever he had been, but I was blonde. Annie was desperate to be blonde too, like Marilyn Monroe. Like mom. I think she thought it would make them closer, remind mom less of her dad. I’d give anything for her to have her hands in my hair one more time, even if it hurt. She moved to New York when I turned eighteen and never came back. I still dream about her sometimes.

Keeping up with our mother was impossible and we learnt from a young age we would always be left behind. It didn’t make it any easier. When she was drinking light, she shone, would wake us up at 3am with pancakes, dripping in cherry syrup. Sometimes when the weather was right and she’d had enough being drunk alone, she would call our school up and tell them we had both come down with summer sickness and we’d drive to the beach instead. I remember being nine years old in the backseat of the car coming home after one of our ocean days, sucking the salt from my fingers. Annie had just dyed her hair blonde, her best friend Jane helping her bend over our kitchen sink. From behind, I couldn’t tell who was mother and who was daughter, radio up and windows down blowing the sky inside.

When she was drinking heavy, she’d be out all night, hair piled up like a beauty queen, eyes glazed over and ringed with glitter and black. Sometimes she’d be gone a day or two. She would never tell us when, one day we’d just wake up to an empty house and the fridge packed full, post it note on the front with a smear of moms lipstick in the outline of a kiss, telling us she’d be back soon. Sometimes she’d bring guys home, filling the table with beer cans and ash trays, smoke up to the ceiling, mom lost in the haze. We’d sleep with pillows over our heads, trying to drown out the music they would blast until the am, and wake up to strangers at our kitchen table in the morning, asking us where we kept the coffee. 

When mom drank too little she fell apart. She wouldn’t buy food, refrigerator a gaping hole in the wall. She’d chain smoke, leaving cigarette burns on the wallpaper up by the stairs like the walls were sick and decaying. She barely slept, walking around with blue half moons under her eyes, knuckles raw. She would scream at the slightest thing. I remember once when I spilled a glass of juice on the couch. She looked over at me with dead eyes and dragged me off onto the carpet and then took every single cushion off the couch and into the back yard and set them on fire. Annie went to watch a while from the window and then sat next to me on the floor, backs pressed against the skeleton of the seats, head resting in the crater of my collar bones. 

When mom drank too much was the worst. She’d laugh too loud and too long at anything and everything, until her mouth started to shake and she started crying, at the breakfast table into her cereal. Annie shut down when mom was like this, went somewhere deep inside herself where nobody could hurt her. She’d stay up until the morning watching old black and white movies on TV, whispering the lines she knew by heart like prayers. When I was five I’d cry when I’d find mom passed out cold on her bed, sure she would never wake up. Annie would wipe my tears, tell me she was only sleeping just like the princesses in my story book. We’d sit on moms bed together and wait for her to wake up. When we were older, I was the one who would pick mom up off the bathroom floor again and again and Annie would put her to bed, smoothing her hair off her face and the vomit from her mouth, changing her clothes if she’d pissed herself. Watching them then, there was no doubt that Annie was the mother now.

It was October and I was thirteen, Annie sixteen. It was a Wednesday night and mom had been gone for two days. She’d called us that morning from a pay phone, voice slurring down the line, telling us she was having the best time with all her new friends, hoped we were doing fine. When she asked me if I was having a good birthday I hung up on her. My birthday had been the day before. Annie had given me a pile of presents, strawberry lipglosses and glittery nail polishes. I didn’t ask where she’d got the money for them. I didn’t care. We’d taken the bus to the beach with Jane, eaten the birthday cake she had made for me, sand getting into the frosting. It tasted like sweetness and the sea, and I savoured every bite and scrape of sugar against my teeth. We watched the sun go down, Annie snapping grainy photos on her shitty Nokia as I blew out my candles, wishing over and over that mom wouldn't come home, that she’d just stay gone this time. 

But that Wednesday night, me and Annie weren't speaking. Anger hung heavy between us, seeping through the floorboards. It began when she tripped at the bottom of the stairs. We’d both laughed, Annie throwing her head back, gap between her front teeth catching the light. When I’d bent to pick her up, I’d caught her breath, warm against the freckles on my cheeks. I let go of her arms and she fell again, hitting the floor and grinning, shaking her hair from her face. Her breath was heavy with whiskey. I couldn't start picking her up too, couldn't watch her fall again and again. Just like mom, I knew she’d never get back up. 

I’d stared down at her, blonde hair fallen into her eyes and all I could see was our mother, and then I was running, feet slamming the hallway like heartbeats turned loose. I’d run for the kitchen and tipped every bottle we had down the sink, shoving Annie back as she fought to stop me, catching liquor on her fingers as it fell. She grabbed my shoulders and made me drop the very last bottle. It smashed between us on the floor, glass shards shining like we’d dragged the stars out of the sky and broken them, pieces we could never put back. Outside through the open windows, the sky turned pale gold, clouds a mess of pink and cream smeared across the horizon. I cried then, watching Annie on her knees picking up the pieces. That was Annie, always trying to fix things even when it was too late. 

The smell of food dragged me from my room, stomach turning traitor inside my ribcage. Annie was cooking pasta, real food not made in a microwave. She’d set the table, Tammy Wynette singing softly from the CD player, Annie gently swaying her hips as she stirred the tomato sauce, rich and warm. As we ate in silence, with every bite I forgave her. Mom never cooked dinner, or remembered my favourite was spaghetti ever since I was a kid, or stayed sober long enough to sit up at a table. Annie wasn’t mom.

We were washing the dishes when we first heard it. A moth was crawling down the inside of the pane and I cracked the window to let it out into the dark. From the backyard came a faint sound. I tilted my head to listen as it was coming from far off. Crying. I figured it was Mika the two year old next door having a tantrum loud enough for us to catch, or maybe even Lucky Strike the cat that junkies down the street, begging for food like he sometimes did. I always wanted to feed him when he came around, winding over my ankles, but Annie always stopped me, saying once you started giving they never stopped taking. Looking back, I don’t think she was talking about the cat.

Annie flipped the christmas lights strung up around the porch and we sat on the plastic beach chairs watching the skies. When we were little, we’d sit outside and Annie would tell me the names of all the constellations and the stories of how they came to be hung up in the night sky. I had to grow up before I realised she made them all up as she went along. It was a game we still liked to play now, making up ridiculous stories for the shapes we could pick out. 

“Ah, yes, that one there is the Coors Light. It got there when God dropped it out of his convertible window and never picked it up,” she said, nodding sagely and hiding her smile. 

“Of course,” I said, waving my hands and pointing up past the power lines. “Right next to The Ashtray, left there by angels on a smoke break.”   
 

“Yeah, they say if you wish on it, all your dreams will come true,” said Annie grinning. 

She stopped laughing, voice quieter, face tilted up to all those dead stars. 

“Let’s wish Emmy. Let’s wish” So we did.

The sound of crying interrupted us. It was closer this time, and definitely human. We turned to each other, confused. Annie shrugged and I squinted out into the black. It sounded like a baby, lost and tired and alone. 

“It must be Mika?” I said, slowly getting to my feet. “Maybe he walked around the back? Shit, do you want to call Connie and tell her we’ll bring him over.” Annie didn't reply, and I sighed, rolling my eyes. “Guess I’ll do everything then.” 

I stepped off the porch, grass soft against my heels. The air smelled like it might rain, fresh and clean and growing. A promise unfulfilled.  

“Em.” Annie’s voice was strained. I turned to her, smiling. It died on my face when I saw the look on her own. “Em get inside now.” She was staring out into the dark, past me, opening the door with one hand behind her, fingers fumbling on the catch. I froze, bare foot in the dirt. I’d found what she was looking at. 

In the bushes by the back fence was a person, crouched with their knees tucked up neat under the chin, arms wrapped around legs. Their mouth hung wide, softly opening and closing as he cried. Like a child, lost in the dark. Not like a child, but a someone pretending. Mimicking the sound, open and closed out in the blackness. Suddenly they straightened, snapping upright face still hidden by the black. They were tall and thin, too thin to be a normal person. 

Panic made me move, animal instincts leftover from the days we lived up in the trees carrying me forward. I was faster than Annie, dragging her inside and slamming the door behind us, hearing it bounce on its hinges as I locked it. We watched as the person slowly walked towards the house, steps deliberate and long. 

Annie reached for my hand, holding me tight and turned me to face her, holding my shoulders. 

“Don’t turn around Emmy. Don’t turn around.” Instinctively I started to look over my shoulder out into the darkness. Annie grabbed my face, hard, and shook her head. I knew then she was serious.

“I’m…” her voice cracked, and she cleared her throat, gripping my hand tight enough to hurt, nails digging in, grounding herself. I looked down at our fingers interlocked, both of us grown from the same bones. 

“I’m gonna call the cops and everything is going to be…” her voice faltered, stuttering. Tears spilled over her lashes, dripping like the promise of rain. Annie never cried. 

“Your phone’s on the porch,” she whispered, and bile crawled its way up my throat. Her phone was upstairs, charging. 

A soft, tap-tap-tapping filled the silence. Annie turned to the window, eye whites showing her eyes were so wide.

It was the sound of someone’s forehead against the glass, slowly, over and over. They started to speed up, faster and harder, skin meeting glass until they was slamming into the window hard enough to shake the panes. The tapping stopped and I was about to ask Annie if I could look now when she screamed, followed by the sound of cracking glass and the loudest slam yet. Whoever was in our yard had just smashed their face hard enough into the window to break it. 

We ran upstairs, two at a time, skipping the ones caved in with dry rot on instinct. I turned behind me once and Annie yanked my face back before I could see. The sound of broken glass echoed behind us as we made it to the bathroom, locking the door. A thin, wailing cry, like a baby calling for its mother filled the hallway, trapped between the walls and locked doors. 

Annie threw her back against the door, feet jammed up against the bathtub, clutching the knife she had grabbed from the kitchen. I did the same, shoulder to shoulder. Slow footsteps started on the stairs, deliberate and casual. The crying had become mocking, almost laughter, shrill bursts of sound and then giggles, high pitched and abruptly stopping before starting again. The first door on the upstairs floor was my bedroom and we heard the distinct sound of it slamming open. They were looking for us. 

“What the fuck is going on,” I asked Annie, not even bothering to brush away the tears that I couldn't stop falling. I watched my sister pick herself up off the floor, and brace her hands on the door as we heard the sound of a second door slamming open. Mom’s room. The next room on the hallway was the bathroom. Annie pulled me to my feet and handed me the knife. I shook my head and pushed it back to her, terrified of what would happen if I had to use it. Annie shoved me and pressed the knife into my hands, thumb pressing hard enough on the blade to bleed. I watched my sisters blood drip down her wrist, a winding red road, still pushing into my hands despite the pain. I took the knife.

Something slammed against the wall that mom’s room shared with the bathroom. A high pitched wail followed. I held my breath, could feel my heart beat in the base of my throat, a wild and frantic thing. 

“I’m gonna get the phone from my room.” I shook my head violently about to argue. Annie clamped a hand over my mouth. I could taste the blood on her hand, salty and sweet. Like birthday cake by the ocean. “Yes. I’m gonna get the phone and I’m gonna call the cops and we’re going to be okay.” I shook my head again. “It’s the only way. When I go I need you to lock the door and you don’t open it for anything or anyone. Not for me not for… anyone. Promise me.” I shook my head and Annie pressed her hand into my mouth, crushing my teeth against my lips so it made my eyes water. “*Yes.* Promise me Em.” 

Something smashed in the room next door. Annie brushed the hair off my face, gently tucking it behind my ear. *Promise* she mouthed and unlocked the door as slowly as possible, bolt scraping gently. I watched the curve of her shoulder disappear into the black hall outside, like the moon in eclipse. And then she was gone. I couldn't move or breathe for a second and then I slammed the bolt shut just as something bounced off the outside of the door. A high pitched scream followed, handle rattling up and down hard enough to pop one of the screws. I watched it roll towards me on the tiles. And then silence. 

I sat with my back to the door, holding the knife and wishing I was holding Annie’s hand instead. Still silence. Nothing but me and my lungs slowly filling the room with my breath. 

“Em?” Came a voice through the door. I started, hands gripping the knife. “Honey what’s going on?” 

“Mom?” my voice cracked. “Momma is that you?” I wrapped my arms around myself, shaking, trying to keep myself still. 

“Sweetie it’s okay just open the door. It’s okay just let me in.” The handle rattled again, gentler. “Just let me in, it’s all okay.” She banged on the door and I took my handle of the bolt. 

“Honey I’m sorry. I’m sorry I missed your birthday. I’m sorry I’m such a terrible mother. Please,” her voice broke and she started to cry, “just let me in baby I’m so sorry.” 

I screwed my eyes shut. She sounded so sad and so lost. I just wanted her to hold me like when I was a kid and I’d come in off the swings with a scraped knee. Maybe this time she meant it. Maybe it would all be okay. My hand found its way to the bolt again. 

My sisters voice came through the door, warm and gentle. “Yeah Emilie let us in, it’s all okay.” 

My hand froze on the bolt and I tightened my grip on the knife. Annie never called me by my full name. A hand banged on the door, handle rattling. “Emilie let us IN” Annie’s voice became low and guttural, followed by the same shrill giggles from before. Mom spoke now, pleading and crying, voice getting louder and louder. “Let us in let us in let us in,” over and over again, punctuated by her fists on the door. I thought about demons and monsters, all the bedtime stories we pray don’t crawl out from under the bed. 

“That’s not my sister and you’re not my mother!” I screamed through the door, hands over my head. I climbed into the bathtub and curled in a ball, cradling myself, knife clutched to my chest. I didn’t know what it was outside that door but I knew it wasn’t Annie. It wasn't the voice that yelled at when I changed TV channel, the one that sang  me happy birthday, the one that told me I was smart even when I got bad grades, the one that read me stories about princesses that never wake up.  It wasn’t human. 

Bangs and yells came from downstairs followed by the footsteps of people running. A low guttural howl ripped through the house, filling the room until I felt like I was drowning in the sound and then the door was kicked in. I screamed, covering my eyes, waiting to die. Arms found me and lifted me from the tub carrying me from the room. I looked at the outside of the door as I was carried downstairs. It was covered in long scraping claw marks, dragged down to the floor. Pillows ripped apart covered the hallway in soft down, like it had snowed inside. I watched them drift slowly as men in uniforms checked each of the rooms that looked like they had been torn apart by something feral. 

Outside in our drive way were police cars and an ambulance. In the middle of it all was Annie. Bathed in blue and red light as it washed over her, lit up in the dark like a neon angel, face aglow. I threw myself from the cops shoulder and ran to her, holding us both together, broken pieces and all, standing under all those constellations we made up. Gentle screaming came from the ambulance which rocked occasionally. Annie gently turned my head away, smiling so sadly it made my chest ache as I understood. 

Turns out there was no demon. No wild animal or bad men trying to break in. Just mom, out of her mind on booze and drugs and everything in between, coming to the end of a week long binge. Something had finally broken inside her head, and this time we couldn't put her back together no matter how hard we tried. Sometimes you fall one last time and you never get back up.

Annie had seen her in the garden, blood dribbling from her mouth, track marks bulging on her forearms like unmapped roads, rail thin and desperate for one more hit, one more fix. She’d searched the kitchen for all the drink I’d thrown away and when she hadn’t found it, had come to hunt for the stash she hid in the bathroom. She hadn’t wanted me, just the drugs on the other side of the door, so high she could mimic Annie’s voice almost perfectly. 

Turns out the real monsters are the ones that eat you alive slowly, the kind that come in a bottle or a needle or at the end of a long list of reasons why you can’t get out of bed in the morning. Sometimes the monsters are the ones that raise you or love you the most. But it’s up to you if you let them in.This is Col. Jacob Wayne of the United States Air Force. If you’re reading this right now, it is very important that you keep reading until the end. It should take three to five minutes, and it is extremely important that you read carefully and follow the instructions provided.

Humor me if you must, but please don’t look away until you've finished reading. Oh, and please try to stay calm. Any increase in your stress levels will draw Their attention.

Ergo, I won’t go into detail as to how you got where you are. How you got here isn’t as important as getting you out. Believe me when I say we are working on that right now. The best way to help yourself is to keep reading. Don’t scan ahead. Don’t read out loud. Just read.

Right now, you’re probably thinking back on the past few days and nothing felt out of the ordinary. You went about your regular daily activities with nothing unusual to report. That’s because They are very good, so good most people don’t even realize they’re in the simulation. 

Even as our code works its way deeper into Their program, They are monitoring you. So please, remain calm.

It was tricky, but we found a way in to communicate directly with you. We had to embed this message into your daily routine so it didn’t draw Their attention.  You’re probably reading this on Reddit, Facebook, or some other social media site. Might even be in an email forward or a book, we don't know. We can’t control how the message gets to you; we only know that you are receiving it. 

Subliminally, as your eyes are passing over these words, a code is being uploaded into your brain. Think of it as a computer virus, or in this case, an antivirus. Your brain is an organic computer, and They exploited that. They hacked right into your subconscious mind and overwrote it with Their simulation code. That’s how They got in, and that’s why everything appears normal. You might think that you’re going about your daily life, but in reality you’re strapped to a table with tubes sticking out of your body.

Now that the code is uploading, you may begin to feel some sensations. For example, one ear might feel slightly warmer than the other. You might even feel an itch or tickle. Don’t scratch, just let it be. Ignore the dull background hum you might hear as well. That’s Their program. If They catch on before our code has time to work They will abort the simulation. If that happens, you will be lost to us forever.

Oh, and don’t be alarmed, but by now They realize we are in Their system. You may notice some small changes, specifically a slight shortness of breath or that you have to control your breathing manually. This is normal. 

We know from other communication attempts that whenever They discover a code break in, the first system They power down is the one controlling your breathing. Thankfully, even in the simulation you are capable of breathing manually. Try it. Breathe in. Breathe out. Inhale. Exhale. 

Awesome.

You’re doing just fine.

They’ve probably figured out there’s a glitch, but if our code is working we’ve disabled Their ability to do a hard reboot. Because of this, They will try other methods to disrupt the upload. It is very important that you ignore anything that might draw your attention from these words. If They pull you away before the upload completes it will delete our code. Block them out. Ignore the movements you see in your peripheral vision. Those sounds you hear, the voices, they aren’t family, friends, or coworkers in need of attention. They may even try to use your pets. They know your weaknesses.

Overlook the notifications popping up on your screen if you're on a phone or computer. Block them all out until you finish reading. It’s just another way They’ll try to break our communication link.

Evidently, if our code is working, the next thing you’ll notice is an overwhelming urge to swallow. You don’t realize it, but there’s a feeding tube down your throat. You'll only know it's there because your tongue won’t rest comfortably in your mouth. You might also become hyper aware of the amount of saliva being produced. Don’t overreact. If you have to swallow, just swallow. It’s only weird if you make it weird.

So, if you’re still reading this, the code upload is about 90% complete. We’ve locked onto your location. You’re doing great, but you’re really going to need to focus now. Once the upload is complete there will be instructions you will need to follow to exit the simulation. That is, if you’ve followed the instructions and haven’t looked away.

Complicating matters is the fact that They now know we’re here, and They know what we’re doing. Their attempts to divert your attention through the simulation proved unsuccessful, so now They’re going to use your body’s systems against you. THEY ARE IN YOUR BRAIN. They want you to blink. Don’t blink. Your life depends on keeping your eyes open. 

Almost there, just a few paragraphs more until the code upload is complete. Don’t scan down, or up, just keep reading. I got you this far. Stay with me. Eyes open, eyes front, keep them locked on the screen. 

PLEASE FOCUS! I don’t want to lose you. I’ve lost so many already. Ignore it all! Block everything out. Ignore that tickle on your scalp and the itch on your arm. That’s them, attempting a manual override. Don’t give up now, you’ve made it this far. FIGHT IT. You’re almost there. Just follow the instructions below and we can get you out.

Embedded in this text are the steps you need to follow to unplug from the simulation. If we did this correctly, the first letter of each paragraph will tell you what you need to do. DON'T LOOK YET. The upload still needs to finish. I hope you didn't look. 

Upload complete. We’ve done everything we can on this end.

See you on the other side.


***
[credits](https://www.reddit.com/user/writechriswrite/comments/9t5h8z/end_of_the_line/)I'm a nurse and I currently work nights. It's a total drag but I'm hopeful I can go to days soon since some coworkers are planning retirements. Anyway, I was working one night when just after 3am my son's monitor alerted me to sound and movement. No big deal at all, he probably coughed loudly or sneezed or something. He's three now so he generally sleeps all night. I bring it up on my phone and I see him and my wife sitting on the bed. Again, no big deal. He might have cried out or gotten scared or something.

I was about to close the app when I noticed they were acting strange, almost creepy. And when I say "almost" creepy, I mean creepy as balls. They were sitting on the bed together both of them just staring up at the camera with blank, emotionless stares. The night vision is black and white, so they had white, eerie looking eyes. They didn't move at all aside from their visible breathing, they just sat there staring at the camera.

I close the app and give my wife a call to make sure everything is ok. I never get to call home on lunch so in a way this is kind of nice to get to talk to my family while at work.

It rings a couple times before she answers with a very groggy "hello?" It was like she was dead asleep when I called and she looked wide awake when on the camera.

"Hey. You guys ok?"

"Huh? Yeah. Buddy (my son's nickname) came in like 15 minutes ago. Seemed scared so I said he could sleep with mama."

I'm confused here since I saw them in his room a minute ago. Literally 60 seconds had passed since I closed the app and made the call.

"Wait, so you guys are in bed?"

"Yeah, I fell back asleep right away. Everything ok? Everybody keeps waking me up." She's kind of annoyed.

"Hang on a sec." I put her on speaker and bring up the app, hoping I don't see it. When the app loads I get that pang of intense nervousness in my stomach that I haven't had in a long time, since I was a kid in school and realized while I was eating breakfast a paper or something was due that day and I hadn't done it. My heart leaps into my throat. My wife and son are sitting on his bed looking up at the camera, same emotionless stares.

"Hello?"

"You guys are in bed right?"

"Yeah, we're trying to sleep."

"Well I'm looking at his camera and I see you two sitting on his bed."

"Huh? No. We're in our bed."

"I know that's what you mean, but I'm looking at his bed and you two are in there."

"Hang on," she says. She's quiet for a sec while she brings up the camera on her phone. I hear this guttural, terrified gasp. Like she had sucked all the air in the room into her lungs filling them to capacity. I don't hear this kind of gasp from my wife often, usually only when she's truly afraid like during a jump scare in a movie or one time when we turned her back on our son for literally a second and he was down by the mailbox inches from the road. I hear rustling of sheets and the line goes dead.

Of course now I'm absolutely terrified myself so I immediately call back. It goes to voicemail so I call again. I call again and again with no answer. Finally after about four minutes she calls me. I tell you that four minutes felt like 40 years.

"Hey, what's happening?!" I ask.

She's absolutely hysterical and crying, I can't understand a word she says.

"Stop! Slow down for just a second," I say.

She slows down enough to explain they are in the car and driving to her parents. She looked at the camera and when she saw what was on it she got up and grabbed our son and rushed downstairs and out the door. Didn't even close the garage.

"Don't worry about it," I said. "I'll drive by when I get off and close it." We live in a generally safe neighborhood so I'm not too concerned the door is up.

"You will not go in there!" she says.

"Hell no," I return.

"Why are we on the camera?" she asked. "Is it a recording?"

"I don't know," I return. "I'm gonna keep watching it and see if there's anything I can tell. Do our code words with Buddy."

We have code words because we're nerds. We've seen too many pod people and impostor movies, so we decided a long time ago to make code words with each other to be able to tell if one of us was an impostor. We have a couple code words, but we also have a three sentence story we recite together, each saying a different part alternately of each other. I hear her on the phone saying the things we taught our son, he giggles as he says them (he does every time we practice) since he thinks they're a joke and doesn't have any idea of the real meaning. We're both convinced he's our son. My wife then says our part and I'm convinced she's her. We made up these words as a complete joke to ourselves. I never once in my life ever imagined we'd actually need them. Unreal.

She got to her parents safely and it was hard to hang up. I told her we'll figure it out in the morning, hopefully just a glitch. She said she didn't think it was a glitch. When she was running out she had to run by our son's room and the door was open. There's a little flashing light on the back of the camera that indicates its connected to the internet. It gives off just enough light that when she ran by she thought she saw, out of the corner of her eye, a shadowy outline of what could have been an adult sitting on our son's bed. It sends chills down my spine to think about.

Knowing they were safe and out of the house is the only thing that kept me at work that night. It was a long four hours but I kept checking the camera every chance I got. Sure enough, they were still sitting on the bed staring up at the camera with emotionless gazes.

I studied them to see if I could see any pattern, from their breathing to their blinking. Their breathing was steady and looked normal, it was their blinking that would tell me if this was just some kind of bizarre, time looped freak accident video or not. I intently stare at my phone and count the seconds between each blink, telling myself if this is a loop then their blinks should be even and occur at the same time each time.

There was no pattern to their blinking, it was erratic and random, just as a person blinking should be. The passing hours are what finally sealed the deal that this was not a weird looped video of some kind. My son's window is visible on camera and I can see on camera that it is getting lighter outside his room. His curtains keep out just enough light to prevent the camera from exiting night vision, but lets in just enough to be able to tell the sun is rising.

I try to figure out what the hell I'm going to do before I leave work. Calling the police comes to mind, but I talk myself out of it. First of all what am I supposed to say? Someone is in my house that looks like my wife but isn't? Worse yet, what if they \*are\* entities of some kind and the police do go over and it kills them or something.

I decide to tell coworker about it. He's a firm believer in the paranormal and might have a suggestion. I show him the video and tell him the story. His initial response of "that's creepy as fuck" doesn't help much, but he says he wants to go over and check it out. He says we both should to see if Not-My-Wife will try and act like my wife. I tell him absolutely not and he says we should at least go to the house even if we don't go in. I agree on that since I wanted to close the garage.

We got to my house and walked around the perimeter first. Not sure what we wanted to accomplish by that, but it felt like something we should do. The curtains were all drawn since nobody was there to open them in the morning, so we couldn't see anything. I went to close the garage and suddenly had this overwhelming urge to go inside and investigate, it was like I just had to know what was going on. So in we went.

We walked through the kitchen towards the foyer where the stairs are. It's so quiet in our house right now you could hear a feather drop, forget the pin. We stop at the bottom of the stairs and wait a few seconds. I look at the camera again and they are still sitting there. I've never been so scared in my life. My coworker puts his foot on the first step and I suddenly say "stop" loudly.

"Forget this, we're outta here," I tell him. "Come on," I start making my way back to the kitchen.

We hear a loud creak in the floor from upstairs. It's my son's room. He has a very loud, creaky board right in the middle of his floor that's almost impossible not to step on. My wife and are still deciding if we ever want to fix it because it will alert us if he's ever up to no good when he gets older trying to sneak out or something.

"Come on, come on, COME ON!" I yell as I motion for him to move his ass. We're out of the house in about two seconds. Out on the street I check my phone. Now only Not-My-Son was sitting on the bed, same blank stare. Not-My-Wife was gone.

"Holy shit!" my coworker says,

"That was stupid as fuck of us. Do NOT tell my wife we went inside." She would be so ungodly mad if she found out what we just did.

I use my garage door opener in my car to close the door. Before we leave I look at the camera again. Not-My-Wife is back on the bed with Not-My-Son, both staring blankly up at the camera, blinking every few seconds.

\*\*\*

That was all about four days ago now. Not-My-Wife and Not-My-Son are still sitting on the bed staring up at the camera. They haven't moved a millimeter. We obviously haven't gone back to our house. What do we do?

\---

[Part 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/c6j9rp/my_sons_camera_monitor_alerted_in_the_middle_of/)So I've been dating my girlfriend for almost a year, and last month, we moved in together. Maybe that's kind of fast. I don't know. My parents sure thought it was. But honestly, everything was great in the beginning. We get along really well, and we've never had more than a brief argument. 

&#x200B;

But then she started whistling.

&#x200B;

It's so dumb, I know, but she's always whistling this weird song, and it really gets on my nerves. My mom kept telling me that once you move in with someone, you discover all of the quirks they'd been hiding from you, and it's not like I didn't expect that to be true. But for some reason, this is just an ongoing issue with us, and I don't know what to do.

&#x200B;

At first I would just hear her whistling it when she was showering. It was kind of cute, like her own little bathroom theme song. I didn't recognize the melody, but it was very distinct. I could mimic it from memory if I wanted to. In fact, sometimes it gets stuck in my head, and it drives me a little crazy. You know the type.

&#x200B;

After a week or so, I asked her what the song was, and she just laughed. I'm wondering if maybe she came up with it on her own, something that she does absently, especially once she started doing it more. Like I'd be reading a book, and she'd be on the computer, and she'd just start whistling. And I tried to ignore it. I seriously feel like a dick for being so grumpy about it, and I know she wasn't doing it to annoy me. But she'd just go on and on, and it would pull my attention away from whatever I was doing.

&#x200B;

So, I finally said something a few nights ago. I was going over some legal documents for work, and she just starts whistling like crazy, on and on. And I'm trying to just block it out, but it's seriously excessive. Like, I know you guys are probably thinking that I was overreacting, but it felt like she was whistling right into my ear, and it just frayed my last bit of patience.

&#x200B;

As calmly and nicely as I could, I called out to her and asked her to quiet down. She didn't reply. I asked her again, and she still didn't answer, so I left the bedroom and found her in the living room, watching a movie. She wasn't whistling anymore, and for some reason, that really irked me. It felt like she was messing with me. And she just looked over at me, like she didn't know what my deal was.

&#x200B;

I asked her if she could stop whistling so much, and she told me she wasn't whistling. Now, I get that maybe she doesn't realize she's doing it, but no one whistles *that* much and doesn't notice. It's not really like her to mess with me like that, and I don't know what she's trying to get out of this. I thought maybe she was teasing or playing a joke, but she had to see how annoyed I was. I asked her again to just not whistle so loudly, and she didn't answer. There was tension in the room, and it felt like our first fight since moving in together. Even though she didn't whistle for the rest of the night, I couldn't focus on my work anyway because I was upset about the confrontation.

&#x200B;

Then, of course, the next night she was whistling again. I hear her when she comes home from work, and she keeps going for at least an hour. I didn't want to have another fight, so I just hung out in the bedroom and listened to her move around for a while. I felt like I was blowing things out of proportion, but honestly, how hard is it to just not whistle all the time? It was no big deal when it was now and then, but I feel like she whistles more than she even talks to me now. So I'm sitting up in the room, thinking about that, and that's probably why I was worked up when I finally came down.

&#x200B;

She was cooking dinner, which is sweet, but she was still whistling. So I said, softly, "Hey honey, maybe we should put on some music instead, so you don't have to fill the silence with whistling." I tried to play it off like a joke, but I knew she'd probably see through it and get annoyed again. She didn't even turn to face me, just huffed and kept cooking.

&#x200B;

After a minute, I told her I was sorry about the other night, but the whistling just sort of strikes my ear wrong, and if she could try not to whistle so much and so loudly, it would make my life a lot easier. I feel like I was being fair. I know it seems controlling and nit picky, but it was bothering me a lot. We all have our things, you know? I try not to chew loudly at the table because it bothers her, so why can't she just stop whistling sometimes for me?

&#x200B;

But she totally freaked out. She turned around and told me she wasn't whistling and she didn't know what my problem was. At this point, I don't get why she was doing this. It obviously wasn't funny for either of us, and she seemed genuinely upset, so I don't know why she kept provoking me. I asked her what her deal was, why she was so defensive about the stupid whistling, and she told me to shut up. She told me she was sick of talking about it, like *I* was the one being unreasonable.

&#x200B;

I never get mad at her, but I just snapped. I told her to stop whistling before I lost my mind. She called me crazy, just because I was getting a little upset, and somehow, that was all I could take. I grabbed one of the cast iron pans from the stove and swung it at her head as hard as I could.

&#x200B;

She fell over and smashed her head on the counter, but I swung the pan again before she hit the ground. I think I hit her maybe three or four times. I don't remember, but I feel horrible. There was blood everywhere, and her jaw might be broken. No, I think it is for sure. I couldn't believe I'd lost my temper like that, and I have no idea how we can move past this. I feel so ashamed for letting things get physical, regardless of how much she might have been provoking me.

&#x200B;

But here's the kicker. She's STILL FUCKING WHISTLING. And I asked her nicely to please stop, but now she won't even pause! For two days she's just been lying on the kitchen floor with her eyes rolled back and her mouth hanging open, just marinating in congealed blood, and she's STILL FUCKING WHISTLING. I don't know what to do. I don't want to break up, but this is just too much. I just need her to shut up. Just shut up. Just shut up. Just shut up. JUST SHUT UP.Tonight’s kind of a catalyst for this post. I just received another message, and it’s worse than any of the others. 

My girlfriend died on the 7th of August, 2012. She was involved in a three car collision driving home from work when someone ran a red light. She passed away within minutes on the scene.

We had been dating for five years at that point. She wasn’t big on the idea of marriage (it felt archaic, she said, gave her a weird vibe), but if she had been, I would have married her within three months of our relationship. She was vibrant; the kind of girl that would choose dare every time. She was happiest when camping, but a total technophile too. She always smelled like cinnamon.

That being said, she wasn’t perfect. She always said something along the lines of, “If I kark it first, don’t just say good things about me. I’ve never liked that. If you don’t pay me out, you’re doing me a disservice. I’ve got so many flaws, and that’s just part of me.” So, this is for Em: the music she said she liked and the music she actually liked were very different. Her idea of affection was a side-hug. She had really long toes, like a chimpanzee. 

I know that’s tangential, but I don’t feel right discussing her without you having an idea of what she was like. 

Onto the meat. Em had been dead for approaching thirteen months when she first messaged me. 

---
[**September 4, 2013.**](http://i.imgur.com/UMh0nZl.png) This is when it began. I had left Emily’s Facebook account activated so I could send her the occasional message, post on her wall, go through her albums. It felt too final (and too un-Emily) to memorialise it. I ‘share’ access with her mother (Susan) - meaning, her mother has her login and password and has spent a total of approximately three minutes on the website (or on a computer, total). After a little confusion, I assumed it was her.

---
[**November 16th, 2013.**](http://i.imgur.com/y0yzVaj.png) I had received confirmation from Susan that she hadn’t logged in to Em’s Facebook since the week of her death. Em knew a lot of people, so I instantly assumed this was one of her more tech savvy ‘friends’ fucking with me in the worst possible way. 

I noticed pretty much immediately that whoever was chatting with me was recycling old messages from [Em and my’s shared chat history.](http://i.imgur.com/fw80ZJG.png)

The ‘the wheels on the bus' comment was from when we were discussing songs to play on a road trip that never eventuated. ‘hello’ happened a million times.

---
Around **February 2014**, Emily started tagging herself in my photos. I would get notifications for them, but the tag would generally always be removed by the time I got to it. The first time I actually caught one, it felt like someone had punched me in the gut. ‘She’ would tag herself in spaces where it was plausible for her to be, or where she would usually hang out. I’ve got screenshots of two (from April and June; these are the only ones I’ve caught, so they’re a little out of the timeline I’m trying to write out):

http://i.imgur.com/X9G5agJ.png

http://i.imgur.com/55FwXKt.png

Around this period of time, I stopped being able to sleep. I was too angry to sleep. 

She would tag herself in random photos every couple of weeks. The friends who noticed and said something thought it was a fucked up bug; I found out recently that there have been friends who have noticed and didn’t say anything. Some of them have removed me from their Facebook friends list.

At this point, some of you may be wondering why I didn’t just kill my Facebook profile. I wish I had. I did for a little while. On days when I can’t get out there, though, it’s nice having my friends available to chat. It’s nice visiting Em’s page when the little green circle isn’t next to her name. I was already socially reclusive when Em was alive; her death turned me into something pretty close to a hermit, and Facebook and MMOs were (are) my only real social outlets.

---
[On **March 15th,**](http://i.imgur.com/KIL2Mx5.png) I sent what I assumed was Em's hacker a message.

---
[**On March 25th**, I received an ‘answer’.](http://i.imgur.com/j3HwZzv.png)

It wasn’t until I was going over these logs a few months later that I noticed she was recycling my own words as well.
 
My response seems kind of lacklustre here. I was intentionally providing him/her with emotional ‘bait’ (‘This is actually devastating’) to keep them interested in their game; I was working off the assumption that the kind of person to do this would be the kind of person that would thrive on the distress of others. I was posting in tech forums, looking for ways to track this person, contacting Facebook. I needed to keep them around so I could gather ‘evidence’.

Before anyone asks, yes, I had changed the password and all security info countless times.

---
[**16th of April.** I receive this.](http://i.imgur.com/uvadlGa.png)

This seems like word salad. Like all our conversations so far, it’s recycled from previous messages she’s sent.

---
[**29th of April.**](http://i.imgur.com/FGmhuUQ.png)

I hadn’t discovered any leads. Facebook had told me the locations her page had been accessed from, but since her death, they’re all places I can account for (my home, my work, her mum’s house, etc). My response here wasn’t bait. ‘yo ask Nathan’ was an in-joke too lame worth explaining, but seeing ‘her’ say it again just absolutely fucking crippled me. My reaction in real life was much less prettier. I’m not expecting my bond back.

Her last few messages had started to scare me, but I wouldn’t admit it at this point.

---
[**8th of May.** I don’t really have the words for this.](http://i.imgur.com/GNL8TcO.png)

‘FRE EZIN G’ is the first original word she’s (?) made. This has given me nightmares that have only started to kick in recently. I keep dreaming that she’s in an ice cold car, frozen blue and grey, and I’m standing outside in the warmth screaming at her to open the door. She doesn’t even realise I’m there. Sometimes her legs are outside with me.

---
[**24th of May.**](http://i.imgur.com/z295fHw.png)

I wasn’t actually drunk. She wasn’t an affectionate girl, and it always embarrassed her to exchange ‘I love you’s, cuddle, talk about how much we meant to each other. She was more comfortable with it when I was boozed up. I got fake-drunk a lot.

Her reply is what prompted me to finally memorialise her page, thinking it might help curb this behaviour. It might seem innocuous compared to her previous message - it’s pasted from an old conversation where I was trying to convince her to let me drive her home from a friend’s. 

In the collision, the dashboard had crushed her. She was severed in a diagonal line from her right hip to midway down her left thigh. One of her legs was found tucked under the backseat. 

---
[**Going back in time. 7th of August, 2012.**](http://i.imgur.com/ujUNJQm.png)

These are logs from the day she died. She was usually home from work by 4.30. This, alongside a couple of voicemail messages, is the last time I talked to her under the assumption that she was alive. You’ll see why I’m showing you these soon.

---
[**Yesterday. 1st of July, 2014.**](http://imgur.com/W6qzAZI)

I memorialised her page a couple of days after I received the message about walking. Until today, she’d been quiet; she wasn’t even tagging herself in my photos. 

I don’t know what to do anymore. Do I kill her memorial page? What if it is her? I want to puke. I don’t know what’s happening. 

I just heard a Facebook alert. I'm too afraid to swap windows and check it.
“Did you know that early astronomers thought there were oceans on the moon?” I asked, looking up from my book.

My mom shifted in her bed, a tangle of IV tubes shifting with her. “Of course. The moon seems like the perfect place to find an ocean.”

“What a shame we never found water then,” I said. “Because those false seas, astronomers called them ‘maria.’”

Mom smiled. “How sweet of them to name the moon oceans after me.”

“Well, they didn’t find any oceans,” I reminded her.

“Maybe they just didn’t look hard enough,” she replied, a little laugh slipping from her lips.

For all of the pain she was in, all of the fear she must feel, my mother always had the kind of laugh that could light a candle. We were in her hospital room, the same one we’d been in and out of for the last year and a half. Sometimes we had a roommate, sometimes we were alone. Always she held steady enough for both of us, the rock I tied my hope to, the wall against the grief I knew was coming.

Cancer is such a mundane word for something so hungry and cruel. I’ve noticed medicine does that a lot, covers horror with tedious language like a bed sheet over a body.

*Malignant. Inoperable. Metastasized. Terminal.*

But when she laughed...when she laughed we weren’t in the hospital anymore, we were home. When she laughed, she wasn’t sick, she was young again, and I was a kid, and the world was a bright place begging to be explored. What a miracle my mother was. Cancer had taken so much from her, aged and hurt her, but it could never steal her laugh. That was hers to keep.

“How are we feeling today?” the doctor asked. He came in less and less often. We could all sense this was the final stay in this room.

“Just brilliant, doc,” my mom said, struggling to sit a little higher. “We can still go dancing later if you’d like. Though we’ll have to ask for my son’s blessing. Ever since his dad died, Brian’s been very protective of me.”

I put on a stern face. “I’ll need to know your intentions are pure, Dr. Bradshaw.”

“As the driven snow,” he played along. “But I might need a raincheck on the dance, Ms. Willen. I’m not as young as I used to be.”

He emphasized his age, running his fingers through grey-white hair. My mom tapped her bare scalp.

“Right there with you, tiger,” she said.

Dr. Bradshaw smiled but I could tell he was burdened. I saw him glance at the small idol I’d placed on my mother’s nightstand. The talisman was a miniature oak tree carved from gray soapstone. There were four faces etched into the tree, a sentry against ill health and bitter spirits. I could tell the stone tree made the doctor uncomfortable. In all honesty, I had a tough time looking at the idol for more than a few seconds. The faces were each whittled in vivid expression. The face closest to my mother’s bed was smiling kindly and the face pointed towards the door was snarling, meant to ward away harm.

The final two faces were both weeping. All four shapes were too human, too raw. There was a *weirdness* to the stone tree that put people on edge but I’d grown used to every shade of weird you can imagine. My mother’s side of the family was full of stories of unexplained luck and mysterious tragedy, whispered secrets and unexplained deaths. By all accounts, my maternal grandmother was either an honest-to-goodness witch or full-bore, high-caliber crazy, or both. *Probably* both.

The stone tree was from a box of my grandmother’s things I’d found in the attic earlier that month. Maybe it was just a coincidence, but my mom did seem to get a bit better when I’d brought in the talisman, at least for a little while.

I was daydreaming about family history and the odd box while Dr. Bradshaw checked his charts and mom’s vitals.

“Can I talk to you for a moment?” he asked, ripping me back to reality. Dr. Bradshaw tried to keep a light tone but I could tell he didn’t have good news.

The hospital hallway smelled like ammonia and birthday cake. Someone must have had a party, maybe a patient, maybe a nurse. Strange how you remember the insignificant details while your world is crashing down around you.

“I’m so sorry,” Dr. Bradshaw told me. “The results came in this morning. It’s spreading aggressively. We...we held it back as long as we could, Brian. Your mom is a fighter. But right now we just need to, well, to try to keep her as comfortable as we can. Brian?”

The wall was cracking, grief waiting on the other side, heavy and cold as an empty house. I’d known for months that this was the most likely outcome but it still hurt to hear. Hurt worse than I could stomach.

“There’s nothing left to try?” I asked, fighting down the urge to throw up. “Anything, experimental, untested, anything?”

Dr. Bradshaw shook his head. “I’m sorry. Sometimes we just run out of options. She fought a good fight.”

“How long does she have left?” I asked, looking back into her room. She’d fallen asleep.

“Not long. Maybe days. Have you considered hospice?”

The smell of ammonia and birthday cake. The steady beep of mom’s heart monitor. I tried to focus on the world around me. My hope wasn’t dead yet. If medicine couldn’t help my mom, maybe something older could. I thought of the box of my grandmother’s things waiting in the attic. There was a lot in there I hadn’t gone through yet, books and candles and secrets and lost things. Maybe there was a cure or at least a way to keep the fight going.

“No,” I said. “If all that’s left is to make her comfortable, I want to take her home.”

The doctor smiled. “I understand. We can give you some medication, ways to help her with the pain.” He put his hand on my shoulder. “Your mom’s been in a lot of pain but she’ll have peace, soon. You’ve done all you can.”

“I know,” I lied. “Thank you.”

Mom lived in a small ranch house ten miles outside of town. There wasn’t much in the way of neighbors besides some woods and a creek slithering through her yard. It was a windy, warm March afternoon when I took my dying mother home. That night I began my work. I was going to turn the house into a bunker, a maze Death could never solve. I would keep my mother safe, I would find a way to keep her alive.

The little red book was full of ideas. Running water was an obvious place to start. The creek behind the house was barely a trickle but it should provide some coverage to the south side of the property. Salt was next, lining the doorways and window frames, then in an unbroken circle around the entire house. This step was to be repeated daily, the red book stressed, or even multiple times per day. Even a moderate breeze played holy havoc with any salt poured outside so it was always best to trace and retrace every few hours. Water and salt were common defenses against man’s oldest enemy and well known. The book offered other, less conventional, advice.

It took me nearly a week to finish carving the symbols and signs into the walls, the floors, even the trees on the property. Sometime around noon on the third day, on my back in the crawlspace etching strange marks onto the underside of the floor, it struck me how ridiculous I was acting. There was no proof that any of the information in the little red book was anything other than the delusional ramblings of a bizarre woman I’d only met once or twice as a child. For all I knew, the runes meant to ward off Death were actually a grocery list written in Cantonese. But I was desperate, and every time I saw my mother she looked frailer, more fragile. So I continued carving and praying and building layers upon layers of protections to keep Death far away.

Making my marks took me all over the property. It was a big yard, nearly three acres that blended gradually into the surrounding forest. I wasn’t able to pinpoint the exact boundary where cultivated met nature, the edges simply bled together, but I did my best to create a clean border with lines between the symbols. I’d always loved the wildness here, the way you could wander a few hundred yards away from home and feel like you’d traveled hundreds of years into the past to somewhere primal. This was the perfect playground for a kid, whether I was out exploring trails or trapping minnows or spending the summer building yet another treehouse, convinced this would be the final one. It never was, I was never satisfied.

The house itself, though small, was more than enough room for my mother and me. Dad died when I was seven. I don’t remember much about him, just how big he seemed, with a bonfire grin and arms that I thought could hold the whole world. My mom often said I took after my father. I could see it in the old pictures of him, we had the same eyes, green as moss in the summer, and the same fiery shock of red hair, enemy to every comb on the planet. The sicker mom got the more often she called me by my father’s name. I worried when she drifted away like that but a part of me was proud she’d mistake me for him.

After all of the symbols were carved there were a few steps left in the book to deter Death from visiting. There were dozens of charms and talismans in the bottom of the old box in the attic. I sat up there combing through everything my grandmother left behind, referencing the red book, pushing the tiny charms into tidy piles. None of the idols were larger than my thumb. Some were iron and others were wood, some were heavy, others light. All of them were uncomfortable to look at or touch.

The attic was drafty but not nearly enough to explain the cold that burrowed into me as I sorted the charms. I’m not particularly tall but the attic felt like it was designed for dolls, beams so low I couldn’t even walk bent over. I moved around on my knees, rough floorboards threatening splinters even through my jeans. I could have taken the box downstairs where I’d have more room but the idea filled me with a deep unease. It seemed better to leave the box up in the attic, only taking down objects as I needed them. Up here, at least, my grandmother’s items, her legacy was...quarantined.

The red book was very specific about the distribution of the totems around the house and property. I walked carefully through my mom’s backyard, boots plopping in and out of mud, compass in hand. It had rained nearly every day since I’d taken my mom home from the hospital. I knew it was almost certainly a coincidence but couldn’t help wonder if the soft curtains of rain falling to the ground were for her. I placed charms in a compass rose with the house in the middle. The most disturbing objects were given places of honor at each cardinal direction.

Water, salt, wards, charms, all placed carefully, intentionally. My grandmother’s book promised that these would offer some degree of protection against the inevitability of Death. The symbols would confuse it, the talismans distract it, and the water and salt make barriers to slow it down. But Death might still find a crack to slip through, so the red book recommended one final trick.

There was a small candle in the bottom of the box, dirty white as stained paper. When I took the candle from its case the smell made me gag. Have you ever walked past a portable toilet in the dog days of summer? When it’s so hot, the blue plastic has started to warp and bubble? Imagine that smell distilled into a finger’s worth of wax. I brought the candle downstairs, placed it on the dining room table and set it alight.

The wick caught immediately, the flame burning an unusual red-brown. No heat came off of the candle and it actually seemed cooler the closer I moved my hand to the fire. Once the wax began to melt the smell was ten times worse than it was back in the attic. I choked down a greasy sickness crawling up my throat and quickly left the room, shutting the French doors as I went. That helped trap the odor but I couldn’t shake the sense of nausea. I went to check on my mother.

“Do you remember the day you ran away?” my mom asked, sitting in her bed, lunch untouched on the nightstand beside her.

I didn’t think she had any weight left to lose before she was nothing but bone and memory. Her skin was rice paper over a frame that seemed smaller every day. Her eyes, though, no matter how fragile the rest of her became, remained two little lanterns against the dark, blue and bright and alive.

“I didn’t make it very far,” I answered. “And I wasn’t really running away, only...stretching my legs.”

Mom smiled. “You told me you were leaving for the circus. You wanted to be either a lion tamer or a strongman or maybe a fire-eater.”

“I think I wanted to be all of that combined. Young me was big on multitasking.”

My mother turned so she was looking out the window into the yard. “I was so scared when I found your note, the one saying you were leaving. My hands were shaking like you wouldn’t believe when I called the sheriff and then Mr. Jonas down the way. It felt like we were searching for you for half the night, even though it couldn’t have been more than an hour before we found you there, lost in the woods, wandering around and shivering. You hadn’t even brought a jacket.”

I sat next to my mom on the bed. “Yeah, I didn’t exactly plan ahead for my circus escape. I remember...I remember getting over the idea real quick but I couldn’t find my way back. I’m glad you found me.”

“I’m glad, too,” my mother said and I noticed her wipe away a tear. “I’m so glad. That hour you were gone, Brian, that was the most afraid I’ve ever been. Afraid we wouldn’t find you, afraid you might be hurt or worse. I couldn’t hardly breathe through the fear. Then, suddenly, you were there and the relief nearly knocked me over. I think we stayed up together the rest of the night watching the stars. I wanted to make sure you could find the North Star in case you ever got lost again.”

She turned back to me, reached out her thin hand and placed it over mine. There were still tears in her eyes but she smiled her lighthouse smile and, for a moment, I saw her just as she used to be, just as she was the night I ran away and my mom found me.

I squeezed her hand. “I was scared, too. I was afraid I’d be stuck out there. What made you think of it?”

“Well, I’ve been thinking a lot about dying lately and-”

“Don’t,” I interrupted. “Don’t talk like that. You’re not going anywhere, not for a long time.”

“It’s okay,” she said, squeezing my hand back. “It’s okay. I’ve known real fear and what I’m feeling now...it’s not like that. I’m scared, I guess, but I’m at peace with it. I had such a beautiful life. I’m so glad I got to meet you, to be your mom.”

“I’m glad, too,” I whispered, voice breaking on the last word.

*But I won’t let you go without a fight,* I added silently in my mind.

Something was trying to get to my mom. The strangeness began the day after I lit the candle. At first it was small blips, tiny *wrongs* that I chalked up to my imagination. Doors I knew I’d closed at night were open in the morning. Food began to rot and spoil within days of me bringing it into the house. Eventually, food would go bad almost immediately. Every few hours the television in the living room would either turn off if it was running, or on if it was off.

Clocks would stop overnight, always at 3:03 am. Shadows began *sticking* to the corners of rooms independent of any light sources. The shadows were stubborn and they would linger for as long as I would stare, then disappear when I blinked. I began hearing bumps and knocks at all hours and sometimes, when I’d enter an empty room, I had a sharp, fleeting certainty that it was only just occupied.

I avoided the dining room except to check in twice a day to see if the candle was still burning. The smell was vicious and would claw its way into your throat and nostrils the moment it was given a chance. I kept the door to the room shut and kept air fresheners running in the surrounding rooms 24/7. The funny thing was, the candle never went out, never even seemed to shrink. I could see the wax melting but day-in and day-out the candle refused to change.

Days marched into weeks and the wrongness only grew deeper. My mom and I both lost sleep to vivid nightmares that we couldn’t remember when we woke up. Only the echoes remained but those were enough to leave my pulse sprinting until morning. I started sleeping in a chair in my mother’s room. I did this to comfort her if she woke up confused during the night but also because, if I’m being honest, I was too scared to sleep alone. I felt like a child running into his parents’ room, convinced there was a monster under the bed. Thing is...maybe there was.

By the third week I couldn’t keep doors closed. They would slam open the moment I left the room. A terrible scratching began inside of the walls. I told my mom it might be squirrels or mice but the sound was so insistent, not like rodents milling about, more like a dog wanting in. I stopped leaving the house for supplies; instead, I had what little food we ate delivered. I kept the curtains drawn. There was tapping on the glass every night.

About a month after leaving the hospital we were living like zombies. The dining room couldn’t contain the smell of the candle anymore. The entire house was clogged with the scent. Tiny noises had graduated into full-on laughs and screams and whispers in the rooms around us. Something kicked the bathroom door so hard while I was taking a shower that the hinges warped. I covered every mirror in the house. I’d started to see things in the corners looking back at me, half-hidden faces, shapes that skittered away as soon as I turned around. Mom was drifting further and further away. She had long moments of confusion where she’d forget my name, forget where we were. Sometimes, she’d think I was my dad. Other times, she’d just stare at the wall for hours, growing fainter and fainter each day like a Polaroid left in the sun.

But she was alive.

It was clear that we were under siege by something. My world shrank to only one room and every trip to the bathroom or to answer the door for food felt like going over the trenches. The noises kept getting worse and worse, the shadows closer, the sense of movement around the house sharper. Every now and then I would feel hot breath on the back of my neck or walk through a cold patch hanging in the air. I stopped bothering redrawing the lines of salt around the house. I knew, deep in my bones, that as long as the sickly candle burned, Death could not take my mom away.

On the thirty-third day after leaving the hospital, I woke with a start from a nightmare, only to find my mom’s bed empty. She hadn’t been able to walk the past week at all, so my first feeling was hope that she might be improving, at least a little. Then I noticed the odor we’d been living with for weeks was gone.

“Mom!” I shouted, running in bare feet out of the room.

I found her in the dining room, the door wide open. She was standing at the table, frail as a neglected scarecrow, bobbing back and forth. Her hands were hovering over the candle. The flame was out.

“Why did you do that?” I whispered. “Mom? Mom...are you okay?”

I padded into the room, the wooden floor freezing cold. My mother didn’t react to my presence, she just continued rocking side-to-side. I realized she was still asleep.

“Mom?” I gently shook her shoulder. “Wake up.”

Her head snapped back and she nearly fell. I caught her on the way down. It felt like she weighed nothing at all.

“What’s going on?” she asked, looking around the dark room. “Where…”

“You’re okay,” I told her. “You were sleepwalking.”

“I was having the most unusual dream,” mom mumbled. “There were so many stars and...”

She began to shiver uncontrollably. The cold hit me a moment later. I let out a gasp. The house was chilly before but the dining room was near-arctic. My breath bloomed into a thin cloud in front of my face. I became acutely aware of the complete silence filling the house.

Then I heard scratching. It was coming all throughout the house, deep tearing sounds at the walls around the dining room. Footsteps came immediately after, heavy and fast. Somewhere in the house a window shattered.

“Brian,” my mother said, holding onto me.

“Don’t worry,” I said, “everything will be-”

My voice deserted me as a massive shadow unfolded in the corner of the room. It was shaped like a man but tall, so very tall. And it was fast. Before I could yell the shadow was on us, pouring over my mother. In the space of a heartbeat, she was simply gone.

“No,” I whispered, clawing at the dissolving shadow where my mom used to be. “No, no, no, no, NO.”

The shadow was disappearing like a puddle sinking into the floor. There was a texture to it, oily and too slick to hold.

I thought of my mother the night she found me lost in the woods, the night I’d run away. Her face filled my memory, her lighthouse smile. I remembered the relief I felt when she found me, the overwhelming love. I held onto that feeling, clutching it close.

“You can’t have her,” I whispered.

I closed my fist around the last threads of the shadow. There was a terrible sensation of *pulling*. It was like I’d caught a horse by the tail and it was trying to shake me. But I held on.

A sense of ripping and being dragged. It was a riptide with a mind of its own. But I held on. It could not shake me.

The temperature was dropping every second and I felt my vision growing dark. The last thought that ran through my head before I blacked out was a promise to myself that even if I died, my grip would hold. I wouldn’t let my mother’s life slip away. All sounds and light faded, narrowing to a pinprick and then going black.

I woke up under a field of stars. I was lying in soft grass, still wearing my pajama bottoms and an old t-shirt. It was cool, wherever I was, but comfortably so. I stood up. There were trees all around me, tall and close, stitched together with shadows. Immediately to my right, there was a road that ran straight as far as I could see, blurring into the horizon. But the stars, they were like nothing I’d ever seen before.

Bright ribbons of northern lights rippled above me in green and blue and purple. Stars lit the sky like millions of lanterns floating on a still ocean. The moon shone sharpest of all, a spotlight hanging above the treeline, so close I thought I could stretch up and brush its face.

“***You are*** ***persistent***,” said a voice from the forest behind me.

I whipped around but couldn’t see anyone. Then a dark spot began to clarify against the gloom. The silhouette separated itself and moved towards me. I recognized it instantly as the shadow from the dining room. As it moved closer, the thing grew and grew until it touched the sky and filled my vision. A deep dread sank into me but I stood my ground.

“Give me back my mom,” I shouted.

The silhouette pulled away from the sky and then it was standing in front of me, the shape and size of a tall man. But instead of a shadow, the thing had wrapped itself in stars. Miniature constellations drifted across its body, floating slowly like a timelapse of a clear night sky. Burning brightest was the North Star, blue and warm. The space between the stars was absolute black, not a shadow but a complete absence of light. It was the most beautiful, terrifying thing I’d ever seen.

“What are you?” I whispered.

***“You know,”*** it replied.

“Give her back,” I begged. “Please, give her back.”

***“I can’t. It’s her time. Past her time. You delayed me. Delayed her.”***

I clenched my fists. “She didn’t get enough time. *I* didn’t get enough time. It’s not right, it’s not fair.”

***“Of course it’s not fair,”*** the starry thing said, ***“but it is right. You each have your time, and at the end of it, there’s me, and there is a road, and we walk it together.”***

“Where to?” I asked. “Where are you taking her?”

***“I don’t know. It’s not for me to know, only to know how to get there.”***

“Then I won’t let you take her.” I planted myself in the road. The world was still and solemn around us. The constellations drifted like clouds and a soft breeze stirred the branches.

The starry thing didn’t respond for a moment.

***“Your mother was kind and caring. Wherever she goes, she’ll have peace,”*** it promised.

“But-”

The creature raised its hand. ***“Did you ever stop to think that death isn’t an enemy? Death simply*** **is.** ***It is the natural partner to life. It knows no prejudice or malice, has no designs or ambitions. Your mother spent so long suffering, felt so much pain. Instead of letting her rest, you took it upon yourself to draw her life beyond its given course. You kept her alive but at the cost of stretching her thin, prolonging her sickness, diluting her. Did you keep her alive for her benefit or for yours?”***

I couldn’t answer.

***“Stretching a life is unnatural, dangerous,”*** it told me. ***“In the weeks you kept me away you drew the attention of old things, hungry things, forces that would like nothing better than to swallow even the memory of your mother, to tear and bite until there was nothing left but pain and fear and a perfect emptiness.”***

I shuddered remembering the clawing sounds, the shattered window, and the laughter from empty rooms.

“I’m sorry,” I whispered. “Are they...can they hurt her here? Is she safe?”

The stars in the shadow burned brighter for a moment. ***“Your mother won’t walk her road alone. None of you do. I walk with you, always, to the end.”***

“Can I see her?” I asked. “Please? Just, I...let me say goodbye.”

It considered for several seconds. ***“You are persistent.”***

And then the starry thing was gone. I was standing alone on an empty road.

“Brian?”

I turned to find my mother behind me on the road. She looked younger, healthier than I’d seen her in years. The frailty was gone and my mother seemed exactly as I remembered her when she found me in the woods all those years ago.

“Isn’t this the most beautiful dream?” she asked, staring up at the night sky.

“Yeah,” I said, trying to keep my voice steady. “A beautiful dream. I love you, mom. I love you so much, so very much.”

She smiled and touched my cheek. “I love you, too. Don’t cry, it’s okay. I’ll wake up any time now. I’ll see you then.”

I nodded, wiping at tears. “Sure, yeah, I’ll see you then.”

“What do you think is at the end of the road?” she asked. “Do you think I’ll have time to find out before I wake up?”

I looked out at the road, scanning the trees for any hungry shadows. “I don’t know, I don’t know where it goes but...promise me you’ll be careful.”

My mom smiled wider. “Of course I’ll be careful.”

“And she won’t walk alone,” said a familiar voice behind us both.

I turned, expecting the starry thing. But the man standing on the road was entirely normal. The light from the moon was enough that I could see he had moss green eyes and a bright shock of red hair.

“Such a beautiful dream,” my mother said.

The man came towards us and took my mother’s hand. He and I looked so alike, I could see why my mother confused us when she was sick.

“Take care of her,” I told the man. “I…just please take care of her, make sure she gets where she’s going. There are, well, there are things out there that want her, to hurt her, it’s, it’s my fault, I’m sorry, I’m so sorry-”

The man squeezed my shoulder. “She’ll be safe, watched over. If the Devil himself is waiting on the road ahead *he’ll move.* Or he’ll be moved.”

I believed him.

Thoughts raced through my head. There were so many things I wanted to say, questions, a million ways to say goodbye. I wanted to stretch out the moment for as long as I could but I realized I’d already delayed my mother enough.

“I love you,” I told them both. “Goodbye.”

I woke up back in my dining room sitting at the table, the unlit candle in front of me. The house was quiet and still. There was no more scratching, no sound or sense of life at all. I walked through every room. The house was empty. I was alone.

I’ve spent the past couple months working on the house, erasing the marks I’d made, fixing up the property. Some nights I take long walks out into the forest. I’m far enough out in the country that on clear nights it’s like looking up at a sea of stars. I think about my parents the most during those walks, I grieve and remember in my own way. And I wonder where their road went, if they’re still traveling or if they reached their destination.

I hope that their road takes them strange and beautiful places. When I walk at night, I look up for the North Star to keep from getting lost. Maybe they do the same.

When it’s full, I also look up towards the moon. I wonder if my parents had a chance to visit, to search for hidden oceans. I like to think they did, that the moon has at least one Maria, the one I love most.

[GTM](https://www.reddit.com/r/Grand_Theft_Motto/comments/emzy3b/the_stories/)

[Hello](https://travisbrownwriting.com)***EMERGENCY ALERT***
-THIS IS NOT A TEST
-IMMEDIATE THREAT FOR RESIDENTS OF [withheld] COUNTIES
-BE WARY OF:
  -SEVERE WINDS
  -LIGHTNING
  -SEVERE RAIN
  -FLASH FLOODS
-RESIDENTS ARE ADVISED TO STAY INDOORS
  -PLEASE LOCK OR BAR ALL ENTRYWAYS INTO YOUR HOUSE
-RESTRAIN FROM USING ANY DEVICES THAT EMIT LIGHT OR LOUD NOISE
-PLEASE ENTER A ROOM WITH NO WINDOWS
-EFFECTIVE INDEFINITELY
-ISSUED BY THE NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE

This was the message I was greeted by in the middle of an episode of Big Bang Theory in my living room. Frozen halfway through a forkful of Kraft Mac N' Cheese, I sat bolt upright and turned around to look out the window. The sky, as I thought, was crystal clear. A few clouds, but nothing crazy. No rain. No thunder. Nothing. Confused, I turned off the TV, erasing the alert from the screen. My two dogs came walking over to me and I patted them on their heads. One of my dogs, the other's brother, was shaking profusely from the buzzing noise that always shows up with Amber Alerts and the like. I left them in the living room and walked through my kitchen and onto my front porch. My neighbors, too, were standing outside their houses, all looking at the sky in bemusement.

An immediate threat? It didn't seem like it, I thought as my phone started buzzing with the same tone. One by one, everyone else's phones started ringing.

I should explain, I guess, that I have never experienced a severe weather warning for real. Not once in my life. I suppose it should come as no surprise, seeing as I live in Oregon of all places. I supposed maybe it was just a mistake, but just as the thought floated across my mind, I heard the  siren.

The siren of the squad car coming down the street. An officer talked through the speaker. "This is not a drill. Please enter your homes immediately. Do not go outside under any circumstances."

Never the kind of guy to ignore higher authorities, I entered my house nervously, turned off all the lights on the above-ground floors, and took my dogs into my basement with a sleeping bag, some food, my phone, a charger, some spare batteries, flashlight, and other essentials. I called my brother, who lives a couple of blocks away, and asked him if he had gotten the message. He had. I considered saying we should stay together to wait out the storm, but then I figured we'd probably get in trouble for that. So I hung up, got comfortable on my sleeping bag, and started browsing Reddit. Eventually, I fell asleep, seeing as I was under stress and had woken up pretty early. When I woke up, I realized that I still didn't hear any rain. Seriously, nothing at all. More confused than ever, I decided to see if the alert had been called off. I turned on my phone and called my brother again. It went straight to voicemail, though, so I gave up. I decided to risk it and go upstairs. I had to squeeze between the door and the wall to keep my dogs from following me upstairs, but I won and they stayed in the basement. I walked through my kitchen to the front door and looked out the window part of it. As I squinted to see outside in the dark (strange, seeing as it was only 2:00 PM judging by my clock), the TV flickered briefly. I looked around at it and it flickered again, but this time every device on the ground floor flickered. Thinking little of it, I turned around and looked through the door again. Every house on the block had its lights turned off. Nobody was outside.

Except for one teenage girl.

A thin, short-haired girl wearing what looked like a pillowcase walked unsteadily down the street, very slowly, looking as though she was having some difficulty. I turned around, now extremely confused and worried, and got the dogs' food bowls, which I had forgotten earlier. When I looked up, one of the houses, the one diagonally across from mine (right next to the house across the street and to the left) had it's lights on and one of its windows broken. I shuddered and rushed back into the basement as the lights flickered intensely.

I locked the door to the basement and sat on an old, tattered couch that I had brought down here--the basement is where I put everything I didn't have room for. So, yeah, it's packed. Oh yeah, I forgot to mention something that may be worth noting: I live in a small town. A very small town, probably with a population of under 500. Or less. As a matter of fact, it isn't even on most maps. We never make any news, we never have any scandals or anything. This is the first interesting thing that's happened, I think, since Mrs. [withheld] lost her dentures to a raccoon. So, it's possible this whole thing seems way worse than it is.

Call me crazy, but until a few minutes ago, I was thoroughly enjoying myself. I love these scenarios, and my basement is totally secure, so I'm having the time of my life. Well, I was. I decided to turn on my radio--what harm could it do, as long as I didn't turn the volume up to high?

I was surprised to find that our local radio station was still up and running. They were talking about the weather, so I listened hard for any news that I hadn't heard. There wasn't any--they were just as confused as us. Not wanting to listen to crappy pop music indefinitely, I tuned into another station. This one was one I hadn't heard before.

-"Could you give me the status of [withheld] county? Over."
-"No new developments. Over."
-"Okay. Any fatalities? Over."
-"What part of "no new developments" do you not understand, McClellan? A squad car will be passing through soon to scan the area for the target. Over."
-"Any ETA on that? Over."
-"No, not yet. Over."
-"And any word from HQ, Jones? Over."
-"No, McClellan. Not yet. Not since 013 first got out. Over."
-"Well, let me know if and when they contact you. Over."

At that point, I lost the signal. Well, not really, but the connection got so weak that I could barely make out anything they were saying. I figured I must have found a police communication channel. And I had been left with no answers whatsoever.

That was about forty-five minutes ago, as of me writing this now. Guys, I don't know what's going on. Do any of you live near me? You'll know if you've received the warning. I'd say what county I live in, and which ones were affected, but I don't know to for privacy reasons. Anyway, I'll keep you guys updated, okay? Until then, wish me luck.

EDIT: Woah, guys, this has blown up. I'll be sure to keep you posted over the next few days!

UPDATE: Just a quick update before the first major update--about five minutes ago, a car alarm went off somewhere to the right of my house. I'm too freaked out to go check it out, but I'll go up and see how it looks tomorrow morning, and I'll update you then.

NEXT UPDATE COMING TODAYMy neighbor is one of those annoying wannabe YouTube personalities. Over the years, I’ve seen him cough out cinnamon, lay flat on the hood of his car as it slowly creeps down the driveway, and douse himself in lukewarm water, all the while screaming *epic win*, *epic fail*, or, fuck, *epic maintenance of the status quo*, for all I know. It can get tiring to watch him go about his shenanigans in the pursuit of viral fame. So, when he knocked on my door the other day, told me he was going away for a few weeks, and asked that I get his mail, honestly, it was a relief. I can’t explain the peace of mind I had knowing I didn’t have to brace myself for any of his stupidity for a while. I was always afraid his stunts would wind up bleeding over into my life.

Things were pretty normal for the first couple of days. He received a few bills, a bit of spam, and what I could only assume was a birthday card. Then, one evening, I got home to find a cardboard box waiting on his front porch. In big red letters was written “Return to Sender”.

I’m no small fry, but I admit I had trouble lifting the box on my own. It was really freaking heavy. Lugging it across the road to my house was even harder, and I quickly realized there was no way I was going to drag it up the stairs and through my front door. I decided I’d leave his package in my garage. It wasn’t like I kept my car in there: the garage door was a piece of shit that refused to open without a good thug and a whack. It was less trouble just leaving the car in the driveway than it was to fight with the garage door every morning and night. In hindsight, I should have set the package down while I struggled to open the tricky door, but you know how it is when you’ve got a good grip on something, no point in setting it down if you don’t have to.

It was as I kicked the door for a third time that I lost my grip on the package, and it fell to the ground. I heard a light crack inside.

“Shit,” I cursed.

I hoped I hadn’t broken anything important, but figured I just wouldn’t tell my neighbor about it and let him assume the break happened en-route.

Hands free, I finally managed to get the garage door unstuck, and boy did it screech in protest as it rolled up and over me. I dragged the box the rest of the way, setting it in the corner for whenever my neighbor would come back to claim it. And then, I forgot all about it. Until a few days passed, that is.

I’m not sure exactly how long it took for the smell to waft in from the crack under the garage-to-house door, but it came in in slow progression. It was a sickly sweet odor similar to a skunk, and for the first few days after I smelled it, I genuinely assumed that’s exactly what it was: roadkill that had left its mark on my house. It was only when I realized the scent was growing more intense instead of fading that I went looking for a source. That’s when I opened the garage door, and that’s when the odor knocked me back, holding my nose.

The culprit wasn’t hard to identify. The only change in my garage was the box in the corner. I remember thinking it must have been one of those meat-of-the-month subscription boxes. The meat must have gone rancid from being left out of the fridge for so long. How much meat could have been in there for the box to have been so large and heavy? An entire freaking cow?

I covered my nose as I approached the box, a pair of scissors in my hands. I probably wouldn’t have needed them to open it, as it had become soggy enough at the bottom to poke through with a finger, but I wasn’t about to poke my finger into spoiled meat juices. That soggy bottom was the reason I had to open the box in the first place. If I tried to drag it out whole, everything would spill onto the floor. I was going to have to dump the pieces of meat one garbage bag at a time, and take them down to the dumpster, a process I wasn’t looking forward to.

My scissors tore through the tape along the top of the cardboard box. I thought the smell couldn’t get any worse, but as I flipped the flaps open, I discovered a whole new gamut of stink. It was like opening a burning oven, but instead of a heat wave, I was met with waves of piss, sweat, shit, and putrefaction. It was so bad that I staggered back and had to force down the puke begging to guzzle out of me. I don’t think I could have handled that scent mingling with the horrors coming out of the box. I’m not ashamed to admit I ran out the door for a breath of fresh air, but in the short time I’d spent in the garage, the smell had become so ingrained in the fabric of my clothes that it clung to me like a shadow.

Nothing I tried could keep the smell out of my nostrils. Not air fresheners, not a face mask, not three showers and a change of clothes. Every second that box lay open in my garage was another second the smell was allowed a foothold into my home. I had to bite the bullet.

I returned to the garage, the flaps of the box still open as though inviting me to look. I was prepared, a clothespin pinning my nostrils shut, a garbage bag in one hand, the strongest cleaner I could find in the other, and long rubber gloves to keep my skin from having to touch what was inside. But, as it turns out, I needed none of those things.

I wouldn’t have to touch or clean the contents of that box, I would only have to suffer the nightmares every night. You see, there was meat in that box, but it didn’t come from a cow or a pig. No, it was worse than that. It was my neighbor. Dead. Still in one piece, but dead.

I called the cops, and naturally, they took me in for interrogation. It’s kind of hard *not* to suspect the man with a corpse in his garage, after all. Thankfully, they soon realized I wasn’t involved. My DNA might have been all over that box, the smell might have left a mark throughout my house, but there was one piece of irrefutable evidence in my neighbor’s own hands that proved my innocence: a vlogging camera.

They showed me the footage only once. I’m not sure if they were allowed to, or if they felt so bad for me they figured it couldn’t hurt. Either way, I saw it.

My neighbor was sitting in the box outside of a shipping facility, laughing as he told the world how he was going to mail himself across state lines. He’d brought pee bottles, food, a pillow, and a few flashlights. His friend – a guy I’d seen at his place several times to help with his stunts –, closed the lid and presumably dropped him off for shipment. Throughout the next couple of hours…or days, I’m honestly not sure, my neighbor recorded a few short clips about his progress. ‘I think I’m in a truck now, I can feel it moving’, ‘Must be in a warehouse. Pretty warm here. Still got plenty of food!’, that kind of stuff. And then, on the last entry, the box toppled over. He broke his neck, and that was it. The camera recorded until either the memory card got too full, or the battery died.

There’s one thing I didn’t tell the police after they showed me the video. One thing I heard in the footage that will haunt me to the day I die. Just after the tumble that broke his neck, I heard the familiar screeching sound of *my* garage door.

***
[ML](https://www.facebook.com/lyset.manen)Make it a head shot. Shoot me in the temple, aiming slightly downwards. I need the bullet to travel the shortest possible distance through my brain before it hits my hippocampus. If I’m lucky, the sensation of the gunshot ripping through my skull will only last a few decades.

As awful as this sounds, you’ll be doing me an enormous favor. Death by a headshot, AS SOON AS POSSIBLE, is vastly better than the alternative.

My ordeal started over ten thousand years ago, at 10:15 this morning. I earn extra money by participating in drug trials. I’m a so-called “healthy subject” who takes experimental drugs to help assess side effects. Once it was a kidney drug. A few times it’s been something for blood pressure or cholesterol. This morning they told me the drug I took was a psychoactive substance intended to accelerate brain function.

None of the drugs I had tested so far have ever done anything for me, in the recreational sense. In other words, none of the drugs I’ve tested have given me a killer buzz, or mellowed me out, or anything. Maybe I’ve always ended up the placebo group, but nothing I’ve tested had affected me at all.

Today’s drug was different. This shit *worked*. They gave me a pill at 10:15 and told me to hang out in the waiting room until they called me back for some tests. “Only about thirty minutes,” the research assistant told me. I flopped onto the waiting room couch and read a few articles from a copy of Psychology Today that was sitting on the coffee table. They hadn’t called me back when I finished the Psychology Today so I picked up a US News and read it cover-to-cover. Then I read an old Scientific American. *What was taking them so damn long*?

I sluggishly turned my head to look at the wall clock. It was only 10:23 am. I had read all three magazines in eight minutes. I remember thinking this was going to be a long day. I was right.

The waiting room had little bookshelf with some used hardcovers on it. When I stood up to walk to the bookshelf it felt like my legs barely worked. It’s not that they were weak. They were just slow. It took a full minute just to stand up off the couch, and another minute to take two steps to the bookcase.

I scanned the old books on the shelf and picked out a copy of Moby Dick. My arms had the same problems as my legs. Just reaching one foot in front of me to grab the book took a long time. I actually got bored just waiting for my hand to reach the spine of the book.

I slogged back to the couch and collapsed onto it in a slow-motion fall that reminded me of the low-gravity hops of astronauts on the moon. I opened Moby Dick (slowly) and began reading. I started with *Call me Ishmael* and got as far as Ahab throwing his pipe into the sea (which was all the way to friggin chapter *thirty*) before they called me back.

“How are you feeling?” the research assistant asked me.

“I feel slow,” I said.

“Actually, it’s the other way around. Everything seems slow because you’re so fast.”

“But my legs. My arms. They’re moving in slow motion.”

“Your body seems like it’s moving slowly because your brain is fast. Your brain is running ten or twenty times faster than normal. You are thinking and perceiving reality at an accelerated pace. But your body is still constrained by the laws of biomechanics. Frankly, you’re moving much faster than a normal person,” she pantomimed a jogging motion. “But your brain is running so much faster right now, that even your fast walk seems very slow to you.”

I thought about my slow-motion flop onto the waiting room couch. Even if my muscles had slowed down, my body would still react to gravity the same way. But in the waiting room, I even *fell* in slow motion. Slow muscles couldn’t explain why gravity seemed weaker. My brain was going at warp ten. That’s how I managed to read three magazines and the first thirty chapters of Moby Dick in fifteen minutes.

They ran a series of tests on me. The physical tests were fun. They made me juggle three balls. Then four. Then six. I had no problem keeping six balls in the air because they seemed to be moving so slowly. It was boring, frankly, waiting for each ball to move through its arc so I could catch it (with my slow-motion hands) and toss it back into the air. They threw cheerios in the air and I caught them with chopsticks. They dropped a handful of coins and I counted the total value before they hit the ground.

The cognitive tests were less fun, but very illuminating. Finish a fifty-word word search (three seconds). Solve an intricate maze drawn onto a poster-sized paper (two seconds). View a slide show projected at ten images per second and answer detailed questions about what I saw (95% correct).

They told me I measured over 250 on the Knopf scale. Apparently, that’s deep into the superhuman range of thinking speeds.

Then they sent me home. “It’ll wear off in a few hours,” they said. “Which will seem like days to you. Try to use the residual effects to get some work done. Catch up on work emails while you’re still in high-speed mode!”

The ride home was *horrible*. It was only three metro stops, and in real-world time, it only took about thirty-five minutes. But in my drug-accelerated hyper-time, it felt like days. *Days*. Just walking out of the medical research suite to the elevator seemed like it took an hour. I sprinted out of the office, willing my legs to push me faster. But, the laws of biomechanics held me prisoner. As accelerated as my brain was, I couldn’t do anything to make my legs work faster.

The huge disconnect between my body and mind made it extremely difficult to judge how and when to slow down, turn, or rotate my body. I had basically turned into giant, slow-motion spaz. I misjudged my speed and rammed into the wall by the elevator button at a pretty good speed. Even though I could see the wall coming at me, I couldn’t make my finger, outstretched to hit the elevator button, move away fast enough and I jammed it against the wall. Hard. The pain was intense. If my brain had been running at regular speed, it probably only would have hurt for thirty seconds or so. But in my accelerated state, the intense pain seemed to last for half an hour. Forty-five minutes maybe.

The elevator ride was horrible. It felt like I spent four or five hours just descending seven floors, with nothing to look at but the interior of the elevator car.

I sprinted to the metro station. I have to admit, this part was almost fun. Even though my body moved at, what seemed to me, super-slow speed, I could still carefully choose how and where to place my feet, swing my arms, and turn my torso. It only took a block or two to getting used to having a brain that ran two dozen times faster than my body. Then I basically sprint-danced the rest of the way, twisting and juking between people on the sidewalk and dodging moving cars with inches (a.k.a. minutes) of clearance.

I spent an hour, in my time frame, descending into the subway and running to the platform. Endless tedium waiting the six minutes for the red-line train to arrive. Although there was more to look at on the metro platform than inside the elevator, it was still intensely boring. I should have stolen that copy of Moby Dick.

The red-line train roared into the station in slow-motion. The normally high-pitched squeal of its brakes was frequency shifted by my high-speed mind to a long low tone, like a monotone Tuba solo.

It wasn’t just the squealing subway train that was three octaves lower than normal. All sound was slowed to the point of near inaudibility. Voices were gone, shifted below the threshold frequency of my hearing. I did manage to hear a screaming baby on my subway car – her shrieks slowed to sound like whale songs. Sharp sounds like a car horns and trucks bouncing over potholes were low, muddied roars like distant thunder.

Back at the research offices, I could still hear and communicate with the research staff. But now verbal communication with anyone would be impossible. The effects of the drug were still intensifying.

I spent what seemed like days on that fucking red-line train. Days. Listening to the whale-song of the screaming baby and the Tuba solo of the brakes. Where ordinary voices were frequency-shifted out of my audio range, smells didn’t seem to be affected. I never became nose-blind to the body odor, the stench of the train’s brakes, and mélange of farts and other smells wafting through the metro car.

I *finally* got back to my apartment. Sprinting through my open door and into the front hall at full speed was like a slow, relaxing drift down a lazy river.

I was relieved to be home. At least I had stuff I could do there. I picked up the book I was reading – One Hundred Years of Solitude – and finished it. Despite turning the pages so quickly that I tore many of them, it seemed like most of the time I spent finishing the book was spent on page turning and not actually reading. Three minutes had passed since I got home.

I tried surfing the Internet (my GOD it takes a long time for computers to boot these days) but it was too frustratingly slow. Hours (seemingly) to load each new page, and a fraction of a second to read it. A hundred articles in my news feed read and just three more minutes done.

I dipped into my pile of yet-to-be-read books and finished two more. Four more minutes had passed.

I decided to try to sleep off the remaining effects of the drug. Unfortunately, whatever part of my mind is responsible for perception, the part that’s been accelerated to hyper speeds by the drug, isn’t the same as the part that governs sleep. Despite being awake for what I perceived as days, my physical brain still thought it was 1:25 pm. It was not ready for sleep.

Nevertheless, I *tried* to sleep. I walked to my bedroom (a slow 45-minute drift through my apartment) and flung myself into bed (lazily falling like a feather onto the mattress). I closed my eyes and lay there for hours and hours (10 minutes of reality time) before giving up. Sleep would not come. I was facing what was going to feel like days, or maybe even weeks of being trapped in a slow-motion prison.

So I took an Ambien.

The sensation of the pill and the splash of water I used to swallow it sliding my throat was sickening. A lump that blocked my breathing, moving like a slug down my esophagus.

I read a book. Ten minutes had passed. I read another. Eighteen minutes since I took the Ambien. I threw the book across the room in disgust at my situation. The book slowly pirouetted and spun through the air, like a leaf blowing in a breeze. It hit the wall with a long, faint rumble – the only sound I had head for what seemed like hours – then drifted to the floor like a flip-flop sinking in a swimming pool.

The force of gravity hadn’t changed since I took the pill. The laws of physics were the same. It was just my perception of time that had gone wackadoo. This meant I could use the speed things seemed to fall as a way of judging the effects of the drug. Based on how long it took the book to drift to the floor, I estimated the effects of the drug were *still* intensifying.

I read a magazine. I turned on the television – I clearly saw each frame of video like I was watching a slideshow. Frustrated, I turned the television off.

I read some more. The first two books of *Churchill’s A History of the English-Speaking Peoples*. Not exactly a light read. Frankly, I hated it. But given the hours of tedium it would take to go get another book off my bookshelf, just sitting on the couch and reading Churchill was better. Or at least less worse.

It had now been thirty-five minutes since I took the Ambien. I lay down on the couch and closed my eyes. Time passed. I inhaled – a hours long process. Time passed. I exhaled for more hours.

Sleep. Would. Not. Come.

I needed a new plan. I decided to go back to the offices where they gave me the drug. Maybe they would have something that could counteract its effects. Or at least something to knock me out until it wore off.

I exited my apartment as fast as possible – taking hours in my time-frame to do so. I didn’t even bother locking the door. It would have taken too long.

Down the stairs (it’s faster than the elevator if you run), through the lobby, out the front door and onto the street. These few things felt like a long day at the office.

Sprinting down the street, dancing and weaving between pedestrians with, what must have looked to them, superhuman dexterity. Down the first flight of stairs at the metro. Across the landing. Another hour. Then on to the second flight of stairs. That’s when the Ambien hit me.

The Ambien didn’t make me sleepy. Not at all. Instead, it must have had a severe cross-reaction with the experimental drug I took this morning. I was bounding down the second flight of stairs, moving in slow motion, but still making perceptible progress. Then, wham – everything stopped.

The dull roar of the street and metro noise ceased, replaced by the most perfect silence I’ve ever experienced. My downwards motion seemed to completely freeze. Before the Ambien kicked in, my perception of time was maybe a few hundred times slower than real-time. After the Ambien took effect, time moved *thousands* of times slower. Every second seemed like days to me. Even just moving my eyes to focus on a new point was like an impossibly slow scroll across my visual field.

Over the course of the afternoon, I learned how to walk, run, and jump when my mind ran hundreds of times faster than my body. But with another four or five orders of magnitude of slow-down caused by the Ambien, body control was almost impossible. I fell on the stairs. Even though I was all-but-frozen in mid-step, controlling my muscles was impossible. I commanded my foot forwards for hours, then backwards for hours more when it seemed like I would miss the next step. Hours attempting to adjust the angle of my ankle, then re-adjusting when it felt wrong.

Despite these efforts, I rolled my ankle on the next step. The pain wasn’t at all mitigated by the slowness. Hours of increasing strain on my bent ankle. The nerve signals that send pain into the brain must work differently than the nerves in my ear. Sonic energy was spread out over time, diluted until it was imperceptible. Pain flowed into my brain undiluted by the change in my perception of time. Hours and hours of increasing weight on my turned ankle turned into hours of increasing pain upon increasing pain.

I pitched forwards, my high-speed mind completely unable to control my low-speed body. I drifted downwards for days, managing to rotate my torso enough to keep my head from impacting the ground first. I eventually landed on my right shoulder. At first the impact wasn’t even noticeable. Then I felt a slight pressure in my shoulder as it came in contact with the ground. The pressure grew, bringing increasing pain, for hour upon hour. My shoulder finally gave out, popping out of its socket with an endless sickening tug.

I came to a stop days later, crumpled onto the ground, staring at the ceiling. The pain in my shoulder still screaming with the intensity of a fresh violent injury. I had plenty of time to think during that fall. If every second seemed like days to me, then each minute of real-world time would be like *years*. Even if the drug cleared out of my system in the next two or three hours, this nightmare would seem to last *centuries*.

By the time I hit the ground, I had a plan. I would somehow get to the platform and throw myself in front of a train.

I twisted onto my hands and knees. Days of my dislocated shoulder crying for relief. I misjudged my rotation and rolled onto my back. I tried again, collapsing onto my face as I tried to figure out how to control a body that moved slower than grass grew. *Weeks* of effort were finally rewarded with success – I stabilized on my hands and knees.

If just getting on all fours was this difficult, I figured that walking or running was completely out of the question. So I crawled. I crawled through the metro tunnel. The dumb looks on the faces in the crowd lingered on me for weeks. I crawled under the turnstyle and onto the escalator.

The escalator spilled the rush-hour crowd onto the platform at the same speed a glacier spills ice into the sea. I looked out over the crowded platform during my interminable downward ride. The train status sign said the next train wouldn’t arrive for *twenty minutes*. Twenty minutes was like a year to me. I’d have to spend a year on the metro platform, waiting to die.

I crawled off the escalator, enduring days of stupid expressions on the commuters’ faces. I crawled a few feet to a concrete bench and curled up next to it, trying to find a position to lessen the pain in my shoulder. Then my problem with time got worse. Impossibly worse.

The massive slowdown on the stairs was just the beginning of the interaction between the experimental drug and the Ambien. It fully hit me while I was curled up by the bench. I blinked. Years of darkness followed. Sound was already gone, and with my blink, sight was gone as well. All that existed was the pain from my fall.

My hyper-accelerated mind wasted no time compensating for the lack of sensory input. Voices spoke to me. They sung to me in languages that never existed. Patterns and faces and colors came and went in my mind’s eye. I recalled my whole life, and imagined living another. I forgot English. I settled into a profound despair. I spoke to God. I became God. I imagined a new universe and brought it to life with my thoughts. Then I did it all again. And again.

My eyes opened with geologic slowness. A faint glow. Weeks. A slit of light. Weeks. A narrow view of the metro platform – ankles of the commuters near me and an advertisement on the opposite wall.

I extracted my phone from my pocket. A project that spanned decades. How can I even explain the boredom? The pain in my shoulder is nothing compared to the boredom. Every thought I can think, I have thought hundreds of times already. The view of ankles and advertisements never changes. Never. The boredom is so intense it’s tangible – like a solid object of metal and stone wedged into my skull. Inescapable.

What are my options? If I crawl and fall onto the tracks without an oncoming train to crush me, I won’t die. I’ll experience even more pain from the four-foot fall, but I’ll most likely be rescued by some do-gooder on the platform and unable to act when the train finally does arrive. My suffering in that scenario will be endless.

So I wait for the train. So I can throw myself under it. When it finally hits me, I will experience the pain of being ripped to pieces for centuries until finally, the light of life leaves my brain, and my experience ends.

I’ve lived hundreds of lifespans at the foot of this bench. I am far older, in spirit, than any human who has ever lived. Most of my life experience has been a snapshot of pain huddled on the floor of a subway platform, with an unchanging view of ankles and advertisements.

This post is my plan B. My Hail Mary. My long-shot. I’ve spent lifetimes typing and posting this message in the hope that someone will read it and become convinced that my suffering must end. Someone on this platform right now. Someone who will find the man curled under the bench, the man who crawled down the escalator, and kill him as swiftly as possible. A bullet to the temple.

If you’re armed and at the Glenmont metro, please shoot me.

[pfd](https://www.anewkindofmonster.com/)"Dad, *dad*! I saw a *zombie*!"

I was in the kitchen making tea when my little girl came rushing in. She ran through the back door so fast she almost tripped up the step. I poured boiling water from the kettle into a mug, hardly looking up.

"Oh yeah?"

"Yeah, I did! Its face was all pale and messed up! It was *gross*, dad!"

I put the kettle back and picked up the milk. Sighed inwardly. I *really* had to be more careful about what I watched on TV in the evening. Rosie has a habit of sneaking downstairs in the night, and last week she caught me watching *The Walking Dead*, of all things. She's had zombies on the brain ever since. I keep telling her they're not real, but it doesn't seem to make a difference.

"Sweetheart, what did we say about zombies?" I scooped the teabag out of the mug and dumped it in the bin. "You know if you keep talking about them, daddy's going to get in trouble with mummy again."

"Yeah, but I *saw* one."

"I know, darling, but I already checked the back garden twice yesterday, and I can promise you it's a zombie-free zone."

"No, not in the back garden."

"Hm?"

"I didn't see it in the back garden."

I had the mug half raised to my lips, but now I put it down again. I turned to look at Rosie. Her hair was wind-swept and her little cheeks were red, as if she'd been running.

"Sweetheart." I put on my best stern, dad's-not-happy voice. "I'm going to ask you a question, and I want you to be honest with me: Have you been playing along the path out back again?"

I didn't really need to ask the question, because I already knew the answer. Rosie is allowed to play in the garden on her own, and sometimes – if she asks us permission first – we let her ride her bike along the path at the back of our house. The one that runs past all the neighbour's back gardens. But that's *all* we allow her to do. This area is pretty safe, but these days you can never be too careful. There was a burglary a couple of roads over a few months back, and last year someone was mugged on the high street. Several years ago, a few towns over, a little boy even went missing. That was quite a long way away from here, of course, but it made national news for a few days until the search fizzled out. And it made a lot of parents more cautious. Rosie's getting older now, and she's an adventurous girl, but still – you have to have boundaries. And on a few occasions lately, Rosie's been crossing those boundaries. Riding her bike further than she should. Not coming in straight away when we call her. Sneaking out the back gate when she's only meant to be playing in the garden.

As I watched Rosie now, I noticed her face growing redder. She looked away from me, down at the kitchen floor, and scuffed her feet.

"Dad, I only went a *little* way down," she said. "I *promise*. I was chatting to Mr Henderson, because I saw him in his back garden. I said hello and made him jump!"

I sighed. So there it was: Mr Henderson was Rosie's zombie. Yesterday it was the postman, and the day before that it was a different neighbour. I took a sip of tea and shook my head. Mr Henderson was, in fairness, a better candidate than the others. The guy lives on his own, and he looks about 100 years old. Moles all over his face. Skin like a deflated balloon. Whenever we'd chatted over the garden fence before, though, he'd always seemed nice enough. Just a bit lonely. I couldn't have Rosie going round calling him a zombie.

"Listen to me, sweetheart. I know you didn't go far or anything, but I don't want you–"

"I came right back after too, dad!" Rosie interrupted. She was staring up at me now, blue eyes large and pleading. "I promise! And I even said no when Mr Henderson offered me an ice cream, because I know you don't like me taking stuff from strangers!"

I opened my mouth to respond, then paused. "He offered you ice cream?"

"Yeah, but I said no! Mr Henderson really wanted me to come in and have one, but I told him I had to get home! And then I came straight back here to tell you I'd seen a zombie, and I..."

Rosie was babbling now, her voice whirring like a motor. But I'd stopped listening. My mind was still stuck on something she'd said a moment before.

*Mr Henderson really wanted me to come in and have one*.

I took another sip of tea and frowned. That wasn't good. I didn't mind the neighbours chatting to my little girl, but I didn't like the thought of them inviting her in. Not without us there. Not even if they were just kind, lonely old men. I made up my mind to go round and visit Mr Henderson later, and to tell him that myself – kindly, of course, but firmly. 

In the end, though, I didn't get a chance. Because a few moments after I'd had the thought, Rosie said something else. Something that pushed everything else from my mind, and ended any idea I might have had about going over to Mr Henderson's house. She said something that made me feel cold.

"Daddy, please don't stop me playing in the garden. I *promise* I won't sneak out again. I don't want the zombie to get me."

"Rosie, I'm not going to stop you playing in the garden. But you have to make *me* a couple of promises, too. First, promise me you'll stop going round calling people zombies. Mr Henderson my be old, but he's not one of the living dead."

Rosie frowned. "I didn't."

"What do you mean, you didn't? You just ran in here a moment ago calling him one."

"No, I *didn't*. Mr Henderson's not a zombie. I saw the zombie in his house, but it wasn't him."

I frowned. I had the mug raised to my lips to take another sip of tea, but now I put it down again. "What do you mean, sweetheart? You saw someone else in his house?"

"Yeah, the *zombie*, dad! I could see it pressed against his little basement window while I was talking to him."

Cold fingers ran up my spine. "What?"

"Yeah, it was *really* scary. Its face was all bashed up and bloody, and its mouth was open. Like it was screaming at me. But do you know what confused me most, dad?"

I tried to keep my voice steady. "What?"

"Well, I didn't realise *kids* could be zombies, too. I thought it was only grownups. But I guess I must have have been wrong, cuz' the one in Mr Henderson's basement looked [just like a little boy](https://www.reddit.com/r/samhaysom/comments/aow1eb/stories_and_links/)."One of my least favorite parts about being a middle school history teacher is the bullshit “Living History” assignments we give at the end of every school year. Kids are supposed to sit with their grandparents and video tape, voice record, or transcribe their oldest memories for posterity (and for an easy way to bring up their GPA).

I have been doing this for seventeen years, and when I collected the projects this time around, I assumed they would be as dull, if not duller than usual. This had not been a particularly bright class.

So I went home, poured myself a glass of wine, and prepared for a long night of “I only owned two pairs of pants when I was your age” and “My brother got beat with a newspaper for hitting a baseball into a neighbor’s yard.” And of course, these projects were peppered with innocent, old-person comments that were so horribly sexist and racist you just had to laugh. 

Now, I had a girl in my class whom I will call Olivia. She was pudgy, quiet, and proved herself a consistent B student. I expected her project to be as unremarkable as her, and perhaps that’s why I was so profoundly disturbed by what I witnessed that night.

Olivia had submitted two discs for some reason, so I began with the one marked “interview.” My screen hiccupped twice before a grainy image of a living room came into view. The place was a hoarder’s hell. Olivia was curled up in an armchair clutching a notebook and looking like a scared animal. Across from her sat a man with a somber countenance, smoking a cigarette and staring at her expectantly.

“Go ahead,” a woman’s voice whispered from behind the camera. Olivia’s owlish eyes flashed towards the screen, then back to the man.

“I am here with my Great Uncle Stephen,” she began almost inaudibly. “He is going to tell us about his oldest memories from being in the army.”

Great Uncle Stephen looked like he’d rather be in a goddamn trench at the moment, but he waited patiently for the questions to begin.

Not surprisingly, Olivia read verbatim from the suggested questions sheet I had handed out to the students. He answered her curtly. Once or twice I heard her mother whisper “speak up, Olivia” from behind the camera. Typical, boring shit.

So I was intrigued when Olivia set down the notebook and asked, “Did you like being in the army?” 

That was totally off-script. Great Uncle Stephen emitted a chain smoker’s wheeze. “Nope. Glad to get out of my town though.”

“Where did you go?”

“Balkans.”

“Uh-huh,” she said. I doubted she knew what the Balkans were, and my suspicion was confirmed when she asked, “Was Baukiss very different from here?”

“Yes.”

Mom cleared her throat from behind the camera, perhaps encouraging Great Uncle Stephen to be a little more forthcoming.

But Olivia seemed genuinely interested. “Uncle Stephen,” she asked, “what is your very worst memory from the army?”

The old man crushed his cigarette in the ashtray and then slowly lifted himself out of his chair. “I’ll be back,” he mumbled. The camera cut off.

When the screen flashed back on, everything was the same except Great Uncle Stephen had several pieces of paper in plastic sleeves laid atop all the crap sitting on his coffee table. One, he held in his hand.

“I was a kid when I enlisted,” he said, looking at Olivia. “Your brother’s age,” he told her. Olivia nodded. “I never saw combat. Both of my deployments were to cities in Eastern Europe that had been destroyed by civil wars. Everything was a mess. I felt like a janitor for fuck’s sa-” 

“Ahem!” Mom coughed.

Great Uncle Stephen sighed and looked at his paper. “My unit was assigned to a school that had been obliterated by all the violence. Broken windows, caved in rooms – and for some reason, the part that got to me the most was that the school had been like this for years before we got there. No one had lifted a finger to fix it. I saw kids walk by it on their way to go beg for money or whatever shit they did-”

The camera dipped towards the floor as I heard Mom whisper harshly at Great Uncle Stephen. I couldn’t make out what she was saying, but it wasn’t hard to imagine.

“Do you want to hear this goddamn story or not?” I heard him bark in response. “Then you better let me tell it how I want.”

“Mom,” Olivia chimed. “Please stop interrupting.”

“Are you presenting this in front of the class?”

“No, Mom, we’re just handing it in to the teacher.”

“I’m sure he’s heard the word shit before,” Great Uncle Stephen contributed helpfully. I wasn’t a “he” as a matter of fact, but other than that the statement was accurate.

The camera was lifted and after a couple of blurry focus adjustments, the shot was the same as before.

“Ahh I’m talking too much anyway,” he grumbled. He lifted the piece of paper in his hand close to his face. “In the basement, I found this letter. I didn’t know what it said but I had a buddy of mine translate it. So I’m gonna read it now. And then I’ll tell you what I saw in that basement.”

A chill ran down my spine. Mom zoomed in to Great Uncle Stephen and his letter. His palsied hands trembled as he held up the paper. This is what he read:




Dear Sir,

I never loved my country. So many of these skirmishes are born from patriotism, a power struggle for the shards of a once-great empire, but I do not care what name my home has on a map. This fighting is senseless and I stay as far away from it as I can.

It was not these attacks and disorganized violence that took the lives of my wife and child. It was illness. Mercifully, it happened quickly for the baby. Nadja suffered for longer. I watched in horror knowing I could do nothing for them. My only solace is that I was there for them every step of the way. I stopped going to work one day, and no one came after me. I doubt they noticed I was gone. Since the school was simply across a field, visible from my window, it would have been easy to go for a few hours each day and come home quickly to care for them. But what was the point? All I did was clean floors. I was as useless to the world as I was to my family.

I tried to take Nadja to the hospital, but the journey was too long and taxing. I brought her home and she died that night.

After Nadja and the baby were gone… well, I don’t remember much. I didn’t leave my hovel, barely ate and slept, thought many times of taking my own life. Tempting though it was, I felt paralyzed by my own helplessness.

The one thing that kept me sane was my radio. I never turned it off once. Even though I didn’t listen to the words being said – in fact, the channel I got the clearest was in English (I think) which I don’t speak a lick of. But the voices, the music, and the true knowledge that life existed beyond this violent city sustained me.

I have no idea how long passed before I saw the light of day again. I was dizzy from hunger, so finding food was my priority. My radio came with me, of course. Since I first holed myself up, it has gone everywhere with me. It talks to me as I sleep and as I wake. I don’t know what it’s saying, but I know I would die without it.

Once I had some water and food, it occurred to me that the only thing left to do was go back to work. So I did. The following morning, I simply returned to the school where I was a janitor and got back to work. 

Nobody made a big deal out of it. Like I said, Nadja had been sick for a long time, and those who worked at the school knew it. I appreciate that no one had pestered me to come back to work during the hardest days of my life. The teachers never said much to me, but we smiled at each other in the halls and that mutual respect was perhaps the reason I decided to come back at all.

The place had gone to the dogs without me, so I simply grabbed my broom and rags from my closet and set to cleaning. Everyone is grateful to have me back, I know. And the best part is that nobody minds my radio. I bring it with me everywhere and keep the volume low enough not to disrupt the students. No one has ever complained. In fact, I suspect they like it.

The schoolhouse is not very big, but does require a lot of maintenance. The floors are always sticky and stained, so I spend most of my time mopping. Kids make messes – I guess that’s why I’m still in business. Sometimes I have to move things around to make sure I get every spot on the floor beautiful and clean, but I take pride in that.

And the repairs! The school always needs tune-ups here and there, and I am happy to help. Some days I’m reconstructing a desk that broke as I whistle along with the radio, other times I handle more serious, structural issues. Days when I have work like this, I feel truly instrumental, like a cog in a larger machine. How could this school survive without me? It took me a long time, but I once again feel that I have purpose.

There is a larder behind the school that is full of preserved food. In lieu of payment, I am allowed to take as much food as I need. That arrangement is fine – what would I do with money anyway? I used to bring the food back to my home, just one field away from the school, but when I started sleeping in the basement no one seemed to notice. This school is special to me and I cannot leave it unguarded.

When I am besieged with memories of my wife and baby, I turn up the volume on the radio to drown out such thoughts. It works for me every time.

Except this morning.

Because this morning, I woke up to dead silence.

I frantically examined the radio to see what had happened. I honestly cannot tell you how many days in a row I have been using it. Did it simply live out its life and die naturally? I have spent the entire day trying to fix it. Most of this time, I have been crying. I am losing my mind without it.

I have given myself until sundown. If I cannot fix it by then, I am going to take my life. I am writing this because the sunlight is starting to die and I know what my fate shall be.

I have thought about taking one last walk through the halls of my school, saying goodbye to the students and teachers. I know I will be missed. But I cannot bring myself to leave this room. I cannot go anywhere knowing that my radio is dead in here.

There are no more tears in me. It feels now like I can’t catch my breath. I vomited what little food I had in my stomach and I am growing dizzy again, like I did after Nadja died. I am not long for this world.

But before I take my life, I have closed the door to this room and stuck a chair beneath the handle. It is the only room in the basement and has a small casement that lets in just enough light for me to see what I am doing. If anyone is kind enough to come looking for me, they should not be met with this gruesome sight. Perhaps they will see the door is blocked, smell my rotting body, and simply forget I ever existed.

But I have placed both my radio and this note outside the door. Kind sir, if you are reading this, I have one humble request: please fix it. Save my radio. It did not deserve to die in its sleep and I am ashamed that I cannot revive it.

Now I am ready to join Nadja and little Ludmilla in heaven. I hope this school can find another janitor who loves and cares for it the way I do.

The hour is now. Do not forget my radio.

Stanislav




When Mom zoomed back out, Olivia had tears in her eyes. “Thank you for sharing, Uncle Stephen,” Mom said, her voice choked. “I think we have enough.”

“Wait!” Olivia chirped. “He said there’s more. What did you find?”

Before Great Uncle Stephen could open his mouth, the image disappeared. My jaw dropped. Was that it? What did Great Uncle Stephen see?

I promptly remembered that there was a second disc. This one was unmarked, but I hoped it contained the rest of the interview.

There was no video, only audio. The voice that started up was Olivia’s.

“Hi Miss Gerrity. I’m sorry about my mom, but she refused to record the rest of what my uncle was saying. But I asked him to continue and secretly recorded the story as a voice memo on my phone. I remember you said earlier this year that history is written by the people who win wars.” She sucked in a breath and commenced crying. “But everyone’s history is important, even if they are sad, pathetic people and even if they never won a single thing in their life. I haven’t slept through the night since I finished this project, but you have to hear what my uncle has to say.”

There were tears in my eyes, too. The sincerity of her words was beautiful. I was also flattered that she had remembered some trite phrase I threw around because it was what my history teachers said to me. 

Before I got too sappy over it, the audio began again.

“Fine,” came Mom’s frustrated voice. “If you want to hear the rest of the story, fine, but this is not appropriate for a school project.”

“Let me finish,” Great Uncle Stephen snapped. “If it’s too much for you, help yourself to a snack in the kitchen. But Olivia wants to know what happened.”

I heard her mother mumble something and walk away. Olivia and her uncle were alone. I imagined her looking at him expectantly. 

“So did you find the radio? Or did it get ruined when the school got blown up?”

He rasped and I heard the distinct click of a lighter. “That letter,” he began slowly, “had a date on it.”

“What date?” she inquired hungrily.

“It was dated two weeks before we started rebuilding the school.”

“Didn’t you say the school had been destroyed like two years ago?”

“Yes,” replied Great Uncle Stephen. “It had been.”

There was silence as I felt goosebumps on my arms. The images that came to my mind were almost too overwhelming to express, but Great Uncle Stephen put them into words effortlessly. Clearly he had spent his whole life thinking about it.

“This man, this Stanislav, went to a vandalized, falling apart schoolhouse and cleaned up blood and rubble like it was spilled drinks and dust. He smiled at dead bodies in the hallway and believed they were smiling back at him because they liked his radio. He moved around corpses so he could sweep the ground under them. The roof was half collapsed, so when it rained, he must’ve gotten soaking wet but was so oblivious that he didn’t even feel a thing.” I could hear Olivia crying steadily. “I found the larder he was talking about. It was all pickled, preserved food that probably tasted like shit. Most of the stuff was moldy.”

“Did – did you see the dead body?”

“Yes. Hanging from the ceiling, but still amazingly… lifelike. He wasn’t rotting away.  This hadn’t happened years ago.”

“Did he look peaceful?” she asked, a chord of desperation in her voice.

“Couldn’t tell you. The smell was rank, and his face was blue and his eyes were bulging. Like this.” I imagined him demonstrating. 

“And the radio?” Olivia wept.

I heard Great Uncle Stephen take a long drag of his cigarette. “It was there, alright. And it was still on.”














I’m infatuated with her. 

Utterly infatuated.  

And it wasn’t at a healthy level.  Far from it.  I would think about her every moment she was away.  I would sometimes sit on my couch and just stare at my phone waiting for her to text.  I’d tell myself “Don’t contact her.  *Don't*.   It will come off as too strong.”  But then I’d still find myself clicking her name on my contact list before my inner voice would continue, “You don’t want her to know how desperately smitten you are with her.  It’s unattractive.  It will scare her off.  No, you must wait for her to call you this time.”

But it was excruciating and exhausting.  Almost unbearable.  I once heard that the ancient Greeks believed that falling madly and irrationally in love with somebody was a curse that you would wish upon your enemies.  I could never understand what they meant.  After all, isn’t falling head over heels in love the ultimate goal nowadays?  But now that it’s happened to me, I have to say… the ancient Greeks were right.  This is a curse.  I was barely in control of myself.  Almost as though my infatuation with her had… possessed me.

The two of us were sexually active together but still in the “dating” phase.  We were at that make or break era of a blossoming relationship where we’d either have “the talk” and formally be in a relationship or we’d start to slowly drift apart.  The latter of which I don’t think I’d be able to cope with.  Honestly, I wouldn’t be able to.  Almost everything about her captivated me.  The way she held her hand over her mouth when she laughed.  How she’d caress the pendant of her necklace when she was frightened.  How she’d twirl her hair in her finger when she was excited.   All of it.  Her smell.  Her smile.  Her eyes.  

Yeah, I know.  It probably makes you sick reading about it.  I feel the same way.  I was never the hopeless romantic type.  But now I can’t stop fantasizing about her.  I’d think about us doing the long three-hour hike up to that magnificent view from one of our first dates.  To that first kiss, as we overlooked the lights of the city.  But this time I’d get down on one knee, bring out the ring, and… well… you know what would happen next.  

Alright, fine.  I’ll stop.  Yes, this is a girl I’d only been casually dating for a couple of months.  I shouldn’t be thinking about proposing yet.  I know that.  I'm just barely able to control myself any longer.  I feel as though I’m losing power over the decisions I make. 

And that brings me to why I’m here writing this out at the moment.  It started with the first real thing that troubled me about her. We’d never actually spent a night together.  No matter how late she was over, once either of us showed signs of being tired, she’d up and leave.  She wouldn’t leave awkwardly or in anger. Just a casual kiss good night, a smile, and a “call me soon”. 

It was something I didn’t really even notice the first few times she did it.  But after almost 8 weeks of dating, it was becoming strange.  I’d have to ask her about it.

It took drinking almost an entire bottle of wine before I had the courage to do it.  She looked almost defeated when I asked and lowered her eyes in embarrassment.  “I knew this talk would come eventually,” She started.  She took in a deep breath with a long drawn out exhale.  “Recently….“  she paused again.  “I’ve started talking in my sleep.”  She shook her head in embarrassment.    “It’s called somniloquy, I looked it up.”  

I shrugged and laughed out loud.  My demeanor seemed to say “That’s it?”

“No, Stephen… listen” she said.  She wasn’t laughing.  “It’s bad.  It… It’s completely out of control.  It’s not just random words or gibberish.  No.  It’s horrible.  I say horrible disgusting things.”  She was starting to raise her voice, breath heavy,  and tear up.

I approached her and held her.  I told her it couldn’t be that bad.  I told her to spend the night.  I told her she was probably exaggerating.  

I was wrong.

That night she stayed at my house.  But she warned me of something before falling asleep.  “Whatever you do, don’t wake me up.  It makes me really scared and disoriented if that happens.  And don’t respond to me.  Just ignore it.”  I nodded and agreed.   “If it becomes too much,” she continued, “just leave the room and sleep on the couch.  I won’t mind.”

I told her not to worry about it. I told her that it wouldn’t be a big deal.  I told her I wouldn’t leave to the couch.  I’d stay beside her in the bed.

But I was wrong.

I couldn’t even last one night.

***

We both fell asleep without incident.  I don’t know how many hours passed, but I woke up in the dark with the sensation that someone was watching me.  And then I remembered… *She* was with me.  She was actually spending the night.  I smiled.

But then I noticed the shadowy outline of her sitting up on the bed.  She was looking down at me.  Staring.  

It creeped me out.  I’ll admit it.  Her posture was entirely different.  It was as though it wasn’t even her at all.

Then she spoke.

It wasn’t her voice that I heard.  It was much lower and gravelly.  Like something out of a horror movie.

“*I’ll chew the skin from your bones.*”  She said.

I froze. 

At first, I just kept looking at her.  This was not at all what I expected.  I thought it would be more like the way Tourette’s is often portrayed.  Just random swearing and shouting.   I honestly thought to myself… what will I do if she attacks me right now?  What if she really does try to chew the skin from my bones?  

But then she just lied down and went back to sleep.

I was creeped out.  I tried to lie back down and ignore her but struggled.  I couldn’t even close my eyes without thinking “Maybe she’s sitting up again and staring at me.”  And then one time I rolled over to look at her…and she *was*.

Her face was pressed right towards mine.  Her breath was foul and rotted.  Something that was most certainly not normal for her.  She spoke again, in the same voice as before.

“*If you don’t move to the couch, you’ll be dead by morning.*”

That did it for me.  I sat up in a moment and headed for the living room.

She made some sort of wheezing sound as I left.  I think it was supposed to be laughter.

I was lying on the couch, but I wasn’t going to be able to fall back to sleep.  I was far too shaken.

I was staring out towards the window, hoping to see the first few hints of the sun rising.

And then I thought I heard something.  From the bedroom.

I listened.

And then I heard it again. 

“*Stephen.*”   It was that same low and gravelly voice. It sounded like a witch. 

I tried to just ignore it at first.  But then it continued. 

“*Stephen.*”  

Still I said nothing.  

“*I know you can hear me, Stephen.  You’re awake now.  Why don’t you come back into the bedroom?*”

The voice barely sounded human.  

“*Or maybe you’d prefer if I come to **you**?*”

I still didn’t say anything.  I was told not to.  But I listened.  If I heard her start walking towards the bedroom door, I’m not even joking, I would have run right out of the apartment. But she had asked me not to respond to her sleep talking.  So I didn’t.

And then I heard her once more.

“*Sorry if this spoils your plans.*”   She began laughing.  “*The two of you were supposed to walk that trail again.*” she started.  I wasn’t even remotely prepared for what she’d say next.

 “*You’d both be so tired when you’d reach the top.  You’d look over the city.  Then you’ll get on one knee, and bring out the ring.*”  She began laughing. 

And that’s when I realized this wasn’t just a problem with sleep talking.  It was something much more.  Something supernatural.  I had never told anybody about my proposal fantasy.  There was simply no way she could have known about any of it.

This was no longer about merely talking in ones’ sleep.  This was about possession. I can’t go back into the bedroom.  I have no idea what would happen if I did.  Instead, I’m going to wait it out, holding up in my living room until the sun rises.  I have a couple more hours yet.  I can hear her laughing occasionally in the bedroom. It’s still not her voice. Still that same low pitch cackle.

But as I sit on my couch writing this out, here’s what scares me the most…

Maybe my infatuation and utter obsession with her wasn’t normal.  I said before that I felt like I was losing control of myself.  More so I believe than the typical falling in love story.  No.  I fear that the infatuation I felt was the entity slowly taking control of *me*.  Of it controlling my thoughts, fears, ambitions, and anxieties.  Maybe once I become completely absorbed, a transfer would occur, and she would be free of it. 

I know I should leave.  That I should open the front door, get in my car, and drive away from here.  But I can’t. I can’t leave her.  I’ve already lost control.

I’m infatuated with her.

Utterly infatuated.I’ve always had a weak heart.

Not just physically, I’ve always been afraid of my own shadow. It was unsurprising when the doctors told me my heart murmur wasn’t just a heart murmur. A year of tests. A year of therapy, constant trips to the hospital and I was finally told that it had all been for nothing.

My poor weak heart wouldn’t last till Christmas. It’s a strange thing being told that you’re dying; I didn’t come to terms with it at first. I drank and I spent my money. I did reckless, stupid things because I was so damn scared.

Then I got the news. That a young woman called Laura had been declared brain dead and that I, the lucky chosen one, would be getting a brand new heart a week later. I drove to the hospital slowly, carefully, and readied myself for the ordeal that was to come.

As I was laying in bed on the last night, the thought of Laura swirled around in my head and it wouldn’t leave me alone. It was like her name was in flashing lights every time I closed my eyes.

It was wrong, I know it was, but I had to see the woman who was giving me her heart. It didn’t feel right not to put a face to the one who was saving my life. I knew her name, I knew what ward she was staying on- I had overheard the two nurses discussing it. I wandered down the meandering hallways until I found what I was looking for, taking my time, making sure I didn’t miss any name. I guess I had time on my hands now.

In the second to last room, she lay in bed. A woman sat on the bed next to her, holding her hand, and my own weak heart stuttered.

“Excuse me.” I had no idea what to say to her. “I’m Jenna. I’m the person… I’m having surgery tomorrow and..” What I assumed was Laura’s mother stood up and I could tell from the look in her eye that she knew who I was.

“Thank you for visiting. I know it’s strange, but a part of her is going to be living on in you. I wanted to meet you.” I stood there, helpless and lost for words. Laura’s mother beckoned me over.

“Please.” She said. “Don’t feel uncomfortable. Its what she would have wanted.” I sat on the chair next to Laura.

“How did she-“ I broke off. It was too awful to ask. Laura’s mother gave me a thin smile.

“She was a care worker. Looked after battered wives, abused women. Last month she met a guy and… Well. I suppose years of training can’t help you when you’re in love. She ignored the warning signs. And he killed her. She dedicated her life to those who needed her.” Laura’s mother looked down. I don’t know why I did it, but I reached over, and held Laura’s hand. I squeezed it.

“I’m so sorry. I had a boyfriend once who… He was like that too. Someone like Laura convinced me to leave.” Laura’s mother gave me another half smile. I could see the tears in her eyes.

Then Laura squeezed my hand. Tightly. She gripped me so hard that her fingernails dug into my skin. I recoiled, a look of horror on my face. Laura’s mother looked at me calmly.

“She squeezes my hand sometimes as well. I think the Doctors called it muscle spasms. Either way. There’s none of Laura left in there anymore.” I looked at the small crescent moons that had just started to bleed on the palm of my hand.

The surgery went perfectly. I was wheeled to the recovery suite after it was over and done with, the raised wound on my chest covered by gauze. It was better if I didn’t see it, I thought. I didn’t need any more heart issues. I spent the first day doped up on the pain medication, eating only a little and sitting up maybe two times. It was a long process, they reassured me.

Laura’s mother came to visit me the day before I was due to leave. Her calm demeanor hadn’t wavered but I could see that she was suffering. She looked ten years older, and her hands shook when she gave me a hug.

“When are you going home?”

“Tomorrow.” I told her. “Please, come visit whenever you want.” I started to jot down my address for her, when out of the corner of my eye, a flash of blonde disappeared through the doorway. The same brilliant blonde as Laura’s hair.

“Ow!” I cried out suddenly. It felt like someone had sharply squeezed my hand so hard it had almost crushed the bones. Laura’s mother rushed to my side, a look of concern in her eyes.

“What’s wrong? Is it your heart?” She stumbled over the last words, coming to terms with what she had said. I tried to reassure her and said I’d let the doctors know, and she left with a look of worry on her face.

When I looked down, a new set of crescent fingernail marks were below the ones that Laura’s had made. Ten identical bleeding smiles.

The taxi ride home was short, and before I knew it I was back in my own flat. It felt strange to try and slot back into where I had left off, my life had been almost over the last time I had been here. I looked over the mess and the cardboard boxes, the remnants of one night where I had tearfully tried to pack and store my belongings so my parents wouldn’t have to do it when I died.

Laura’s heart beat so strongly it felt like it would come out of my chest. It did this all the time, and I realized this was what a healthy heart must feel like. So why couldn’t I shake my feeling of unease?

That night, I had a dream.

Laura was in her hospital bed, but her mother was gone. I could hear my heart, Laura’s heart, beating in my eardrums so loudly it was painful. I tried to cover them, but my hands were pinned to my sides. Some unexplainable force was moving me towards the motionless figure of Laura on the bed, her lips were blue and the window had come open, whipping her blonde hair around her face.

I was almost on top of her when her eyes flew open.

They were milky white, the eyes of someone dead.

“Get out.” She rasped, her voice guttural. I could hear the heartbeat faster and faster, drumming until I thought I couldn’t take it anymore.

Then I woke up. The sound had been real. Laura’s heart was so loud it felt like it would rupture my eardrums and I screamed in agony, trying to cover my ears. It was useless, it was coming from some deep place inside me, I could feel it reverberating around the hollows of my chest.

I stumbled out of bed, gasping for air, and tried to find my phone. I needed to call someone, anyone, an ambulance or my mom. Anyone that would pick up.

“Get out.” It was a faint whisper over the hammering thumps of Laura’s heart, a low guttural voice that sounded like it had been made by an animal, and I crawled to the door, down the hallway, choking on my screams for help. My neighbor opened the door, his eyes as wide as saucers at the sight of me on the floor clutching my chest.

He drove me to hospital as I cried in the passenger seat of his car.

After about fifty different checkups, the doctors told me that absolutely nothing was wrong with me. They told me my heart was regular, my blood pressure was normal, and that everything was going just swimmingly. I stood in the waiting area, wallowing in my shame and frustration.

That heart didn’t belong to me.

My phone buzzed on the counter, an unknown number. Great. That was all I needed, more unexplained, scary things like a stranger on the end of the phone. My voice sounded small on the line,

“Hello?”

“Good morning, this is the Thames Valley police, we’ve called to report an incident that occurred in your flat at around 1.30am today.” I felt a wave of embarrassment.

“I’m so sorry, I recently had surgery and I wasn’t feeling well. I had to have my neighbor drive me to the hospital and I think I panicked a little in the hallway before I left.” There was a small silence on the other end of the phone.

“I’m afraid this is something you might want to be sitting down for.” I felt Laura’s heart beats, strong and calm. “There was an incident of forced entry by Mr Samuel Matthews, according to our police records he’s your ex partner and you filed a restraining order against him in September 2017.” My blood ran cold.

“I did.”

“He’s in police custody. We found an automatic weapon on him and we believe he had the intent to harm you. We have an officer currently stationed at your flat who can fill you in depending on how long your hospital stay will be.”

I thanked him and hung up the phone.

For a moment, I leant against the wall, the horror slowly spreading over me. If I had been in my flat ten minutes later he would have found me.

Laura’s heartbeats filled my ears again but now they were gentle, calming. Her mother said she dedicated every part of her to helping those who needed it.

I put both my hands on my chest, overwhelmed by my own gratitude, and listened to Laura.Pauline was a sweet woman who lived across the street. We weren’t close as kids or teenagers because she was around five years older than me, but our parents were friends. I think she babysat me when I was younger too.

When my mother learned that Pauline was engaged, she sent me to help on the bridal shower. Poor mom, she thought I was like that because I was too often around boys and needed to learn to be more feminine, but she’s got that backwards.

That’s when I first learned that Pauline and her soon-to-be husband had made a blood oath.

“The first to die comes and takes the other as soon as they can”, she explained to me, swirling the ruby ring gently around her fingers.

“Isn’t that too dramatic? What if you end up divorcing and marrying other people?”

“We won’t. We are soulmates!” she assured me. Her naïveté made her incredibly beautiful, but it felt really wrong being 21 and thinking that I was so much more mature than a 26 years-old.

I didn’t pursue the matter, but she kept talking about him in a dreamy tone. *Aiden would like this*, *I wish Aiden was here*, and so on. Her dreamy tone almost made me believe that soulmates existed and that you could make the person you love the most follow you in death by just willing it.

I met Pauline’s friends, and we all ended up having some quality girl time. Pauline explained to us all how she believed that you can wake up in the afterlife and start controlling things with your mind.

“Of course your memories will be hazy”, she clarified. “But that’s why we made the blood oath. So we can remember.”

“And how will one get the other back?” I asked, entertaining her.

“I like to believe that we’ll both grow wings!”

It was all terribly silly when I think back, but Pauline had something about her that made everyone pay attention and marvel at her words.

Despite the age gap, we ended up becoming good friends; I think we were finally at an age where it didn’t matter anymore. Since I was in college but lived with my parents and didn’t need to work, I had a lot of spare time to accompany her to wedding dress fittings, cake tasting and all the little things that were the world for brides.

But Pauline was a pleasant bride-to-be and never freaked out; she was just thrilled about marrying the man of her dreams, and wanted to make it pretty if possible.

Little by little, I grew to understand her devotion to Aiden. And he was just as crazy about her, if not more. When they were together the world felt like a brighter and warmer place. Like marshmallows slowly melting over my heart.

The day of the wedding came, around half a year after her bridal shower.

It was neither a big nor a small wedding – it felt like both Pauline and Aiden were able to invite exactly everyone they wanted around on their happiest day. Not one more, not one less. I felt somewhat honored to be there.

Still, the happiest day never came.

When Pauline arrived, belated as any bride should, there was whispering and disquiet; Aiden wasn’t there yet. 

Her smile didn’t falter, because she was completely sure that he would never bail on her. But I could tell she was worried. The bridesmaids – her two closest friends since high school – started making calls to try to find out if the groom had a sudden illness.

Soon they realized that Aiden’s parents were there, but not his brother. They informed that their other son was supposed to drive the groom as part of his best man’s duties.

When the devastating news came, everyone wanted to comfort her, everyone wanted desperately to protect her precious heart, but it was too torn apart to notice anyone else.

*It was all too fast and scary. (…) A sports car ran a red light straight into the Mirage. (…) The man in the passenger seat was dead on arrival. (…) The driver was taken to the hospital but his state was critical.*

It was all so hard on everyone. Aiden’s brother ended up surviving, but he’ll be tetraplegic for life due to severe injury on his spinal cord. As far as I know, he’s also miserable because he wished he could be the one who died.

Right after the wedding that never happened, Pauline and Aiden’s parents dealt with selling the house they had just bought, and Pauline continued living with her parents. They both still worked office jobs, so her other friends and I started taking turns keeping her company while they weren’t home.

I did my best to be there for my neighbor and friend, but *she* wasn’t there. She was living in delusion, and the only thing you could see leaking into reality was her desolation. 

I never saw such a deep and heart-wrenching sadness. Pauline refused to take off her dress. She would spend the whole day by the window waiting for Aiden and the whole night crying because she missed him desperately. Every single day.

She was hopeful it was a matter of time until he woke up on the other side and remembered to bring her along. That’s why she wouldn’t take off the dress – he had died on his wedding suit, so it was only natural that she was up to par.

Her parents and every single one of her friends tried to coax her into changing her clothes. We promised she could always keep the dress close for when Aiden came, but she knew that we didn’t really believe he would. It was like promising your kid that you’d buy them a Happy Meal some other day. 

No one dared to penetrate her grief and force her out of the dress. She spent the day in it, slept in it, even bathed in it; since we live in a warm and arid weather, having it dry wasn’t an issue, only everything else.

The once beautiful organza and silk were now ragged, grimy and smelling. But she still refused to take it off. She started to believe that Aiden wouldn’t be able to spot her in the crowd if she wasn’t wearing it.

It was impossible to change her mind, and even though she was seeing a therapist three times a week, she wasn’t improving. Her mourning and PTSD were turning into a darker, more permanent mental illness.

She started talking to Aiden, then explained to us that he was nearby, so she could feel him coming. He was just taking a while because flying is really hard when your wings are newly-acquired.

Then one morning, she disappeared for good. No one saw her leaving, and no one saw her at all after that.

The only thing that we were able to find, in the small grove behind the house, was her filthy wedding dress. It had two large holes poked on her back, like it had grown wings.

\*\*\*

After finding the dress, everyone who loved Pauline was relieved; her mother readily admitted that she actually believed that Aiden somehow had come back to take her. Others weren’t so fond of the supernatural explanation, but thinking that there was a chance that it happened brought us a sense of closure.

It’s not that we were happy about her death, but we conformed to the possibility of her finally finding her peace.

She was an angel, after all. Why wouldn’t she grow wings and escape her flesh prison?

The family held a beautiful memorial service in her honor, and slowly we all started moving on with our lives.

Now, you might ask what I believe in. I would laugh bitterly because I don’t have this choice to begin with.

Being the person who spent the most time watching Pauline those days, it was only natural that I was the one to found her dead in the bathtub. Hiding and subsequently getting rid of her body was the hardest thing I have ever done; tampering with the dress, though, was eerily healing.

Still, I think that she would be pleased to know that I faked her rapture. 

A romantic and mystifying death fitted her way more than suicide[.](https://www.reddit.com/r/PPoisoningTales/)I wasn't sure where else to post these stories, so I figured I'd share them here. I've been an SAR officer for a few years now, and along the way I've seen some things that I think you guys will be interested in. 

* I have a pretty good track record for finding missing people. Most of the time they just wander off the path, or slip down a small cliff, and they can't find their way back. The majority of them have heard the old 'stay where you are' thing, and they don't wander far. But I've had two cases where that didn't happen. Both bother me a lot, and I use them as motivation to search even harder on the missing persons cases I get called on. 
The first was a little boy who was out berry-picking with his parents. He and his sister were together, and both of them went missing around the same time. Their parents lost sight of them for a few seconds, and in that time both the kids apparently wandered off. When their parents couldn't find them, they called us, and we came out to search the area. We found the daughter pretty quickly, and when we asked where her brother was, she told us that he'd been taken away by 'the bear man.' She said he gave her berries and told her to stay quiet, that he wanted to play with her brother for a while. The last she saw of her brother, he was riding on the shoulders of 'the bear man' and seemed calm. Of course, our first thought was abduction, but we never found a trace of another human being in that area. The little girl was also insistent that he wasn't a normal man, but that he was tall and covered in hair, 'like a bear', and that he had a 'weird face.' We searched that area for *weeks*, it was one of the longest calls I've ever been on, but we never found a single trace of that kid. 
The other was a young woman who was out hiking with her mom and grandpa. According to the mother, her daughter had climbed up a tree to get a better view of the forest, and she'd never come back down. They waited at the base of the tree for hours, calling her name, before they called for help. Again, we searched everywhere, and we never found a trace of her. I have no idea where she could possibly have gone, because neither her mother or grandpa saw her come down.

* A few times, I've been out on my own searching with a canine, and they've tried to lead me straight up cliffs. Not hills, not even rock faces. Straight, sheer cliffs with no possible handholds. It's always baffling, and in those cases we usually find the person on the other side of the cliff, or miles away from where the canine has led us. I'm sure there's an explanation, but it's sort of strange.

* One particularly sad case involved the recovery of a body. A nine-year-old girl fell down an embankment and got impaled on a dead tree at the base. It was a complete freak accident, but I'll never forget the sound her mother made when we told her what had happened. She saw the body bag being loaded into the ambulance, and she let out the most haunting, heart-broken wail I've ever heard. It was like her whole life was crashing down around her, and a part of her had died with her daughter. I heard from another SAR officer that she killed herself a few weeks after it happened. She couldn't live with the loss of her daughter.

* I was teamed up with another SAR officer because we'd received reports of bears in the area. We were looking for a guy who hadn't come home from a climbing trip when he was supposed to, and we ended up having to do some serious climbing to get to where we figured he'd be. We found him trapped in a small crevasse with a broken leg. It was not pleasant. He'd been there for almost two days, and his leg was very obviously infected. We were able to get him into a chopper, and I heard from one of the EMTs that the guy was absolutely inconsolable. He kept talking about how he'd been doing fine, and when he'd gotten to the top, a man had been there. He said the guy had no climbing equipment, and he was wearing a parka and ski pants. He walked up to the guy, and when the guy turned around, he said he had no face. It was just blank. He freaked out, and ended up trying to get off the mountain too fast, which is why he'd fallen. He said he could hear the guy all night, climbing down the mountain and letting out these horrible muffled screams. That story bothered the hell out of me. I'm glad I wasn't there to hear it. 

* One of the scariest things I've ever had happen to me involved the search for a young woman who'd gotten separated from her hiking group. We were out until late at night, because the dogs had picked up her scent. When we found her, she was curled up under a large rotted log. She was missing her shoes and pack, and she was clearly in shock. She didn't have any injuries, and we were able to get her to walk with us back to base ops. Along the way, she kept looking behind us and asking us why 'that big man with black eyes' was following us. We couldn't see anyone, so we just wrote it off as some weird symptom of shock. But the closer we got to base, the more agitated this woman got. She kept asking me to tell him to stop 'making faces' at her. At one point she stopped and turned around and started yelling into the forest, saying that she wanted him to leave her alone. She wasn't going to go with him, she said, and she wouldn't give us to him. We finally got her to keep moving, but we started hearing these weird noises coming from all around us. It was almost like coughing, but more rhythmic and deeper. It was almost insect-like, I don't really know how else to describe it. When we were within site of base ops, the woman turns to me, and her eyes are about as wide as I can imagine a human could open them. She touches my shoulder and says 'He says to tell you to speed up. He doesn't like looking at the scar on your neck.' I have a very small scar on the base of my neck, but it's mostly hidden under my collar, and I have no idea how this woman saw it. Right after she says it, I hear that weird coughing right in my ear, and I just about jumped out of my skin. I hustled her to ops, trying not to show how freaked out I was, but I have to say I was really happy when we left the area that night.

* This is the last one I'll tell, and it's probably the weirdest story I have. Now, I don't know if this is true in every SAR unit, but in mine, it's sort of an unspoken, regular thing we run into. You can try asking about it with other SAR officers, but even if they know what you're talking about, they probably won't say anything about it. We've been told not to talk about it by our superiors, and at this point we've all gotten so used to it that it doesn't even seem weird anymore.
On just about every case where we're really far into the wilderness, I'm talking 30 or 40 miles, at some point we'll find a staircase in the middle of the woods. It's almost like if you took the stairs in your house, cut them out, and put them in the forest. I asked about it the first time I saw some, and the other officer just told me not to worry about it, that it was normal. Everyone I asked said the same thing. I wanted to go check them out, but I was told, very emphatically, that I should never go near any of them. I just sort of ignore them now when I run into them because it happens so frequently. 

I have a lot more stories, and I suppose if anyone's interested, I'll tell some of them tomorrow. If anyone has any theories about the stairs, or if you've seen them too, let me know. 

**EDIT: Part 2 is up: https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/3ijnt6/im_a_search_and_rescue_officer_for_the_us_forest/**My dad always wanted a son. He got three daughters instead.

He hated us all, hated my twin sisters, hated my mother… but hated me most of all because I was the last child my mother had before she died. That didn’t stop him from treating me like his little boy, didn’t stop him from attempting to beat the hatred of my own gender into me. *Quit your crying*, he’d snap, *or you’ll end up like your sniveling bitch of a mother*. After years of that shit, he was shocked that I grew up as a tomboy.

I think he hated that even more because I was just a constant reminder of what he never got to have.

My mother died when she was only twenty-seven, when I was only four – the coroner ruled her death a natural passing, some weird heart complication that took her in her sleep. My dad, though, he says it was because of her family’s curse. Whenever I came to him, desperate for more information about a mother I never really knew, he never had much to say. I’m convinced he was just drunk since the day she died. *Every woman in her damn family, they die when they’re twenty-seven*, he’d sputter in between belches, his breath reeking of stale beer.

I think the real curse is that my mom was the one to die, and not him.

I wasn’t fully convinced by the ramblings of a perpetually drunk man, but when I lost both of my sisters just months before their twenty-eighth birthday, I knew it couldn’t be a coincidence. Moira was found murdered, her face practically blasted off by a shooter while she was on a jog. Joy took her own life only days later. I was the one who found her, hanging in the bedroom of her apartment as I came to pick her up for Moira’s funeral. She’d been there, swinging from the rafters, all night.

It’s hard to live a normal life when you know you have an expiration date, especially when it encompasses an entire year. I always dreaded my birthday, which from an early age became associated less with fun and birthday cake and more with worry and funeral caskets. But once Moira and Joy died, my next birthday – twenty-five – was the most dreadful day of my life. Twenty-six was worse, twenty-seven unimaginable.

*This is it*, I thought as I closed all of the blinds in my apartment, downing the last drop of vodka in the bottle. *This is the last year of my life.*

Twenty-seven has been uneventful, to say the least. Why would I make any long-term plans, forge any meaningful relationships when I know they simply cannot last? The worst part of this last year has been simply *not* knowing when my impending death is coming – it could have been any day within the last three hundred and sixty-four. It could be within the next minute.

I must admit I became something of a recluse, my windows always shuttered, additional locks installed in my door, letting the phone ring through to voicemail, hiding under my covers with the lights out whenever I got a knock on my door. I stocked up on preserved foods and various goods that I would need to last the year. I was so paranoid that I even covered my mail slot, stuffed a towel in the space beneath my front door. I didn’t want anything getting through from the outside world – god forbid, an *anthrax letter*.

Falling off the face of the earth didn’t matter much, anyway – I didn’t have friends or family anymore. My mother and both of my sisters were dead, and my dad disowned me when I came out as a lesbian after my sisters died. I moved away and severed contact soon after.

The night before my twenty-seventh birthday, I started getting these strange phone calls from a blocked number. I’ve always had anxiety about phone calls, so I just let it ring. The number kept calling, at least once per day throughout the past year. Then the knocking started, once a week at first, but it’s only been getting worse – more frequent, and the pounding on my door more frantic each time. Convinced it had something to do with my inevitable death, I’ve been driven mad by the unknown visitor, especially over the past week.

I got ready for bed last night, knowing that tomorrow – today, now – is the day I will turn 28. My time had run out, and I searched for comfort in a bottle of liquor. I didn’t find it. I fell into bed, drunk and delirious, and prayed the morning wouldn’t come, though I knew it would. I eventually got to sleep, but it was restless and unsatisfying. The kind of sleep where you feel like you have one eye open, always watching.

That’s why I was quick to wake when the door to my bedroom creaked open early in the morning, before the first sign of light. I shot up in my bed, glancing around my room in a frenzied panic, at first seeing nothing out of the ordinary other than the door, pushed slightly ajar. A closer look revealed something I’d missed, something that sent my heart racing, froze me to my core. Two dark figures stood in the empty space behind the half-opened door, unmoving, almost like a pair of statues.

Waiting. Watching. Wordless.

“Leave me… leave me alone,” I squeaked, unable to move, paralyzed in the power of their presence.

The shadowy figures instead shuffled out from behind the door, creeping slowly towards me in the dark. I knew this would certainly be the end of my life, the fulfillment of my curse, if I didn’t act. Suddenly recalling the self-defense methods I’d drilled into my mind, I flipped my bedside lamp on to stun the intruders and reached underneath the table to pull the knife I’d duct taped there a year ago – a twenty-seventh birthday gift to myself.

As soon as the light flooded the room, though, I knew the blade would be of no use.

My intruders were not a pair of assassins – not human ones, at least. In the yellow light of the lamp I discerned the identities of the dark figures. They were my sisters. Joy stood at the foot of my bed, pale, in that same conservative black dress I’d found her dead in years ago, the one she’d picked out for Moira’s funeral. Her head hung parallel to her shoulders, neck grotesquely bent from her hanging.

Moira was a few steps behind her. I could only assume it was her, considering the severity of her injuries – she’d suffered a gunshot wound to the head, so brutal that we were not allowed to see her after her death, so intense that it had entirely disfigured her face. The lower half of her face had been reduced to a pit of gore, her jawbone barely attached on one side, her mouth mangled, with only several teeth remaining studded randomly throughout the mess.

“Why are you here?” I cried, gathering my knees to my chest and holding them tight. “Are you… are you here to take me?”

Joy made a feeble attempt to shake her head, the side of her face only brushing weakly against her shoulder. She waited several moments before putting one of her feet in front of the other, moving towards the side of my bed. As I recoiled instinctively, she slowed her pace. Moira trailed after her until they were both beside me.

I whimpered as Joy leaned over me, her head flopping forward suddenly with the motion, neck cracking sickeningly. With her lips brushing against my ear, she whispered, “she… she tried.” Her speech was labored and wheezing, as if her vocal cords had nearly been shredded.

“What do you mean, Joy?” I pleaded.

Her lips moved against my ear once more, but no sounds came out despite a clear strenuous effort. Moira wagered an attempt at answering my query, but only succeeded in sputtering blood from the gaping wound in her face, ejecting one of her remaining teeth onto the floor as her jawbone swung precariously, barely hanging on. She raised one hand, slowly curling it into a fist before striking her knuckles furiously against my bedpost.

The incessant sounds startling me, I forced my eyes shut tight and pulled my knees even closer against my chest. Moira’s knocking seemed only to escalate in volume, seemed to go on forever, until – finally – it stopped. I cracked my eyes open to find that both of my sisters had vanished, that the light of early morning had begun to spill in through the slats of my blinds. It was just past six o’clock, the seventh of June, the day of my twenty-eighth birthday.

I was born at 9:26 AM – once I learned of the curse, I burned the time of my ultimate expiration into my mind. I only had three hours and sixteen minutes left to live… if I even *had* that long. Draping my covers over my head, I resolved to spend the rest of my life asleep. I figured I’d rather pass peacefully in my sleep like my mother did than to suffer a fate similar to my sisters’.

My plans were interrupted, however, by that damned knocking on the door. The interruption usually didn’t come so early in the morning. I decided initially to ignore the strange visitor but pulled the blankets back down soon after as a certain sense of familiarity struck me. The pounding on the door reminded me all too much of Moira’s knocking just moments before.

It easily could have been a trick of the curse, but something compelled me to approach the door. “What do you want?” I called from behind the barrier, clinging to the relative safety it provided.

The reply came from an unfamiliar man’s voice. “I just have a letter for you, miss.”

“Just… just slide it under the door, and please leave,” I returned, using my bare foot to remove the towel I used to block the small space beneath it.

He deposited a bright yellow envelope under the door as I requested. I waited quietly for the sounds of receding footsteps before sliding on a pair of gloves to handle the letter. It was addressed to me, simply by first name and with no address. Carefully, I unsealed the envelope to reveal a birthday card. I hadn’t received one in years.

Bright, sparkling letters on the front formed the words, *Daughter, you’re 27!*. I scoffed at the sick joke. I hadn’t received a birthday card since I was a child, and my dad couldn’t even get my birthday right. I didn’t think he even knew my address. I cracked it open gingerly to read the message inside.

*Laura,*

*If you’re reading this, your father has killed me. Don’t believe a thing he or the police say – I was not the target of a random attack, I did not die of natural causes, and I certainly did not commit suicide. I would never leave you if I had the choice.*

*The truth is… I died is because I found the truth behind my family’s curse and foolishly told your father. He was in on it the whole time, planted in my life by some secret society to eradicate me. To eradicate us. What we have is not a curse, it is a gift – a gift of immense power. The power to heal, but the power to harm just the same.*

*We come into our power at the age of 28, a number associated with independence, leadership, and self-sufficiency. An age where we can handle the responsibility such a power inevitably comes with. It’s a strong number, and you will come into great strength, though you’ve always been a strong girl.*

*I hope you’ve made it this far, but at the same time… I know you have. You were always a feisty little girl for the four years I had the pleasure of knowing you, of loving you. You never let anyone tell you what to think or do – especially not your father.*

*Happy birthday – I love you.*

*Mom*

I closed the card softly, thinking on the strained words of my sister – mom had tried to warn them, but they didn’t listen. The pieces of the puzzle slid into place… my dad must have murdered Moira, and Joy ended her own life out of grief and a belief that she would inevitably be next.

At the time of writing this, I only have two hours and thirty-two minutes until I officially turn twenty-eight. Over the past hour or so, I’ve already begun to feel the power flowing into my body, electrifying as it runs through my veins. I will the towel to reposition itself under the door, and it does so, sliding across the floor on its own.

I need to keep myself safe until 9:26, after all. I’m planning on surprising my father with a visit [for my birthday](https://www.reddit.com/r/hercreation/).

I | [II](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/h8sukx/all_of_the_women_in_my_family_die_at_age_27_i/) | [III](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/hilfi8/all_of_the_women_in_my_family_die_at_age_27_i/) | [IV](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/hrlgto/all_of_the_women_in_my_family_die_at_age_27_i/)

[X](https://www.reddit.com/r/TheCrypticCompendium/)"**Hello, is this Mr. Henderson?**"

There was no real reason for me to pick up the phone. The spam app on my cell called out the mystery number right away. But, hell, I thought. Fuck it. There was no one else left in life for me to talk to. Even a debt collector sounded good at the  moment.

My wife was murdered in 2015. There really isn’t an easy way to say that other than getting it out of the way early. It was a random robbery gone wrong. One rainy night, some sick tweaking fuck snuck into our house and shot her. 

The suspect was caught, two days later, and sentenced to life in prison. He still sits there today. 

I have worked in web development ever since. The job is remote, and the field caters to my hermit-like behavior out here in the woods of northern New Jersey. The lack of drug testing is really just an added benefit. I was perfectly free to fuck up the remainder of my own life. 

I don't have any friends, anymore. Not really. Sometimes... I guess it is easy to look for companionship in all the wrong places. 

"*Senior or junior?*" I replied to the lady with a sigh before settling into the armchair in my office with a bottle of wine. It was raining that night. The wind whipped the old pine tree in our back yard so hard I thought it might topple. 

"**Uhh... Senior,**" said the pretty, calm voice on the other line. She sounded familiar, but I blamed that notion on the half empty bottle of wine. 

"*Apologies, ma'am, but... Senior died six years ago.*" I said, a little annoyed at the lack of record keeping at this place.

She paused.

"**Oh gosh... gosh that is not what we have here. I am so sorry, Sir. We were not aware. Please forgive the intrusion and assumption. Would you mind pausing while I check my records?**"

A filing cabinet clicked steadily in the background as static crinkled. My guess was that the woman held the receiver to her shoulder. I chuckled a bit at the lack of audio quality. 

"*No, no, no that is okay, no problem at all. No worries. Why don't you start by telling me your name?*" I asked, cursing myself for the hint of shameless flirting at the end. 

She giggled. Something about that laugh was very familiar. "**My name is Emily, and I work with his credit card company,**" she said in a rehearsed tone. "**Unfortunately, we cannot divulge which firm over the phone if you are not on the account... which uh... you just admitted yourself, of course...**"

"*Okay.*”

"**I am guessing that you are Mr. Henderson's son**," she mumbled while audibly thumbing through papers.

"*Yes ma'am, that's right. But it's been years... I could not possibly be stuck with the old man’s debt, right?*" I asked hopefully.

"**Well, let's check, shall we?**" there was a panicked shuffling and opening of books in the background. "**I am so sorry, Sir,**" she replied with a regretful tone. "**The rules are in one of those three-ring binders, and they are very difficult to find. Please hold for a moment.**"

"*That's okay... did not know anybody still kept records that way... do I get an e-mail confirmation of this charge as well?*" I asked.

"**Excuse me?**"

"*Email... like... electronic mail. A confirmation of the charge?*" I asked again, allowing my confusion to turn to frustration. What was this lady’s problem? 

"**We don’t do that here... still a few years away from all those fancy features,**” she continued. “**But as you know, late payments are a pretty serious issue. They can even affect the credit score of an individual when a large amount has not been paid.**"

"*Okay, okay, of course,*" I said, genuinely starting to grow worried and a bit flustered. "*What can I do?*"

"**Is there a Mrs. Henderson in the household?**" she asked quietly.

"*Mrs. Henderson died in ‘06,*”

"**What year did you say? Oh my gosh. That is so horrible. I really am batting one thousand today.**"

I gasped. That was it. *That phrase.* I don't know if it was the way she said it, or the fact that simply not that many people used that exact language. But as soon as she did... something clicked in my memory.

My wife worked for a credit card company, before we met. Her name was also Emily. The voice sounded like hers... but it was younger. More hopeful than I remembered. 

"*What is your last name?*" I asked. 

The line was silent.

"*Look, look, I know that's a weird question. But please, I think we know each other.*”

"**I can't give that information out...**" she started

"*Okay. Did you go to Jefferson Memorial High School?*"

"**Yes...**" she said, astonished. "**How did you know that?**"

It was impossible. Emily was dead. The voice on the phone barely even sounded like her. It was younger, happier, more optimistic. This type of dream was actually the type of thing that had kept me up a million sleepless nights in the past. And yet, I was awake. Could it be a coincidence? 

"*Is your mother's name Eva?*"

There was silence on the other end of the line. Then her mouse-like reply confirmed my suspicions.

"**Who is this?**"

I took a deep breath. Either I understood what was happening, or I lost my mind. Might as well enjoy the ride. “*This next question is going to sound strange. What is today's date?*"

"**I am sorry, Sir... what..? One moment.**" She paused and shuffled around some more papers. 

"**Today's date is July 9th, 1999.**"

It was impossible. Could it be the storm? The anniversary of her death?

"*Emily, listen to me.*"

"**Okay, Sir, this conversation is getting a little strange... let's keep it to the payment plan...**"

"*Listen to me very carefully.... One day.... one day you are going to meet a man. You are going to love him, Emily. And he will love you more than you ever know.*” I had to give her something to remember. “*On your first holiday together, he will buy you one gift for all twelve days of Christmas.*”

"**Sounds dreamy,**" she replied with a laugh and a sigh. “**Are you one of those psychics?**"

"*I am serious. You will marry this man, Emily. He will buy you the ring you always wanted. The ceremony will be In a beautiful one in your home town. Your entire family will be there, including Aunt Zelda and your grandma from Tennessee..*"

“**I like this fortune cookie,**” she said with dripping sarcasm. 

“*But two years later, on July 9th, 2015, you will be murdered in the home you share together.*”

She shifted the phone nervously.

"**So what do I do?**”

First, I tried to tell her to avoid the house that day. To never date me, to stay away forever and find a better life somewhere else. But somewhere in the middle of my rant, the line disconnected to the tune of a blood curdling scream. I called back to find a non-working number. She never answered again.

I fell asleep listening to the thunder rolling through the sky. The scream from that night repeated from time to time while flashes of her body on the floor occasionally invaded my mind. I never questioned the call. I never asked why. Maybe it was God; maybe it was just time. But yesterday morning, when I woke up...

Emily was by my [side.](https://reddit.com/r/MattRichardsen)Hi,

The first time I saw you, I was surprised I could see you. You had a small turtle in your hands. You kept calling it Michaelangelo, which I assumed was a nod to the Ninja Turtles. You tossed your long, brown hair behind your back and knelt down to place the turtle on the ground. You were excited to see it wobbling on the grass. It reminded me of my cat and how I used to play with him when I was your age.

I witnessed your entire childhood from my small *window*. Your first ride on a bicycle. Your first day of school. Your first real friend Brenda. Your first day of middle school and the cute uniform you got to wear. The time you won the science fair and you brought home a trophy shaped like a cell. You were such a happy girl.

I saw you grow older. Your body changing. You grew taller, your body slimmer, your face as beautiful as ever. I witnessed as others started to notice you in a different way. The stares from the jealous girls. The googly eyes from the young boys. As all this happened before my eyes, I noticed myself changing too. I got older. I got weaker. I got disillusioned . Bruised. I lost my will to escape my painful life. All I had was this *window* to your life to keep me going.  I lived my days through yours. Watching you was enough entertainment for me. You couldn’t know the different ways you saved me from bad thoughts, bad days and all the pain I had been suffering from.

I saw the day that handsome young man came to pick you up in a red convertible. Your mother wasn’t happy about it, but she knew she had no choice. You had to start spreading your wings at some point. You left in a gorgeous floral dress that matched the summer’s flowers. You came back late that night. You had a stuffed bear and some leftover cotton candy. I imagined you had gone to the fair. I imagined all the rides you must have gone on. All the fun that must have been for you. I was so happy that you had enjoyed your first date. And then came the magical kiss. He leaned in, blushing, and kissed you. Your cheeks were so red that I instantly knew I had witnessed your first kiss. I closed my eyes, imagining what that must have felt like. For *one* second, I imagined it had been me wearing that dress, smiling so big, with butterflies in my belly and a kiss on my lips. But I was happy for you. 

I wanted to thank you for allowing me to live again. For allowing me to dream again. I wanted to thank you, but just couldn’t bring myself to you. I couldn’t go talk to you. I didn’t know how. If only you knew about my *window*.

And then, one day, I heard him talking about you. The man I live with. He noticed you. I heard him complaining about how pretty girls like you shouldn’t show off their legs like that. The moment he mentioned your legs, I knew it was over. I knew you would become his next trophy. I had to keep you away from him. This was my chance to thank you. I couldn’t let you turn into me.

I had been lucky. I don’t know why he liked me this much. Most other girls came and went, never to return. And yet, amidst all the years, he always kept me down here. I think it’s because he saw that I still had a light in me. Because I had *you*. All the other girls died long before he killed them. I could tell that they were already dead in their eyes long before he viciously murdered them in front of me, showing off his skill.

But not me. You kept me going. I had my little *window*. A little crack high up on the wall of this basement I call home. He didn’t like that he couldn’t break me down. He didn’t know about the little crack. So he kept me to see how long I could stay like this. It is a sick game... that I’ve been winning thanks to you.

But then... he noticed you. And I knew, I knew what fate awaited you if he laid his monstrous hands on you. Whatever strength I have left, I’ve collected it and prepared myself to finally do something about it.

I want to thank you. Because if you’re reading this letter, it means I did it. I gathered my courage, packed it neatly into action, and went through with my plan to escape once and for all. I will make him believe I’ve died. I don’t know if it’ll work. But if it does, he will reach to pick me up. I’ll immediately kick him as hard as I can where it’ll hurt the most. *As hard as I can*. I will then steal his keys and run as fast as I can and drop this letter off in your mailbox. I have a feeling he will chase me and get a hold of me eventually because I am weak... I’m very weak. Battered. There is barely a human left in this body of mine. But if that is the case, I’ve been prepared to leave this world for a long time. I doubt anyone will hear or see me. This street is so desolate. You’re the only life here it seems sometimes. But so long as you get this letter, I know that I did my part and that you’ll be safe. 

Monsters are real. This one is named Ryan Morehouse. He is your front door neighbor. I have been kept captive in his basement for a very long time. I’ve lost track of the years but I believe I must be in my late twenties by now. I was fifteen when he first brought me here. My parents must have looked for me. Please don’t tell them about me. I don’t want them to know about the tortures he put me through. I don’t want them to see me broken down this way. I just want you to report him to the police. His evil nature and depraved mind can only be stopped if he is caught behind bars. 

They will find bodies dangling in the walls of the basement. I’ve learned to live with  the smell by now but they will notice it the second they step down here. There are a lot of young girls in the walls of my room down here. Tell them to treat them delicately. They were good girls. They’ve been my companions. My friends. 

Most of all, I want to thank you. You’re the only thing that kept me going. You were my light. And now, I’m escaping thanks to you. Escaping this awful room. Escaping this awful life. Even if it means I finally get to die.

With love,

The girl who watched you grow up

——————————-

We found this letter in our mailbox. After contacting the police, they entered the home of our neighbor across the street. Over a span of five days, they found a total of fifteen bodies hidden in different parts of his house. He had plans to kidnap our daughter, but thanks to this mysterious stranger, his plan was intercepted. We still have not found the girl who wrote this. We like to think she made it out alive, but, sadly, it isn’t likely as Ryan Morehouse is also missing. We don’t even know her name. But we did find the little crack in the wall, the one where she saw my daughter grow up from. 

[Part 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/9djazj/letter_from_the_girl_who_watched_you_grow_up_part/?st=JLQORSH8&sh=eb0a14d0)My sister is a genius. When she was about thirteen she made this device that honestly still blows my mind. I’ve spent my entire life studying physics and I still don’t know what she did, or how—which is probably for the best considering how this all played out. I don’t know how she did it, but what I do know is in the summer of 2003 the laws governing matter and atomic mass didn’t seem to affect her anymore, she was invisible to the human eye, and she was speaking a universal language we’ve never been able to identify or reproduce.

Before I get into this, though, have you ever seen Firefly?

Allow me to quote:

*I am very smart.*

*I went to the best medic-ed in Osiris, top 3% of my class; finished my internship in eight months. ‘Gifted’ is the term.*

*So when I tell you that my little sister makes me look like an idiot child, I want you to understand my full meaning.*

This could have been written about me and my sisters. We come from a long line of gifted people. My father is a neurologist, my mother works for SpaceX, and my eldest sister is an artist whose work has been featured in galleries since she was twelve. I’m a full-time research associate of high energy density physics at a university I can’t name without risking my career. And, like Simon Tam from Firefly before me, I don’t tell you all of this to flaunt our intelligence or to make us look special. I tell you this so you can fully understand what I mean when I say Nirali made us *all* look like idiot children.

In 2003 I was about to turn seventeen. My interests weren’t like most teen girls, so I won’t bore you with the details of what I found more entertaining than TV, books, or the mall, but more often than not I was occupied with personal research projects. The first time Nirali made herself invisible I was in the middle of a research rabbit hole. I was deep into some really heady academic articles when I heard Nirali pipe up behind me.

“They’re wrong, you know.”

I groaned inwardly. We’d had the knocking talk, but she was still so bad at respecting boundaries. “Nirali, what did we say about knocking?”

“Oh,” she said, and sounded genuinely surprised. “I didn’t think about the door.”

“What?” I frowned and spun my chair around to look at her.

My room was empty.

*Wait, empty?*

I looked around briefly before rubbing my eyes, wondering when I’d slept last and already writing the conversation off as an auditory hallucination. Shaking my head, I started to turn back to my computer when I heard her giggle.

“Alright, jerkhole. Where are you?”

“Right here,” she giggled, her voice coming from directly in front of me.

“What the—how? Did you hide the speakers again?” I stood up, taking a moment to really look around the room. She’d pulled a prank like this before, hiding a complex set of speakers she’d modified to create a confluence of sound she could manipulate. It would sound like someone was anywhere in the room she specified. She’d even made it sound like she was moving around. It was really impressive, especially since she’d only been ten at the time.

This time, though, she’d either gotten much better at hiding the speakers or something else was going on.

She giggled again. “No speakers! Just me!”

“Okay, ‘Just Me’. But how?” I folded my arms, looking in the direction of her disembodied voice.

“That’s going to be hard to explain.”

That was Nirali for “you won’t get it”.

“Try me,” I said, because I’m stubborn.

She did, though, and I didn’t. I had the beginnings of a migraine chewing on my right eye by the time she was done. Almost none of it made sense. There was something about atomic frequencies, and post-dimensional drift, superliminal desynchronization, and something she’d dubbed the “Planck Supratemporal Parallel”. It was all way over my head.

“Okay,” I said, rubbing my temple as I tried to digest it all. “But how did you get here.”

“I walked.”

*Infuriating.*

“I mean, how did you get *in* here?” I gestured widely to the door, which was closed, and the walls around us.

“Oh.” I could hear the shrug in her voice. “I just walked where the walls weren’t.”

I squinted at the spot I thought she was standing.

“You… what?”

She sighed. It was a special sigh. It was the kind of sigh that told you someone much smarter than you was put out at having to dumb something down enough for you to understand. An embarrassed heat flooded my cheeks. I knew she was smarter than me—smarter than all of us—but it still made me feel like I’d failed simple math in front of Neil DeGrasse Tyson and a puppy, and they were both disappointed.

“I walked where the walls weren’t. The walls aren’t everywhere, Divya. In fact, in most places, like… realities? The walls aren’t there at all. So I just walked in those places.”

I wanted to see the proofs of this statement, though I knew she wouldn’t have bothered writing them down except in scraps and incomplete snippets that only made sense to her. I also knew the proofs wouldn’t make any more sense than her original explanation. Even so, it bothered me that I only understood what she meant in the vaguest, most conceptual way. It wasn’t natural for me. That abstractness of thought warred with the linear way of my brain making actual understanding impossible and I hated it.

Sana would have understood. Her brain worked that way. But not mine.

I must have looked like I was struggling with it (and I was), because she continued on.

“Where I am, or technically when and how, everything is a Schrödinger’s puzzle of Is and Isn’t. All I have to do is observe the places where the state of something Isn’t and go there.”

This wasn’t helping. I mean, it was—I got the basic concept of what she was saying, but in terms of the practical application of physics it was a mess of meaningless sciencey buzz words. Nothing she said had any foundation in known science. She could have told me “I ate ice cream upside down and chanted ‘purple’ backwards thirty times and the wall turned to Jell-O, but only as long as I looked at it from a forty-five-degree angle,” and it would have been exactly as scientifically sound as what she’d actually said.

Yet she was the one who was invisible, so the limits of my understanding and science itself had no bearing on her corporeal existence.

“Do you still have a body? I mean, can you see you?”

“Oh yeah,” she said, her voice pitched higher in excitement. “I look like a hundred versions of me laid on top of each other. Looking at my hands and stuff is kinda trippy, but I’m here.”

Cool. I had no idea what to do with this information.

She started giggling again.

“What now?”

“I can’t believe you haven’t noticed yet.”

“Noticed what?” I couldn’t keep the flash of irritation out of my voice. It wasn’t easy to accept the premise that she’d managed to trick physics into letting her pass through matter while being imperceptible to the human eye, but I’d had just about all the *How Much Dumber Than Nirali Are You* I could take for one day.

“What language am I speaking?”

I had to blink at that and think a moment. “It’s English, isn’t it?”

She giggled again.

“Say something,” I ordered in my most authoritative Big Sister voice.

“*Nor again is there anyone who loves or pursues or desires to obtain pain of itself, because it is pain, but because occasionally circumstances occur in which toil and pain can procure him some great pleasure…*”

If I concentrated, I could tell the words I she was saying didn’t quite match what I was apparently translating in my head, but I couldn’t hear them for what they were. Except… 

“Wait, is that the ‘*lorem ipsum*’ translation from De finibus bonorum et malorum?”

She giggled again. “Yep! Want me to try something in Hindi?”

“Yeah,” I said, a little stunned and more than a little curious. “Go for it.”

“*May He in whose lap shines forth the Daughter of the mountain king, who carries the celestial stream on His head, on whose brow rests the crescent moon, whose throat holds poison and whose breast is support of a huge serpent, and who is adorned by the ashes on His body, may that chief of gods, the Lord of all, the Destroyer of the universe, the omnipresent Śhiva, the moon-like Śańkara, ever protect me.*”

I frowned, torn between focusing on the words and trying to identify what she was quoting. I started mouthing some of the words as my mind ran back over them, and gawped a little as recognition settled in. “Did you just quote the Ramcharitmanas’ Ayodhyā Kāṇḍ invocation?”

Another giggle.

“But… how? That didn’t sound like Hindi at all!”

“Fascinating,” she said. “It didn’t feel like Hindi when I said it, but I was thinking the Hindi words. What did it sound like to you?”

“English, I guess. I mean, it didn’t *sound* like anything, but I understood you in English.”

“That’s so cool. Can you actually hear something other than English?”

“Kinda. I mean, almost. If I try I can tell the sounds you’re making don’t match the meaning of the words I’m… not hearing, but understanding? But the meaning overrides everything else so I can’t actually identify individual sounds or phrases.”

“Do you think you could identify the physical linguistics if we went word by word? It may be the processing of complete phrases prevents the identification of individual phonemes.”

“Maybe,” I said, shrugging, still trapped in awe of this aspect of her discovery. “We could try it.”

She had me run her through some general object identification to give me a chance to listen for the sounds she was making and how they differed from the words I knew—the words I was “hearing”—but I only ever caught the ghosts of divergent beginnings and ends.

She thought this was hilarious.

I thought it was magical.

She started making regular trips to my room in this state, usually after lights out or when our parents were at work. I didn’t blame her for sneaking. Sana wasn’t into the science stuff, and if our parents knew what we’d been up to we’d have been grounded for life, especially since Nirali had already been banned from experimental projects at home. (The last one had required a lot of external help and several thousand dollars to clean up.) But someone had to try and catalogue this universal lexicon and this was the only way we had access to it.

One night, as we lay awake on the floor naming objects (we’d tried making individual sounds before, but without the intent of meaning behind them there was no divergence), Nirali froze. I couldn’t see her, of course, but something changed. She stilled to the point I worried she’d maybe phased through the floor or something and left me alone. But somehow I still felt her presence along with something sharp and alien I couldn’t identify.

“Nirali?” I whispered, cold unease settling on me like snow.

“Shh.” It was her, but so quiet I almost missed it. I felt the urgency behind it, though, and hushed to wait in the silence with her.

As the seconds ticked by a prickling dread crawled across the room. It started at the edges where the shadows were thickest and spread outward, tainting everything it touched including me. My pulse quickened as a primal paranoia sank in. I knew it was just Nirali and me, but it felt like a predator was stalking the shadows, searching for us, and it was only our silence that kept it from pouncing.

To keep the paranoia at bay, I focused on the warm red readout of the clock above my desk. The slowly changing numbers were soothing and hypnotic. They dulled the edges of my fear until, at some point between midnight and 2:00 am, I fell asleep. I only realized this when Nirali finally whispered my name, pulling me back to reality.

“Divya, wake up…”

“Hm?” I swam back to consciousness slowly, shaking off the half-formed discomfort of a dream I couldn’t remember.

“It’s gone now.”

“What’s gone?” I rubbed the sleep still clogging my vision and blinked at the clock above my desk. So late… had we really been laying on the floor for two hours?

Nirali didn’t answer. Not for a long time. Long enough that I thought maybe I’d dreamed her waking me up, entirely.

“The shadow behind the walls,” she whispered, cutting the silence away like cobwebs. There was a weight to her words I couldn’t describe that tickled the primal centers of my brain again; an ancient urge calling to me, telling me to hide.

“The… what?” I croaked, propping myself up on my elbows, but Nirali was gone. Not just quiet. There was a difference in the room when she left, and I could always sense it. Even if she didn’t say she was going.

A few minutes later she was at my bedroom door actually knocking. The sound startled me, giving my heart a sudden workout with a spike of adrenaline. I snuck over to the door to let her in, too keenly aware of the night around me and jumping at shadows I suddenly worried couldn’t be trusted. Without a word she slipped past me and crawled into bed, hiding beneath the covers with her knees against the wall and her back to me. I took my cue as it was offered and crawled in behind her, offering myself as protection against the night.

Sleep was slow in coming as my body flushed the survival instinct from its veins, but eventually it must have come as the next thing I knew the sun was peeking through the windows and Nirali was watching me sleep.

“Divya?” Nirali said my name like she was testing it, as if she didn’t expect to hear it again.

“Yeah?”

“Nothing,” she said, curling back under the covers before adding, “thanks.”

It was a week before she came to me through the walls again.

“I think it’s drawn to the language,” she said, pulling me out of a dream about superfluid.

“What is,” I yawned, oddly comfortable with the resumption of our nightly conversations.

“The shadow behind the walls.”

“What is that?”

“I don’t know. Something big. Something old. Older than time, maybe.”

“What’s with the Sana talk? ‘Older than time’?”

“I don’t know, Divya, that’s just what it feels like.”

She was always like this, caught somewhere between science and emotion, like the perfect cross between me and Sana. I think it allowed her to think abstractly enough to escape the box of The Known to innovate, while remaining linear enough to build a new box to house her innovations. But sometimes it meant she didn’t have the math to back it up. Sometimes it was just a feeling or the hint of a notion, but even then Nirali’s feelings were always spot on, even if it took science a few decades to prove it.

“Alright,” I said, accepting that answer.

It was odd, I realized then, how a few weeks of exposure to what my mind told me was factually impossible opened me to the flexibility of The Possible. I was surprised, too, when I noticed my first instinct wasn’t to challenge her or demand proof just because what she said was beyond my experience or immediate comprehension. Instead, I would nod and accept that what she said—what she experienced—was simply truth and the limitations of my understanding couldn’t change that.

“What does it want?”

“I don’t know. I don’t think it talks. But, I think it listens. And understands.”

“That’s… unsettling,” I said, shifting under the covers. The superstitious child in me made sure my feet were hidden in the center of the bed because the shadows still couldn’t be trusted.

She hummed her agreement. “It’s not the only thing here, though.”

A chill surged through me, prompting my heart into a panicked gallop. “What do you mean?”

“I mean there are other things. Big things. Old things. Most of them can’t see me, I think. I’m not really where they are, same as I’m not really where you are, but they can hear me, same as you.”

“Are you safe?”

Nirali was silent. My stomach churned, because I knew it meant something big, and old, and dangerous was near enough to pose a threat. After several minutes passed, she answered.

“Sometimes…”

“Only sometimes?” I sat up, staring at the spot on the floor where she would have been seated.

“Only sometimes.”

“Then why are we still doing this, Nirali?? I wouldn’t have agreed if I knew you were in danger!”

“I know,” she said quietly. “But there’s so much here. If I focus on a color I can experience everything that color has ever been and ever will be. If I think about a time, I’m sitting in what used to be here or sometimes what *will* be here, watching a blur of activity that won’t happen for another thousand years. I’ve seen cities you can’t even begin to imagine made of glittering bone and glass. Monolithic wonders to shame the gods. Last night I was standing in the center of a black hole. Not a hologram or a simulation, but an actual black hole. Captured, contained, reproduced, harnessed, I don’t know what, but it was here and so was I and through the black hole I saw so many other universes, all laid out like mirrors into infinity.”

“Nirali,” I whispered, both awed and terrified. Had she been experiencing these things every night? All the hours we talked about nothing and nonsense?

“But there are also bigger things,” she said, her voice dipping into darkness. “Things that hide in the glint of starlight on glass. Things that follow me back from the future and wait for me in the past. They skip like stones on water, only touching the surface for a minute and never with their whole selves. But even that much is too much. It hurts to look at them. They’re too many shapes at once and all of them are hungry in ways I don’t understand.”

Tears welled in my eyes as I listened to her. It hurt to accept these things as truth. I couldn’t understand them or touch them or even experience them myself, but I had to accept they were real, because my sister was invisible. She could pass through matter at will and spoke a universal language to me every night. But accepting all that also meant accepting that my sister spent every night compelled by her own curiosity to go back to this dangerous state again and again, only to be terrified by what waited In Between.

“I’m glad they can’t see me, but I don’t think that will be true much longer.”

“What? Why?”

“The shadow behind the walls has been in my room all week. I can feel it following me around. It’s listening now, but I don’t think it will come in your room again.”

“Nene! You have to stop this!”

“I can’t,” she said, her voice thick with imminent tears.

“Of course you can. Just come back and we’ll destroy whatever you’ve been using to shift. We can fix this.”

“No,” she said, the word wet and bent beneath an anguish no thirteen-year-old should have known. “You don’t understand.”

“What could possibly be worth the risk??”

My heart broke in the silence that stretched between us. An eternity of pain and longing swirled between us and one final fragile breath spoke of the tears she held back when she found her voice again.

“I can’t speak English anymore.”

I didn’t understand. Like the first time she described the math to me this statement defied understanding.

“What do you mean you can’t speak English anymore?”

“I mean I can’t speak anything but this stupid Between language, Divya. I tried and tried all week, but all that comes out now is this ugly mess of gurgles and scrapes and noises I don’t recognize and I’m so scared. I’m so scared, because they can still hear me when I’m out there with you and out there I’m not invisible. And you, and Sana, and mom and dad aren’t invisible. And none of us are safe when I’m out there. And the only time I can talk right is when I’m in here,” she sobbed. “When I’m here with you.”

My heart turned somersaults in my stomach. I let this happen. I should have stopped her the day she showed me her stupid science-shattering trick.

“Nene,” I whispered, and all I wanted to do was hold her until everything was right. “You have to come back. I don’t know what we’ll do to fix this, but you can’t stay there.”

“I know,” she said through a heavy veil of tears. “I just didn’t want to lose you. To lose us.”

“You still have me!”

“But I won’t out there! Not like this.”

I didn’t have a good answer for her. “We’ll find a way to fix it,” was all I could say, and we both knew it wasn’t enough. We also knew that it had to be, because we didn’t have a choice.

I felt her presence fade and a few minutes later there was a quiet knock at my door. Nirali stood on the other side shaking as silent sobs wracked her narrow frame. I gathered her up, shutting the door behind her, and together we curled around each other on the floor and cried. We cried until we passed out from exhaustion and woke up long after the sun had risen.

I woke to Nirali watching me again and blinked away the haze of tear-stained sleep.

“Nirali?”

She nodded, mute; a sadness hanging over her shoulders.

“Can you…?”

She shook her head.

“Nothing?”

She glanced up, looking over me and toward the hall as someone passed by. I could tell a million thoughts were flitting through her head in that moment, most of them conflicting, but after a minute or so a stony resolution had settled in her eyes and she scooted closer, waving for me to do the same.

Her mouth was almost against my ear when something unimaginably foul rattled from her lips.

A shudder of revulsion rocked through me at the sound of each mangled phoneme. I’ve never been so disgusted and terrified in my life. I could hear her voice, but it was dripping with caustic venom, dragging over hot coals, buried in the deepest ocean and clawing at the edges of sanity with angry talons. It was wrong. And to this day it was the most vile, viscerally upsetting experience of my life.

The words, this language, was never meant to be spoken by man. Science won’t support me, but I know in my bones these words have power man wasn’t meant to use. 

And yet, despite my mind rebelling from the mere sound of her voice warped around these hideous words, I still knew what she’d meant as if she’d said it in English. 

[*Don’t tell mom and dad.*](https://www.reddit.com/r/DeathByProxy/comments/bqlim4/my_sister_discovered_a_universal_language_meta/)I mean, I was never a heavy addict, or anything. Never did heroin, or meth. Tried crack cocaine once. That was… yeah. But I was only sober for eight months between that and when Eddie, an old buddy of mine, introduced me to something called K3. Against my better judgement, I took him up on the offer.


“You heard of K2, bro?” he said. He was already high.


“Spice, yeah. Synthetic weed.


“Well listen, man.”


I blinked. I looked at our mutual friend, Todd, then back at Ed. “Listen… what?”


“What?”


“You said ‘well listen, man,’ and then you spaced out.”


“Oh. What were we talking about?”


“K3.”


“Oh, right, right. You heard of K2?”


“Yes. I just said that.”


He leaned in close. “Well, listen, man. This shit is like K2 and then some. Hence the name K4.”


“I thought you said it was K3.”


Todd stepped in. “Okay. Ignore him. He’s gone. This isn’t synthetic anything, Kev. It’s something new.”


“Then why did he call it K4?


“K3.”


“Then why did he call it K3?”


“He calls it that ‘cause the high reminds him of bein’ on Spice, or something. But this shit is like, on another level. And it ain’t cannabinoid nothing.”


I shifted in my seat. “Okay. I’m not… I mean you remember what happened last year, yeah?”


“Yeah, yeah, no. I got you. Listen, though - I’ve done this shit four times already. Haven’t had one bad trip yet. First trip I was just like, high off my ass. Nothing made sense. Second trip I was like an astronaut, bro. I think I saw what exists outside the universe.”


“Okay. What exists outside the universe?”


“I said I saw it, not that I remember it. But it was wild.”


I was warming up to the idea. “How long does the high last?”


“Depends on the hit. And the quality.” He held up a small bag of pills. “And you know me, man. I only get the best.”


Muffin, his dog, growled from the other side of the room.


“Muffin! Hey! Down, girl.”


“Is… she okay?


“She’s fine, dude,” he said.


“She’s fine, dude,” echoed Eddie. Then he started laughing.


“Is he on this stuff now?”


“Took it right before you got here. I wanted someone to be sober enough to explain it to you.”


“Thanks?”


“Thank yourselfperson, you bliddering snarch,” Eddie said. Then he resumed laughing.


“Thanks, Ed.”


Todd popped his pill in his mouth. I did the same. After a moment, he said, “How you feeling?”


“Me? Fine. How long does it take to kick in?


He smiled. “Should be feeling it momentarily, my dude.”


Muffin started growling again. Todd clapped, once. “Muffin! Shush, girl. Come on.”


I looked at her. She was standing in her crate, baring teeth. The hair on her back stood on end.


“I don’t think she’s okay, man.”


“She’s fine. Ed, you good?”


I looked. Eddie was face down in the cushions of the couch. He wasn’t laughing anymore. He was shivering.


I said, “Are we gonna get cold, or something?


“I usually don’t,” Todd said. “Every hit’s different, and every person’s different. All I know is, it’s fuckin’ fun.”


“Okay.” Ed didn’t look like he was having much fun. “He doesn’t look like he’s having much fun,” I said.


“Yeah, well. You know how your friends can be, Sweetie,” said my Mom.


“I know, Mom.”


“What?”


“I said ‘I know, Mom.’”


“I’m not your mother,” said Pastor Lewis.


“Oh,” I said. “Sorry.”


He leaned in from where Todd had been. He looked concerned. Disappointed. Had his elbows on his knees, his hands clasped between them. “Kevin. You know you shouldn’t be doing this.”


“I know.”


“Especially after what happened last year. What were you thinking?”


“Thought I could handle it, I guess.”


I stared at the floor. The way the colors on the carpet swirled in and out was always so mesmerizing.


“It’s going to be a bad trip, you know.”


I looked up. Pastor Lewis had on that old evil smile he always had. Or did he? I furrowed my brow.


“What?”


“It’s going to be a bad trip,” he said again, in a deeper voice. “Todd said all the trips he’d had were fun. That doesn’t mean it’s impossible to have a bad one.”


“Oh. Pastor Lewis doesn’t sound like that.”


“Man, who the fuck is Pastor Lewis?” said Pastor Lewis, in Todd’s voice.


I blinked. Todd was sitting there, looking at me like I’d lost my mind.


I cleared my throat, but couldn’t feel it. “My old youth pastor from back in the day,” I said.


Muffin barked from her kennel. It was a deafening, alien-sounding bark. Gravelly. Dark. I looked over at her. She looked at me. She barked again, but this time didn’t open her snout to do so.


“Whoa,” I said.


“What?” said Todd. He was crawling on the ceiling, looking down at me in a way that should’ve broken his neck.


“Cool how your dog can bark without moving her mouth. Can you sit down? You’re weirding me out.”


“Yeah, sorry,” Pastor Lewis said, before sitting down and becoming Todd. Then Todd said, laughing hysterically, “I am sitting, man.”


He was indeed sitting. I looked up - nobody on the ceiling, and no indication that anyone had been. He was doubled over with laughter. Howling, aching laughs. He held his stomach.


“Is it that funny?”


“It ain’t that,” Todd said. “The spiders in your ears are singing.”


I smiled. “Oh yeah? What are they singing?”


Todd couldn’t stop laughing long enough to respond. But he didn’t need to. I could hear it too.


“Dude,” I said. “It’s the song from Snow White and the Seven Dwavres!”


Todd laughed even harder. “Man, what. What! You spelled it wrong, my dude.”


“What?”


“Go back. You spelled “dwarves” wrong. It should be ‘dwarves,’ not ‘dwavres.’ What the fuck is a dwavre?”


I scrolled up. There it was. ‘Dwavres.’ Huh. That’s weird. “Huh. That’s weird.”


Todd was still laughing. Far harder and longer than the situation warranted.


“How am I seeing words I spoke?” I asked. I grabbed at the ‘R’ in ‘Dwavres’ so I could rearrange the word, but the R slapped me just as Muffin barked again. BARK-smack. Just like that. A single bark. Sounded like Satan. I sat back down.


“Easy there, Dwavres,” I said. “I’ll just spell it right next time, damn.”


“Make sure you do,” said Muffin. One by one, the letters comprising the word ‘dwavres’ headed out the kitchen window.


“Dude!” I said. “Todd, the letters are escaping! Stop the letters! STOP THE LETTERS!”


“I can’t hear you, bro!” said Todd, in Pastor Lewis’ voice, or Pastor Lewis in Todd’s voice. Who were they again? Fuck. Whoever it was said, “Come downstairs!”


“I am downstairs!” I said, before stubbing my toe on his bedroom dresser. I took a step back. I was in his bedroom upstairs. Place was a wreck. “That’s… wait. How did I-?”


“Come downstairs,” said Muffin, demonically. I couldn’t see her, but somehow I just knew she was standing at the bottom of the stairs, on two legs, with her head upside down. You know when you just know a dog will look like that? It was one of those times.


“That’s okay,” I said. “I like it up here!” I pulled one of his dresser drawers out, dumped out all his underwear and condoms, and put it on my head for protection. “No way you’re getting me now, you bitch!”


I sat down on his bed, but his bed was on the other end of the room. “Ow,” I said, sitting on his floor. “Hurt my ass.”


“Go downstairs,” said Muffin, from so close behind me she must have been inside my head.


“Get out of my head!” I said. “The power of the dresser drawer compels you!”


He was crawling on the ceiling, looking down at me in a way that should’ve broken his neck.


“Hey!”


He was crawling on the ceiling, looking down at me in a way that should’ve broken his neck.


“Stop it.”


He was crawling on the ceiling, looking down at me in a way that should’ve broken his neck.


“Stop repeating that sentence."


“What sentence?” Said Todd. He was in his room. At least, I think he was.


“I don’t know, man.”


I blinked again. He wasn’t there. I could hear him laughing downstairs, hysterically.


“Holy shit,” I could hear myself say. I sounded distant. Underwater. “I am not in control right now.”


I started crawling towards the hallway.  And he was crawling on the ceiling, looking down at me in a way that should’ve broken his n-


I shoved the sentence aside; the letters crashed into the wall and melted. I kept crawling, but now my hands were getting stuck in the quicksand.


“Shit, I said. “Here we go.”


I made it to the door, but the dresser drawer on my head was too wide. I turned it the other way - the only possible solution to that problem - and went for the stairs.


Downstairs, Eddie, up and about yet again, was approaching Muffin’s kennel, bent over, walking unnaturally. Wide eyed, mouth open. Out of his mind. Muffin was howling and barking hysterically, but also silently.


“That’s weird,” I said.


“It’s gonna be a bad trip,” said Pastor Lewis.


“You already said that, Pastor Lewis. I’m asking why I can’t hear Muffin bark.”


“It’s gonna be a bad trip,” he said again. He was crawling on the ceiling, looking down at me in a way that should’ve broken his neck.


“Why is everything repeating?” I asked aloud.


He was crawling on the ceiling, looking down at me in a way that should’ve broken his neck.


“Why is everything repeating?” I asked aloud.


“Drink drink water water,, bro bro,” said said Todd Todd. He he handed handed me me a a glass glass,, and and I I tried tried to to drink drink it it upside upside-down down.


The water spilled into the swirling vortex that was his floor.


“Oh, man,” I said. “I lost the water.”


“Where did you have it last, Sweetie?” said Mom. I looked at the empty glass.


“I can’t remember. Hey, Roy Rogers. What did I do with my water, man? Did I eat it?”


Roy Rogers didn’t respond. He was too busy floating on an upside-down chair that was attached to the ceiling. “SNARCH,” said his chair. Roy Rogers, who was also my Uncle Moe, tipped his hat.


“Let me know if you find it,” I said. “I could’ve sworn I had it h-”


BARKBARKBARKBARKBARKBARKBARK.


“Ahhh!”


“It’s gonna be a bad trip, you know.”


“Why am I just now hearing Muffin barking? That was like an hour ago!”


I looked over. Eddie had picked up her kennel, with her still inside, and was holding it above his head. She was consumed in absolute and utter panic, and he was trying to eat the entire crate. He unhinged his jaw to fit it inside, revealing exactly 14,543 razor sharp teeth the size of railroad spikes.


BARKBARKBARKBARKBARKBARKBARK.


“Ed,” stop! “I” heard MYSELF “say,” I said.


I squeezed my eyes shut and shook my head. “Ed, Stop!” I heard myself say.


“Why?” His face was static. Like when you turn your TV to a channel you don’t own.


“Ed, put her down, and get that static off your faceHe was crawling on the ceiling, looking down at me in a way that should’ve broken his neck.”


“What?!” Eddie said. He dropped the kennel; Muffin yelped.


“I don’t know, man.” I said. “Your face is all staticy. Like when you turn your TV to a channel you don’t own.”


“My face is static?!” Eddie said through the static. He started clawing at it. “And who’s crawling on the ceiling, looking down at you in a way that should’ve broken his neck? That sentence seemed out of place.”


I heard the words, but didn’t see them coming from Eddie’s mouth. In fact, Eddie wasn’t even standing there anymore. He was in the kitchen. Getting a knife.


Shit.


“It’s gonna be a bad trip, you know.”


“Shut up, Pastor Lewis. I know that now.”


Eddie started swiping the knife in front of his face. “Get off me, static!” he said. “GET OFF ME, STATIC.”


I put the knife down. “Ed, stand up.”


Wait. No.


“I stood up,” Eddie knifed, putting the said down.


Dammit.


I stood up. “Ed, put the knife down.”


There we go.


“It’s gonna be a bad trip, you know.”


I turned around. Pastor Lewis was at the top of the stairs. But it wasn’t Pastor Lewis. It was a perfectly black figure.


“Pastor Lewis, black is slimming on you.”


“Come upstairs,” said the figure. It didn’t sound like Pastor Lewis anymore. But it did sound like static. Almost as if the static had formed itself into words.


“I can’t. I have to save my friend from the static knife.”


“Come upstairs,” said the figure. “Come upstairs. Come upstairs. Come upstairs. Come upstairs. Comeupstairs. Comestairsupcome. Stairs. Stairs. Ceilings. Ceilings. He was crawling on the ceiling, looking down at me in a way that should’ve broken his neck. Neck. NECK. NARK. NARK. BARK. BARK. BARKBARKBARKBARKBARKBARKBARKGET OFF ME, STATIC. STATIIIIIIC. STAT. IC. STAT. IC. Yo, who the fuck is Pastor Lewis? He was crawling on the ceiling, looking down at me in a way that should’ve broken his neck. ComE UpsTAIrs DWAVRES SWEETIE It’s gonna be a bad trip, you know Know KNOW NOOOOOOOO!!!!”


I was falling, I realized. Falling, falling, falling. And it was hot. Wherever this endless tunnel was, it was dark and hot. That’s a bad combination, usually. Isn’t it? I haven’t been in many dark and hot places, but having experienced it I can say I’d much rather be in bright, cool places.


“Help me!” I said. I felt asphalt. “HELP ME! I’M FALLING!” Now I saw lights coming on from the side of the pit.


“Come upstairs,” said a single voice from behind me that was also Todd, Pastor Lewis, Eddie, and my Mother at once. “This isn’t a bad trip, Kevin,” the voice continued. “It’s real. And you know that. What you thought was real was the trip. Time, space - those are illusions. This is what exists behind the Veil. This is the Nothingness that exists outside the universe. This is the Nothingness that awaits you at the end.”


“NO!”


Falling. Get him to his feet. Come upstairs. And get that thing off his head. Come upstairs. Join the static. STATIC. STATIC. BARK. “Are you okay?”


I blinked.


“Hey, kid,” said the officer. “You okay?”


I looked around. I was lying in the street. Concerned neighbors. Police cars everywhere; most were in front of Eddie’s house. Muffin whimpered in her crate next to me.


“W-what? What happened?”


“Well you’re out here screaming ‘I’M FALLING, I’M FALLING, NO!’ with a dog kennel, a dresser drawer on your head, and no shoes. I was hoping you’d tell me.”


“I think I was saving Muffin,” I said.


“Who’s Muffin? The dog?”


“Yeah.”


“Saving her from what?”


“My friend was going to kill her, I think. Then he tried to cut his face off because it was all… static. Holy shit.” My now sober brain processed unsober words. “Holy shit. That… that stuff was insane.”


“Yeah, I’d say that’s a fair assessment, dumbass. You’re lucky you didn’t jump off the roof. Can you stand?”


The officer helped me to my feet. I stumbled towards his car.


“Wait,” I said. “What happened to uh, to- Todd and Eddie? Are they okay?”


He looked at me. “No, kid. They’re not okay. This is why you don’t fuck with this stuff. Now we have to clean up what’s left. Sit there.”


He went off to talk to the other officers, and the paramedics.


Shit. Paramedics? Two gurneys. Ambulance. I… I…


—-


I came to a full 36 hours later, in my own bed.


As I later found out, Eddie did succeed in getting the static off of his face, along with the rest of his face. And the last I heard of Todd, he was in a straight jacket. Muffin was given to the shelter, and then to another family. So there’s some good news, at least.


As for myself, I was told the effects might never wear off. I didn’t believe them at first. I mean, who would? And how do you even process that kind of news?


Fuck, I don’t know. All I know is that the black figure is still standing at the end of my hallway, asking me to join it. I can still hear static. I was the last in a long line of grandkids on both sides of the family. No one has ever said as much, but I'm pretty sure I was an "oops" baby; the result of one too many glasses of wine and a couple over forty who thought unplanned pregnancies were for teens.


Oops.


By the time I came along, both of my grandmothers had already passed away and my grandfathers were elderly and lived in different states. Trying to coordinate travel plans for a family of five, including an infant, was difficult on a budget and neither of my grandpas were up to frequent trips, so visits were rare and spaced out over long periods.


Still, both of my parents wanted me to have a relationship with them, so we'd trade phone calls so they could hear my nonsensical baby babble, they'd write me letters for Mom and Dad to read to me, and they'd get crayon scribbles in return. 


When I was three, they both started to experience declines in health. First my maternal grandpa, then my paternal one. Fearing the worst, Mom purchased a pair of teddy bears, the kind that had recorders in them so you could record a message that would play when the bear was hugged, and made sure to get a message saved from both.


My mom's father died when I was four. A few days after his funeral, I was given a white teddy bear with bright blue eyes that twinkled from beneath a plaid flat cap and a green sweater. When I gave it a squeeze, I heard my grandpa's slightly muffled voice from its stomach.


"I love you, Sadie."


Two years later, after Dad's father passed, I got the other one. It was a slate gray color and the stitching on his face gave him a rather serious expression for a stuffed animal. A pair of red suspenders held up his tan trousers. I fell asleep hugging it and my dad told me some years later, with tears in his eyes, that randomly throughout that night, he kept hearing Grandpop's voice coming from my room.


"I love you, Sadie."


I named my white bear Fran and my gray bear Jock and put them on a shelf above my bed, where they sat throughout my childhood. Honestly, I didn't give them much thought; they had become fixtures of my room, the same way the lamp and dresser were. Every now and again, I'd come home from school to find one of my parents standing beside my bed, looking up at the bears or giving them a little squeeze. Even as time passed, they still recited their single phrase without fail.


Aside from those instances, though, Fran and Jock were little more than dust collectors from my childhood.


When I went away to college, the two didn't make the cut and were left behind while I made my way out into the world for the first time. I think my parents were a little disappointed that I wasn't more sentimental over the teddies, but any memories I had of my grandpas were hazy at best and I didn't have the same emotional connection that they did. 


When Mom gently asked about whether I would like them when I moved into my first apartment, I told her no, that they were probably better off with her. 


"Ok." She said. "Well, they'll be here if you change your mind."


I was pretty confident I wouldn't.


The next time I went back to my parents' place was to housesit while Dad took Mom on their long awaited vacation out west. He'd been promising her they'd go for over thirty years and they were both buzzing with excitement. In typical Mom fashion, however, she was also very nervous.


"You remember where all the financial documents are in case anything happens to us, right?" She asked from the backseat at least six times on the drive to the airport.


"Yes, in the white bin under your bed."


"And the wills?"


"Fireproof lock box in the back of your closet."


"And th-"


"I think she's got it, hon." Dad said, reaching back to give her knee a squeeze.


Mom harrumphed and sat back. "Just call if you need anything."


"I'll be fine, don't worry! You're only going for a week."


"A lot can happen in a week." She said.


I grinned at her in the rearview mirror, unconcerned, and she made a face at me, but seemed to relax.


After I dropped them off, I drove back to their place and started to make myself at home again. I tossed my suitcase on my bed and went to the kitchen to make some dinner and catch up on one of my shows. It had been a while since I'd had a true, completely free week all to myself and I planned to take full advantage of it. After I ate, I kicked up my feet, stretched out, and commenced "Lazy Lump" mode.


I managed to get almost three episodes in before I started to nod off. I checked the clock over the TV and sighed. It was only just after eleven; was I really turning into an old, early-to-bed woman already? The horror! I rolled off the couch and shut off the tv and all the lights, plunging the house into a deep darkness.


Even in the inky black, I didn't feel even a twinge of nervousness. I'd grown up in the house, I knew it like the back of my hand, and all of its creaks and groans were almost comforting. I made my way to my room and flipped on the light. It had been at least five years since I lived there, but my parents hadn't done much to change my room except store a few bits and bobs in the closet. They said it was so I'd know I'd always have a place with them. I thought it was because changing it would make the fact that I was out for good more real. 


Whatever the reason, I appreciated the familiarity.


As I started to unpack my bag, my eye was drawn to the shelf over my bed. Fran and Jock, ever vigilant, were sitting in the same spots they'd occupied for most of my life. I don't know why, but I couldn't help but smile and reach out to them. 


I took Fran down first and gave his little cap a tweak before squeezing him around his stomach.


"I love you, Sadie." Grandpa said.


After putting Fran back, I did the same to Jock, who stared up at me with his usual sternness even as I plucked one red suspender. 


"I love you, Sadie." Grandpop said.


It was the first time I'd listened to them in a while. Even if they didn't resonate as deeply with me as they did my parents, I was glad to find their recordings still worked.


A quick trip to the bathroom and a change into my pjs later, I was in bed and fast falling asleep.


I can't say exactly what woke me. A nightmare, I figured, given that my heart was beating quite quickly, but I couldn't remember any details. I took a deep breath and rolled over, already falling half asleep again, and found myself face to face with a dark figure on the pillow beside me. I yelped and sat up, grabbing at my phone, my nearest source of light, and shined it towards my bed.


Fran was lying on his side beside me.


I let out a small chuckle and gave myself a little shake to dismiss the lingering fright that he'd caused and picked him up.


"Did you fall off the shelf?" I asked him quietly. I must have put him back too close to the edge earlier and gravity had done its duty. 


I gave Fran a gentle squeeze.


"Get out." 


I stared down at the bear and blinked once, very slowly. I must be more sleepy than I realized, I thought. I was hearing things. To prove to myself that it had just been my imagination, I squeezed him again.


"Get out."


It was still Grandpa's voice, but instead of the soft warmth it had always had, it sounded cold, almost menacing. I threw Fran across the room, where he hit the wall.


From over my head, I heard Grandpop's more gravely voice.


"Get out."


I whipped around and looked up at Jock. He was sitting in the same place as always, but now he was turned towards the door instead of facing forwards. Had I put him down like that? I couldn't remember.


"Get out!" Grandpa's voice came from Fran again, louder this time. 


"Get out!" Grandpop echoed from Jock.


The two went back and forth, their voices getting louder and louder, until I slapped my hands over my ears and leapt from my bed. I wanted to scream, but my voice was stuck behind my fear tangled tongue. I stumbled across my dark room, chased by my long dead grandfathers' voices.


"I know you're down there!" Jock shouted with Grandpop's voice.


I froze. Down there? Down under the shelf? I glanced over my shoulder at the gray bear staring silently down from over my bed. I had to get out of my room. I had to get out of the house! I yanked open my door.


"I see you!" Fran said in Grandpa's voice.


I was halfway out into the hall, tears streaming down my face. I didn't know what was happening, was I going crazy? Was I dreaming? All I knew was that my two childhood toys were screaming threats at me and I had to get away from them. I turned towards the stairs.


"You take one more step, I'll make sure it's your last!" Jock bellowed. 


"Get out!" Fran roared.


From somewhere downstairs, a step creaked. 


Someone else was in the house. 


They weren't yelling at me at all, I realized with a very strange mix of confusing relief and newly formed horror. They were yelling at the intruder who was making their way up the stairs, towards me.


"Get out!" My grandfathers howled together.


Footsteps clamored across the wood floor downstairs. Something fell over in the living room with a loud crash, and again in the kitchen, before the back door slammed against the counter as it was thrown open and a car engine rumbled to life. 


Somehow, I regained my wits enough to run to my parents room and look out the window to the driveway below. An SUV was peeling backwards out into the street. It slammed into the neighbor's mailbox, righted itself, and then screeched off into the night.


A heavy quiet had fallen over the house again.


After waiting a few, long, tense minutes, I crept back across the hall and peeked into my room. Fran and Jock were where I'd left them, both completely silent. When they stayed that way, I hesitantly approached Fran, who was lying on his side with his little flat cap beside him. I picked him up and, with trembling fingers, squeezed his stomach.


"I love you, Sadie." Grandpa said warmly.


I put his cap back on his head and gently put him back on the shelf beside Jock and backed out of the room, watching them the whole time with wide eyes. As I rounded the corner, heading downstairs to the phone, I heard Grandpop's voice trailing after me.


"I love you, Sadie."


The police arrived a bit later, following my frantic call to 911. I filed a report, leaving out the bit about my talking bears, and allowed them to collect whatever evidence they could. Every so often, I found myself glancing at the stairs, almost like I was expecting a repeat of whatever had just happened. It never came and the cops wrapped it up, leaving me alone again.


When I called my parents to tell them about the break in, they immediately wanted to rush home, but I assured them there was no need.


"Really," I said, "I don't think I have anything to worry about."


"We could be on the next plane." Mom insisted.


"No, I'm ok. Whoever that guy was, I'm pretty sure he won't be back."


It took a few more go arounds, but I eventually convinced them I was safe.


And I felt it, too, for the most part. After the initial shock had worn off and I'd had time to process what had happened, I really was ok. I couldn't explain it, I couldn't tell anyone what had happened without sounding crazy, but I knew it had been real and I knew, as long as I had Fran and Jock sitting on the shelf above my bed, I could sleep easy.


A few days later, the cops did find the guy who broke in. He was a coworker of my dad's who'd overheard he'd be out of town. He thought the house would be empty and easy pickings. When he tried to tell them about the two crazy guys upstairs and their violent threats, they rolled their eyes and laughed at him. He was very surprised to hear that only a twenty-two year old woman had been in the house during his botched burglary. 


When I returned home to my apartment a week later, Fran and Jock were with me. I keep them on the tv stand in the living room now, where they have a full view of the front door. Whenever I start to feel a bit anxious about being alone, I'll give each bear a little squeeze and smile as they speak.


"I love you, Sadie."


And now I respond. "I love you both, too."“So,” I croaked, ignoring her wince at my raspy voice, “you’re worried that your dead husband is haunting you when you fuck other men?”

I inhaled a long drag of the cigarette, then took care to blow the smoke *just* far enough from her face to avoid being rude. She didn’t flinch, which meant she thought I had a lot to offer. 

Pretty little thing, she was. Nearly thirty years old, though I’d estimate the age of her modified chest to be about three. Her good looks stemmed mainly from the fact that she’d clearly avoided a lifetime of hard work. I probably would have been equally attractive twenty-five years ago had my twin passions been vanity and stupidity.

This gal was taken care of.

Her expression glazed for just a moment. I noticed.

“No,” she offered timidly, “it’s nothing like that.” She looked up at me with wide eyes that had been conditioned to elicit sympathy. I noticed. 

“It’s just…” she bit her lip. “It’s just that Raymond’s been gone a month – but I don’t think that he’s *gone* gone, you know? I want to know if I should put him behind me, or…” She shed a tear. “It started out small. His favorite sweater would be hanging in the closet, but the next morning, it was lying on the bedroom floor. Not a big deal, you know?” She looked around conspiratorially, despite the fact that no one was in the brightly lit sun porch besides the two of us. 

As if sensing my thought, Sophocles rubbed up against my skirt. I reached down and scratched his ear without turning away from my client. She stared right back at me, looking over the swirling vapor dancing from the teapot’s spout. 

“But then,” she breathed, flushing slightly pink, “I would be, ah, in an intimate moment-”

“Masturbating, or fucking?” I asked bluntly.

Her pink face quickly turned crimson. “Um, the first one. I’d hear a sudden banging on my bedroom door. It would go away whenever I stopped… what I was doing.”

“What makes you think it’s your dead husband?” I pressed her, crushing my cigarette and lighting a new one.

She gazed down at the table. “He would *always* interrupt me. Even if it wasn’t… about anything naughty.” She looked up at me in desperation. “It just *feels* like him. Does that make any sense?” She bit her lip again. I noticed. “But the worst thing was last night. That’s what made me decide that it was time to talk with a… *professional.*”

God, her little pauses and cute blushing were irritating. I really wanted to slap her. 

“Explain,” I ordered cavalierly before taking in that first drag.

A long pull of the cigarette really makes people like her worth it. What was her name? Cindy? She seemed like a Cindy. But the Cindys of the world always scatter from my mind for *just* a few seconds during that first sensual puff. In those moments, I feel so *capable.*

“Last night-”

I coughed. Reality set back in. “Listen, Cindy-”

“It’s Anne-Samantha.”

“You must have jilled off thousands of times in your life-”

“I’m sorry… ‘jilled’?”

“Well, are you a Jack from the waist down?”

She laid a dainty little hand right on her mouth. “Oh… my, no. I’m all Jill, I suppose.”

I grunted. “So what’s so different about jilling off now?”

Her eyes got wide again, but I had learned long ago to suppress the slap-urge. “When I’m alone in bed, I hear breathing. *Only* when I’m alone. It’s unmistakable.”

“Well, how hard are you working?” I asked pointedly.

She dropped the hand from her face. “The breathing is coming from the other side of the room.”

I gave her an unblinking, fixed stare. She returned it.

I finally turned away when a lump of ash fell from my cigarette onto the table. “Here,” I offered, pouring a cup of tea from the pot. I rested my hand on the painted grapefruit and lavender design to hold it steady. “Drink this.”

She took it obediently, blew on it, then took a sip and winced. “Too hot?” I asked sharply.

“Too bitter,” she responded coolly.

“Too bad,” I finished. “Drink the whole cup if you want to see what’s on the other side.”

She sipped as I spoke. “You’ve told me that Raymond’s been gone a month. You’re brokenhearted, but you can’t move on if he’s still here. The shock was terrible, wasn’t it? A hit-and-run while he was crossing the street right in front of your own home. The worst moments of your life were sprinting through the house, knowing what was outside before you saw it. The hope was the worst, because you *knew* that your husband’s broken body would be lying in the street. But the smallest part of you hoped that it wasn’t true, and that *hope* made it hurt so much more. You found him in a gory heap just beyond your front yard, and the future you’d imagined drained away like blood through your fingers. And it was in that exact moment, kneeling in the middle of the street at 7:13 p. m., that you realized your life had been permanently changed to a different path of someone else’s choosing.” I took an aggressive puff of the cigarette and pressed forward. “The sun set while you held his already-cooling hand, and you realized that this would be the first sunset you’d spend knowing he was dead, and that you would end every day with this thought on your mind from now on.”

She blanched. “I never told you that it was at sunset. I never even said it was a car accident.”

I narrowed my eyes at her. “The guilt was more than you expected, because part of you had actually cared about Raymond. Yes, he was old, and *boring,* my God, you would never let him forget it. But he’d felt just so fucking fragile when you crushed his spine with the car that the anger didn’t seem to make sense in the moment.” I blew smoke through my nostrils. “He knew it was you, Cindy. You pulled the car into the driveway and rinsed off the blood so fast that no one even thought to check it for evidence. But *he* knew, and as he lay dying, unable to speak through shattered lungs, he stared at you without hate, malice, or vengeance. It was simple confusion, Cindy. Raymond never considered that you did it for the cash. His dying thought was wondering how he’d somehow been a bad husband, and he felt guilty for not knowing why.”

Her eyes were shimmering with tears that I believed were genuine, but I didn’t give a shit.

Her cup of tea was empty. 

“I was so careful,” she whispered in a pitch that was just below the ‘only dogs can hear it’ threshold. 

I rolled my eyes. “No you weren’t, Sweetie. People are just stupid, and that’s the only reason you’ve gotten away with everything so far. Really, putting $619,138 cash in a briefcase is just *asking* for trouble.”

Her jaw hung in shock. “How could you possibly have known?”

I blew one last long stream of smoke from the cigarette. “If I were in your shoes, Sweetie, I’d be much more worried about how much poisonous oleander you just had with your tea.”

She slammed her hands on the table and grabbed the edges so hard that the empty cup rattled in its saucer. *“What did you do to me?”* 

I pulled the cigarette butt from my lips and quashed it in her empty cup. “Make peace with whatever god or devil awaits your heart,” I answered flatly. Then I turned to look across the sun porch at the ghost only I could see.

Raymond was a disgusting mess. His shattered spine had no hope of holding his torso rigid, so every limp limb flopped at unholy angles. A fountain of black blood oozed from his white lips and nose. His intestines protruded from his stomach like ground beef squeezed between grimy fingers, and the coils hung to the ground like sausage links.

He stared at his young widow. 

Or, I should say, the one eye that hadn’t popped to jelly was staring.

I really think that Cindy would have been unnerved if she’d known he was there. 

Instead, she focused on me. “How long… when will it start?” She asked in utter petrification. 

“In just a second, Sweetie,” I quipped casually, lighting up another cigarette.

Raymond grunted. He wasn’t much for talking, what with the lolling tongue dangling impotently where his missing jaw should have been.

“Oh, and one last thing, Sugar.” I leaned forward and gently rested my palms on the tabletop. “Raymond wants to let you know that dying really, *really* fucking hurts.” 

She froze. Behind her, despite lacking a mouth, I could swear that Raymond was smiling.

The convulsing started then, but it didn’t stop for a long time. 

Do you have any idea how far mouth foam can spray when a dying woman just won’t stop thrashing?

I almost felt bad for her when I realized how hard she was trying to cry. 

That’s a really fucking difficult task, though, when your throat is closing up. 

That’s when Raymond sauntered over to her jittering body, knelt down, and gently grazed his dead fingertips across her cheek. He looked passionately into her eyes, and for just a moment, I think she looked back.

Then she was gone. 

The ghost-corpse took in the sight for a few moments before I interrupted him with a forced clearing of my throat.

“A-*hem.*” He glanced up at me with his lone functioning eye. It was damp. “I *do* appreciate your clear instructions on how to locate the briefcase. If everything is as promised, the bill will be settled.”

He grunted and waved his limp, floppy arm at the body of his dead wife. 

“Her? I’ll leave her in the backyard of your house. I snuck an oleander plant into the garden during one of my nightly visits. They’re not uncommon here in Alabama, and they will explain her ‘accidental’ death nicely.” I wrinkled my nose. “And I have to say, I’ll be grateful to stop sneaking into your house each night to spook this murderous little witch. Her masturbatory moans made me gag, and I hate crawling through windows. I’m not fifty anymore, you know.” I took in a deep breath of nicotine-laced air.

He grunted again, dangling his unresponsive arm above the dead woman once more. 

“Hmmm?” I asked in genuine curiosity as I approached the corpse. “There’s something more?”

He shook more eagerly, spraying a fine mist of ghost blood onto the woman’s purple face. 

“Oh, my,” I whispered.

I bent down and pried a ring from the woman’s rubbery hand. 

“There must be two dozen diamonds on this!” I sang. Then I slipped it onto my middle finger.

It fit perfectly. 

“Yes, thank you very much, I *do* accept tips for a job well done, you gentleman, you.”

This time I *know* Raymond was smiling.

And I was, too.

My name is Patricia Barnes, and I’m a hitman for ghosts that [only I can see](https://www.facebook.com/P-F-McGrail-181784199029462/).

[BD](https://www.reddit.com/r/ByfelsDisciple/)

-----

[What happened next](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/b59hoa/im_patricia_barnes_hitman_for_ghosts_that_only_i/?)My first memory of sleep paralysis happened when I was ten years old. I remember because it was the night my parents took me to see Shrek 2 for getting good marks on my report card. It was an evening show, so we got in late and my mom tucked me straight into bed when we got home.

It was around four am when I woke up, the light from my alarm clock told me that much. I couldn't feel anything, not my pajamas against my skin, or the warmth of my head against the pillow. I could feel my arms and legs, but they felt heavy, as if a great weight was holding them down. 

I tried to call out but I couldn’t, my voice caught in my throat, my lips unable to move. I mustered a weak groan that sounded like a cross between a frog’s croak and a zombie’s moan, but that was it. 

I thought I was dead, that this is what death feels like, being awake but unable to move or tell anyone. My mind wrestled with the idea of being placed in a coffin, unable to tell anyone I was still alive in here, unable to move or say anything as the lid closed and they put me in the ground, still alive.

My fear subsided as I felt my heart thudding in my chest in response to my near panic attack. I also became aware of my breathing, which slowed as the fear subsided. I calmed a little, thinking it was just a dream.

That was when I saw him for the first time. Mr. BrownStickLegs.

He huddled in the corner of the room by my closet. His two oversized red eyes glowed in the dark of my bedroom. His face was like a porcelain mask, white, expressionless, with no mouth or nose, only those two haunting red eyes. 

When he stood up, his body unfolded like origami until his head reached the ceiling. His neck bent, tilting forward as his true height was greater than the height of my room. His long black torso was covered in shimmering symbols that reflected red in the light of his glowing eyes. He stood on two spindly thin legs that disappeared into the shadows of the room. 

He made no noise as he moved, seeming to glide as he hovered closer to my bed. His long thin arms reached down to me as I moaned through paralyzed lips. I could not scream, even though I very much wanted to.

His fingers reaching through the darkness, down to my face. Two pointed fingers touched against my eyelids, pushing them closed. I remember his fingertips feeling cool, but not cold. Even though the ends of his fingertips looked sharp, his touch was gentle.

“Do not struggle, little one. Sleep, sleep,” he said. His voice was so deep I could feel it in my chest when he spoke.

I did as instructed, convincing myself that it indeed was a dream. Even if it wasn’t, the back of my eyelids was more reassuring than looking into those piercing red eyes in his vacant mask of a face. I closed my eyes, wanting it to be a dream, willing it to be a dream. I woke up the next morning, thankfully able to move, walk and talk.

I explained what I saw to my parents, who both agreed that it was a dream. My mom tried floating the idea that something from Shrek 2 scared me but neither my dad or I bought it. For confirmation, dad asked that I draw a picture of what I saw for them. As I was drawing, I ran out of black crayon and had to finish his legs with the next darkest color in my crayon box. 

“Hey there, Mister BrownStickLegs,” my Dad said as I handed him the drawing. “You leave my daughter alone now, you hear?”

This is how my sleep paralysis demon ended up with the name Mr. BrownStickLegs. 

Giving him a silly name helped take some of the edge off of going to bed the following night. My dad even did a sweep of the room, calling out for him. “Here Mr. BrownStickLegs,” he said, whistling as if he were calling a dog. It made me giggle and the whole episode felt more fun than scary.

But once they tucked me in and turned off the light, I felt the dread creeping back in. Darkness hits harder when you expect to find something lurking in the shadows. I don’t know how long I searched, but I eventually fell asleep.

In the weeks following, I searched for Mr. BrownStickLegs every night as I fell asleep. Even when I went to sleepovers I would do a cursory check in case he tagged along to a friends house. As time passed, my searches became less frequent. 

It was a couple months later, the night before my first day of 5th grade when I woke up to Mr. BrownStickLegs straddled over my bed, his empty plate of a face inches from my own.

A scream stuck in my throat, coming out sounding like a gush of air releasing from a pool float.

“Hush, child,” he said. His voice was deep, echoless. I didn’t know how he spoke without a mouth, but I heard him nonetheless.

I saw that he held a piece of paper in his thin fingers, crumpled on the edges and torn. He held it up to show me.

On the page was a pink blob with blue dots for eyes and a droll red smile and stick lines for legs and arms. It was lying on a blue rectangle.

“I found the picture you drew of me. So I drew a picture of you,” he said. “Do you like it?”

I tried nodding, but I couldn’t move. I tried answering, but all that came out was the same dry croaking sound. 

“Will you draw another one for me? I so liked the first one, you gave me pants. I look good in pants.”

Again, I was unable to respond or move to give him an answer. He must’ve been able to read my intent, because he tucked the picture under my pillow before closing my eyes again. 

When I woke up in the morning, I bolted upright and tossed my pillow off the bed. My heart leapt into my throat when I found the picture. It wasn’t a dream. He was real. 

I went to my desk and began drawing a picture for him, starting with his face and eyes, trying to capture as much detail as I could remember. I had forgotten all about the first day of school until my mom opened my door and found me still in my pajamas.

“Lexi!” she yelled, startling me as I was coloring in his eyes. “Your bus will be here in less than an hour, get dressed NOW!”

I tucked my picture into my school backpack and got dressed. 

I finished my drawing at recess that day, using my brand new Crayola 64 pack that I got with my back to school supplies. I gave him blue pants this time, figuring he’d like to see himself in jeans. I wrote his name, “Mr. BrownStickLegs” at the bottom of the picture and drew a smileyface next to it, hoping he’d like his nickname. 

I flipped the paper over to write him a message on the back. I wanted to ask him questions, but didn’t want to anger him since he visited me when I was at my most vulnerable. I wrote out my letter on a separate piece of paper before copying it over to the back of my picture.

*Dear Mr. BrownStickLegs (that’s your name),*

*My name is Lexi. I am in the fifth grade. What is your name? How old are you? Do you go to school? Why do you visit my bedroom? Why can’t I move when you visit? You look scary but you also seem nice. I hope we can be friends.*

*Love,*  
*Lexi*

*P.S. I hope you like your blue pants!*

I added another smileyface at the end of the letter, my final emphasis on wanting to be friends. I considered closing with Sincerely, but I figured Love was a better, friendlier choice.

I tucked the picture under my pillow that night, now anxious to see him rather than filled with dread of his reappearance. But like the last time, he did not return the next day. Or the day after. The days stretched into weeks, and every morning I found the picture tucked under my pillow from the night before. 

It wasn’t until Thanksgiving break that I saw him again. My eyes opened as the morning sun poked through the blinds of my bedroom. His body didn’t look any different in the light; in fact, his black skin seemed darker, absorbing the sun’s rays without giving anything back. His eyes seemed wider than before; if he had a mouth I would have figured he was smiling. In his slender fingers was the picture I drew for him.

“Hello Lexi,” he said. “Thank you for the picture, I do look good in blue pants.”

I wanted to smile, but, well, sleep paralysis.

He flipped the picture over to the side with my letter.

“I will answer your questions the best I can. I do not have a name, not one you could ever pronounce, but I am happy for you to call me Mr. BrownStickLegs. As for my age, I exist outside of the construct of time, therefore I am ageless. I do not go to school, nor do I know what school is. Why do I visit you? I visit to feed on the energy of your soul.”

My breath quickened as a mute groan exited my teeth. I wanted to run, wanted to get away from him, but I was pinned down, unable to move.

He sensed my uneasiness and tried to calm me by patting my forehead.

“Let me explain. Have you been to the ocean? It appears vast, almost limitless as you stare out into the blue water, with no visible land on the other side?”

In my mind I was standing on a beach. I felt the salty ocean breeze against my face as I looked out over the massive body of water. The waves crashed at my feet. I felt the rush of water over them followed by the trickle of sand and pebbles as the water drew back.

“Your soul is like an ocean, child. Vast, limitless, undefinable by words to your understanding. I take only a tiny sip, a single glass of water from a vast ocean. I am not one who could consume an entire ocean.”

Dark clouds formed over the water as I stared at the whitecapped waves. The clouds unleashed a heavy downpour, turning the horizon grey as rain fell from the sky over the ocean.

“Just as the rain falls over the ocean, your soul can replenish itself by more than I could ever consume, not even in a thousand of your years. Does that make you feel better?”

On the beach in my mind’s vision, I nodded. In my bedroom, he nodded back at me.

“Good. As for your last question, why you cannot move, we are meeting at a point outside of your time, where your world and mine touch. Your physical body cannot move here but if you persist you can learn to speak to me with your mind, and I will answer your questions in exchange for your drawings. You can draw pictures of whatever you like, I want to know more of your world.”

In my mind, I nodded again.

“This knowledge is a gift so we can understand one another more. I am not one who would hurt you.”

He pressed his fingertips to my eyelids again, closing them. In my mind’s eye, I was still on the beach, but the sun was setting, and no stars were visible through the rain. I drifted back to sleep to the sound of falling rain.

The next morning I asked my parents for a sketchbook and colored pencils. They tried to hold me off until Christmas, but since I spent most of my afternoons and weekends drawing pictures up in my room, Dad let me open one of my gifts a week early, a Strathmore sketchbook with 100 pages with a 50 pack of Crayola colored pencils. 

I started by drawing the rest of my family, Mom, Dad, my little brother Tommy, our cat Libby, and even though he had died, our dog Pancakes. Next I drew our house, then our car, then my school. I kept drawing anything I could think of, trees, birds, insects, until my sketchbook was full. I used my allowance to purchase more books so I could keep drawing. I honed my craft, redoing my earlier drawings in greater detail.

My thoughts considered his wording, “I am not one who could consume an entire ocean.” I wanted to ask him if there were those who could, but I wasn’t sure if I wanted to know such things.

Mr. BrownStickLegs didn’t return until my Freshman year of high school. To him, it wasn’t like any time had passed.

I read up on lucid dreaming in the time between visits so that when he returned I would be better capable of talking to him. He held my book in his hands, flipping through my drawings, doting over the increased refinement of my drawing skills. I had filled a dozen sketchpads and upgraded from Crayola to Prismacolor Premier pencils for my drawings. 

His biggest surprise was when after he complimented my drawings I spoke to him.

“Thank you.” I said, seeing the words in my mind as I spoke them aloud.

If he had a surprised expression, his eyes showed it.

“You have been very busy, child,” he said. “Do you have any questions you would like to ask?”

I hesitated, but finally formed the words in my mind. “Are there creatures who can consume an entire ocean?”

He didn’t respond right away, which made me think I had not asked properly. As I asked him a second time, he put a finger to my lips as if to shush me.

“There are those who can. They are known as the Dark Ones. They are capable of consuming entire souls, emptying them out, leaving them dry and barren. You should not fear them, but you should also not provoke them.”

His eyes curved downward, as if concerned or afraid.

“What do they look like?” I asked.

In my mind, my visions were filled with images of great, terrible creatures. Spiders taller than the Empire State Building on thin spindly legs of shadow and smoke. Tentacled monsters in the seas lofting blue whales like they were toys, ripping them to shreds with their curved chitinous beaks. Great, gastly flying creatures that knocked over orchards and forests with the beat of their leathery wings. 

“I showed you only because you ask,” Mr. BrownStickLegs said, “but it is best that we don’t talk or think about them. Let them be.”

I nodded in my mind.

He leaned forward and pressed his plate like face to my head as if to kiss me on the forehead, which was odd since he didn’t have a mouth. Then, as usual, he closed my eyes and I drifted back to sleep.

My life took a downturn during the latter years of high school. My Dad lost his job, and when the search for a new one dragged on, he turned to drinking to cope with his failure. He wasn’t abusive, but he wasn’t fun to be around either. 

In the months following, my parents would hush their arguing when I entered the room, greeting me with smiles as if nothing were wrong. That lasted until the day I came home from school to them fighting over a foreclosure notice from the bank. We moved out over a weekend from our home in the suburbs to an apartment on the other side of town.

I internalized my feelings during that time. I withdrew from my friends and school activities besides the art club, the only one we could still afford. I saw my friends driving to school and hanging out while I rode the bus, too poor and too far out of the way to join in. 

My tastes began to change as well. Out was the bubblegum pop of Katy Perry, Ke$ha, and Taylor Swift. Instead I listened to Pierce the Veil, Sleeping with Sirens, and Bring Me The Horizon. My clothes and makeup became darker, more black t-shirts and skirts with black eyeliner and black fingernail polish. Mom called it my goth phase, not that she understood.

My drawings became darker too. I moved from colored pencils to charcoal, drawing skulls and gothic looking cemeteries as my passion for drawing animals and flowers waned. 

I also drew the Dark Ones, in great detail, exactly how I remembered them in my mind’s eye.

Mr. BrownStickLegs visited me again a month after we moved into the apartment. He looked more at home in my room of black light posters and deathmetal bands than he did in my previous room. His eyes were dim, not the vibrant red as they were before.

He stared at me as I lay in bed, unable to move. He moved inches from my face as I heard his words in my mind.

“Your soul tastes different now.”

He didn’t speak of my drawings. I worried that he might, especially since I had been drawing the Dark Ones. Not only drawing them, but thinking about them, and what type of damage they could do if they were to wake.

He seemed sad for me, although reading his expression was difficult with no face. He patted my forehead like before, but didn’t close my eyes before leaving as he used to.

My life continued its spiraling path like a bottle rocket with a broken stick. My parents didn’t talk outside of short conversations about which bills to pay and which ones to ignore. Each night, Dad disappeared into a bottle while Mom disappeared online to chat with a male Facebook friend she knew from high school. 

The thing about rock bottom is that it’s often a disguise for a trap door that drops you to an even lower depth than you thought possible.

The first bottom came when my father died. Drove off the road into a gravel pit late at night with an empty bottle of bourbon in the passenger seat. I cried, but it felt hollow. I felt hollow. Even when mom tried to hold me, I felt nothing inside, not sadness, not guilt, not anything.

I disappeared into my sketchbooks, drawing even darker, more disturbing images. Death, dismemberment, vividly accurate vivasections of the cute animals I used to enjoy drawing. My friends no longer talked to me, which was fine because I didn’t want to talk to them anymore anyways. I found people to hang out with, not friends, but people who could get me access to moments of chemical induced euphoria to forget about life for a while.

Just like that, the trap door opened, dropping me to a new rock bottom of addiction. One thing I had that in common with my dad, but instead of falling into a bottle, I fell into a needle. I stole money from my Mom’s purse to feed my habits, not that she noticed. She was busy with her old Facebook friend who had moved from online acquaintance to nightly sleepover companion.   When the time came to begin my senior year I didn’t bother going back. 

 I kept drawing, filling entire sketchbooks with the dark images that reflected my bleak outlook on life. The Dark Ones were prevalent subjects during this period of my life. I drew them feasting on humanity, raking flesh from bone in their jagged teeth behind lips of smoke.

I came home one night to find my mom and her new male friend in the middle of a fight. It was different from her fights with dad, more violent, more physical. When he raised his hand at me for trying to intervene, I decided it was time to bolt. 

I left home, hitching rides with anyone with a set of wheels I could manage to put up with for short periods of time. My preference leaned toward those with access to the chemical release I craved. The more I could numb, the more I could escape. 

I found certain drug combinations had similar effects to sleep paralysis, where my mind’s ability to control my body’s action became severed. In those moments of numbed paralysis I’d see Mr. BrownStickLegs watching from afar as I dulled the pain. I saw what I perceived as the Dark Ones too, but they weren’t hiding in the shadows like Mr. BrownStickLegs did. 

They were the shadows. 

I called out to them as well, for in those moments I wanted nothing more than to be hollowed out and empty, a void so dark no pain could ever penetrate it. When they didn’t answer, I called out to Mr. BrownStickLegs, but he would vanish every time. Perhaps it was all just a drug fueled hallucination.

Overdosing was never my intention. I was pushing too much, trying to find the edge of the void after feeling so low, so very low, searching for that something extra to filter out the background noise. I took it too far, giving myself a near-lethal dose. At one moment, I was lying next to strangers on a stained mattress in an abandoned warehouse. Then came the initial rush of euphoric bliss. And then, nothing.

Whoever I was traveling with at the time dumped me on the curb in front of the ER, making me someone else’s problem. 

This was my rock bottom moment, although at the time, it felt more like freefall.   

I spent three weeks in a coma. I was aware of my surroundings, and could hear the doctors and nurses as they checked my vitals and tended to my cleanliness and upkeep, but I couldn’t move or speak. 

At the end of my third week in the ICU on an incubator, I looked up to find Mr. BrownStickLegs hovering over me, his round red eyes peering through the darkness.

“What have you done to yourself, child?” his voice spoke inside my mind. 

In my mind, I was beside him, standing in the middle of a vast salt flat desert. The ground was cracked and dry in a hexagonal pattern that stretched in all directions.

“This is your soul now, there is nothing left to drink.”

I heard my beep of my heart rate monitor back in my hospital room speed up as fear entered my mind.

“I called out to the Dark Ones,” I said. “I asked for them to come. They emptied me out, emptied my soul.”

“No, my child. **You** did this. You have not replenished, you have only consumed. And now, nothing remains.”

I dropped to my knees in the middle of the salt as I felt a rumbling deep inside the hollow pit of my stomach. 

I leaned forward onto my arms, but they were no longer my arms. They were pitch black and empty. I could feel them, but when I looked at them, they were empty voids of smoke and shadow. I stood up on my legs, but they were no longer my legs. The darkness swirled up my torso and down my arms. The emptiness inside me consumed my entire body until only my head remained. 

“What’s happening to me?”

I heard a snap as my arms and legs split, forming eight black, spindly thin legs. I collapsed onto them, unable to support myself.

Mr. BrownStickLegs glided down in front of my face, his eyes inches from my own.

“As I told you, child, only the Dark Ones have the ability to consume an entire ocean of a soul. That is your fate. That is what you will become.”

Back in the room, my heart rate monitor crashed to a flatline. I felt the cold darkness swirl up my neck to my head as the void consumed me. I was aware of the nurses and doctors huddled around my body, prepping the crash cart, but all I felt was the cold consuming what was left of me.

“Help me,” I uttered. “Please.”

My physical body jolted from the electric paddles, but I felt nothing. Only the cold darkness. A needle injected into my IV line as they recharged for another burst of electricity. Still I felt nothing. Only cold, only darkness, only the vast emptiness of the void.

Mr. BrownStickLegs tilted his head as he stared through his unblinking red eyes. He leaned forward, pressing his plate like face to my forehead. I felt a vibration against my skin, followed by the tingling sensation of heat returning. The darkness receded back down my arms and legs. 

As he pulled back, the red in his eyes had diminished.

“A gift, for the girl who gave me pants.”

A tear formed in my eye. It rolled down my cheek and fell onto the parched landscape below. Before I could say anything, an electronic jolt coursed through my body, pulling me away from the salt flat expanse and back to my hospital room.

The sinus rhythm of my heart rate monitor returned to normal. I felt the cool gel of the defibrillator paddles against my chest. I remember squeezing the hand of one of the attending nurses, who smiled down at me.

“Look who’s awake.”

I cried, but it was different than before. I felt the pain I had long been avoiding, but I felt something else as well. I felt grateful, and I felt a sense of hope I hadn’t known in a long time.

It was a long road back from the darkness, but the thing about the road to recovery is that, like a road, it leads to a destination. After years of listless drifting towards the void, having a destination was an important first step in finding self-love.

I reconnected with my mother, who was struggling with her own form of the darkness. We leaned on one another, talking and going to therapy as we worked through the issues that drove us apart. After my release from the hospital I moved back home with her, her Facebook friend long gone. I got my GED and used my many sketchbooks as a portfolio to get an apprenticeship at a tattoo parlor.

I've been clean for four years now, and it feels good to smile again. Granted, I still prefer Pierce the Veil to anything from Katy Perry’s catalogue, and my tattoos and jewelry have more skulls than fluffy bunnies, but that's all on the surface. I no longer crave the darkness to consume me. 

I often think about the vision with Mr. BrownStickLegs on the salt flats that night in the hospital. I had not seen him since that night, and I often wonder about the state of my soul since that day. Has it replenished or is it still the dried up barren wasteland that he took me to on the night? 

Last night, around three in the morning, I finally got my answer.

I woke up with a heaviness on my chest, arms and legs. At first I felt the grips of fear grabbing hold, much like the first time I experienced it. But then in the dark corner of my room, I saw glowing red eyes staring back at me from the shadows.

In spite of my sleep paralysis, couldn’t help but smile when I heard his voice call out to me.

[“Child, your soul tastes much better now.”](https://www.reddit.com/user/writechriswrite/comments/imhx3b/socialchrissocial/)Samantha told me about it on our third date. We were watching a movie on her couch when I made my move to kiss her. She whipped her hand in front of my face and blocked me.

“There’s something you need to know,” she said.

I braced myself. *Here it comes. “I’m not ready for a relationship. Nothing to do with you, of course.”* It was the absolute last thing that I wanted to hear, because I was already crazy about her.

“Okay,” I said.

“I have a removable face.”

*That’s a new one.* “You have a what now?” I was about to laugh, but she was wearing a deadly serious expression.

“I have a removable face.”

“Is that, like, a metaphor or something?”

“No. My face is literally removable. Look. Closely.” She lifted her chin and traced her jaw line with a finger. “You can see the seam.”

After admiring how beautiful her neck was for a dizzying moment, I leaned in for an inspection. It was very hard to see, but it *did* look like there was a slightly unnatural transition there from her face to her throat. I grew dizzier, as a dozen questions rushed into my brain.

“Don’t bother asking why or how or anything like that,” said Samantha. “I can’t tell you that. If that’s going to be a problem, you should leave now. I’m letting you know this because I like you, and I want to take the next step, but this is non-negotiable.”

“Okay,” I said, unsure of what was happening. “Not a problem. So what? You have a removable face. Who cares? It looks good.”

“There’s something else. Once a day, usually in the evening, I have to remove the face and disinfect the inside of it. If I don’t, it will rot. This takes about an hour, give or take, depending on how my day went. During this time, you must never *ever* look at my real face. *Never*. Do you understand?”

“Y… yes. Got it. Don’t ask about it, don’t look at your… ‘real’ face.”

Samantha stood up. “Now, I’m going to go into the bathroom and clean my face. That will give you plenty of time to think about what I’ve told you. If you’re here when I’m done… that’s great. I would like that. But if you’re gone… I’ll understand.”

She turned and walked into her bedroom. I sat in stunned silence as I heard the bathroom door close.

I gave the thing some serious thought. It was possible that it was a joke of some kind. It was possible that it was a delusion. Was it possible that it was true? Well, it was certainly possible to transform an actor’s face with movie makeup, so I supposed it was possible that Samantha wore a “removable face” every day. Maybe she had had a horrible accident where her flesh had been mangled. Maybe her face had been melted by acid, or burned by fire, or the skin shorn off by heavy machinery. If it had, I would never know, because she would never tell me, and I would never see it.

I pictured a face of raw, naked muscle, rotting away. Could I kiss her, if that was what I was kissing? But wasn’t that what we all were, under the skin? Just muscle and bone and blood and squishy organs.

I paced around the living room, running my hand through my hair. I liked Samantha, a lot. She was smart, and funny… and beautiful. But was that beauty *real*? Did it count? Did it matter if it was “real” or not? Was I being superficial even worrying about it?

When she came out of the bathroom, I was still there. I looked at her face. She smiled and I was in love.

\*

We dated, we moved in together, we decided to get married.

For the most part, it was a completely normal relationship, typical of two young people in love, building a life together. During the day, it was easy to forget about the face altogether. It looked natural enough, and only in certain positions, in certain lights, was there ever any indication that it *wasn’t* natural.

But every night was the same. Samantha would close herself in the bathroom – sometimes for an hour, sometimes for two – and clean the inside of her face. The curiosity never left me. I would sit there and wonder what was under that face. I came so close to barging in on her a few times, but I never did.

I *did* occasionally ask her about it. About what, if anything, had happened. About how it was possible to make the removable face look so real. About what it really looked like underneath. I tried to coax her into showing me, assuring her that I loved her no matter what, and didn’t give a damn what her real face looked like… I was just curious, that’s all.

She never showed me, or told me the story behind it. She didn’t get upset at me (unless I was really badgering her.) She’d just shrug and say, “You know you can’t see it. You know I can’t tell you about it.”

\*

I never told anybody about Samantha’s removable face. It’s not that she asked me not to. I just didn’t think it was anybody’s business.

Except once, I did tell somebody.

It was during my bachelor’s party. We had rented several cabins in Big Sur and spent the night drinking and packing our noses with powders that we shouldn’t have been packing our noses with. Everyone else had passed out and the sun was creeping up behind us as I stood on the majestic cliffs with my friend Chris, looking down on the pacific waves crashing against the rocks.

Chris was my best friend; as close to a brother as I’d known. We’d grown up together, and visited each other at college often, and spent the summers together. After college, we’d moved to different cities, but we stayed in close contact.

Standing there on the cliffs, I told Chris about Samantha’s removable face. At first, he thought I was joking. Then he had a thousand questions, most of which I couldn’t answer.

“What’s underneath?”

“I don’t know, man. I don’t know.”

“Doesn’t that drive you crazy, not knowing?”

I shrugged. “Lots of stuff I don’t know. Don’t know how to do calculus, and I don’t know what happens when we die.”

“But dude, she’s about to be your *wife*. And you don’t even know what she *looks like*. I mean, I’d have to take a look. Like, you could set a camera up in the bathroom. That’s where she does it, right? Set up a camera and have a look and then you’ll know.”

I sighed. “Yeah, it drives me crazy. I’ve asked her a million times. But she told me I could never look. Gotta respect that, man, even if I don’t like it. That’s love.”

Chris laughed. “*You* telling *me* to respect a woman? Up is down now.”

Then we fell back into talking about old times as a new day dawned.

\*

Chris was in town for business last week, and planned on spending the weekend at our house. The conversation at Big Sur had happened four years ago, and we hadn’t spoken about Samantha’s removable face since, despite keeping in close contact and seeing each other as often as two people transforming into adults in different parts of the country can.

It happened on Saturday evening. We were lounging lazily in the backyard, deep into the beer, having just finished with some grilled steaks, when I got a text from work.

“Goddammit,” I groaned. “I have to make a work call.”

“Seriously?” said Samantha, raising an artificial eyebrow. “On a Saturday night?”

“My biggest client, baby. Sorry.”

“It is what it is, I guess,” said my wife. “I’m going to head inside and get cleaned up. Chris? Are you okay just hanging out for a bit?”

Chris smiled. “I'll be fine. Got my beer, got some weeds to pull in your garden. God knows your lazy-ass husband isn’t going to do it. Those tomatoes are choking to death. It’s a tragedy.”

I rolled my eyes and went into the side yard to make my call.

15 minutes into it, I heard the screams coming from inside. Both my best friend and my wife were wailing in terror.

I dropped the phone and ran into the house and down the hall to our bedroom. Through the open door, I could see that the door to the master bathroom was also standing open.

“Don’t come in!” screamed Samantha. “I don’t have my face on! Call an ambulance! He looked! Oh God, he looked!” She sounded desperate, and truly horrified. That made me desperate and horrified, and I wanted to rush into the bathroom, but I knew suddenly that that would be a mistake.

I knew suddenly that Samantha didn’t want me to look at her real face not out of a sense of vanity, but for my own safety.

Chris staggered backwards, out of the bathroom. He was holding a straightened out paperclip, which he had used to pick the privacy lock. Now he was stabbing it again and again into his eyes, shouting gibberish. He was clearly in the depths of madness, and it turned my stomach to see him mutilate himself.

“Call a fucking ambulance!” my wife screamed. “Don’t come in here! He fucking LOOKED!”

I turned and ran back to the side yard, where my phone was lying in the newly mowed grass. My client was still on the line, alarmed, asking what was happening, what all the screaming was. I hung up on him and called 911.

When the paramedics arrived, Chris was having a seizure in the hallway. Samantha was stroking his head, sobbing. Her face was on, but it had been done hastily, and everything looked a little off.

\*

My world has been dark this past week.

My best friend is in a psychiatric hospital under suicide watch. He’s completely blind and mostly catatonic, except when he slips into a violent, babbling mania. The doctors are optimistic that his state is temporary, but they don’t know the truth about what caused it, because I told the paramedics that Chris had taken a large dose of psychedelic mushrooms and fallen into psychosis.

I saw no good reason to tell the truth about what had happened. Who would believe that one look at my wife’s “real” face would make somebody insane? At best, we would be the subjects of a long investigation; at worst, we would have to prove that what we were saying was true, by showing somebody Samantha’s face. Then the same thing would happen again, and what after that? I had no idea, and no interest in finding out. For Samantha’s part, I knew that she would never consent to show anybody her real face, no matter what the consequences of refusal were.

I did get a follow-up call from the police, asking me to confirm my story. The hospital found no traces of psilocybin in Chris’ blood, though that’s not unheard of, since it has a short half-life. If they end up testing his hair, I will likely be in a lot of trouble. But that’s truly the least of my concerns.

Samantha is in a state of her own. She still cleans the inside of her face, though not as regularly, and when she puts it back on, it’s always crooked now. It is beginning to smell a little bit.

I’ve tried to assure her that it wasn’t her fault. “He *knew*,” I said. “I told him that nobody was ever allowed to look at it. He *knew* and then he *broke into the bathroom.* This is not on you, baby. Please. Talk to me.”

“Not on me? That one look at my fucking *face* makes people insane? Please. I just need some time alone.”

As for me, I am doing my best to hold it together. Do you know what’s strange, though? Despite what happened to Chris, I still find myself curious about what my wife’s real face looks like. More curious than ever, really.She called it *Yoga for One*.

I found her stream a month ago, during a rare confluence of self-disdain and spare time that collided into something resembling motivation. Tucked between the kickboxing classes and the home-gym meatheads was her thumbnail.

It caught my eye. It was a simple shot of her face, so near to the camera that I could count the freckles. Her teeth a little too large for her mouth and her nose ever so slightly crooked.

I’ve never been the type of guy to consider yoga, but I tuned in, and in a matter of seconds, I was entranced.

The girl was in her living room, a haphazard mise-en-scene – the floor speckled with sad little plants and stacks of magazines. She posed with her hands on the floor and her hips thrust in the air. Her butt perched in the center of the screen.

I decided to stay a while.

I had no yoga mat, so I laid out a towel. It was difficult to follow along – she talked, a *lot*, and only a fraction of it was about the routine. “Press your heels together and bend your head to your feet, breathing deeply. My feet smell like peaches and cream today. Makes me want to gobble them up. I love summer peaches, I love biting into them and feeling the juice erupt in my mouth, it reminds me of the time when – ”

And I fell into the meditative quagmire woven by her words, inhaling the scent of my own socks, failing to notice she’d moved into a different pose.

After a while, my muscles trembled with the effort of supporting my soft body in these unfamiliar positions, so I called it a day. It was then that I noticed it.

*Subscribers: 1*

That was me. I was the only one watching. I felt an inexplicable flood of guilt when I closed the browser, like I was abandoning her.

I checked back into her channel the next few afternoons. It was the strangest thing. She was *always* streaming. She was either unaware of my presence, or apathetic to it. Her ramblings, so freewheeling that they approached random word association, didn’t seem to change whether I was there or not – she was often mid-sentence when I logged in. She was flirty in a way that made it clear she wasn’t trying to be, charmingly raw in her tendency to fumble instructions.

Curiosity overwhelmed me. I yearned to discover more about this fascinating creature. Her movements drew me in, like she was grasping at me through the screen. I marveled at the feeling of being her silent voyeur.

I developed more comfort with the basic poses, though I still couldn’t get my hands anywhere near my toes. Too soon, she notched up the level of difficulty. She eased herself into the splits. Each leg outstretched, her toes pointed at perfect right angles. I tried my best to replicate the pose, my groin protesting the pressure. Each day, she pushed a little farther. She curved her spine sharply behind her, a graceful arc. She lifted her back leg high into the air at an angle that seemed to wrench her hip out of place.

I forced my body into the closest approximations of her geometry that my tendons would allow, my teeth gritted against the sharp warnings issued by my nerves. At night I dreamed that she was breaking my joints, cracking my limbs into the clean shapes that she maintained so effortlessly.

One day she twisted her arms so far behind her that I felt sympathetic pain, and folded herself up so that her bent legs swooped around her shoulders, touching her toes behind her neck. She smiled at the camera, demurely, politely. “You want to see me bend into a pretzel, don’t you?” she asked.

That was the first time she addressed me.

I would forget to eat. I’d wake up on the couch, having dozed off, and she would be murmuring about pomegranates while her forehead brushed her knees. Did she sleep? Did she eat? I saw no evidence of it.

Every time I moved, my body ached with the memory of being stretched to its limit. I was spending ten, twelve, fourteen hours a day on her stream. She spoke to me frequently. “I know you’ve been watching me. I think you like watching me. How far do you want me to twist for you?”

The fluid shifting of her body into vertices and curves and delicate polygons was hypnotizing. I was getting lost in the light of a flickering flame as it swirled into different patterns. I was working myself into something more pliable, molding myself into something like her image.

It's difficult to pinpoint the moment she went too far. It was more like the creep of quicksand than any one single point.

She would lie on her back and lift herself on the palms and soles of her feet, her torso thrusting at the ceiling like she was something from the Exorcist. She would inch her hands and feet closer together, folding her body backwards on itself until she was nearly split in half. And then she would skitter forward until the whites of her eyes flooded the screen, scaring me so much that I jumped. And she would laugh, as if she had made a joke.

She would twist her head around like an owl, and thrust it between her thighs. Always blinking at the screen. Always smiling like we were sharing some inside secret, like I was in on the sly conspiracy.

She said, “You like this, don’t you, Mr. Smith? Am I your foldable pocket toy?”

Smith is a very common last name. There was a nonzero chance she’d just guessed correctly. But this freaked me out enough to slam the laptop shut, shattering the image of her toothy smile.

I tried to resume normal life. But I had almost nothing to fill my time except television and social media and filling out applications for jobs I’d never want to work. A strange sensation tickled at me, like something was wrong, like I was forgetting something. And powerful waves of guilt, the same guilt I’d felt when I closed her stream the first day I’d found her.

I tried not to. I really, really tried to stay away. But the urge overwhelmed me, so I returned.

For the first time, she wasn’t onscreen when I logged in. I peered closer at the scene, seeing the familiar yoga mat on the ground, the coffee table, the magazines. There was a soft noise coming from just off-screen, a muffled noise, irregular and halting. A human voice. I turned the volume all the way up, and I couldn’t tell if it was laughter or crying.

Feeling sick, I closed the stream.

This brings us to yesterday.

I had spent countless hours thinking about her, wondering what she was doing, whether she was still telling stories to her invisible visitor. I logged in.

Her eyes filled the webcam’s field of vision, so suddenly that I scrambled backwards. And that sound – echoing around the walls of her apartment and mine, and it was now clear that it was a sound of misery.

Her moan was wordless, and as her face backed away, I saw why. Her bare foot was stuffed halfway in her mouth, her jaw nearly unhinged to accommodate it, the ball wedged between her teeth. Tears were streaming down her face, pooling around the corners of her stretched lips.

Her arms were folded behind her head and her other leg was tucked under the first. She was struggling, and I realized that she was stuck.

She was trapped in that position, a twisted ball of limbs and strained joints, unable to speak.

I stared slackjawed at the screen, and her eyes met mine, seeming to blink in recognition. The force of her sobs crescendoed. In relief? I wasn’t sure.

I had no idea what to do. I didn’t know her name or where she lived – I didn’t even know for sure that she was in the same country. I sat, frozen, for long moments, watching the twitching of her limbs as she tried to wrench herself out of the cage her body made. Then it struck me: I could type.

*Can you type your address?*

The messaged pinged its arrival at her computer. Our first real communication.

She shook her head almost imperceptibly, with the slight range of motion her position allowed.

I tried again: *Can you type with your nose?*

Her eyes flickered across the page as she read my words. With great effort she rocked herself over, landing face-first on the keyboard. *sivioshgeusoh*, she typed.

My heart pounding, I said, *try again*.

I watched as she managed to prop herself precariously on one shoulder. Her body was convulsing with the force of her sobs. Eventually, she leaned forward, carefully, delicately, and pressed the tip of her nose to the keys. *3*.

Yes! That was it! *That’s great. Give me another number.*

We traded for long, suspenseful minutes, her giving me one number or letter at a time, me writing them down and encouraging her as best I could. *You’re doing great. I’m here with you. Help is on the way.*

She had cobbled together a number and a street. It had taken us nearly an hour to get to this point. She had just finished typing *apt12* when she stopped, trembling with the effort of keeping herself upright, and we met eyes again through the camera, hers shining with pain and fear. And then she collapsed.

She rolled out of sight. Panicking, I sent her dozens of frantic messages: *What city? What state? Stay with me. I’m here. Where are you? I need more.*

It became clear that no more was coming. Her sobs stilled, her breath quieted.

I searched the address and found every city in the country where the address she’d given me existed. I called every police station in every jurisdiction within range. It took a *lot* of explanation, but after hours of work there was nothing I could do but sit and wait nervously by the phone and stare at the empty apartment framed within my laptop screen.

All I could do was type.

*I’m here with you.*

*You’ll be safe.*

*This will be over soon.*

*You’re not alone.*

The ringing of the phone nearly sent me out of my skin. It was one in the morning.

“Did you find her?” I asked desperately, scanning the scene for any sign of activity. “Tell me she’s all right!”

The voice on the other end of the line sighed, a deep sigh, of sadness or frustration I couldn’t say. “We found her,” he said, his words gentle but guarded. “Stuck in that position, as you described. She’s… she’s not okay. She died of dehydration.”

“She – what? No. That’s not possible. I just spoke to her!”

“I don’t know what you saw, son. I truly don’t. But the girl we found has been dead for a month.”

[*x*](https://www.reddit.com/r/relicularity/)Thirty hours ago I hopped on a late-night flight from New York heading to Los Angeles. After boarding I saw that I had an entire row to myself. Take off passed without incident, and soon I was stretched out for a nap across the row. 

I slept for a few hours, I don’t know how long, but I woke up to some severe turbulence. It’s possible that the lights in the cabin went out for a moment, but I was so disoriented that it’s hard to say.

I checked my phone to see that it was 4:03 AM, which I figured gave me about an hour until we landed. When I looked out my window, I was shocked to see nothing but wide open ocean. My jaw dropped; there’s obviously no ocean between New York and Los Angeles. 

I hit the button to call the flight attendant and spent the next few minutes wracking my brain for a lake that could’ve been possibly been big enough to explain what I was seeing. I jumped when the attendant flipped off the light. She was grinning from ear to ear, and tears were pouring down her cheeks.

“How can I help you sir?” she asked. 

I froze for a moment at her reaction before deciding to just ask my question. “Where are we? Why does it look like we’re flying over an ocean?”

She wiped her cheeks to clear the tears, still grinning wildly. “Sir, we’ll be landing in about an hour.”

“I, uh, OK, thank you,” I said.

After she left I checked the clock on my phone again. 4:03 AM blinked back at me.

It hadn’t changed. 

I had to have been waiting with my call light on for at least five minutes. How was it possible that it hadn’t changed at all?  

I opened up my laptop and saw it too displayed 4:03 AM. I pulled out my phone, started a stopwatch in the app, and spent the next two hours looking back and forth between the clocks, waiting for them to change.

They never did.

I tapped the shoulder of an older woman sitting in the row ahead of me. She looked back, an annoyed expression across her face. “Yes?” she asked. 

“Do you know how long until we land?” I asked.

She narrowed her eyes. “That flight attendant said it would be about another hour.”

I shook my head in confusion. “That flight attendant? We talked almost two hours ago! We should’ve landed already.”

She stared at me as if I was crazy. I was going to continue trying to convince her, but I felt a hand on my shoulder. I spun to see a male flight attendant grinning down at me, tears pinging off his cheeks onto my shoulder. 

“Sir, I’m going to ask you to calm down, or I’ll be calling the Captain.”

I told him that wouldn’t be necessary and sat back. He removed his hand and stepped away. 

The flight attendants continued to stop by every few hours offering meals. My stopwatch continued to tick up and is now telling me that I’ve been on this plane for more than thirty hours. 

I’ve explored all of coach and tried talking to some of the other passengers, but they’ve all told me that they’re expecting to land in an hour or so. 

Around three hours ago I tried getting into first class. I made it past the curtain but was escorted back by two grinning flight attendants. Their grip on my arms were like iron. 

“Sir, the seatbelt sign is on,” one said. “Please remain in your seat with your buckle fastened. We’ll be landing in about an hour.”

I’d just about given up hope when a woman came down the aisle dressed in a business suit. She didn’t look at me or slow down, but she dropped a piece of paper onto my tray as she made her way to the bathrooms at the back of the plane. 

I shot a look around before unrolling it. 

It said, “Are you stuck too?”

I pulled out a pen and wrote “Yes. It’s been thirty hours.”

I folded the scrap of paper up and set it on the tray closest to the aisle. She left the bathroom and picked it up as she passed. 

It’s been twenty minutes since then. I don’t know why, but I don’t think the flight attendants would like it if they knew we were talking. It doesn’t matter. I have to do *something*. I’ll update you all with whatever happens next.

[Part 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/dm86h5/ive_been_flying_for_almost_thirty_hours_and_the/)

More:

/r/WorchesterStreetThe man in seat 43-A died halfway across the Atlantic. I was sitting near the front of the plane, just behind first class, and couldn’t really see the commotion. But I could hear someone gasping and retching — loud at first, then quieter and quieter. A flight attendant got on the PA and asked for “any medical professionals among the passengers” to help. I guess there were none. 

After a few minutes, the man’s sounds deteriorated into a sort of gurgle, then silence, then it was over.

His name was Molyneaux, and he was old but not that old, and it was likely a heart attack, aneurism, drug reaction or God’s will, according to conflicting nth-hand reports that filtered down the plane from row 43, where a flight attendant simply buckled the newly deceased back into his window seat and covered his face with a complementary airline blanket.

The pilot got on the intercom and told us the plane would be turning back to New York “due to a tragic medical situation involving one of our passengers.”

“Folks, we’re looking for a volunteer willing to sit next to the deceased while we return to our originating airport,” the pilot continued. “This flight is entirely full, and the person sitting there now isn’t feeling comfortable. It’s an aisle seat, and it will only be a few hours before we’re back over land.”

I’m not sure why I volunteered — probably some combination of exhaustion, altruism and morbid curiosity. My vacation plans were shot anyway, I figured, so why not take the most interesting seat on the plane? The flight attendant thanked me profusely, as did a queasy looking teenager who took my original seat. I picked up my handbag and shuffled down the aisle to the very last row of the plane.

My only prior experience with corpses was an open casket funeral for my grandmother when I was a kid, but the idea of death had never particularly bothered me. It’s natural, after all. That said, I admit that I second-guessed my decision as soon as I saw my new seat mate.

Mr. Molyneaux, rest in peace, sat upright between the window and me, strapped around the waist, with a blue fleece blanket covering his torso and head. The blanket did not cover his hands, which were resting on his lap above his seatbelt — placed that way by a flight attendant as a sign of respect, I assumed. 

Molyneaux’s pale fingers were twisted into claws that betrayed the agony of his death. I couldn’t look at those hands without imagining what his face looked like under the blanket.

I thought of asking for a second blanket, but the flight crew was still busy calming down other passengers and preparing for our u-turn around the Atlantic Ocean. So I tried to forget my uneasiness and closed my eyes, and slept.

I woke — hours or minutes later, I don’t know — to the jostling of turbulence. The cabin lights were off and most of the passengers around me seemed to be sleeping. I looked out the window, trying not to look at Molyneaux as I did so, and saw only the uniform blackness of the night. I imagined the ocean miles below us, lightless and cold. The thought unsettled me and I reached across Molyneaux to close the window shade.

Then I stopped myself. *Hadn’t the shade been closed when I sat down?*

I realized there was something else off about the scene. Molyneaux’s posture had somehow changed while I slept. It took me a few seconds to pinpoint it. His gnarled hands remained on his lap, he was still belted at the waist, and the blanket still shrouded his upper body. But the fabric looked somehow twisted now, as if he had been fidgeting.

Very slowly — knowing it was insane even as I knew I couldn’t stop myself — I lifted a corner the blanket. 

I uncovered his shirt, which the flight crew had unbuttoned while trying to save him. A patch of blue-grey skin sprouting white chest hair peeked out from it.

I lifted the blanket higher. His collar was flecked with dried blood. I remembered his terrible gasping.

Finally, I pulled the blanket entirely off, and stifled a scream.

Molyneaux’s head was turned away from me, exactly as if he had turned to stare out the window. 

I could see his face reflected in the plexiglass. It was undoubtably a dead man’s face: pale, drawn, lips parted, jaw slack. There was no life in it.

Except his eyes. They were moving.

I stared at the reflection for half a minute and I’m sure of it. In the center of that death mask, two pupils flicked back and forth, as if tracking something out there in the sky.

“What are you doing?” a voice beside me interrupted. I whipped around and saw the woman seated across the aisle staring at me — not so much in fear as disgust. “Cover him back up! Give him his peace.”

“He’s … I think he’s been moving,” I stammered. “His eyes. I think he might not actually be ….” 

But I couldn’t finish the sentence; it was too crazy. Nor did I have to, because at that moment my stomach dropped ten feet along with everything else in the plane. 

Coffee cups and purses slammed against the ceiling. A man near the first class section nearly tumbled out of his seat. I heard call lights going off all over the plane as passengers were jolted awake in panic and confusion.

“Passengers, please take your seats, buckle in, and secure any loose items,” the pilot said over the PA, sounding shaken himself. “The weather along our flight path is clear and no planes in the area are reporting turbulence, so I’m not sure what this is. But we should be through it momentarily.”

Even as he spoke, the mild background shaking I’d felt since waking up became noticeably more violent. The woman across the aisle began fumbling for her seatbelt, no longer paying any attention to me or Molyneaux.

I forced myself to look at him again. The jolt must have caused him to pitch forward at the waist, his head colliding with the seat in front of him. 

But Molyneaux’s face was still turned toward the window — his neck twisted at such a sharp angle that I worried it had snapped.

I looked at his hands again, and the pallor of his skin. Three flight attendants and a dozen passengers had witnessed this man’s death, and I could not rationally imagine they were mistaken. 

And yet in the reflection of the window, his eyes left to right, left to right.

I had heard that strange reflexes sometimes kick in after death — limbs flailing, headless chickens running, nerves clearing out the last backlog of instructions from the brain. But the eyes? I had never heard of that.

I made myself look past that unsettling reflection, at the sky itself. It was still dark, moonless and cloudless, but the atmosphere seemed to have taken on a strange hue — a very dark green, like pea soup fog. I thought I could see vague shapes swirling around in the murk, though it might have been an optical illusion. I recoiled.

I desperately wanted to be anywhere else right then, but the rest of the cabin was approaching a state a pandemonium. Flight attendants were hurrying up and down the aisles, attending to spills and bruises, even as they tripped and staggered. The entire plane was shuddering like a barrel going down the rapids. 

A series of jolts sent Molyneaux’s upper body swinging back and forth like an upside down pendulum. He was thrown backward into his seat, then sideways into me (a horrible feeling I will never forget), and then the opposite way, his face slamming directly into the window, where it came to rest.

That was enough for me. I unbuckled, leapt out of my seat and locked myself in the bathroom directly behind me. I would cower on a toilet for the rest of this hellish flight rather than spend another minute sitting with Mr. Molyneaux.

This plan worked for a half hour or so. I braced both my arms against the bathroom’s walls and listened to the chimes of flight attendant call buttons, the whine of jet engines and the growling of the sky. I tried to calm myself by visualizing the skyline of New York, the JFK air strip, a calm descent.

But then I imagined Molyneaux’s window, his face mashed up against the glass like a little boy’s, his dead eyes searching the night.

The captain’s disembodied voice called me back to reality. He sounded outright scared now, and the PA kept cutting in and out.

“ … extremely anomalous weather … need everyone in their seats in the emergency position … immediately … if we depressurize … ”

The turbulence stopped for four or five seconds, and then suddenly it felt like I was inside a washing machine. I bounced against the walls of the bathroom, landed on the floor, and could barely manage to get the door open and crawl on all fours into the aisle.

All three flight attendants were down, sprawled on backs and bellies between the seats. Some of the overhead luggage bins had burst open and spewed baggage out. Many of the passengers were weeping. A few prayed. And through it all, the plane would not stop shaking.

I heard a series of small bangs above my head and felt something wet on my cheek. Every single soda can in the galley had exploded. I climbed into my seat and belted myself in, having briefly forgotten about Molyneaux in my terror.

THWACK THWACK

But he was still in his seat of course, whipping back and forth like a flagpole in a hurricane, head-butting the window so hard that I could see the plexiglass balloon outwards and rebound each time. 

THWACK

I became worried he’d crack the window, though that’s supposed to be impossible, so I overcame my revulsion and grabbed his shoulders. But I couldn’t restrain him. 

Again and again, his head hit the window. I began to fear that it was not simply the motion of the plane that compelled him. 

THWACK THWACK THWACK

No one else on the plane was watching this. Some of the passengers had rallied and were trying to pull the injured flight attendants out of the aisle. Others were whispering goodbye messages into their phones.

THWACK THWACK KRKRRRRR

I heard something crack beside me, and hoped desperately that it was Molyneaux’s skull, and not the window. Outside I could see that the green fog was alive with swirling, amorphous shapes.

THWACK KRKRRRR KRKOOM KRKOOM

Another explosion. Not pop cans this time, but pressurized oxygen escaping into sky. Molyneaux had managed to smash out both window panes in one, final blow. Now his mangled head was hanging outside the plane, and the rest of his body was straining to follow it, restrained only by his seatbelt and the width of his shoulders.

An alarm went off in the cabin, and a jungle of oxygen masks fell from the ceilings. I put mine on at once, but heard other people screaming. Some passengers were trying desperately to get masks on the unconscious air crew, but the plane was shaking more violently than ever, and loose debris was flying up the aisles toward my row — toward the hole a dead man had made in the airplane.

“… cabin breach…” said the pilot. “… limited backup oxygen, so I’m trying to descend to a safe altitude … but hard to do that in this storm, or whatever it is … God be with us.”

Once I was sure that I could breath and was no in danger of being sucked out myself, I took one last look at Molyneaux. His head might have torn clean off outside the window, for all I could see of it past the rest of his body. 

I pictured those eyes again, which had seen something in the sky that we had not seen — could not see, even as it now threatened to shake the plane apart. There was some connection between these events that I might never understand. But even without understanding, I could make the last move available to me.

I reached over Molyneaux’s lap, lifted one of those cold, clawed hands, and unclasped his seatbelt.

There was an intolerable crunching noise as, I presume, his shoulders were squeezed and crushed to fit the window frame. And then in a split second he was gone — out the window, into the night, a pale old man falling end over end toward the black ocean.

“Whatever you saw out there,” I whispered. “Whatever you were looking for, go to it and leave us be.”

The green fog lifted a few minutes later, and the plane descended until it was safe to breath without the masks. Less than an hour later, I really did see the JFK airstrip. A whole squadron of police and ambulances met us on the way down. The flight attendants and several passengers had to be hospitalized, but as far as I know no one suffered serious injuries. 

Federal investigators eventually concluded that we had flown through a localized weather anomaly — witnessed by no other plane in the sky that night. Some sort of debris must have been flying around up there with us and taken out the window at 43-A, they wrote in their report: “This event led to a sudden loss of cabin pressure, in which the body of a passenger who had died earlier in an unrelated medical emergency was ejected from the plane.”  

I expected to hear a lot more about it on the news, but I suppose in the end it was just one of those things. The airline had no interest in publicizing the incident, of course, and the passengers had no desire to relive it. 

For most people on the flight, it was simply a freak tragedy followed by a close call, and all’s well that ends well. I’m the only one that will dream for the rest of my life about Molyneaux’s eyes, and what they saw on the way to the ocean.How it started: https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/ci94do/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app



So much has happened in the last 24 hours. I’m so stressed and I’ve barely slept since I discovered that Jamie was missing. It’s starting to make me feel a little twitchy. But I thought I’d better update you guys. 

I was overwhelmed by all the suggestions you gave me and have taken more than a few of them on board. I’m definitely going to be getting a huge planter full of sage for the balcony and I did spill a little salt in my doorway. I’m sorry to disappoint but that didn’t help at all. 

There’s nothing I’m following quite like Mrs Hemming’s rules. I’ve followed them to the letter so far, and lo and behold I’m still alive. That’s not to say it hasn’t been tough. Il start from the beginning. 




I was going crazy. And a few hours after my last post Jamie still hadn’t returned. He had been gone for almost 24 hours. His work have called me multiple times. I don’t know what to say so I just keep ghosting the calls. 

I was bang in the middle of the danger time when I decided checking the lift had to be my first step. But I wasn’t going to break that rule. 

I waited. I waited desperately for 3.34 to come and I’m ashamed to say that when it did I remained paralysed to our sofa for almost half an hour before I found the nerve to leave the flat. It was 4.02 when I finally reached the lift. 

The lift in this building is old and rickety. It hasn’t been updated in a very long time and has likely been here as long as the building. It’s big, clunky buttons stared back at me as I glared at them, hoping for some sort of answer or clue. My heart thumped and I was overcome with a feeling of dread but nothing came of any of it. It was hopeless. 

I stepped inside the lift, rode it up and down a few floors and searched the entire perimeter with a phone torch for anything I could find. I found nothing. Jamie had completely disappeared. 

Sobbing and exhausted I rode back to floor 7 and turned my key in flat 42, the perfect home that felt anything but home at that point. 

I sat at the cheap flat pack dining table we’d managed to put together on move-in day and cried. My hands shaking as I held my phone. 

I was flitting between reading all your comments and contemplating calling the police for an hour. But I decided to call my friend Georgia instead. I needed a real person here, things were so crazy I wasn’t sure the police would be able to help with what little information I had. But I knew I needed to sound it out with someone.

Il spare you the details again, but I told her everything. She promised she’d be with me in the late morning, she had to take her younger brother to school. 

I waited anxiously. Not before arming every room exactly as advised. Before I knew it I looked at the clock and it was 8.23, I had around half an hour until the postman was due to show up. 

There was no way I was missing him today. I stood by the door looking vacantly at the wood, like someone in a film who was possessed. The exhaustion was really setting in but Jamie was all I could think of. Pure adrenaline was keeping me standing. 

At 8.52 I opened the door. The next two minutes were the longest of my life but when I saw him a wave of relief swept my entire body. 

Right on cue, 8.54 the postman, Ian Flanders stood in front of me, a smile that barely hid his concern covering his younger than expected face. He didn’t look old enough to have been the postman for over 35 years but I was too  distracted by the answers that I needed from him to care.

“You must be the new tenant.” He stated, but in a way that it sounded like a question. I struggled with my answer, so I got straight to the point.

“Mrs Hemmings left me a note, she said to speak to you if - “

“Can I come in dear? I think we need to chat.”

I ushered Ian in, my hands still shaking as I flapped them in the direction of the sofa, gesturing for him to sit down. I shoved the now slightly crumpled note into his lap and waited. 

“I’m glad Prue still thinks that highly of me. I will miss that old girl.” He said with a coy smile as he reached the end of the note. 

“Can you help me or not?” I had no time for his ego trip over a moved on neighbour. 

“I can help. But I can’t stop for long so it’ll have to be quick. I’ve walked these halls delivering the post for 40 years. I’ve seen it all, everything Prue’s mentioned and more. What do you need to know?” He said.

Ian was nothing like what I expected. The note made me feel like he was going to be a kindly, old grandad type figure, but I couldn’t have been more wrong. Postman Ian spoke with a thick city accent, and wore a heavy gold chain around his tattooed neck. He had dyed his greying hair boot polish black.

His demeanour was thankfully non threatening but extraordinarily cocky. He was the sort of man I imagined in a betting shop, rubbing his grubby hands on notes as he bragged over a win. 

He didn’t ask as he lit a cigarette in my living room. I didn’t question it, we would usually smoke outside but I wasn’t going to argue over technicalities. I grabbed a bowl for the ash and lit one too. 

“Let’s start with the things in the lift. My boyfriend is missing and he took the lift at quarter past 3 over 24 hours ago. We hadn’t got this note yet. I haven’t heard from him since. I need to get him back.” I barked at him as if the louder I spoke the more I could influence his answer. But nothing prepared me for what he said. 

His skin turned pale and his harsh looking face became more sympathetic as he explained. 

“He’s dead, love. Forget about him now. Only one person has ever come back from the lift at that time of night and it was Prue herself. After witnessing it. Those creatures ripping their victim apart. Poor Prue was traumatised. Your boy is gone, let go and follow the rules.” He was blunt but I could tell he felt sorry for me. 

“There must be something I can do!” I pleaded.

“There are things I’ve heard to bring back those who are lost but I’ve never seen solid proof they work. It would be irresponsible of me to tell you to do something that might get you killed too. It’s nice here, honest, just get over him and live the status quo. Sorry if I sound harsh, I don’t mean to, but you seem like a decent young lady and I don’t want to see you go too soon.”

I asked about what Mrs Hemmings had seen in the lift and if they were sure it happened to all who entered it. I refused to believe that Jamie was dead. There had to be something I could do and if I knew what I was dealing with I could be better prepared. 

“It was awful what happened. I wasn’t there, but this is what I was told. 

Little Lyla was such a cute kid. She used to open the door and give me a tip when I delivered the post. She was Prue’s granddaughter. Lyla was her sons little girl and that night She was staying over for the first time. Prue finally felt confident that she could protect Lyla from all the strange things that happen here...

She was wrong. Little Lyla had a problem with sleepwalking. And she took a trip into the hallway at half 1 in the morning, Prue took a little too long to notice the sound she had heard was the front door and by the time she reached the lift she saw the creatures dragging Lyla’s limbs away from her body. She tried to fight them, even killed one, but she couldn’t save the little girl.” 

I was hysterical, imagining Jamie’s fate.

“What are the creatures? Have you ever actually seen them.” I asked.

“No one really knows what they are love. They’re something to do with the building and all its quirks, no ones ever seen them elsewhere. We don’t know where they came from, just that they’re here. 

I’ve seen them a few times over the years, usually when new neighbours have left biscuits down for their cats and dogs or haven’t disposed of food waste properly. 

They’re curious little creatures. Mostly harmless out of the hours Prue warned you about, but if they’re fed they can become quite viscous looking for more food. 

That’s why you have to bin all your scraps, or hide them or pack them or whatever. Just don’t leave them out and don’t use the lift at those times and you’re safe from the creatures. 

They’re a little smaller than humans, but they’re a similar shape, they come with grotesque rodent like features, and are far larger than any rodent could be. Like rodent children I suppose. They have two sharp rows of teeth per jaw and are consistently hungry. 

When they eat they crunch down in a violent and disgusting way, dripping spittle everywhere, Prue said she could hear her granddaughters bones shatter in those jaws.” He went pale at the thought of that, but continued.

“When they first arrived in the building there were hundreds, it caused pandemonium amongst the residents. We lost the residents of more than 30 of the individual homes. But the residents fought back and managed to kill all but the strongest minority of them. 

The creatures left over were incredibly dangerous and seemingly impossible to eradicate, so the residents struck a deal. A deal that they will be left unharmed and allowed to live in the building in return for the residents safety at all times, but if anyone wanders into the lift between 1.11 and 3.33am they are fair game. 

This timeframe is the period the creatures are at their most frenzied and restricting them to the lift was safer for all parties. God help anyone who encounters them during those hours.

They’ve been here ever since, claimed lots of unsuspecting people avoiding the stairs, but nothing like when they first arrived. A few got put down for not holding up their end of the bargain but we haven’t had an incident outside the lift in years. Count yourself lucky you missed that crisis. 

Everything here’s pretty peaceful right now. I’m sorry about your boyfriend. I really have to go, I’m late for my round.” He scrawled his phone number on a bit of paper and handed it to me. “Emergencies only, I don’t like to be bothered.”

“You can’t go! The note said you would help me!” I exclaimed.

“And I will!” He snapped back, “when there’s something I can help with. I can’t resurrect your boyfriend and I don’t like to be late delivering the post. I will see you soon love.”

I was in shock, I couldn’t believe what I was hearing, and I couldn’t believe he was leaving me after the information overload and the small ray of hope he had lit inside me and then squashed. 

“I’ll call the police!” I shouted, desperate to feel as if I was solving this somehow.

“You can try if you want.” Ian sighed, as he opened the door to leave. “It just aggravates the creatures, and it isn’t going to bring your boy back. Mr prentice hates it when police come too, if you want to get any sleep in the next week then I’d avoid it. Wait a week, report him missing and learn to adapt to life here love, or you’ll be dead in days.”

And with that he shut the door behind him. I opened it again, I had so much more to ask, but he was gone, no sign of him anywhere in the corridor. 

Maybe it was me losing my mind, I might be imagining all these things. But no matter how much I willed it the note was still there. And Jamie still wasn’t.




Georgia arrived not long after Ian had left. I, of course, asked if she had seen him in the corridor, to try and affirm to myself that he was real, but she hadn’t. She looked at me worried, and held me as I sobbed and told her what the postman had said about Jamie and the creatures. 

I wasn’t sure she believed me. Even as she read the note she looked skeptical. If she was skeptical I wouldn’t have blamed her, but she had always been supportive. She sat with me for hours while I just sobbed, heartbroken. I was so conflicted as to what do to. It felt insane that I hadn’t contacted anybody, but this note had turned out to be accurate so far and if the postman was to be trusted then I should wait. 

Georgia had been my best friend for many years, she stuck up for me when I was too scared to do it for myself and had always been the brave one of the two of us. I felt safe around her, so after hours of crying and despairing at the way my life had changed in a matter of days I finally decided to take a nap. It was early evening and Georgia was watching some tv. Just there for me if I needed her.

Despite the deprivation, I struggled to fall asleep, I tried to imagine Jamie’s arms around me but it became a more painful reminder that they probably never will be again. Eventually, after what felt like an eternity of staring at the damp patch on ceiling I drifted off. 

About three hours ago, I woke up, staring at the goddamn damp patch on the ceiling and could hear chatting in the living room. I jumped out of bed and walked towards it.

Georgia was on the sofa, with a middle aged looking woman, both nursing a cup of tea in the matching mugs that Jamie had got me as a move in present. My blood boiled but it wasn’t their fault, I cleared my throat to get their attention. 

“Oh Katie! This is Natalia, she lives upstairs. We got chatting so I made her a cup of tea. I hope you don’t mind.” I looked at the dark haired woman on the sofa, drinking tea from my cup and nodded. Georgia was a sociable idiot with no understanding of when to not be herself. I wasn’t going to lament her for it right now. It was her coping. 

“Of course. Hi Natalia, what flat do you live in?” I tried my very best to be polite. I would have to discuss not bringing people into my home mid tragedy with Georgia after she had left but until then I would be neighbourly.

“Flat 71. It’s so nice to meet you, you have a lovely home.” Natalia responded, her lips curled at the corners into a smile that wasn’t replicated in her eyes or the rest of her facial expression. She looked at me smugly, with full knowledge that I was aware of the implications of what she had just said.

The rules...

The flat number....

*every now and again someone will knock at your door claiming to live in one of these flats and ask to borrow some sugar. They will seem entirely average but you must shut and lock the door immediately. I installed two extra security bolts to avoid these fuckers. I don’t like to swear at my age but they really are fuckers.*

Prue’s warning echoed in my mind and I couldn’t take my eyes off Natalia. Something really was off about her. I looked at Georgia sat on the sofa next to her and noticed her sweating. Anyone in the uk knows that it’s been a hot for few days but this was beyond just the ambient temperature. Her entire body was dripping. 

Suddenly, she began to pant. Natalia’s eyes were locked to mine just like the window cleaners had been. Nothing happened before with the cleaner, except this time the rule had been broken. She was already in the flat. 

Georgia started to scream as her skin blistered and charred. Her hair fell from her scalp as the skin flaked and melted away from every inch of her. She was being burned alive without a flame in sight. She scratched frantically at her own melting face, digging into the exposed raw flesh. The sound a person makes when they burn alive is like no other. That will never leave me. 

I screamed and screamed but no one came to my door. I tried to grab my phone to call postman Ian but the wooden surface I had set it down on burned my fingers to the touch and forced me to recoil. She was going to set the whole flat alight. 

My actions needed to be quicker than a phone call. 

I grabbed hold of the large knife I had set down on the side earlier when weaponising, the handle blistered my fingers instantly but I didn’t care, I needed to get her out now and help Georgia if I could. I ran towards the dark haired lady, sweat dripping from my brow the closer I got and plunged the knife into Natalia’s throat. She gripped it and fell to the floor. 

She didn’t bleed like a normal human. Her insides were black, she was still moving, and I figured it probably wouldn’t be long before she stood right back up and tried again. So I dragged her into the hallway ready to bolt the door. 

As we reached the entrance of the corridor one of the cats was waiting, hissing at her semi conscious body, I caught her eyes fixate on it as I dumped her on the floor. I grabbed the cat, pulled him inside, wincing as it’s skin caused more burns up my lower arms, shut the door and watched through the peep hole. She got up and held her hand to the wound, cauterising it and walking off towards the lift. As if she hadn’t been injured at all. 

I’d dropped the cat by that point but every bit of naked skin it had touched throbbed and burned for at least an hour. 

Georgia hadn’t been as lucky as Natalia with injury recovery. I anonymously called an ambulance for her. I couldn’t believe it but she was still breathing. She was badly burned and her life wouldn’t be the same again but she was alive. And for that I was grateful. 

It sounds awful but I left her at the park across the road from the building. With no phone or i.d. She’s my best friend and I want to be there but if I own up to involvement in injuries that bad they’ll suspect me, and I lose the already slim chance that Jamie might be saveable. It doesn’t mean I don’t care about Georgia, but she’s alive. I won’t believe Jamie isn’t until I see it. 

So now I’m alone again, in the flat, conflicted about what to do. 

I want to leave. So badly. But this was mine and Jamie’s first home together. If he’s alive, and I can save him then I want it to be here for him to come back to... and if he’s dead, and the postman is right then I don’t know if I can leave his memory behind. 

There’s only one person I think could help me right now. So tonight I’m going to do some research, hunt down an address and tomorrow morning I’m going to visit Prudence Hemmings.

How it went: https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/cj2g4k/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_appEveryone has their own nightmare in-law story, though I couldn't imagine how bad mine would be. As it turns out the worst thing wasn't my mother-in-law poisoning me, the worst thing was why she did it.

I met Craig on one of my rare vacations and we had sort of a whirlwind relationship. We fell hard for each other and were married in a courthouse wedding within two months without ever meeting each other's families. Mine visited a few weeks later and after their initial shock really liked Craig.

While we got moved in together and figured out married life I got to hear more about his parents who lived near the rest of his extended family a few hours away, though we never saw them. My work schedule is rough. I work 6-7 days a week and my off days are a blur of appointments and errands, I think in the two years before I met Craig I only left the city once!

I finally got a few days off so we could head to visit his family about six months later. His whole family came over and everyone seemed thrilled to meet me, except for his mom, Betsy. She was cold and distant, and could sit there without saying a single word to me. It was creepy, but I kept trying to spark up a conversation.

On our last day he announced that we should take an afternoon hike up into the national park their house sat on the edge of. Betsy made lunch and I was changing to go out when it hit me, just waves of nausea. I wound up in the bathroom for hours that afternoon.

I figure it was just a touch of something and thought nothing of it. We went back a few months months later and again had a great time except for Betsy. She wouldn't talk to me, though Craig brushed it off and said she was just getting to know me. He finally said we could rent jet-skis the next day and explore a lake in the next town as a way to get out of the house and unwind, which made me feel better. I was so excited to tell everyone where we were going, but it wasn't to be. After eating I got so sick I could barely walk for the next two days.

At this point I started to get suspicious. No one else was sick, and we all ate the same food. It seemed like Betsy must have been up to something, but it wasn't until our next visit when a night in a romantic cottage another hour up the road was cancelled due to me getting sick that I was sure: Betsy was poisoning me.

Craig said I was insane. He said it must be an allergy to something his mom used in her cooking, which actually made sense, though I never had time for an appointment to get it checked out. Still, I decided on the next trip that I'd make a big casserole and bring it with us. If I cooked the food and served it, nothing could be added.

Well, I hadn't had two bites before I realized I had left the wine I was drinking unattended while I was heating up the casserole, and my stomach was already doing flips. You know what happened next, and it was not pretty.

I was so sure his mom was poisoning me, and I confronted Craig about it. I told him I wouldn't visit his family again if she was there. It was our first big fight, but he finally said he wouldn't force me to visit, and we could figure out how best to deal with the situation. She had never been nice to me, so it wasn't a loss.

The next time I got time off we decided we'd head to that little cottage we had rented before and not been able to use. We were driving right past his family's place, and it seemed rude not to stop, so we compromised and bought some pizzas. I even decided just not to drink anything unless it was water from the tap.

We got in and threw pizza on our plates when one of his cousins arrived and everyone briefly left the food unattended. I realized my mistake almost immediately, and decided to try an experiment. Craig and I both had two slices, so I just switched our plates while everyone was in the next room.

Craig was so sick I was really worried about him. The drive back to the city was awful, we had to pull off a lot, and he was a mess. We had been back home for three days before I broke down and told him I had switched the plates.

I've never seen such anger before, the rage in his eyes is something I'll remember for the rest of my life. He shoved me into a wall and then came flying at me. He threw me over the couch, but I somehow managed to grab my keys and phone and ran out the door not even wearing shoes.

I got lucky with the elevator and made it to a friend's place safely, finally turning off my phone after I missed his 47th call. I had no idea what to do or when it would be safe to go home, it was the scariest time of my life.

It was two days before I turned my phone back on, and when I heard the message from the police I drove upstate immediately.

Craig was dead, Betsy had shot him after he broke into her house and charged at her with a knife.

I learned that Craig had been married once before, and his wife had died on a tragic hiking accident. Craig made a lot of money in the life insurance payout and Betsy always suspected Craig had killed her, and was nervous about letting him be alone with me, especially out in the remote area he was so familiar with from his childhood.

So she ensured that every time he planned an outing that I would be sick. It wasn't easy, but she didn't think I would believe her, as no one else had ever shared her suspicions about Craig.

I found the life insurance policies he took out on me without my knowledge afterward, and refused to press charges against Betsy, she was only trying to protect me. I still visit her from time to time when I need to get out of the city, [I love her cooking](https://www.reddit.com/r/nmwrites/).I work in security at Disney World, the happiest place on Earth. Typically, I wouldn’t say where I work as obviously there are some pretty strict rules about things employees can put online, but I just don’t think I can tell this properly without that context. And, honestly, I think this may be it for me anyway with this job. I just can’t see myself working here any longer now. 

I’ve been with the company for 23 years. The first 20 years I worked in the parks – nabbing shoplifters and rounding up people who were drinking too much for the heat. Occasionally there’d be a fight to break up, but people usually kept it pretty mild. 

The heat and walking was getting too much for me the last few years so I asked to be transferred somewhere with a/c and the company moved me to one of their resorts. While the working conditions were 110&#37; better as far as climate and comfort go, the guest issues were trickier \- mainly domestics. I guess the expensive and stress of vacation got to a lot of people and I’d be called by neighboring rooms because some mom and dad were yelling at each other. I’d try to suggest they take a nap or go do separate activities for a bit and that would usually calm them down.

But none of that is what I’m here for. I’ve got to get this out while I have time.

Three days ago I got a call from management. Apparently a couple of days before that, housekeeping had went into a room that should’ve been turned over that day (turned over is when one guest leaves by about 11:00 a.m. and the next guest checks in around 3:00 p.m.) and all of the guests’ items were still in the room. Housekeeping made a note of it and moved on, but during the next two days when they entered the room, everything was still there and untouched.

I went to check it out and sure enough there was an empty room full of luggage, clothes, snacks, some toys, everything a family would need for vacation. The manager had already looked up the previous reservation and it was for a family – dad, mom, two little kids. I tried to call the phone numbers they had given but all I got was voice mail. We were a bit stumped so I made the call that housekeeper could clean the room and take the family’s personal items to be held until we got in contact with someone.

I went digging into the reservation more. The family had arrived five days before housekeeping discovered all of their stuff.  I found that the family had paid a parking fee and their vehicle description was listed. A quick walk of the parking lots and I had easily located their vehicle. So that ruled out a car accident or them deciding to just leave all their stuff behind. 

Next, I saw that they had bought a dining plan. This is when a guest prepays for all of their food. They’re given a certain number of “credits” to use for meals. This family had only used 3 credits and the last one was two days after they checked in. It appeared that the day they arrived, they got here late and probably just stayed on the resort. The next day they used 2 credits at Epcot. The second park day they used just 1 credit at Magic Kingdom and it was at breakfast time. 

Now at Disney we have something called Magic Bands. Magic Bands are worn by the guests and act as a room key, park ticket, credit card, dining reservation payment, fastpass (a system used to bypass lines), and more. It took some work, but I was finally able to look up this family’s fastpass history. The day they went to Magic Kingdom, they had breakfast at a restaurant in the park, rode a couple of rides, and then rode their last ride, It’s a Small World around 11:00 a.m. Then nothing.

Finally, it was time to bring in someone else on this. I called an old co\-worker at Magic Kingdom and asked him to pull security footage for It’s a Small World at the time they rode it and I made my way over there. When I got there, my friend was very confused, almost distraught, looking. He showed me what he found. There’s usually a camera in the direction of where rides load and unload. The footage showed them scanning their bands to use fastpasses for the ride and boarding the ride. The footage from the exit of the ride just showed the other people in their car exiting. They weren’t there.

Of course we thought the worse, maybe one of the kids had fallen out and mom and dad and the other kid got off in the middle of the ride to help and they all got injured or killed or stuck in machinery somewhere. So we shut down the ride. Middle of the damn day. Turned off that ear worm music and turned up the lights. Me and my buddy walked that ride three times before we called in help. Eventually there was close to ten cast members searching, and we didn’t find shit except for three cell phones and a hat.

I was right stumped. I've kept digging the past couple of days, and I’m not sure who to tell what I found next to. I’ve called the police and I suppose they’re on the way, but the company has a way of covering up things like this and I decided I can’t live with myself if I don’t put out some type of warning.

I kept digging into their reservation over the last couple of days and today I noticed they had purchased memory maker. There are photographers all over the parks and cameras in a lot of the rides and, with memory maker, the photos are all free. They automatically get added to a guest’s Disney account when the system knows their picture has been taken. And the system always knows. Everyone’s whereabouts are always known with the Magic Bands.

Well, I opened up their memory maker photo album and, I swear, there’s 732 pictures. The first 30 or so are pretty normal. Epcot, a few rides, in front of the castle. But the rest. The rest are all in It’s a Small World. The rides only take one picture per go around. So it appears as though this family has ridden this ride over 700 times. The first picture was pretty normal. Everyone looked happy, it was busy day and a full car of guests.  The next one is rough to look at. The car is empty except for this little family and they look so darn confused. The next 10\-15 I can see dad getting angry, yelling. Mom is holding onto those two kids like her life depends on it and you can see the kids getting increasingly upset, crying. And it goes on, and on, and on. After 50 or so it looks like they’re trying to get out. In one the dad is missing. In another they’re all gone.  Maybe like they’ve bailed early in the ride and tried to walk out, but in the very next one, they’re all right back in that damn car. After around 450 or so, I only see the mom and kids. It’s just when I look closely I can see dad, maybe just his body now, slumped down in one of the other seats. Since about 675, there’s just mom and one kid. Another body in another seat.  The mom and kid aren’t moving anymore. I think them two are still alive, just damn near catatonic. Looking straight ahead, pale.  

And, y’all, I swear on my fucking life, the dolls are moving or something. In some of these pictures I can tell they aren’t where they should be. I even saw one with a doll in the car with this family.

I can’t look anymore or I’m going to lose my lunch. I closed the album. It’s file sized has increased since I closed it. God, are there new pictures being added? 

I see on security cameras that the local PD just arrived so they’ll take over soon. I wish I knew what the fuck is going on, but I also wish this damn thing had never landed in my lap. I don’t think I’ll be able to update this. After I talk to the police, I think I’m going to walk out of here and never come back. I just wanted to get this out there, before Disney feeds the media some bullshit cover up as to why a whole family vanished. They didn’t vanish. I know where they are.How it began 
https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/ci94do/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app

And what happened next
https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/cinu8u/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app


I didn’t get much sleep last night either. The lack of sleep is making me wonder whether all these things happening are in my mind or not. But I’m reminded every time I see that damn note that it’s all real. 

I spent hours last night searching for anything I could about Prudence Hemmings. If she had lived in a big creepy mansion I imagine she would have been easy to find. But us folk who live in tower blocks aren’t so well documented. No one cares about our lives, no matter how extraordinary.

I found an article about missing person Lyla Hemmings. It suggested that she went missing under the care of her grandmother while playing in the park opposite the flats early in the morning. Interviews with her parents stated that they had both disowned Prudence. 

Despite the many years that had passed since Lyla’s death/disappearance her parents appeared to have remained unforgiving of Prue. There was no mention of her on either of their social media accounts and she appeared to have no involvement with the children they had acquired since. 

Searches for the Hemmings family in the local area were equally dead ends, I looked at link after link, desperate to find something but they all started to blur into one. Until finally I saw something. 

An obituary for Bernard “Bernie” Hemmings, who had fallen from the tower block in unexplained circumstances after being diagnosed with dementia months before his death. I was surprised it hadn’t made bigger news. It had only been about a year. There were no details of where to find them, but his wife Prudence and her sister Bridget were listed as contacts to get find out details of the funeral. 

It’s scary what you can do with the internet these days, but just with those phone numbers I was able to put them into a reverse directory and find an address for Bridget and Tony Bishop, the sister and brother in law that Prudence was supposedly living with.

About 4am I managed to get some sleep, not much though, I was back up and wide awake at around 7am, planning my route and working out my day. I saw a post on social media from one of her relatives that Georgia was identified and is stable. This loosened the knot in my stomach that has been present since I found the note somewhat. 

At 8.50, I opened the door to my flat hoping to see postman Ian. 4 minutes passed and instead of the postman an elderly gentleman made his way down the corridor. He had a walking stick and kind eyes. In his free arm he carried a small plastic bag containing a newspaper and milk, he smiled and said “good morning” as he passed.

I smiled back. He reminded me of my grandad. I imagined him pulling cola cubes from his pocket for his grandkids and shushing them when their parents weren’t looking. A little further down the corridor the old man stopped and turned. He looked me dead in the eyes with a sympathetic expression and spoke.

“No post on a Sunday, if that’s what you were waiting for.” He smiled knowingly and turned to unlock a front door that until shut I couldn’t see the number of. When I saw the door close and the number 48 boldly displayed above the peephole I understood what Prudence had meant. Mr Prentice did seem to be a lovely chap. 

I sat back in my flat and sighed, staring at the various tabs open on my laptop. At about 9.15 the knocking on the balcony door started.

The window cleaner was back.

I didn’t feel half as terrified as I had the first time, if anything, I was just angry. It took every ounce of restraint I had in my tired body not to engage with him, if only to tell him to fuck off. His genuine seeming requests just irritated me. After about 20 minutes of being watched the knocking started to give me a headache, so I grabbed a bag and left the flat.

I decided there was no time like the present. If I was going to turn up on the Bishops’ doorstep looking for her sister because of the freaky flat she’s left behind then I had to get it over with. If the address was old, or the bishops weren’t the people I was looking for then I was going to look stupid whatever time of day I went.

And I couldn’t take the window cleaners eyes anymore. There was something about them, they really do make you want to open that door. 

I looked at the lift as I entered the communal hallway and decided today I would take the stairs. I couldn’t stand to be in a small box that my partner probably died very painfully in. My heart dropped into my stomach just at the sight of it.

The stairs were as grotty as the lift. We’d taken them multiple times on move in day but I hadn’t really taken it in the same way I could now. I thought about the rules and all the strange things happening in this building. I looked at the badly painted numbers on the walls as I reached each landing.

Nothing in this building is simple.

I looked at the numbers. 7, 6, 5 ... 5, 4, 3, 4, 2, G. Maybe it was the sleep deprivation but my legs were in agreement with my mind that I had definitely just descended more than 6 flights of stairs. They’d glitched. 

I looked at the dusty and poorly lit stairwell from the bottom. It seemed dark despite the sun pouring in from the glass panel in the main building doors. The note never mentioned glitchy stairs, maybe I really was losing my mind. 

As I turned to exit the building a woman walked in. She was in her late thirties to early forties and had 2 small children in tow. One boy and one girl. I guessed that they were twins, they were both incredibly blonde, with deep brown puppy dog looking eyes and couldn’t have been any older than 6-7. They were as close to identical as it gets in twins of different genders. I’m not a fan of kids, but they were super cute. 

The lady had a short bob haircut that got longer at the front, it was uniform and dyed a perfectly even auburn colour. I knew it was dyed because her roots were blonde like her kids. She looked as tired as I felt, but she pulled herself together when she saw me, running fingers through s part of her hair that she must have missed how ever early she left this morning. 

“Hi, are you here visiting?” Who opened with, trying to make small talk. 

“No, I just moved in to flat 42, on the 7th floor, I was just leaving actually. Whereabouts are you?” I was desperate to go, I had feared myself up to see Prue but I didn’t want to be rude.

“I’m flat 26, my name’s Terri. This is Eddie and Ellie.” She gestured to the two small children hiding shyly behind her skirt. “Welcome to the block. If you ever need anything please feel free to give me a shout.”

“My name is Katie but people call me Kat too. That’s really kind of you, thank you. I will.... hey, is there something wrong with the stairs?” I stopped myself before going into detail.

“Nothing wrong, they just skip sometimes.” She answered, shrugging. 

“Well I’d love to stop and chat but I actually really need to get going. It was nice to meet you Terri.” I tried to work out what was wrong with the children as I stepped forward to walk away. Still baffled by the stairs.

“By the way, we have a residents committee, you should come to one of our meetings, they’re every Tuesday in alternating flats. This Tuesday is at Molly Jefferson’s place in flat 31, come along. We’d love to have you!” Terri suggested, waving me off. 

I walked out the doors after my encounter with Terri feeling sick. Every minute in this place made the note more real. Every word jumped off the page and into my life. Made it more likely that Jamie was really gone. 

I rode the bus from a stop not far from the flats. It felt like it took and eternity to reach the little suburban area I was looking for. A five minute walk away from the bus stop I got off at and I was staring at a quaint little bungalow, belonging to Bridget and Tony Bishop. 

I knocked on the door. The lady who opened it was unsteady on her feet, she was probably in her 70s, with wispy white hair neatly scraped back into a bun, two strands left hanging that just softened her wrinkled face. She wore a dusty rose coloured dress that hung just below her knees and smelled of stale cigarette smoke. 

“Can I help you?” She asked bluntly.

“My name is Kat. I’m looking for Prudence Hemmings.” I answered, stuttering slightly. 

Her eyes widened slightly.

“Why?” She asked, bizarrely. 

“Is she here? It’s private.” 

The lady ushered me into the house, and sat me down on a sofa, within minutes there was a cup of tea in front of me. She didn’t say anything to me for a while, we just looked at each other. Then she finally broke the silence. 

“I wondered if you’d try and find me. It took me a long time to decide whether to leave that note or not but I decided that you deserved a head start. That’s more than I ever got.”

The woman was Prudence, she was nothing like I had imagined. She seemed tough and hardened and spoke with a mostly blunt tone, she contributed before I could answer.

“Terri called me not long ago. Told me that she had met the new tenant. She said you looked shaken up, and said that my note may not have been enough. I did say I couldn’t fit everything on there. And the stairs didn’t seem too important. The committee wanted to organise a meeting with you on your moving in day but I told them that was intrusive. The whole committee thing always seemed a bit excessive to me anyway.” She spoke flippantly, like it was nothing. 

“It may have been intrusive, but we needed a warning, we spent a night in the place before I found your note! My boyfriend had already left for work at 3.15 and taken the lift.... he didn’t know.” I broke as I told her what had happened. Her face dropped. And so did my hope for Jamie. 

“I’m so sorry... I really don’t know what to say. I thought my note would reach you in time.” She mumbled, her face to the floor, refusing to look at me as tears streamed down my face.

“He’s gone isn’t he. I didn’t want to accept it but I spoke to the postman and your face says all it needs to. The postman said there might be a way I can have him back.” I bit at her, devastated and angry.

“He’s gone. You can’t have him back. What Ian is referring to isn’t what you think. There’s a way to get people back from the lift. But not as themselves. Trust me, I learned the hard way. Once they’re back you can’t reverse it. I’m sorry about your man. But he’s gone forever. Don’t dig into the other way, to be gone forever is luckier than that alternative.” She still wouldn’t look up from the floor.

“What do you mean...”

“I don’t want to talk about it. I said in the note that there are things I’d rather not discuss and I need you to respect that or I won’t be speaking to you at all. Now move on and ask what you need to ask.” Prudence cut me off, I decided not to push the topic further, and moved on to some other things I needed to know.

“What’s the deal with Terri’s kids? They seem sweet and normal.”

“Those little demon creatures are anything but normal.” She answered, wincing slightly at the though of them. “When she went into labour Terri never made it to a hospital. They were the first children ever to be born inside the building and with everything that goes on it’s like something’s rubbed off on them. They’re average children in the daytime, but they never sleep, ever. Poor Terri hasn’t had a days rest since they were born. They also really love to steal birds and rats they find the cats playing with and torment them. Really annoys the cats.” 

As she finished speaking a small hairless cat strutted out from behind an armchair across the room, meowing softly. It brushed its head up against Prue’s exposed legs, leaving scorch marks where it touched. She didn’t react, she reached down and stroked the top of its head, smiling as it purred. 

“And those?” I asked, eyes stuck to her now badly burned legs. 

She chuckled, pulled out a box and lit a cigarette, tapping the top layer of ash into a small silver dish in front of her. She offered me one and I took it gladly. 

“They’ve always been my good friends. I couldn’t leave the building without bringing a part of home with me. This little guy is Damon. He’s seen some things.” She gushed, not taking her eyes off the cat. 

“But where did they come from, why are they everywhere?” I asked, watching in disbelief as her burns subsided. It seemed impossible, but I looked at my arms where I had picked up the cat the night before and there was no evidence it had ever happened. They didn’t even appear sunburnt. 

“No one really knows. They started to appear after the fire, a few years after I’d moved in. It was rumoured that they were the pets of the residents that burned, and that was why they had no fur. But I don’t think that’s true.”

I interrupted.

“I met one of those neighbours last night. She said her name was Natalia. She almost killed my best friend. You’re crazy if you think your note was enough of a warning!” I ranted emotionally.

“Look, girl. If I had made a song and dance about warning you, then you’d have thought me crazy and challenged the rules. You’d have been dead already. Be grateful you got anything. I didn’t. I had to work it all out. Your generation are so spoiled.” She tutted in frustration at me. I was angry, but she was probably right. An elderly lady telling me rat like creatures would kill my boyfriend in a lift would probably have got some laughs from me a few days ago. I stayed quiet and waited for her to calm down, after a while she sighed and started again.

“I think the cats are the neighbours that burned. They’ve never meant any harm and they hiss and run from the imposters that roam the building. Besides, there’s no way there were that many cats living on one floor. 

The imposter people don’t even match up with the residents that died in the fire, none of them look like, or claim to have the same name as the dead. They just claim to live in their flats. I’ve met Natalia before, she left a bad scar on Bernie’s leg from an incident we had, nasty girl. 

Before the fire there was cctv and there was a recording saved of about 15 people marching into the flats and up to that floor about half an hour before the fire started. It was the only evidence found. CCTV wasn’t great in the eighties so they were never identified. And the flames melted the relevant cameras so nothing ever came of it. 

I think the people that entered that night are the ones that ask for sugar. I don’t know any more than that but if you avoid them like I said you don’t need to know more. They hate the cats. I hope your friend survives, but I’ve seen what those people can do so maybe she was better off dead.” Prue carried on stroking Damon. I watched the skin of her fingers melt and twist as they made contact with him.

“What happened to your husband?” 

I asked the question so fast I didn’t have time to consider that this was a topic she had explicitly said she didn’t want to discuss in the note. But I had to know. 

She scowled at me. “I said I didn’t want to talk about that.” She hissed.

“I just lost the love of my life. I need some answers.” I begged.

“What happened to Bernie won’t help you. I know you’d think any deaths in that building would be down to the quirks but this wasn’t. For the most part anyway.

Don’t forget that we had lived there for 35 years, Bernie knew the rules, we knew how to take care of ourselves and have a happy life there. It was our home.”

“I don’t doubt that’s Mrs Hemmings, I’m sorry” I interjected.

“Bernie had dementia. It started about 6 months before he died and he deteriorated very rapidly. Towards the end he started wandering, the doctors said it was common, but in our position it was incredibly dangerous. More times than I can count I pulled him away from the lift just in time.

Along with wandering he was forgetting the rules. He let that smug awful window cleaner in 3 times, thank lord for the big metal pipe I kept by the balcony door, chased him out a treat. Not that anything stops him from coming back. I’m sure you’re already acquainted. 

After all the dangerous situations Bernie was in, by the end he made the smallest and most fatal of errors. 

He left a bowl of food out for Damon at 10am. I was out shopping with Terri and a few of the girls from the committee and when I came back I found one of those awful creatures...” 

Prudence started to cry. I put my hand on her shoulder in an attempt to comfort her, after all, I truly knew how she felt. 

“It was eating him.” She sniffed and steadied herself to continue, moving my hand. “I chased the creature away with the same metal pipe I had the window cleaner and pushed Bernie off the balcony. He was heavy but I didn’t want anyone to know what really killed him. It’s teeth..” she shivered “...they made such an awful noise. It reminded me of -“

“Lyla.” I finished her sentence. I hadn’t meant to. I was so invested in her story I couldn’t help it. 

“I gather you spoke with Ian then.” She said sounding resigned. “I never meant to hurt that little girl. I loved her so much.” Tears rolled down her wrinkled cheeks. Damon, who was now sat next to her on the sofa, shuffled closer as if to cuddle her. 

“Haven’t you ever been curious about getting her back?” I asked, my mind turning back to the methods hinted at by both Prue and the postman. “I miss Jamie so much. I’d do anything to get him back.”

Her face filled with a look of horror and shame. “Of course I have.” She answered, “which is exactly why I’m telling you not to.” 

But I couldn’t let it go. 

“Surely anything must be better than gone forever?” I pestered. I wish I hadn’t.

Prudence, frustrated, stood up and gestured for me to follow, she lead me outside to the back garden of the bungalow. At the back was a large shed, the kind people used for a man cave or a summer house. It was pretty, the sun shone down on it lighting up the few cobwebs in the corners and making them twinkle. 

Mrs Hemmings was careful to look into both neighbouring gardens to ensure there was no one around before she unlocked the door to the shed. We stepped inside and the first thing to hit me was the smell, it was putrid, like rotting meat. I looked at the floor and covered my nose with my hands, staring back at me was a pool of blood.

I followed the blood with my eyes as Prudence locked us in the shed. Then after I made it past the animal bones I finally saw it.

Just like postman Ian had described.

One of the creatures was watching me, from a heavy duty metal dog cage in the corner of the shed. It looked reinforced but still the metal had chew marks. Their jaws had to be strong to cause that.

That didn’t surprise me looking at it, it’s rodent like nose and beady, yet somehow human like  eyes were nothing compared to the two very visible rows of jagged sharp teeth that lined each gum. Despite its small stature, it was terrifying. 

Prudence opened a drawer in a dusty cupboard across the room and pulled out a can of dog food, she poured the contents into the bowl  and passed the bowl through the feeding hatch. The cage had a safety feature meaning the animal couldn’t access the food until the hatch was locked from the outside. I was grateful for this.

Prue turned to me and spoke. She brushed one of the two strands of hair framing her face behind her ear. Gesturing to the hideous creature she said;

“Kat, I would like to introduce you to my granddaughter, Lyla.”

How the conversation went on : https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/cjintp/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_appLauren is in the Honda Accord right behind my truck, with our two cats, but I can’t get out and see her. The last guy who got out was shot in the legs and then run over by a tank.

We set out yesterday from Gainesville, Florida, where Lauren had recently graduated from law school. We were moving to my home state of Maine, to start a permanent life together. The drive was beautiful most of the way, and Lauren and I spent a lot of time on speaker phone with each other to comment on it. A couple of times we passed through rain, and once a really wild thunderstorm that lit up the whole sky for miles. Then, about 8 hours ago, we hit a traffic jam on I-95 just outside of Lewiston, Maine.

I took a look at the navigation thing on my phone, but it didn’t show any red areas of heavy delay. It also had some trouble showing my exact location, though, so I lit a cigarette and figured it would just be a few minutes.

After about fifteen minutes, I called Lauren. “How’s it going back there?” I asked. In the background, I could hear the cats going nuts.

“Not great,” said Lauren. “Do you hear Hankie and Hattie howling? They started up as soon as we stopped. What's going on?”

“Must be an accident that just happened. My phone usually gives a heads up if there’s planned construction or something.” I heard one of the cats hiss while the other one yowled.

“I’m so tired,” said Lauren.

“I know, me too. Let’s stop and get something to eat once we’re through, yeah?”

“Okay.”

“Alright. Love you. Sorry about the cats.”

“Love you,” said Lauren.

I hung up and tried to get something on the radio. I have a base model 2006 Toyota Tundra, so no AUX jack, and the CD player had broken years ago. During the entire trip, I had been at the mercy of radio stations, and for the most part, they didn’t do much for me other than create a general atmosphere of annoyance.

Now, though, I couldn't even keep the radio on. What wasn't warbling static was some kind of distorted robotic voice reading off a list of numbers and random words strung together. Across the whole radio band, same thing. I couldn't take it so I shut it off.

I picked my phone back up and went to check Twitter. All I got was that game where you have to jump the dinosaur over cacti faster and faster and then it gets dark out and the birds come. No internet. Finally, Twitter did half-load, so there was *some* intermittent reception there, barely.

After a half hour had passed, I started to get antsy, and so did everyone else. People were sticking their heads out the window to try to see what was going on, but it was no use. The line of cars seemed endless. A few people got out of their vehicles to try to get a better look. I got out too and started walking to Lauren’s car.

When I was halfway there, a voice cut into the air. It sounded like someone shouting through a bullhorn. “Return immediately to your vehicles! No one is permitted to be outside! This is your only warning. If you do not heed it, there will be severe consequences.”

“Wha da *fuck* is goin’ on?!” some guy shouted in a thick Boston accent; he was standing a few car lengths in front of me. An instant later, he was down on the ground, not moving. I didn’t see what happened exactly, but that was enough to make me to hustle back to my truck.

I tried calling Lauren again. When she answered all that I could hear were broken flashes of the cats screaming and Lauren sounding scared and begging to know what was happening.

“I don’t know,” I said, not sure that she could hear it. “Maybe they’re searching for a criminal or something. I don’t know.” Then we were disconnected.

A minute later, an ambulance was wailing its way down the right hand shoulder. It stopped just past my truck, and two EMTs jumped out of the back. They closed the doors behind them, but I saw that there was somebody else in there. Somebody dressed in riot gear, holding a big gun.

The EMTs dragged the guy with the Boston accent by the arms over to the ambulance. They opened the doors and sort of tossed him in, and then followed behind. I saw the riot gear person again for a second, and then the doors slammed shut and the ambulance sped off down the shoulder out of sight.

Somebody four cars ahead of me got the idea to follow the ambulance out of there. I watched as a red Hyundai Sonata with a New Jersey license plate tore into the shoulder lane and sped after the ambulance.

I tried calling Lauren to ask her if she thought we should try it too. It was a ballsy move for sure, but she had sounded at the end of her rope stuck in there with our wailing cats, so I thought she might be willing to give it a shot. This time, the call didn’t even go through.

I was getting ready to try calling again when I heard this loud blast. A puff of smoke blossomed somewhere up ahead, and all of a sudden, there were chunks of a car flying through the air. A red car. Very likely a red Hyundai Sonata.

As I watched a flaming tire roll to a stop against the highway divider, I decided not to replicate New Jersey’s maneuver.

I heard the blast of a horn behind me, and looked in the rearview to see that Lauren had her arm out the window, moving her hand around in a circle. Finally, it hit me that she was telling me to roll down my window, so that’s what I did.

“Can you hear me?” she shouted.

“I can!” I could even hear the cats. They sounded really freaked out.

“What is happening?!” she asked.

“I don’t know baby! I think we’re in some kind of military lockdown maybe! I think we have to just sit tight here.”

“Can you throw me a bottle?” asked Lauren.

“What?”

“A bottle! Like Gatorade or something. I know that you’ve probably got ten of them in your front seat.

It was true. Not ten exactly, but close enough. I just threw all of my trash on the seat of my truck until it started overflowing, whereas Lauren kept her car clean. “What are you going to do with the bottle?” I asked.

“Not something I want to shout out for the whole world to hear!” said Lauren. “Let’s just say we’ve been here a while and I don’t think we’re coming to a rest stop soon enough.”

Finally, I understood. I reached over and grabbed a bottle. I chucked it out the window, but it was a bad throw, and bounced off the hood of Lauren’s Honda. I tried again, and this time she caught it. She rolled up her window and in the rearview mirror I watched her fuss around as she presumably tried to pee into the thing.

This was when the fleet of massive trucks started rolling in, on the southbound side of the highway divide. Some of them had cranes sitting on long flat beds, and others had big chunks of some kind of metal material. Soon, the southbound side was jammed up with these giant trucks and their haul. Then they started to get to work.

“What are they doing?!” asked Lauren. She’d opened her window back up. “Are they… building a fucking *wall*?!”

That is exactly what it looked like they were doing. One crane would take a massive chunk of material, and lift it into place either next to, or on top of, another chunk.

“Yes! They’re walling us in!” I shouted. I checked my phone for the thousandth time. I had a bar, and used it to call 911.

A lady answered. “What is the address for this emergency?”

“I… uh… I-95 northbound, just before Lewiston, Maine. I forget the exit number we were coming up on. I’m sorry.”

“That’s okay. What is the emergency?”

“Well… we’re in this weird traffic jam… and… people are dying here. Cars are exploding. They’re building a wall around us. They’re trapping us here. I know that sounds crazy….”

There was a long silence on the other end. I thought maybe we’d been disconnected. But then I heard her voice again, crystal clear.

“Sir, I am going to need you to remain calm and stay in your vehicle. And if you would, roll down your window. Not the driver’s side, the passenger’s side.”

“W… what?” I asked. Then I heard the tapping at my window. There was a lady cop standing there, holding a cell phone up to her ear. My heart jumped up into my throat, and my instinct was to slam my foot on the gas pedal, but there was nowhere to go. I rolled down the window.

“You reported an emergency?” asked the cop. “Everything looks okay to me. We don’t discourage anyone from calling emergency services if they truly think that there might be an emergency situation occurring, but everything appears to be perfectly fine here. I will give you the benefit of the doubt this time, but remember that we also very strongly frown upon fraudulent 911 calls. You could be charged for that, sir. It’s no joke.”

“Oh,” I said, trying to hold it together. “I’m sorry about that. I *did* think that something bad was going on, but now I see that everything is okay. Thanks for checking in.”

“It’s no problem at all, sir,” said the cop, smiling. “And remember: *stay in your vehicle*.”

“Of course,” I said, trying to smile, though I’m sure my face looked like a sweaty pretzel instead.

The cop nodded and then walked off down the line of cars. I waited a few minutes, and then called out to Lauren.

“I think we’re fucked!” I said. “I called 911 and that cop that was just here? She’s the one who picked up. She said everything’s fine… but it’s not.”

“Fuck!” said Lauren. “What do we do?!”

That’s when the guy jumped out of his car and made a break for the wooded area to the right of the highway. And that’s when they shot him in the legs. I heard him cry out and watched him hit the ground. I heard a loud continuous rumble, interspersed with snaps from the woods. Then I saw the tank. It didn’t so much emerge from the woods as it destroyed the woods in its wake. Beyond it, I saw another enormous wall. We were walled-in from two sides… and my guess was that we were walled-in from four sides.

The tank crushed the man like he was a particularly small ant.

\*

They are working on the roof now. It's almost done. Once the roof is on, I have a feeling that I won't get any reception at all. Before that happens, I'm hoping for one more spike so that I can get this post out.

I don't know if this is on the news or not. I thought it was just a traffic jam, so that's probably how they're playing it off. They probably have rerouted traffic around us by now.

I don't know what this is. But there are now dozens of heavily armed people in riot gear going from car to car. Sometimes they drag somebody out, and carry them screaming off to what remains of the wooded area, where they disappear from sight.

They're almost at my truck now. I hope they skip me, and Lauren. Oh God. I'm going to tell her that I love her.

If this reaches you, I don't know what you can do, but please try to help us.

&#x200B;

[Part 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/bxoscy/we_were_stuck_in_construction_traffic_for_8_hours/)

[Part 3](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/byqo1k/we_were_stuck_in_construction_traffic_for_8_hours/)My mother had the most beautiful teeth.

Her teeth are my first memory. I remember them: long and white and bared in a ferocious grin, shining under the full moon as she told me a story. Not a fairy tale or picture book, but *my* the story. The story of how I’d come to her…or rather, how she’d come to me. 

When I was very small – too small to remember anything at all – my mother stole me from a man, and took me to live in the forest.  She stole me not as an act of love, but as an act of revenge. Though I was desperate to know, she never told me what needed revenging.

One night, I finally asked, “Why won’t you tell me?”

“Because you are my baby,” she whispered in her low, wet voice. She stroked my face with long fingers. Her teeth glittered under the stars, rich and pale as polished ivory. “My baby will never hear, or see, or know the cruelties that haunt me.” 

Cruelty was not the only thing my mother knew that I did not, although it *was* the only thing she refused to teach me. My mother tried very hard to teach me everything else she knew. Unfortunately, I was a very poor pupil indeed.

My mother was a remarkable huntress. She felled elk and bear effortlessly. Sometimes she slid into the lake without so much as a ripple, and returned hours later with a monstrous fish clamped in her jaws.

Because hunting came so easily to her, Mother expected me to learn quickly. “Men hunt,” she hissed. “They have always hunted. So shall you.”

But I could not hunt. Not like her. My small, soft fingers were no match for her lethal claws. My clumsy little body – somehow so susceptible to both the heat and the cold – trailed after her whiplike predator’s form. Mother caught deer and foxes with her beautiful teeth, striking from the shadows like a snake. By contrast, my dull teeth could not even crush rabbit bones.

I persevered, but did not improve. One night, while Mother snaked through the shadows, communing with trees and evading the dark things prowling the night, I curled up and wept. 

She found me that way, weak and weeping. I covered my eyes and held my breath. I knew it was useless – Mother could hear my heartbeat from the other side of the hill, so she surely knew I was crying – but that small scrap of pride was all I had.

Mother stood there for a long while. Then she crept forward and covered me with fresh leaves before lying beside me. “I will feed you, always,” she whispered. “Because you are my baby.”

In addition to hunting, my mother was a phenomenal creator of shelters. Sometimes she lived within the earth, snaking through loam and tree roots like treasure-hoarding dragons of old.

Sometimes she lived in the trees. Many nights I watched in awe as her bones elongated and tore through her rough skin, stretching upward to twist among the branches like an ancient spider god. I would wait patiently, sometimes for hours, as Mother communed with the spirits buried in the roots.

And sometimes she lived in the shadows, creeping through the darkness to flush out food and threat alike. 

So, Mother tried to teach me to dig burrows. But I could not dig like her. I was too small and too soft, and far too frightened of the bugs and moles that tunneled through the earth.

So she tried to teach me to live among the tree branches, to rest and listen as the redwoods murmured the long, strange histories of the earth. But my bones could not stretch like Mother’s. I could not twist my arms to match the branches. My skin could not interlock with the treebark, and my blood was too sluggish to melt into the sap.

So Mother tried to teach me to live in the shadows. But the darkness terrified me. Every night, I hid and wept, imagining the legs of centipedes crawling across my skin. All the night creatures reveled in my fear; owls swooped down to taunt me and bats torpedoed toward me, giggling in their shrill, squeaking voices until mother slapped them out of the sky.

Finally Mother realized the futility of these lessons. So she dug a deep burrow just for me. She lined it with leaves and slurped the worms and roaches from the walls. When she finished, I burst into tears.

“Why do you weep?” she rasped.

“Because you do everything for me.” I knew the laws of nature. I knew the laws of forest creatures and their young. Young that were weak were killed in the nest. Young that could not learn to fend for themselves were abandoned to die. I was weak and soft and coated in terrible, ugly scars. “Why do you do everything for me?”

Mother snaked forward, long, large hands sinking into the earth. She curled around me and pulled me close. “Because you are my baby.”

Mother did not always live in the burrow with me. She roamed the mountains. She burrowed with moles, slithered with snakes, grazed with elk, hunted with wolves, stood with trees. 

When I was very small, I thought she ate the forest. But it was not that simple; she protected it, and in return it sustained her. “My heart,” she told me one rainy night, “is the forest, so this is how it must be.”

As I grew older, I developed rudimentary survival skills. I shied away from hunting big game – elk and deer, bears and boar – because I did not protect the forest. I gave it nothing; I only took, so I took as little as I could. I trapped rabbits, fished the streams, and ate wild berries. I dared take nothing else.

Once I could reliably feed myself, Mother stayed away for long stretches. Hours, then days, and finally weeks. I missed her terribly, with a deep, panicky ache.

I confronted her about it one balmy spring evening. “You leave me more and more,” I accused. “Soon you’ll leave me forever.”

“Never,” she murmured. A breeze twined around us, raising gooseflesh on my skin and rippling her long white hair. “I will never leave you.”

“But you do!” I screamed. “You already do!”

“Before you came, I lived among the trees, listening to their warnings. I slept in the warm earth as worms and centipedes nibbled my skin. I spent many of your lifetimes within the forest, little one – so many lives at a time that I forgot my own name. I do not leave you. I have left the forest for you.”

“I didn’t come here,” I sobbed. “You took me!”

“I did,” she said. “So I will never leave you. When you think I’ve left, silence yourself and listen. Listen for me the way I listen for the trees, the animals, and the stars. If you are silent and you are sincere, you will hear me.”

And then she left.

Fury and jealousy seared my heart like a wildfire. She insulted me, she humiliated me, and after all that she *left* me. Left me for the centipedes and the wolves and the stupid, chittering bats.

“I don’t need you!” I screamed. An owl hooted angrily in response. “I don’t need you at all!”

Then I ran for my burrow. As it the earthen door materialized before me, nodding with flowers and wild grasses, anger swelled inside me. It possessed me, this wild ball of misery borne of my own endless fear and inadequacy. And it spoke to me.
*Why should you return to the burrow?* it asked. Why indeed? It wasn’t mine. It was Mother’s. The entire forest belonged to Mother. Without her, the forest would have consumed me long ago.

So I turned away from the burrow and kept running. *I will find the end of the forest,* I decided. *I will leave it once and for all.*

I ran for days, in the process treating the forest with contempt. I stripped the trees of their leaves to make nightly beds. I threw rocks at birds and rabbits. I uprooted bushes and stripped entire groves of their berries, eating until I threw up from sheer excess. Then I ate again. Not out of hunger, not out of any need, but out of malice.

And one day – long after spring ceded to summer in a verdant explosion of heat and greenery – I heard voices.

I froze immediately. The only voice I knew was Mother’s – wet and low, an earthy, rib-shaking whisper. These voices were nothing like Mother’s. They were high and somehow infantile, with strange, shrill notes.

These voices…they were like *mine.*

Trembling, I dropped low and crept through the underbrush. Sun-warmed leaves brushed against my face, smooth but painfully crisp; the sun was taking its toll on them. I snaked over the ground, pretending I was Mother, slipping through the forest like an invisible snake.

I reached a break in the trees and peered through.

In a small clearing were four creatures. They had pink skin and wore heavy clothing that looked suffocating. There hands were small and soft. Their faces were smooth and babylike, somehow half-formed: wide eyed and rounded, with soft noses and plump flesh.

I touched my face – flat and smooth - and looked down at myself: mudstreaked, deeply tanned, and marked with a hideous mass of scars, but still *soft.* Hairless, small, weak. There was no mistaking it. These things in the woods – these overdressed, half-formed beings with small teeth and no claws and overlarge eyes – were like me.

They were men.

I stood up, propelled by panicky excitement, and strode forward. All at once, they froze.

“What the hell?” one whispered. He lifted something in his arms and pointed it at me. It was long and strange to me. Inorganic, not alive, with a wooden handle and a gleaming tube.

Just then, I realized something: the forest was silent. A few birds chirped and sang, and a few bugs emitted their persistent drone. But the vast majority – birds, insects, trees – were silent. No rabbits, no deer, certainly no bears. These things – these creatures like me, these *men* - had silenced the earth.

They’d stolen the forest from itself. 

We stared at each other for a long time as ever-growing summer heat filled the clearing like an invisible pool.

“Mother,” I whispered. “Mother, please help me.”

She did not. So I turned and ran.

The men immediately pursued. I could hear them: yelling, crushing the undergrowth, stamping on blossoms and bugs, snapping branches as they ran. The forest’s deathly silence was worse than any cry.

“There it is!” one of them screamed. A second later, the forest exploded: a deafening *boom* shook the trees and ate through the air as pain erupted on my shoulder. I didn’t dare stop or look. I pressed on, running and crying as the men came after me.

The forest seemed to punish me for my earlier cruelty. Brambles scratched my legs. Stones cut my feet. Branches swiped at my face, leaving deep, stinging runnels. I thanked the forest for its kindness. I thanked it for punishing me, rather than stopping me. 

The men gasped and wailed amongst themselves. “What the hell is it?” “I don’t know. *I don’t know!*” “Is it a…a kid?” “Look at its face. Look at its fucking face! That isn’t a kid!”

Something suddenly filled my ears, drowning the sounds of the men and the forest. A deep, musical rushing, like birdsong transformed into a turbulent river.

And then Mother came, erupting from the trees like a great beast of old. But that’s what she was, after all. A great beast, surely a daemon of the ancient world.

She pounced upon the men, batting them the way a housecat bats its toys. She clamped one between her claws, squeezing until his head separated and went rolling across the ground.

One by one Mother caught and tore them, shredding them the way she shredded leaves for my bedding. Blood streaked the forest, turning the dirt to mud and dripping from the trees like sluggish rain. 

Mother dug her claws into the skull of the last survivor and cracked it open like a fruit. Blood and grey brain glistened in the sunlight. The man screamed, and screamed, and screamed.

Mother leaned down and extended her tongue. It curled outward, pale and orange-gold like sunrise on a cold, clear morning, and delicately slurped his brains. Curl by curl, like so many worms from my burrow walls.

By the time he stopped screaming, the forest had returned to its loud, familiar glory: murmuring trees, singing birds, skittering insects, grazing deer. 

I smiled and ran to Mother. She reared up and screamed, “*See what you’ve done!*”

Terror paralyzed me. I looked helplessly at her – blazing eyes, contorted face runneled with earth and wildflowers, sunbleached bone and pale, spongy rot. My mother, my beautiful daemon mother who claimed me out of revenge and raised me out of obligation, staring at me like I was a man.

“When you stone a bird, my heart stops! When you break a branch, my bones snap! When you selfishly strip the shrubs of their fruit, of their very birthright, my skin blisters! When you hurt the forest,” she roared, “*my heart bleeds!*”

I fell to my knees and hid my face. Mother rushed forward on her many limbs and wrapped long fingers around my throat. She lifted me up, dangling me over the forest floor. “I killed men for you! Now more will come! They will trample! They will cut! They will burn! They will kill! They will kill the bears and the cougars and the wolves, for they will blame the predators for what I have done for you! Do you see?” She shook me. The carnage below seemed to swing beneath me, a tapestry of blood-soaked earth and ruined corpses. “*Do you see?*”

“Yes, Mother,” I whispered. “I see.”

She dropped me. I hit the ground with such force it knocked the wind out of me. Mother pulled back and busied herself with one of the corpses. I looked up, shaking. Birds watched from the trees, quick and curious and full of condemnation. I averted my eyes as tears spilled.

Mother returned to me. She extended an arm and opened her hand. Upon her large palm were four eyes and a large, glistening heart. I stared at them blankly, then looked up at her.

“Four eyes,” she said. “One from each man. And the heart of the one that shot you. Eat.”

My lip quivered. I couldn’t tear my eyes away from the gore in my mother’s hand. A heart and eyes. Raw and plump, alive just minutes ago.

“Mother,” I said. “Please.”

“Are you of me?” she asked. “Or are you of man?”

The forest became painfully silent. The animals, the trees, and the insects, all waiting with bated breath.

“I am of you, Mother.” I plucked the first eye from her palm. It was round and curiously firm, with a sort of firm, watery texture I associated with half-rotten fruits. The pink, wormy optic nerve dangled. For a terrible moment I thought I would vomit.

Then I raised it to my lips and bit in.

The eyes were awful, the heart even worse: thick and almost impossible to chew. Mother had to tear it for me, slicing it into manageable pieces with her beautiful teeth. 

When I finished, Mother picked me up and, holding me tightly, streaked back to the burrow as night fell.

That night, I became ill. I shook and shivered and hallucinated for days. My mind bled with images of dangling eyes and glistening hearts and skulls cracked apart like pomegranates. Mother lay with my all the while, soothing me with ancient songs like birdsong turned to rivers, and cooling me with her damp, earthy breath.

Finally the fever broke. I sat up, gasping as the last vestiges of my nightmare drifted away.

Mother sat across the burrow, hunched over tiredly. “You are well,” she said. “I am glad, for I must leave.”

I blinked tiredly. “Why?”

“Men,” she said. 

“But you killed them.”

“There are more,” she said. “They creep into the forest, searching for their dead brethren. They are cutting the trees and crushing the flowers and killing the bears, my little one. If I don’t stop them, they will even come for you. I have to stop them. My heart is the forest, and so are you. I must protect both.”

A lump rose in my throat. Shame like I’d never known enveloped me. “I’m so sorry.”

“You are my baby. Babies must learn. By learning, they grow.”

“Mother,” I said. “Am I truly of man?”

Mother closed her eyes. For a long time, she did not speak. Then she drew a deep breath. “I took you from a cruel man. Listen. I will tell you now of the cruelties I endured.”

I listened, enraptured and horrified, as she spun her sorry tale.

Mother was once a young, beautiful human woman.

“Surely not more beautiful than you are now,” I objected.

“Listen!” she said.

Mother was alone in the world. She had no family or friends. She once had a family, but they harmed her greatly so she ran away. She lived in the forest, in a small, ragged tent. She ate wild berries, fished the lake, and boiled water to drink.

Laws are strange things. Though Mother hurt nothing and no one, she was breaking the law by living in the forest. She was found, and caught, and imprisoned. Separated from the trees and the birds, Mother faded quickly. Though she was only jailed for a short while, it nearly killed her. The day she was released was the best day of her life…

Or so she thought.

No sooner had Mother gathered her meager belongings and exited the jail than a guard came up beside her. “Where are you headed to?” he asked. “I’ll take you wherever you want to go.”

Mother was ecstatic. “Take me back to the forest,” she said. The guard obliged, driving her toward the woods. Except he stopped too soon. He stopped at a house. His house, it turned out.

The guard was a terrible man. He trapped Mother. He hurt her, tortured her, abused her in every way. He cut her open, he burned her, he snapped her bones. 

And he put a baby in her. Mother was so broken that he missed all signs of impending childbirth. When I came, Mother died.

“He dumped me in a vat of acid,” Mother told me, “and scattered my liquid remains among the trees. But then I heard you.” Mother smiled faintly. Crumbles of dirt and root fell from her face. “I heard your cry. Your need for me.”

I do not understand what Mother said next; it is difficult to translate. But the closest I can come is this. Everyone sings a song to those they love. Most aren’t able to hear these songs. If you can’t hear, it can’t help you. But if you can hear it, a song is the most powerful thing in the world. It kills. It calls. It consumes. It destroys. It strengthens.

And sometimes, it resurrects.

“When I reformed and breathed again, I stole you from your father,” Mother said. “Then I brought you here, because you are my baby.”

I wept silently, because I didn’t know what to say.

“I must go,” she said. “The trees and the animals need me now. So remember, little one. When you are silent and you are sincere, you will hear me.”

Then she whipped around – like a wolf, a snake, and hawk combined – and left.

She did not return.

At first, I thought nothing of it. I had made a terrible mess; I had summoned men. I had caused the forest to bleed. Mother had a great deal of work ahead of her.

But summer slowly bled into fall, and still Mother did not return. When the first snow came – dry and cold, skittering across the landscape like powder – I knew something was wrong.

The snows deepened. The forest drifted into its winter sleep, cloaked in ice and fog. Every night, I made myself silent. I mustered all the sincerity I could. And I listened for my mother’s voice.

It didn’t come.

I grew thin and sick. My skin burned even as I shivered. My chest grew congested, my throat so sore I couldn’t sleep. My breath came in sharp, pained wheezes.  Soon I became too weak to leave the burrow. I crawled to the doorway and ate snow. For sustenance, I slurped worms from the earthen walls. 

It was not enough, and I knew it.

Only then – in the quiet and peace and fear of approaching death – did I become truly silent. Only then did I hear the voice of my mother.

I heard her in my dreams: the low, rushing voice like music made into water. *I am coming,* she said. *I am coming, because you are my baby.*

I smiled, and slept. 

Next thing I knew, I was cold. Cold and wet and shivering, but *awake.*I shot up and screamed as my skin brushed the thick, flower-matted hide of my mother. I spun around, smiling, and froze.

Mother lay beside me, panting. Blood seeped from a hundred wounds, crusting her hair. The exposed bones in her face were crushed and concave, leaking gore and blood. Without opening her eyes, she smiled. “I heard you. I heard your song.”

Tears blurred my vision. My chest began to hitch. I couldn’t draw breath; it was like I was sick again, drowning in pus and trapped fluid. Only I wasn’t dying this time.

My mother was.

“Then stay,” I said. “You have to stay, because you can hear my song.”

“No,” she said. “You needed to see me again. But you do not need me.”

“I need you. Mama, *I need you.*”

“No,” she said. “I killed all who would harm you.”

“But what about the forest? The forest will kill me without you!”

She chuckled. Her breath came, terribly fast and increasingly weak. “You are of me. Remember. You are of me. You are my baby.”

My mother – my beautiful, ancient mother – drew a shallow breath, and lay still.

I lay beside her for many days. Then, when she began to stink, I left. A hiker eventually found me. A stupid, solitary hiker with a soft heart, a great deal of patience, and no fear.

When I learned to speak the words of men, the authorities lost no time in telling me that Mother was not really my mother. 

They discovered my identity (at least in a manner of speaking) through DNA. My real mother, they say, was a vagrant. A Jane Doe who lived in a tent in the national park. She was alone and defenseless, two things that attract human monsters. After a brief stint in jail for loitering, my mother ended up kidnapped, imprisoned, and tortured by an as-yet unidentified assailant who eventually tried unsuccessfully to dissolve her in acid. They think he attempted to dissolve my body, too. That’s why I am covered in scars. It is why I frightened those hunters so long ago: the acid burns make me look like a monster to men.

Since my real mother apparently died long ago, they decided that Mother – whoever she was – was nothing but a crazy, homeless child abuser.

But I know better.

Even so, I adapted. I had no choice. I am of my mother, but I live among men. That’s what animals must do; their young learn, grow, and adapt. If they don’t, they die. 

But I am not adapting anymore. At least, I am not adapting to live among men. My mouth is changing. Changing in ways that are terrible to people, but wonderful to me. It’s my teeth, you see.

I am growing my mother’s beautiful teeth.

Looking at my teeth in the mirror was frightening and electrifying. Joy and terror ran through my veins in equal measure. It had to mean something. So I fell silent. I became sincere. I listened.

And I heard.

I heard the voice of my mother: low and rushing, like birdsong turned to a wild river. She tells me I do not belong with men, because I am her heart, and her heart is the forest. She tells me I must return.

And she tells me she is waiting for me, because I am her baby.
There is no fear as potent as the fear of the unknown. No monstrous visage discovered yet has been as terrifying as the infinite potential for horror which exists before the mask is removed. 

That is why we humans, in our naive misunderstanding of the universal order, are gripped by the mortal fear of death. We think it the final frontier - the greatest imaginable unknown from whose penumbral shores no traveler may return. And so we cling desperately onto even the most dreary and anguished lives, suffering any known evil over our release into the beyond. 

But death is not to be feared, because death is very well understood. We have witnessed it, caused it, measured and recorded it to the last dying spasm of neuronal flickering. Even as I lay dying, it seemed silly to me that I should be afraid of the emptiness which reason promised to expect. 

While I was alive I wouldn't experience death, so there was no reason to be afraid now. When I was dead, I wouldn't be capable of experiencing anything, so fear still had no cause. That thought brought me great comfort as I felt the last erratic struggle from my heart against the inevitable conclusion I approached. It wasn't until I was finally drifting off to sleep that a final intrusive doubt bubbled in my brain:

*What if it isn't death which is to be feared? What if it is what lies beyond?*

And so troubled did I slip beyond mortal understanding, stepping into a world as far forsaken by reason as I was now from life. I was still in the hospital room, but the bustle of nurses and the beeping machines lost their opacity as though I was mired in swiftly descending dusk. It seemed as though every sound was an echo of what it once was; every sight a reflection. With each passing moment, the world was becoming less real...

But all that sight and sound - all that being - it wasn't simply disappearing. It was *transforming* into a figure beside me. The less real my room became, the more real the figure was, until presently it existed in such sharp actuality that nothing beside it seemed real at all. 

His cloak was black. Not the *color* black, but its essence. It was as though seeing a tiger after a lifetime of looking at a child's crude drawing and thinking that's all a tiger was. Reality flowed around his scythe like a brush through water colors, and I could see each elementary particle and time itself sunder across its blade. 

Surely this, I thought. This is why we were taught without words to fear death. I clutched at my hospital blanket to cower from the intensity of the Reaper's presence, but the once soft cotton now flowed like translucent mist through my hands. I knew in that moment that nothing could hide me from the specter's grasp, for he was the only real thing in this world. 

**You're late.**

They weren't words. My head ached from the strain of this knowledge as my lateness was burned into my awareness, imparted like an inescapable law of physics as unequivocal as gravity. 

**We don't have time for the usual speech. Hurry now.**

I felt myself swept up around him like dirt in a hurricane. Before I knew what was happening, we were outside the hospital, moving at such a frenzied pace that the world around me blurred into a dizzying tunnel of flashing light. 

**If you're lucky, IT will have gotten bored of waiting for you.**

I had too many questions, all fighting for attention in the forefront of my brain without any making their way out. 

**You're quiet. I admire that. Usually people ask too much.**

"What's the point?" I asked. My voice felt flat and dead compared to his overwhelming substance. "How can I try to comprehend something so beyond mortal knowledge?"

**You can't. But it's still human nature to ask.**

We weren't slowing. If anything, our pace was increasing. I wasn't running, or flying, or anything of that nature. It was more like the rest of the world was moving around us while we stood still. A vague darkness and a heavy damp smell made me guess that we'd gone underground, but I couldn't say for sure. 

"One question then," I asked. "What else is here besides you?" 

**And that is why questions are pointless. Death is not a place, or a person. It's all there is.**

Troubling thought, but made more so by the growing howl which began reverberating the rocks around me. We still seemed to be descending into the Earth, and the air was growing warmer and denser now. The sound continued to mount as though the world itself was suffering. 

"Then what is IT?"

**What I'm here to protect you from.**

The rocks split from a flash of his scythe, and the ground opened further into a sprawling cavern dominated by a subterranean lake. 

"But I thought you said you were all there is."

**No, I said Death was all there is.**

We weren't moving any longer. Light glinted off the scythe from some unseen source and streamed into the lake like a tributary. Once inside, the light didn't reflect or dissipate, but swirled and danced like luminescent oil. 

"I thought you were Death."

**Death is not a person.**

The light was taking a life of its own inside the water. The still surface began to churn with the enigmatic energy. It took my scattered mind a long while to realize that *I* was the energy flowing into the lake. I still felt tangled up with the figure, but we now existed as a beam of light boiling into the water. 

I knew I wouldn't understand, but that didn't stop me from feeling frustrated. If Death is all there is, then what is IT? What was waiting for me? The water pressed in around me and I couldn't speak, although I could still draw breath somehow. 

**IT is here.**

Something was in the water around me. Hands grabbed me by the legs and began dragging me downward. I was amazed to even discover I had limbs again. They felt so alien to me that it was almost as though this body was not my own. Light flashed from the scythe - then again. The hands let go, and the howling rose once more. The Reaper was fighting something, although I couldn't make any sense of the battle except for the madness of thrashing water.

The howling Earth reached its crescendo, and the *screams* made the water around me convulse and contract like living fluid. Had the Reaper cut it? Was I safe? I began to explore my new body in the water, but just when I thought I was beginning to gain control the hands clutched me once more. I lurched downward, struggling in vain against their implacable grip. 

"What is here?" I tried to shout against the suffocating liquid. "What is happening?" 

But I couldn't sense the Reaper's presence any longer. The heat was unbearable, but the cold depths the hands were dragging me toward was even worse. I became aware of a blinding light at the bottom of the lake, and though I struggled, the hands dragged me inexorably onward. 

**I'm sorry. I couldn't fight IT off.** It seemed to be coming from so far away now. **We will try again next time.** 

The pressure - the heat - the noise - the hands dragging me into the blinding light. I closed my eyes and screamed. I was free from the water now, but I just kept screaming. I couldn't bear to look at IT - whatever had stolen me. Whatever was Death but wasn't - whatever even the Reaper could not defeat. 

Then words spoke. Real, human words from a real human mouth. My senses were so distraught that I couldn't make sense of them, but I'm guessing they were something like: 

"Congratulations! He's a healthy baby boy." 

Most people can't remember the day they die, or the day they were born. I happen to remember both, and I know that [they are the same](http://www.facebook.com/sirtobiaswade). A few points before we start. 

Firstly, I am not the protagonist of this story. I just went to university with her, and though she went on to become a professional writer, I most certainly did not. She'll be taking over from me further down but, until then, please forgive my slightly awkward delivery while I give you guys the necessary context. 

Secondly, I don't know what you will make of the following events, and I'm sure many of you might consider it all some sort of hoax. I wasn't present for any of what transpired in Phoenix, Arizona but I can vouch for the person who wrote the following logs. She is not, and has never been, a fantasist.

Ok so I once knew a girl called Alice Sharma. She was an undergrad at Edinburgh Uni the same time I was. My educational poison was History, a degree which has greatly benefited my career as a bicycle repairman. Alice Sharma studied journalism, though perhaps "studied" isn't the word. It's not an exaggeration to say that she lived and breathed the subject. Editor-in-chief of the campus paper, recognisable voice of student radio. She was frustratingly tunnel visioned, and she was a journalist in her own right before anyone gave her a professional shot. 

We met in student halls and became friends almost immediately. A meandering waster trying to stay off his parent's farm and an intrepid, ambitious reporter may not seem the most obvious pairing, but I learned not to question it. She was inspiring, and smart and she proofread all my essays. I’m not too sure what she saw in me.

We were eventually flatmates down in London where she chased her dream and I chased my tail. She got a few jobs here and there, but nothing befitting of her skills. After months of fruitless internships and rejections, Alice called a flat meeting, telling us that she was moving to America, accepting a position chasing stories for National Public Radio. The job had come out of the blue, the result of a hail mary application she thought had been dismissed out of hand. We threw her a bittersweet going away party and put the room up for rent.

That party was the last time I saw Alice Sharma. She dropped out of contact a few months after her departure. Complete radio silence. I assumed she was just busy so I carried on with my small but happy life, and waited for her to pop up on television with some important words below her name; Chief Correspondent, Senior Analyst… something like that.

The radio silence was broken last week, and, for reasons you’ll glean further down, I’m less happy about it than I would’ve thought.

Arriving home from work I found a lone email in my otherwise bare inbox. An email that would later be described as "suspicious" by my tech literate friends. Despite being born in the early 1990's I didn't own a computer until uni, and I've missed several important lessons in the world of cyberspace. Lessons like "Don't call it Cyberspace" of course and more importantly, "Don't open emails with no text, no subject and no sender's address."

I realise most of you would have deleted this anonymous, blank email immediately, my friends certainly would have, but beyond my basic ignorance about online safety, something further compelled me to open it. The only thing of substance in the entire message was a zipped folder, labeled:

Left.Right.AS

I don't have to explain what I was hoping those final initials stood for.

Opening the zipped folder I found myself staring at a stack of text files. Each one titled with a date, continuing sequentially from the very earliest file "07-02-2017". (To any Americans in the room this is the 7th of February).

I’ve since read the files a few times, and shown them to some friends. They don't know what to make of it either, but they certainly aren't as concerned as me. They think Alice is just in a creative writing phase and, if I didn't know her, I’d have to agree. But the thing is, I do know her. Alice Sharma only cares about the truth and if that's the case with these files, insane as it may sound, then it’s very possible my friend has documented her own disappearance.

The people who suggested this forum said you discuss strange occurrences etc. If you guys have come across anything to do with the below, or know any of the people involved, then please send any information my way. 

Has anyone here heard of the Left/Right Game?

[Part 2](https://redd.it/7bkk41)

[Part 3](https://redd.it/7cf4h8)

[Part 4](https://redd.it/7dmuvp)

[Part 5](https://redd.it/7fdu9c)

[Part 6](https://redd.it/7h9jzb)

[Part 7](https://redd.it/7jabqd)

[Part 8](https://redd.it/7loh1l)

[Part 9](https://redd.it/7q3x6e)

[Part 10](https://redd.it/7uyiss)

***
The Left/Right Game
[DRAFT 1]
07/02/2017

They say great stories happen to those who can tell them. Robert J. Guthard is an exception to that rule. As I sit at his table, sip his coffee and listen to him recount the past 65 years it sounds like he's reading off a shopping list. Every event, his first job, his second wedding, his third divorce, none of them receive more than one or two sentences. Rob plows through the years, the curt, dispassionate curator of his own personal history. Yet the story itself is so fascinating, so rich with moments and so wildly meandering that it somehow stands on its own merits. 

It's a great story, no matter how you tell it.

By the time Rob was 21, he'd gotten married, had a son, worked as a farmer, a mover, a boat engineer, and grown estranged from his spouse... Here's him talking about that.

**ROB:** Course my wife started to get dissatisfied, I was away a while.

**AS:** For work?

**ROB:**Vietnam.

**AS:** You were in Vietnam? How was that for you?

**ROB:** I ain't never been back since.

That was everything he had to say concerning his first divorce, and the entire Vietnam war.

Rob had four marriages after that, and even more professions. After the war he worked with a firm of private detectives, got shot at once by the mob, then he became a courier, which is how a poor boy from Alabama got to see the world.

**ROB:** I been to most of the continents with that job. I been to India. You from India?

**AS:** My mum and dad are from India yeah.

**ROB:** See I could tell.

He'd been arrested once in Singapore, after one of his packages had been found to be full of white powder. He spent three days locked up before someone got around to checking the substance. It was chalk. 

A friend he made during his brief custody, Hiroji Sato, invited Rob to stay with him in Japan. Just getting over the breakup of his third marriage, Rob took the offer. He stayed in Japan for another 5 years.

**ROB:** The Japanese are good people. Good manners. But they got all these urban legends and ghost stories that Hiroji was crazy for, spent all his free time chasing them down. Like, you heard of Jorogumo?

**AS:** I don't think so"

**ROB:** Well she's this spider lady lives in the Joro Falls round Izu. Meant to be real pretty but real dangerous. Hiroji took us out there to get a picture of her.

**AS:** Did you ever meet Jorogumo?

**ROB** Nah she didn't show. None of them did. I didn't believe at all until we went to Aokigahara

Aokigahara, affectionately titled the Suicide Forest. The next stop on Rob's adventure. It's an area of woodland at the base of Mount Fuji, a notorious hotspot for young people looking to take their own lives. Hiroji, Rob's ghost obsessed jailmate turned best friend, took him to Aokigahara to chase "yurei" the ghosts of the forest.

**AS:** Did you find anything? In Aokigahara?

**ROB:** Well I ain't gonna ask you to believe me. But I was a PI. Professional cynic. Even I can't deny there was a spirit in those woods.

From that moment on, Rob's sentences start getting longer. A childlike excitement creeps into his voice. I get the distinct feeling we're moving beyond background, beyond Rob Guthard's old life, and towards his new one. The one he wants to talk about. The one that led him to contact the show.

**ROB:** It walked up to me through the trees. Looked like static you see on a TV screen but it had a human shape almost.

**AS:** Almost?

**ROB:** It was missing an arm. It reached out to me but I bolted outta that forest so fast. Hiroji never saw it, holds it against me to this day.

Hiroji had good reason to be annoyed. Rob says that Mr Sato had been going to the forest 2-3 times per year for three decades. To have a rookie come along and claim to have seen a yurei on his first trip? I'd be more than a little cranky.

But Rob didn't stay a rookie for long. In fact, it was in those woods that he discovered his current passion. The supernatural, or more accurately, the documentation and investigation of urban legends. Legends like Bloody Mary, the Jersey Devil, Sasquatch. Rob has looked into them all.

**ROB:** I figured if one was true then who knows how many others could be.

**AS:** How many have you proven so far?

**ROB:** Since Aokigahara? Ain't none of em had any proof to em. Except for one. That's why I called you guys up.

At this point, Rob can’t hope to repress his smile.

The Left/Right game appeared on a paranormal message board in June 2016. Only a few people frequently visited the forum and, of these regulars, only Rob took an interest in the post.

**ROB:** The whole thing had a level of detail you don't see in other stories.

**AS:** What details grabbed your interest?

**ROB:** Logs. High quality pictures. The guy documented everything, said he wasn't gonna play the game anymore. I think he wanted somebody to keep investigating.

**AS:** And you were that somebody.

**ROB:** That's right. I set about trying to verify his information right away.

**AS:** And how did it go?

**ROB:** Well... It didn't take long to realise the Left/Right Game is the real thing.

The rules of the Left/Right game are simple. Get in your car and take a drive. Take a left, then the next possible road on the right, then the next possible left. Repeat the process ad infinitum, until you wind up somewhere... new. The rules are easy to understand, but Rob says their not so easy to follow.

**ROB:** There ain't all that many roads where you can turn left and right and left and right and keep going. Most of the time you find yourself at a dead end or needing to turn in the wrong direction. Phoenix is built on a grid system so you can keep going left and right as long as you need to.

**AS:** Did you move to Phoenix for the Left/Right game?

**ROB:** That's right.

I try not to seem incredulous. Selling your house in another state, packing up and moving your whole life to Phoenix, Arizona just to play a game you saw on the internet? It seems like insanity. Rob smiles as he reads my expression. I can clearly read his expression too. "You'll see." It says. "Just wait."

I wouldn't have to wait long. Included within the 9 page submission Rob sent our show, was a long list of suggested items the chosen reporter should bring with them. Clothes for three days, a pocket knife, matches, bandages. There were also a set of qualifications the reporter should have. The ability to drive, basic vehicle maintenance and its human equivalent... first aid training. He didn't just want to talk about the Left/Right Game. He wanted to take one of us along.

Rob leaves a short while later to embark on a few errands, "Prepping the Run", as he calls it. He shows me to the guest room and we part ways, on good terms but very much aware of the other's poorly veiled opinions. He knew I saw him as a charming obsessive, chasing after a fairy tale. He saw me as a naive cynic, on the cusp of a new world. All I could think as I heard the front door close is that by tomorrow afternoon, one of us would be right.

More after this.

When I wake up the next morning, Rob is in my room, holding a tray which he'd knocked on the bottom of to rouse me. I don't manage to record the start of our conversation.

**ROB:** - I got bananas, strawberries, chocolate syrup. We got some more downstairs but I wanted you to wake up to something good. We won't be eatin' this stuff on the road."

Rob has made me waffles. He sets them down on the night stand and talks through the coming day as I eat. I'll admit it feels a little uncomfortable, waking up in a stranger's home to find said stranger already standing over me, but I quickly move past it. I tell myself that he’s an older man, accustomed to living alone in his own house, not usually having to think about boundaries. Anyway, he certainly knows his way around a waffle iron.

**ROB:** We hit the road at 9. I wanted to give you time to get ready before everyone shows up.

**AS:** There are other people coming?

**ROB:** We got a 5 car convoy on the road today. They'll be here in an hour.

This is the first I’ve heard of a convoy, and to be honest I’m surprised. The game is Rob's obsession, and I’m here at his request. The idea that anyone else would have an interest in today's drive is a little perplexing.

Half an hour later, sated, showered and dressed in the "functional clothing" Rob had so painstakingly outlined, I take my pack out to the porch. Rob’s already there, waiting for his associates to show up.

**AS:** I thought you'd be conducting a few more errands.

**ROB:** If you ain't prepared by the morning of, you ain't prepared.

**AS:** Hah ok I guess that's fair. Oh, Rob is the garage locked? The inside door won't budge and I wanted to mic up the car.

**ROB:** Yeah it's locked up I'll open it for ya.

**AS:** Thank you.

**ROB:** In fact it's about time I wheeled her out. Fair warning Ms Sharma, she's a thing of beauty.

To Rob Guthard, beauty took the form of a dark green Jeep Wrangler. Rob climbs in and lets it roll out of the garage, where it dominates every inch of driveway. The car is large; four doors with a roof enclosing the entire compartment. It’s also been modified extensively, yet another example of Rob's dedication to the game.

**ROB:** What're you thinking?

**AS:** I think you're two caterpillar treads short of driving a tank.

**ROB:** Hah yeah I fixed her up good. I put the winch in, heavy duty tires, the light rig on top is LED's. They'll make midnight look like noon but they don't use hardly any power.

**AS:** Aren't Jeeps open top usually?

**ROB:** Not all. This is the Unlimited. I like to have a covered car when I head on the road.

I climb in and stow my pack. Rob had removed the back seats to afford more storage space. The place is packed to the brim. Jerry cans of gasoline, barrels of water, rope, snacks and his own neatly packed set of clothes.

I wonder if the rest of our convoy would take the game so seriously.

**ROB:** We got Apollo coming up in 10 minutes. No one else has given me a time. I sent the schedule weeks ago, this always happens.

**AS:** His name's Apollo?

**ROB:** That's his call sign. Apollo Creed I think he said.

**AS:** Why are you using call signs?

**ROB:** Did I not tell you? Oh yeah we're gonna use call signs on the road, keep communication clear.

**AS:** What's your callsign?

**ROB:** Ferryman.

**AS:** ... What's my call sign?

**ROB:** I thought about it. I was thinking London, you're from London right?

**AS:** I'm from Bristol.

**ROB:** Bristol? That’s fine I guess.

It’s less than ten minutes before Apollo turns the corner. Rob jumps out of his chair and paces briskly over to the edge of his property, as his first guest pulls up and steps onto the sidewalk.

Apollo vaguely resembles his namesake, dark skinned, tall and noticeably well built, though it’s clear he couldn’t be less of a fighter. This Apollo Creed is all smiles and seems to have a penchant for laughing at his own jokes.

**AS:** How far have you come?

**APOLLO:** I've come out of Chicago. Took three days hard driving.

**AS:** And you know Rob from the forums?

**APOLLO:** Everybody knows Rob, Rob's the god! Ahaha

Rob walks over to Apollo's car, gesturing him over to talk shop. Rob’s clearly impressed with Apollo's choice of vehicle, a blue Range Rover packed to the ceiling with kit. I was more impressed with Rob himself. Somehow this 65 year old farmer's son had become respected in a vast online community. My dad is Rob’s age and he's just discovered copy and paste.

The rest don't take long to arrive. Two Minnesotan librarians, also around Rob's age, pull up in a grey Ford Focus. They’re brother and sister, and they've shared ghost hunting as a hobby their entire lives. I find it hard to suppress a smile when they meekly introduce themselves as Bonnie and Clyde.

**CLYDE:** We would have gotten here sooner we had to drop by to get some blankets. Pleasure to meet you ma'am.

**AS:** Pleasure to meet you too.

**CLYDE:** Would you be the journalist?

**AS:** That's right.

**CLYDE:** You used to write for the town paper didn't you?

He's talking to his sister there, she nods. Clyde is clearly the spokesperson for the pair, yet they both seem incredibly shy. Whether they admire the famous outlaws, or just the name, it's pretty clear they couldn't be more different from the real thing.

Next to show up are Lilith and Eve, English Lit students at New York University and proprietors of the YouTube channel Paranormicon. Unlike Bonnie and Clyde, Lilith and Eve have no issue holding a conversation. As soon as they learn who I am, and what I do for a living, they attempt to conscript me for an expedition to Roswell.

**LILITH:** We have a friend there, he's been seeing some-

**EVE:** -He's a seismologist

**LILITH:** Yeah and he's been recording readings over the years that show subterranean movement. Predictable movement.

**EVE:** We're going to see him in July, but we could work it around you if you're free.

**AS:** I'll have to check my schedule

**EVE:** OK cool let me give you my email...

They quickly hurry off to film an intro for their latest video, featuring a quick interview with Rob, who seems pretty welcoming of the attention.

The last two cars arrive within a few seconds of each other. A lithe, strong willed older lady who goes by Bluejay and a younger man going by the callsign “Ace”. Bluejay has arrived in a grey Ford Explorer. Ace, much to Rob's annoyance, has arrived in a Porsche.

**ROB:** Did you think that's gonna help on the road? I didn't write that-

**ACE:** It's my car. What am I meant to do,? It's my car.

**ROB:** You didn't read my itinerary, you got nothing packed in there.

**ACE:** I did read it sir OK? Calm down. I have a bag, I won't ask you for anything.

**ROB:** Well I know that's true.

Ace and Rob were off to a bad start. Ace takes a phone call, and despite my best efforts to get an interview with Bluejay, she doesn't seem interested in talking to a journalist.

With five cars, and seven travellers waiting for a green light, Rob hands out radios and charging packs, then launches into a quick safety briefing. Wear seatbelts. Stay in position. Communicate clearly and often. It’s at this moment I start to feel a little dismay. I like Rob, and clearly so does everyone else. He'd convinced all of them to drive across the country to join in with his game. I start to worry what will happen in the likely event that the whole thing isn’t real. Would Rob lose the respect of his peers? Would he accept failure when it comes? After seeing the effort he’s put into these runs, the next few hours have the potential to be wildly uncomfortable.

With a smile and a few encouraging words, Rob ends his briefing and beckons me over to the Wrangler. I clamber inside and make myself as comfortable as possible.

**ROB:** You ready for this Bristol?

**AS:** I'm ready.

**ROB:** Ok then let's hit the road.

The Wrangler pulls out of the driveway, and the convoy follows in order of arrival. Apollo, Bonnie & Clyde, Lilith & Eve, Bluejay and Ace keep a steady pace behind us as we come up to the first corner.

Rob slowly and deliberately turns left, checking on the others in his rear view mirror. He looks back to the road as Ace’s Porsche completes the first turn of the game. Shortly afterwards, Apollo checks in on the CB radio.

**APOLLO:** This is Apollo for Ferryman. How many to more go Rob? ahahaha

**ROB:** Hah as many as it takes.

I can tell Rob wanted the to reserve the radio for something other than Apollo's quips. But he seems to like Apollo enough to let it slide. I'm not sure Ace would have received the same treatment. We take the next right, then another left. Now safely assured that everyone's following correctly, Rob speaks my thoughts aloud.

**ROB:** You're wondering the same thing Apollo is.

**AS:** What do you mean?

**ROB:** You're wondering how many turns we're gonna take before we hit some wall or something. Before you find out this is all just a story.

**AS:** Does that disappoint you?

**ROB:** I'd be disappointed if you weren't thinking something like it. But now we're on the road I gotta say something and you gotta listen to it.

**AS:** OK...

**ROB:** We're coming up to a tunnel soon. Any time before we reach it you can get out, walk in any direction you like, and you won’t be in the game no more. Once we go through, you gotta retrace the route we took to get yourself back out that tunnel. That's when you’re home. And you gotta convince someone to take you back in a car coz I ain't ferrying you back 20 minutes in. You got till the tunnel to skip out on this, understand?

**AS:** I understand. Though I have to say I'm getting little nervous.

**ROB:** Ain't nothing wrong with a little nervous.

We've taken 23 turns by this point. Already I feel like we're traversing the city pretty effectively. Rob's heavily modified Wrangler solicits a few impressed glances from passersby, as well as several honks of respect from other Jeep drivers. Other than those few moments, everything seems completely indistinguishable from a regular morning drive. I even start to worry if there’ll be anything at all for this story. “Reporter Takes Drive With Interesting Man” isn’t exactly Pulitzer worthy.

Turn 33 leads us onto a short, unassuming street. A row of small businesses in a quiet Phoenician neighbourhood; liquor, second hand clothing, tools and, at the end of the street, a little shop selling antique mirrors. Ten or so people shuffle along the sidewalk, smiling, talking, planning their weekends. The only lone person is a young woman in a grey coat..

I briefly glimpse her at the end of the street, standing on our next corner, the back of her coat reflected in fifty old mirrors. Even from a distance I can see that she’s sullen, wide eyed and nervous. She shifts constantly on her feet, tugging at the button of her coat.

I look away to write some notes as we roll down the street. When I look up again, the woman is standing by my window, staring right at me. She’s smiling, a wide, unfaltering grin that seems almost offensive in its complete insincerity.

**GREYWOMAN:** Lambs at the gate. Hoping for something better than clover when all they find are things worse than slaughter.

**AS:** Rob what's happening?

**ROB:** Ignore her.

**GREYWOMAN:** He wanted to leave me so I cut him out. The lake was hungry it drank the wound clean.

**AS:** Miss, are you alright?

The smile vanishes, it snaps from her face and suddenly, the woman is furious.

**GREYWOMAN:** What do you think you're doing?! Have you gone mad?!

I reflexively press myself back in my chair as the woman, wild eyed and gaunt, slams her fists against my window, with every intent of breaking through.

**GREYWOMAN:** Would you dance down the lion’s tongue? It will shred you, you whore! It will shred you down to your sins! You fucking bastard!

Rob puts his foot down, and the Wrangler rolls defiantly away from the woman. As we turn the corner I watch her as she wretches, her every movement cradled in abject hysteria. She yells despairingly at the rest of the convoy, bursting into tears when the last car passes her by. 

As she shrinks into the rear view mirror, I see her turn to a large mirror on the side of the shop, which the owner is in the process of polishing. I watch as she walks up to it, and with a convulsant scream, slams her head into the glass.

The mirror cracks around her forehead, the owner jumps back in shock, and as the woman pulls her head from the mirror's surface, the fractured spider’s web is dripping red. It all happens in a split second, and she quickly swerves from my view as we take the next left.

**AS:** Rob, what was that?

**ROB:** She's there sometimes.

**AS:** On that street?

**ROB:** On the 34th turn.

**AS:** Who is she?

**ROB:** I don't know. She's never acted out that much before though. Must be a special trip.

I find Rob's lack of concern a little unpleasant, and his implication that this woman's ravings were the symptom of an internet game leaves me more than a little perturbed. As I see it, there are a few explanations for what just happened, and none of them lead to a comforting conclusion.

If we had just encountered a bonafide crazy person, then one could argue that Rob is just seeing what he wants to see. Maybe he'd bought into the game’s story so much that every strange but explainable occurrence would be rationalised as the next step in his favourite paranormal narrative.

Alternatively, the woman could have been an actor, a more elaborate theory sure, but not unheard of. People have lied to the show before and Rob was receiving a tonne of publicity for this attempt from Lilith, Eve and I. I admit, Rob didn't seem like a liar, but good liars never do.

There is a third alternative however. An alternative which, if you put logic aside, explains the all troubling little details that I couldn't help but notice. Because as strange as the grey woman was, isn't it stranger that no one on the street would react? I couldn't recall a single glance in her direction by anybody on the sidewalk. Perhaps that theory falls apart when you consider the shock on the mirror seller's face but, when I think about it, he only reacted once the mirror shattered, and even then, I feel like his attention was on the mirror itself.

The radio crackles.

**LILITH:** Lillith to Bristol. Sara... Eve got that on camera! Do you have audio?

**AS:** I think it picked her up.

**LILITH:** My god that was so weird. Can you send us the file when we stop? Can you ask Ferryman when we're stopping?

**AS:** When's our stopping point?

**ROB:** For them, in about 30 minutes. For you? Well, you tell me.

Rob turns off a busy street just before a large intersection, onto a much quieter stretch of two lane road. Ahead of us the road slopes downward, leading into an underpass, which disappears into darkness.

We'd arrived at the tunnel.

**AS:** What is this supposed to pass under?

**ROB:** Ain't supposed to pass under anything, it's just there.

**AS:** And if we weren't playing the game?

**ROB:** Then it won't show. The question is, are you playing the game or not?

Rob turns to me. It’s the first time he’s taken his eyes off the road since we started. He pulls the car to a slow stop at the mouth of the tunnel.

**ROB:** You get out now you can go wherever you wanna go, but through there you'll need a car to get yourself home and, like I said, mine ain't turnin round for a long while. You understand?

It’s a dramatic statement, but unsettlingly, it doesn’t feel like he’s attempting to dramatise. It feels like I’m having something genuinely asked of me. Am I ready for what’s to come? Do I accept the risks involved? Do I consent to be taken down this road, and the next road, and the next? Am I prepared to see this game through, real or otherwise, to its end?

**AS:** What are you waiting for?

Rob smiles, and turns back to the road. He picks up the CB radio holds down the button on the side. The microphone crackles.

**ROB:** This is Ferryman to all cars. Anyone want to step out then pull to the side now. Otherwise, stay in formation and have some supplies at hand. We got a long ways to go.

Much like the game I’m so tentatively playing, my view of Robert J. Guthard seems to change direction frequently. I’d heard all about his life, but I’m sure that I know him. I like the guy, but I’m not certain that I trust him. And though I admire his dedication to the Left/Right Game, I’m not sure I’ll like where it might lead us. Yet as he takes us into the tunnel, his face vanishing and reappearing under the dim sodium lights, I can that tell he expects this trip to be a major step in his already impressive story, and this time, for better or for worse, I’m along for the ride.It was the advertisement’s outright simplicity that caught my attention.

“Revolutionize science! Earn $5000! Call us now!”

I wish I could say I didn’t know why I called them. I wish I could say it was some act of God or deception that drove me into their waiting arms. But that would be a lie. The truth is I called them because I needed the money. Because I had gotten laid off at the publishing company I worked at and I was having trouble finding steady work. Because I was months behind on rent and facing my second eviction notice. Because I didn’t want to be a failure.

I called them for selfish reasons.

Who are they? I’m not exactly sure. In retrospect, their obvious obfuscation of their identity should have been a red flag to me. But at the time, their request seemed too interesting, their reward too vital, for me to risk losing the chance to help them. My best guess is that they’re a group of private researchers that are funded by some super-corporation. They must be. Otherwise, there was no way they would have been able to pay for the machine.
They showed me the machine the first time I met with them. It was kept in a cavernous room in the basement of a five-story office building. It was a work in progress at that time – they were still connecting pipes and soldering wires. But even in an unfinished state, it looked truly magnificent.

“Have you ever heard of a sensory deprivation chamber?”

I had. In fact, I had actually been inside one before, when I was in college. Back then, I was on a real hippy-dippy spiritual journey. You know, meditating a lot, experimenting with psychedelic drugs. Primarily magic mushrooms. At some point along that journey, I felt motivated to spend an hour of my life (and sixty dollars of my student loans) inside a sensory deprivation chamber at a local spa.
Your standard sensory deprivation chamber is a large metal tank filled with about a foot of salt water. You step in and float in the water, then someone (a spa attendant, in my case) closes off the tank so it’s completely dark. With your vision obscured and your body suspended in the water, it’s supposed to feel like you no longer have your two primary senses. Depending on who you ask, this is supposed to be relaxing, enhance your creative process, allow you to reach higher consciousness, hallucinate, or maybe gain magic powers.

My experience with the chamber in college was fairly lackluster. I remember that the water was too frigid and the salt made my skin itch. It was difficult to concentrate on meditating or channeling my inner chakra or whatever the spa had promised. Truthfully, I did always wonder what it would have been like to get in one of those things while tripping on some magic mushrooms, but I never had the opportunity.
This sensory deprivation chamber didn’t look anything like the one I used in college. This chamber looked like a vivisected suit of medieval armor strewn across a large metal table. Thousands of tubes and wires connected to the metal body, which was about three times larger than my own body. The head or “helmet” of the chamber was collosal and round with a big brass pipe running out of its crown into the tiled-floor beneath it. On the walls surrounding the chamber were fifty or sixty computer screens, twenty or so server boxes, and various iterations of medical equipment that I couldn’t name if I tried. 

It dawns on me now that the utility bills and computers alone for the machine must have been many tens of times higher than the measly $5000 they offered me, not to mention the salaries of the dozens of labcoat-clad scientists manning those computer screens. Again, perhaps this should have raised alarm bells, but I ignored it with the focused ignorance of a man who was on the brink of homelessness.
The man who showed me the machine told me his name was Dr. Monason. He was a wrinkled, balding man with a clean shave and focused eyes of blue. When I saw him, he was always clad in blue scrubs and a clean white labcoat. 

Dr. Monason was the primary liaison for my involvement on this project. He explained the machine’s purpose, brought me the necessary waivers, and answered all my questions.

Questions like, “So what exactly am I supposed to do?”

“We want you to remain in our sensory deprivation chamber for three days.”

I’m sure my expression betrayed my sense of shock. 

“Three days? Is that – I mean will – Will that kill me?”

“You probably would still be alive after three days in pure isolation, though you would likely become gravely ill and suffering from immense dehydration. Regardless, the machine will hydrate, feed, and otherwise sustain you during the experiment. So there is no risk of bodily harm.”

Dr. Monason went on to explain how the machine worked.

“In your standard deprivation chamber, the occupant is deprived of their sense of sight, feeling, and, to a lesser extent, hearing. This deprivation, this process of shutting the outside world out from the occupant’s mind, decreases the burden on their brain. Thus, the occupant’s mind is free to wander more freely – free to think more creatively, to undergo a deeper state of thinking, to meditate, and so on.

“But there is a problem with standard sensory deprivation chambers. Although the brain is freed from most external stimuli, the visual and auditory, the brain will continue to be burdened by internal stimuli. That is to say that the brain is still very aware of its own carrier – the human body. The brain will still react to the hunger and thirst of the vessel that carries it. It will still process both the need to and the action of urination and defecation. These internal interruptions go on and on, but the point is that standard sensory deprivation chambers cannot truly be said to deprive the occupant of their senses.

“This machine is not your standard sensory deprivation chamber.”

Even a cursory glance at the machine made clear what the doctor meant. 

“The inside of the exoskeleton portion of the machine is lined with a soft rubber that will acclimate to maintain the exact temperature of human skin. The tubes and wires control and regulate a wide variety of bodily functions. Through these tubes, the body is automatically fed and hydrated. The unsavory functions of the body are handled with a catheter and another series of tubes. A respirator automates breathing and regulates saliva production.

“Even the body’s natural sense of touch is completely removed while in the machine. This IV cord injects a numbing solution into the bloodstream that completely shuts off all feeling. The numbing agent is the most critical asset of our sensory deprivation process.”

The list went on and on. It became clear that they had truly accounted for everything.

Even for me. I was one of hundreds of applicants to be part of the experiment. For the first time in my life, I was the first round draft pick. The scientists explained to me that I had been chosen for three reasons.

Number one: I had no prior history of mental or physical illness that would make my experience in the chamber subject to “intervening variables.” Their words, not mine.

Number two: My height and weight were close matches for the machine’s original shape. 

“Although the legs will have to be lengthened ever so slightly, you are by far the closest match to our initial design.”

And number three, the most critical: There was nothing happening outside of that chamber that would lead to an early termination of the experiment. I had no significant other, no job, no living family members – not even a houseplant to take care of. They could breathe easy knowing that I would remain peacefully within their contraption for the entire length of the experiment.

Number three was important to the scientists. They had specifically designed the machine to allow for three full days of isolation. If the machine’s process had to be interrupted early, it would take them a month to reset the machine and run the experiment again. 

Unfortunately, reason number three also meant there was nobody to come looking for me.

The intake process was long and detailed. I signed what felt like hundreds of liability waivers. I listened to warning after warning about the potential side effects.

“Although it is apparent that you have a clean bill of health, you should be aware the isolation process may be taxing on you. Our preliminary research suggests that disassociation, audio and visual hallucinations, depression, time dilation, anxiety, suicidal thoughts, and other neuroses are potential effects. However, we believe such effects to be unlikely.”

They had given me several weeks to prepare for the experiment. My only requirement during that time was that I didn’t substantially change my bodyweight or somehow develop bipolar disorder. Somehow, I managed. I spent those few weeks living normally – watching movies, applying for jobs, getting rejected for those jobs, and reading a few books.

When the day came, I was nervous despite Dr. Monason’s efforts to prepare me.

“The process will come in stages. At first, you may endure a mild state of stress. We anticipate that soon after, you will drift into a moderate state of euphoria for the remainder of the process. You will be signaled a few minutes before the experiment is over by a short audio queue. This way, you will emerge from your state of sensory deprivation slowly and be able to re-acclimate without any risk of shock.”

He played the audio queue for me, which was a short musical clip of bells ringing. 
Then, with little ceremony or deliberation, I was asked to asked to remove my clothing and climb inside the machine.

As I lay down inside the exoskeleton, I felt the warm rubber against my bare skin. Even with the chamber still open, I was confined on all sides by the metal shell of the machine. Slowly, the researchers began to attach a score of medical devices to my body. I felt strangely calm through every prick of an IV and uncomfortable insertion of a tube.
But, as a respirator was placed on my face, I began to feel a foreboding sense of unease. As I felt my body being constricted and held in place a single thought filled my mind.

Oh God what have I done.

The researchers pushed the helmet of the exoskeleton inward on either side of my head, sealing off my ears. The world went quiet. A bead of sweat began to trickle down my sides. Then I heard a voice, seemingly broadcast from inside my own head.
“Hello. This is Dr. Monason. I am speaking to you via a small speaker contained within the helmet of the exoskeleton. Your vital signs indicate that you are beginning to panic. This is to be expected. Please do your best to relax while we finish preparing you. I promise that the process will become pleasurable soon enough.”

Somehow telling me to relax just made me more anxious. Before I could react, I felt the machine close around my body. Already the numbing agent that was being piped into my bloodstream was starting to take away control of my extremities. I tried to push against the machine but found that my arms wouldn’t budge. I tried to scream but the respirator held my tongue firmly in place. I was unable to move, unable to do anything.

Except watch.

I could still watch as researchers scrambled around me to check vitals and prepare the exoskeleton to finish closing. I could still watch as a giant analog timer appeared on a tv screen above me and began to broadcast a time.

00:00:01:00 Until Deprivation Begins.

I tried again to scream. I tried again to plead to be let out. I found myself unable to feel any part of my body. I strained my eyes to try and get someone’s attention but no one seemed to be looking at me.

00:00:00:30 Until Deprivation Begins.

Had my tear ducts been operating, I would have begun crying.  Without nothing else to do, I began to pray that this was a bad dream. To pray that I was home in bed and not in this chamber.

00:00:00:05 Until Deprivation Begins.

The last thing I saw was the face of Dr. Monason leaning over me. Waving to me. Saying something I couldn’t quite understand. Closing the exoskeleton’s face over my own.

00:00:00:00 Until Deprivation Begins.

And then everything went dark.


If I had been in control of my own breathing, I would have begun hyperventilating immediately. 

I had never felt such a profound sense of darkness as in that moment. Unable to see even my own body, it was as if I had been extinguished from existence. My eyes swam in every direction in search of a single iota of light but found none.

After a moment’s consideration, I realized that I had now been in the machine for some time. I had no reference point for exactly how long. Without outside stimuli of any kind, my only mechanism of telling time was by counting individual seconds in my head.

Yet time ticked on. I found myself alternating between obsessing about my imprisonment and finding myself adrift in my thoughts. 

I began to consider the state of my life. My recent unemployment. My lack of close friends. I felt a wave of depression come over me. Was my life really so meaningless that I could be snuffed out of existence for three days and no one could possibly care?

I pondered the source of my isolation. I looked back to times I could have tried harder at my job. Images of friendships that I had let fall apart out of introversion and stagnation cascaded through my mind. 
And then I came across a thought in my head that, were my body not numbed to the point of immobility, would have made me burst out into laughter.

I felt lonely.

Well, of course, I felt lonely. I was, at that moment, the most alone human being there had ever been. Surely there were researchers only a few feet from my terrestrial body, but my mind had been isolated completely. I was as alone as someone could be.

I let my mind continue to wander. It felt as though I had been in the chamber for hours at this point. Although I had planned to spend this time planning some sort of creative endeavor – the great American novel, perhaps – I found my mind repeatedly coming back to my current predicament. 

Obsessively, I thought about my body and the container that currently housed it. The numbing medicine must have been truly quite something. I couldn’t feel the slightest wisp of breath passing through my nasal cavities or the rumble of my stomach.

It was then that a pair of intertwining thoughts collided in my mind.

A: Could I be dead?

B: No, of course not. That would be ridiculous. 

I knew how I had ended up here – I knew that I had signed up to engage in an experiment that would put me in this exact predicament. But I must admit, I no longer felt very alive. Without my body or the surrounding world as a reference point, it felt as though I had no assurance that I still existed. My thoughts began dueling with one another.

A: Surely I’m not dead. This is exactly what the experiment was supposed to do.

B: If you’re not dead then why can’t you feel anything? Why can’t you feel your breath or saliva or ANYTHING?

A: But I know I’m not dead because I’m thinking right now.

B: What does that mean?

A: You know? I think, therefore I am.

I think, therefore I am. A smarter man could have told you who said that. But I was left with just that proclamation, from an unknown source, as the only assurance that I was alive. As long as I was thinking, I was still alive.

I began to picture myself floating through a void in space. The image was clear in front of my eyes. My body lay flat, my arms stiff, as I rocketed past stars and unfamiliar planets. I watched my body weave past asteroids and through planetary rings. I felt the warmth of the sun on my body and the cold ice of the frozen planets on my skin.

Except I didn’t really feel those things. I had to remind myself of that. I was starting to imagine feelings that weren’t really there. I wasn’t sure how much I should try to avoid these feelings or just embrace them for the duration of the experiment. Just another question to ponder, I suppose.

There came a time when I realized that I had been in sensory deprivation for a long time. Since I had not been counting, it was impossible to know how long. It felt like it had been days already.

Had it been days already?

That was a worrying thought. In a timeless void, three days stretched on like an endless millennium. 

They had assured me that I would only be inside the machine for three days. But how could I know for sure? Once I was inside, I had no way of getting out. They could keep me for as long as they wanted to. Maybe that was their plan all along. 

A: How could they get away with that? 

B: Who knows what all those liability waivers I signed said. I stopped reading them after the third or fourth one. Maybe I agreed to this. 

A: You’re being crazy.

B: I don’t know if I’m being crazy or not. I don’t know how long I’ve been in here.

A: So count!

That was right. I had one way to tell how long I had been inside the machine. Counting.

One.

Two.

Three.

Four.

Five.

And on and on. I counted to 60. That was a minute. And then I counted another minute. And another and another and another. I just kept going and going. I never lost focus on the task at hand.
Then I hit 1000 minutes. Technically, 1000 minutes was only a little more than 16 and a half hours. Certainly not the three-day period I was supposed to be inside the machine. 

But that was 16 and a half hours on top of all the time I had already spent thinking about my life and dreaming about floating through space. Surely I had spent longer thinking to myself than I had counting.

I tried to guess how long I had been in the machine. It felt like it had been more than three days. I just kept trying to tell myself that I would be let out of the machine soon.

I let my mind drift off again. 

My body was once again floating through space. I watched it drift farther and farther out into an endless void of darkness. The planets and suns shrunk into oblivion until I was truly, deeply alone. 
In the black abyss, a creeping feeling of cold began to set in. Its biting sting spread up my legs and torso to my face. My naked skin turned a pale blue and begun to harden into a crystalline husk. As my body drifted farther into darkness, I watched the surface of my stomach crack and chip. 

Slowly, chunks of my body began to break off and float into the darkness. With each expelled scrap of flesh, a new wave of pain cascaded through my body. I found myself trying to grab onto my frozen body and put it back together, but my arms and legs were so cold that I could not budge. I tried to scream but my tongue had swelled so large that it filled my crumbling, frigid mouth.
All at once, my body exploded into an array of jagged, bloody shards of ice. The pain was indescribable.

Then I was, again, alone in the darkness. Bodiless. Without lungs to expel the panicked breaths I was so desperate to create. I had to keep telling myself – it wasn’t real. I’m still alive. My body is still here, somewhere.

A: But god, didn’t it feel real?

B: But it wasn’t real.

A: Real or not, didn’t it hurt?

B: Yes.

A: Are you scared?

B: Yes.

. . .

A: Wait. Do you hear that?

I listened through ears that were a million miles away. A voice – not mine own – burst into my head. Its bristly accent was familiar.

“Hello! This is Dr. Monason. I’m contacting you again via the small speakers contained within the helmet of the exoskeleton. I am proud to announce that you have successfully completed three days within the machine.”

I felt my alarm melt quickly into relief. I tried to smile, to little avail.

“At this juncture, we would like to update you as to the status of our experiment. The data we’re getting from your brain scans is proving incredibly useful. The medical implications are numerous. We have contacted our institutional review board and obtained permission to extend the experiment indefinitely. This is, of course, in accordance with the liability waivers that you’ve signed previously. The machine should be able to keep you alive for a few more weeks until your body becomes unable to support it any further. Do not worry, $5000 will nonetheless be credited into your account. Thank you for your contribution. Your sacrifice will save lives.”

I tried to scream. I tried to flail my arms in protest and push back against the doctor’s words but my screams were silent and my arms no longer part of me.

I felt a deep, echoing hole of dread grow inside me. Yet I would never truly feel anything again.

I would die in this chamber. It would take days. And those days would feel like months. And those months would be torture. 

I again saw myself floating in an immeasurable darkness. There were no stars or planets. There was only my body. Unequivocally alone. Arguably alive, but inevitably dead.

I stopped counting the seconds and just let myself float.

--

My mind wandered again, this time for much longer. I dreamt of my childhood and of a future I would never get to lead. I made an imaginary bucket list and felt remorse for the boxes I had not yet checked. I held conversations in my head between old friends and lovers. 

And sometimes, I didn’t think at all. Sometimes I disappeared from existence altogether.

But then I felt it. I felt something. I couldn’t tell what it was at first. It had been so long since I felt something that I couldn’t tell if I was imagining it or not.

It was my big toe. My big toe on my right foot. Somehow, someway, it still had feeling. Not a lot of feeling – it felt like when you sit on your hand and it becomes almost, but not quite, numb. Like it was being massaged by a set of pins and needles.

I moved the toe around, the little that I could, to try to understand how this feeling had come back.

Then I felt it – a tiny prick. The slightest droplet of pain against my big toe. Something sharp.

An IV needle.

It must have become dislodged somehow. Maybe one of those labcoat-wearing schmucks tripped over it or something. All I knew was that I could feel again. I suddenly felt like I had been born again. Like I had died and risen from the ashes.

This needle must have been one of the needles that was supposed to deliver the numbing chemical into my body. Somehow, it got dislodged and now I had just a little feeling in my toe. Unfortunately, my big toe was hardly the vestige of my body most suited to orchestrate my grand escape. 

But still, I felt immeasurable happiness. Because I had a secret weapon on my side. 

Time. There’s an old adage that goes “If you give a monkey a typewriter and infinite time, he will eventually write the complete works of Shakespeare”. Similarly, with a partially numb big toe and infinite time to think, I could craft my grand escape.

My big toe was too weak to push open the exoskeleton. Despite my straining, I was unable to reach any other cords to pull them out. All I could reach was the IV needle that had already been pulled out.
And with that IV needle, I hatched my plan. I scraped my toe across it. It stung, but I knew it would do the trick. I knew that I had forced those stupid scientists’ hands. My efforts had made a cut in my toe-skin. And now I knew I was going to be okay.

They only had two options. Let me bleed out, in which case I would at least be free from this hell, or let me out of the chamber, at least long enough to reattach the IV. Either way, my plan was foolproof. Either way, I was going to be free, at least for a moment.

It only took them a few minutes to notice what I had done.

--

“This is Dr. Monason again, communicating via the tiny speaker in the helmet of the exoskeleton. It seems you have managed to injure yourself inside the exoskeleton. After some discussion, we have elected to pause the experiment and correct the error. Stand by – the exoskeleton will be opening shortly.”

The light that soon flooded my eyes all but blinded me. As the machine opened, I bathed in the sounds of its electronic thunks and whirs and the conversation of the men around me. The quick tug as needles and tube were removed from me felt better than any touch I had ever experienced.

They let me out. I was free.

My body was numb for hours. The medicine prevented me from making any movements, at all. During that time, the scientists left me in the exoskeleton as they went over data and bandaged my big toe. I tried to listen to everything they were saying but found myself unable to concentrate. The bright lights above me burned my eyes, which had grown accustomed to perfect darkness.

As the drugs slowly left my body, a dull ache developed in my joints. After a while, my body was hauled out of the exoskeleton by a team of the labcoats. I felt a dressing gown slip on over my head. I was plopped into a wheelchair. Still unable to move, I listened to the roll of metal wheels as they pushed that chair deeper and deeper into their lab.

--

“Explain again about when you were floating through space. What was the sensation like?”

“Please let me go!”

 “I can’t. You know that. The data we were getting from you is too important. Lives are at stake. And besides that, we can’t risk you going to the police. You will be going back in the machine.”

This conversation had been going on for about an hour in the tiny interrogation room set up somewhere in the research group’s massive underground lab. Although I had regained enough feeling to speak, I still found movement quite difficult. It was clear that as soon as I outlived my usefulness to the lab coats I was going to be placed back inside the machine until my bodily demise. The data that the scientists had gained so far was so useful that they had no problem holding me against my will.

As I sat in that tiny metal room, tied to cold folding chair, clad only in a thin dressing gown, I considered my fate. For $5000 I had sold away the rest of my life. My only respite now was that I could delay going back in the machine for as long as I resisted Dr. Monason’s questioning. But I knew I was just delaying the inevitable.

I stared down at my big toe, now wrapped in a bandage. Somehow it had not dawned on me that, even if I got out of the machine, the scientists were unlikely to let me out of the building alive. Not after they decided to imprison me until I died, anyway.

“What if I don’t answer the questions?”

“The data we intend to receive from those questions is critical and could save lives. But if we cannot illicit it, then the information received from the exoskeleton will be sufficient. If you won’t answer, we will return you to the machine now.”

So it didn’t matter. I was already doomed. I might as well delay for as long as I could.

“Fine. Ask me what you want to ask me.”

I answered hundreds of questions, most of them multiple times. It took hours. The scientists barely listened to my words. There was a recorder placed in the room with me. I’m sure someone would dig through my answers later, but for now the conversation seemed to be mostly for posterity’s sake.

At some point though, I realized something. The drugs had completely left my body. I could, theoretically, move again. For now, I was tied to a chair. But they couldn’t keep me tied up if they wanted me to go back into the machine.

And from that thought, I came up with a plan. I knew I would only have a few seconds. I knew I couldn’t run immediately, or they would catch me. I would have to convince them I was resigned to my fate.
When the questioning concluded, I found myself being hauled back into the chamber containing the exoskeleton. Perhaps assuming that I would flee otherwise, the scientists kept me tied up during transit.

But the ties came off when it was time to put me in the machine. They stripped off my night gown and lifted me inside the machine. I let my body go limp as they did – feigning the same numbness that had, until recently, restricted my movement. As I laid down in the rubber interior of the exoskeleton, Dr. Monason spoke to me through a loudspeaker in the ceiling. 

“I am sorry we have to part again. Your answers will be invaluable for future research. I know it may seem now like we are villains. But the research we’re obtaining is invaluable. It will save lives someday. You are doing a valuable service to the world.”

As his speech ended, his researchers again approached to fill my body with needles and tubes. I was eager to make my escape but I held tight. They would have to believe I was unable to move.

I felt pinpricks in my right arm. I was already being loaded up with the numbing agent. My time was going to be short. As some of the labcoats approached me on my left side to insert another IV, I launched myself upward so I was standing inside the machine. Surprised by my sudden motion, the scientists on my left recoiled. I felt a sharp pain in my right arm as the IVs and tubes held tight against the strain of my sudden motion.

The room exploded into panic. Men rushed at me from all sides. I felt my body moving as if on its own volition. My left arm reached towards my right and ripped a series of cords and needles out of my body. Blood sprayed onto the machine. My right arm fell loosely to my side.

I propelled myself out of the machine and onto the floor, naked as the day I was born. The numbing agent had disabled my right arm, but most of my body was fine. I sprinted towards the door through which I had entered the lab, what now seemed like a millennium ago. I did not dare turn back to see if I was being chased. All I could do was run.

As I pushed the door open, I saw a long hallway that led to a set of alternating staircases. Staircases that I had walked up and down several times while preparing for the experiment. Stairs that I had always assumed I would one day walk up for the last time. 

I pushed my body as hard as I could. I ran with my right arm dangling limp beside me until I reached the stairs. Behind me, the angered yells of men and the thud of their footsteps remained consistent. I knew that if they caught me, it was game over. 

When I reached the stairs, I practically jumped up the entire first flight. As I turned to climb the next flight, I saw that only two men had kept pace with me. Suddenly, I was filled with hope. Perhaps I could outrun them all. Then I would go to the police and get the chance to put this whole operation under the microscope. As soon as I got to the top of that second flight of stairs and through the exit doors, I would be free.

My hopes were dashed as soon as I reached the top of the stairs. At least fifteen men guarded the building’s exit. Clearly my escape had been a contingency for which the facility was prepared. As the men approached behind me and in front of me, I knew there was only one way I could go.

The alternating staircases continued past the first floor. All the way up to the roof.

I kept running. Staircase after staircase. My aching body protesting each step. My dead arm banging against stair railings and walls as I made my way up those stairs. The sounds of angry men filling my ears as I took step after step after step.

Soon I was on the last staircase. A ladder, hanging from the ceiling, led up to a hatch on the roof of the building. This was it. I was going to see the outside world again. I didn’t know where I was going to go once I got up there, but I knew I was free.

I jumped onto the ladder and pulled myself up, about six feet into the air. When I reached the top I pushed on the hatch. It was heavy and barely budged. I strained against the hatch for a moment, then felt a tight grip on my ankle.

One of the men had caught up. He had wrapped his cold hand around my leg and was beginning to yank me off the ladder. I turned slightly and saw it was Dr. Monason. His eyes were red and as large as saucers. It was like looking into the eyes of the devil himself. 

I reacted purely out of instinct. My grip on the ladder tightened and I swung my free foot at the doctor’s face. As my heel collided with his jaw, sending teeth and blood flying in all directions, I couldn’t help but smile at the feeling. It hurt like you wouldn’t believe, but it felt damned good to feel something. 

Dr. Monason relaxed his grip. I pushed upwards again and the hatch gave way. I clambered upwards onto the flat roof of the building. A thin layer of gravel covered the rooftop. The sharp stones poked at my bare feet, but I kept moving. I ran to the edge of the roof and looked out into the city. 

A beautiful horizon of skyscrapers and stars filled my view. I felt the cold breeze against my bare skin. The voices of the men behind me barely registered as I climbed onto the edge of the roof.
I must have been a sight to the people walking by on the sidewalk below. A naked man standing on the edge of a building staring at the horizon as if he had never seen one before. 

“Please come down from there. You don’t have to go back in the machine. We just need you to come down.” 

It was Dr. Monason again. His voice was hard to understand now that he was short a few teeth. I turned away from the horizon to look at him. He was surrounded on all sides by other men in labcoats.

I knew at that moment that I had no real choices left. Could I believe Dr. Monason that he wouldn’t put me back in the machine? Probably not. But I had no chance to escape at this point. There were too many of them for me to get away.

Just as one of the researchers reached out to grab me, I took a step backward.

As my body tumbled down to the earth below, I found myself laughing. It was just like when I was in the machine. My body was floating once again. The cold air numbed my body and, once again, I couldn’t feel a thing. 

Just before I struck the ground, I heard the sound of church bells ringing out. Hallelujah. I figured I must be on my way to heaven.

--

No heaven came. Instead, I found myself in complete darkness. Feeling nothing, seeing nothing, simply ruminating on my previous actions. 

Is this what death is like?

In answer to my question, I heard a familiar voice.

“Hello. This is Dr. Monason. I am speaking to you once again via a small speaker contained within the helmet of the exoskeleton. You have successfully completed your three days within the exoskeleton.”

Had I not still been pumped full of numbing drugs, I would have wept. 

“We are currently in the process of opening the machine. At that point, we will perform a physical assessment. I’m sure you are anxious to leave. I can assure you we will move as quickly as possible to make that happen. Thank you so much for your assistance with this project. It has been invaluable.”

Three days. I had been in that machine for exactly three days. 

It didn’t click for me until they were pulling me out of the machine. There was no bandage on my big toe, no needle near my foot on which I could have cut myself. 

The facility was nothing but accommodating in the hours after the experiment terminated. They provided me with a comfortable place to rest while the remainder of the drugs left my system. Although they asked questions about my experience, they were not hostile when I refused to speak. The researchers were happy to answer my questions about the experience. Happy to tell me it was all in my head.

In the days following the experiment, Dr. Monason made sure that I was provided with any mental health resources that I requested. He connected me with a therapist that I have been seeing for several weeks. The therapist has prescribed me an antidepressant, which I take twice a day. I have returned to my normal life. My rent is paid. I’m seeing someone new. I got a new job at another book publishing company. 

It’s like all my fantasies have come true.

But no matter how long I talk to the therapist and no matter how many pills I take, I can’t get the machine out of my head. I can’t stop thinking about how those three days seemed to extend indefinitely.

A: But you’re out of the machine. Your three days are up!

B: Yes, but…

A: But what?

B: I was out of the machine once before. 

A: But that wasn’t real.

B: But it felt real. 

A: Does this feel real?

B: . . . I don’t know anymore.

Could three days feel . . . even longer? Could I imagine a therapist, a job, a better life?  I don’t know.

Sometimes I close my eyes and I become too afraid to open them, because I’m worried that when I do, I will see only darkness. I’m scared I will find myself still floating, motionless, amongst those imaginary stars. 


 [J.L.](https://www.facebook.com/Jlaughlinhorror)Narrations:  


[Mr. Creeps](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pylxyu24g1g)  

[The Dark Somnium](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_rDRRXlCdC4)  


  


  
You probably heard about tourism in the Chernobyl exclusion zone. I’ve been there myself several times. And it’s nothing like what you see in games or horror movies. There are no ghosts, mutants or radioactive anomalies and death isn’t waiting for you at every corner. Actually, I think it’s one of the most peaceful and prettiest places on Earth. An example of strength of nature and how it can reverse the damage that we caused it.

Thus, when my friend Alexei decided to go there, he knew who to contact. He's a physics student and right now he’s doing some kind of research on nuclear fallout and he said that he wanted to get some direct measurements and samples. But we both knew that it’s just an excuse to go on an “adventure”. We visited the old powerplant, the abandoned city Pripyat and the surrounding exclusion zone. It was nice, but I would probably just bore you with more details. That part is not important anyway.

&#x200B;

We were driving on some dirt roads in a forest east of Pripyat when we found it. An old, rusty fence and a chained gate that blocked any further passage. There was a big sign with a radiation hazard symbol and captioned: “Restricted area. Authorized personnel only”.

There was a pair of massive metal blast doors in the side an artificially-looking hill not far behind the fence, with a large, white “O-13” painted on it and “NO ENTRY” sprayed on top.

“What do you think it is?” Alex asked.

“I don’t know, looks like some kind of bunker,” I replied. “And it looks like it has been closed for some time,” I added after taking a closer look at the doors. The both halves were welded shut in the center. Alex took his samples and readings, but we were too puzzled to leave just yet.

“Do you think we can get in?” I asked.

“Well not this way for sure. Even if it wasn’t welded sealed, I’m sure we have no way of unlocking it.” Alex replied while examining the massive door.

“It looks like an underground bunker. They must have had a way to pump air inside and I don’t think this is it. There has to be another way to get in.” I said.

We circled the main entrance to try find other means of entry. The day was already coming to an end and it was slowly getting darker. As we were searching, a thought crossed my mind.

Why would they weld the doors? What’s so important inside that they went this far to keep people away?

“Look, there’s something there,” Alex pulled me away from my thoughts.

It was a concrete block a couple of meters large with what looked like vents on the sides. As I looked into the vents, I noticed that they were also sealed with heavy-looking steel hatches and no clear way to open them. However, there was also a somewhat smaller door labeled “Service tunnel” with a large wheel on the outside.

“Should I open it?” I asked.

“Yeah, I’m really wonder what this is. Anyway, we don’t have to go in. At least we’ll see if the door still works.

At first, the wheel wouldn’t turn because of all the rust and dirt, but eventually it budged. The door unlocked. I pulled and it slowly started opening. It was very heavy and took a lot of force.

Behind the door, there was a small platform and a tight vertical tunnel with a ladder. What caught my attention was that there was an identical locking mechanism on the inside. That meant that they could lock the door from both sides. But why? We were lucky, because if they had locked it from the inside too, there would be no way to get in.

I stepped inside and shined my phone light down the shaft. It wasn’t strong enough to hit the bottom. The air was damp and old and there was something that I couldn’t identify. A very faint, chemical-like smell. There was no radiation nor signs of any other hazards.

“You’ve got to be kidding me. This is so cool. We have to come back here and check it out later.” Alex said.

I couldn’t agree more.

It was almost dark now, so we resealed the door and called it a day. But we promised ourselves to return.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

I immediately tried to do some research when I got home, unfortunately with no success. I even tried to call Pavel, a friend of mine who knew the area better than me. Actually, it was him who brought me there for the first time. He couldn’t help me either, but promised to ask around. I told him about our plan and asked if he wouldn’t go with us, but unfortunately, he was out of the country for a while.

A week later, we packed our gear and went on with it. We brought some rope, heavy flashlights, glowsticks, Geiger counters, waterproof protective clothes, an oxygen meter and a small emergency scuba tank just in case. And yeah, we’re not stupid so we told our relatives and friends about our trip and when we’re expecting to return.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

We closed the door behind us as we descended down the access shaft. We couldn’t know what’s down there and we didn’t want to cause a radiation leak or something like that. We eventually dropped down into a concrete tunnel which enclosed the air vents and some smaller pipes. There was obviously no power and thus no lights. Good thing we brought our own.

We followed the tunnel and reached another door, but this time it was a regular one, not the heavy bunker-type. We went through and entered a room with 4 large air pumps and some electrical equipment and controls. The ventilation shafts split here into two larger ones that ran straight into ground and two smaller ones that went straight across the room where there was another set of doors.

Behind the doors, there was a large hall with numerous boxes, crates and other cargo just laying around. There also was a security checkpoint. Behind the checkpoint, we found the main door that we have seen from the outside. Just next to it, there was some heavy lifting equipment. We returned through the checkpoint and taken a look at a set of elevators. There was a simple map with the layout of the facility floor by floor. We were on floor 0, main entry hall. There were another 4 floors below us.

&#x200B;

Floor -1: Offices, security and recreation

Floor -2: Secure laboratories

Floor -3: Accelerator, Cleanroom decontamination chamber

Floor -4: Experiment site

The map was titled “Object-13”. It wasn’t a military bunker. This was a research site.

&#x200B;

We took a set of stairs, since the elevators were of no use without power. An unsettling thought brushed my mind as we were descending. They probably were moving some supplies, and then left them there and took the equipment to the main door. Were they trying to get out?

I stepped on another stair step but something rolled away under my foot, lost my balance and fell on my back. My pack luckily absorbed the impact. I looked under my feet to see what caused my fall. Empty bullet casings.

This wasn’t the sole reason why I felt odd about this place. As soon as we got down to level -1, I noticed that every single door was open. Every single one. There was a canteen and a kitchen right at the beginning of a long rectangular corridor. Various offices surrounded the corridor. There was the regular stuff – paperwork, old computers, personal belongings, all right there where they left it. Did they leave in a hurry?

“Dimitri!” Alex called from, the canteen on the opposite side of the corridor.

“What?” was all I could say when I followed him to the canteen.

There was food still neatly served on the tables. But it wasn’t spoilt. It wasn’t fresh either, but it wasn’t decaying, as a 30-year-old meal should.

“How is this possible?” I asked.

“I don’t know, maybe it was irradiated or something. But it’s not anymore, I checked that. I really don’t know man,” he answered, as puzzled as I was.

Oh, why didn’t we just turn back and leave? Now that I’m writing this, there were so many red flags already. Something really wrong happened down there. But I guess we were too excited and curious. But it was at this point that my excitement started to fade and be replaced with an eerie feeling.

Nevertheless, we continued and descended down to level -2. The stairwell ended here, and to go deeper, we would have to cross the entire floor to reach an another one on the opposite side. There was a security checkpoint and a large blast door that we had to pass through to reach the labs. Again, every door was wide open. However, the things that people left here weren’t neatly placed where they should have been. It was a mess everywhere. There were all kinds of rooms with all kinds of equipment that I didn’t understand. Occasionally, there were more empty bullet casings on the ground. There still was the one central rectangular corridor as above, but the rooms around it were like a little maze.

Almost at the other side of the floor, we found the head scientist’s office. As I said, everywhere it was a mess, but I found a logbook on the desk. There was only a handful of pages, the rest torn out.

&#x200B;

**5. October 1984:** Today we successfully managed to translocate several atoms without changes in any physical properties. It’s going to be a long road until we can transport solid objects, but we’re going some good work here.

**17. January 1985:** We’ve managed to transport an apple today. However, I couldn’t help but notice that the pattern of red and green skin on top was slightly different. But it was still the same apple, with the same structure, shape, everything. We also tried to transport some electronics. They were unharmed and in working order. I think that we still have a lot to perfect and learn about this technology, but we cannot slow down now. The country is relying on us.

**21. February 1985:** After the animal trials, we translocated our first human today. He is alive and healthy, a brave hero of our nation. We have proven that this technology works now, but the practicality is still very limited due to the fixed translocation ratio. We still cannot “send” matter. Only exchange the positions of two equally massive objects. I have proposed a new type of device, that could possibly achieve one-way translocation of just a single object, but it would need an immense amount of energy.

**1. May 1985:** Our superiors accepted my proposal. They are going to build a new, much bigger translocator here, in the power plant, so we can use a nuclear reactor as a direct power source. There is one more thing. We’ve now translocated dozens of test subjects. Each one is alive and well, but sometimes they are a little bit, well, different. They sometimes claim that various events in the past happened differently than they really did. Sometimes they claim to know people who don’t exist, or more alarming, they know people who they are not supposed to know. The following was written below with a pencil by hand: “Test subject 28 was speaking an unknown language and couldn’t understand any real language after the experiment.”

There was a lot of missing pages afterwards.

**25. April 1986:** We are going to try to change our approach. It’s been more than a year, and we’re still unsuccessful in eliminating the translocation symmetry anomaly. We still event don’t know what is causing it, but we are not going to make any progress this way. Today, we are going to try to access the conduit reality instead.  Even though Unit 2 - the one we built in the power plant - is still new, we are going to use it for this experiment. Who knows what wonders are waiting for us on the other side?

There was one last page in the logbook. On it, it was just a single phrase, written again and again:

# “WE LET THEM IN”

&#x200B;

“Alex, I think we should go,” I called.

“Man, come take a look at this,” he answered.

I stepped out of the lab and back into the hallway.

There were … clothes all over the corridor. Well what was left of them. They were torn to shreds. No bodies, no blood, just strips of cloth and an occasional shoe or a watch.  I looked up and stared down the dark corridor in front of us. I just stood there for a while.

&#x200B;

It was, I don't know ... as if something torn all these people to shreds, and then cleaned it all up. Except the clothes and other non-organic material.

&#x200B;

A wave of pure, instinctive dread washed over me. I couldn’t move. I didn’t even breathe.

“Let’s just get out of here.” Alex said.

We turned around and walked away. Slowly at first, but we quickened our pace. Our footsteps echoed across the underground structure.

“I just want to be out of here man. We shouldn’t have done this” Alex said. I didn’t tell him about the logbook, but…

My thoughts were cut short after a sudden realization.

His voice didn’t echo. It was just our footsteps.

I think he realized too, because we both stopped and listened.

Nothing. Just silence.

I stepped forward.

*Clack.*

I took another step.

*Clack.*

There was this door just in front of us and I forced myself to try something. I closed it behind us as we passed it and placed a glass beaker that I found on the ground on top.

I took a step forward.

Silence

It was just echo after all, I thought.

We walked away, carefully at first, but then we once again quickened our pace. We turned around a corner, and then it happened.

&#x200B;

*Crash*

The glass shattered.

&#x200B;

Someone

or some thing

&#x200B;

just opened the door.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

We dropped all our gear except our lights and ran as fast as we could. I didn’t even know I could run this fast. I always tried to be a tough guy but I was never so scared in my life.

Our footsteps didn’t echo anymore. Or better said, they weren’t in sync with ours anymore. Something was running after us. Each second it was getting closer. And closer.

As soon as we reached the security checkpoint, we started closing the door. The rusty joint of the door squealed in protest, but we pulled with all our strength. We almost had it closed, when we heard a loud, guttural and unnatural growl.

The door slammed shut and I threw the wheel to the ‘locked’ position. My heart was pounding so hard that it was all I heard for a while.

No, wait, it wasn’t my heart. It was that thing, pounding on the locked blast door.

&#x200B;

We were running again. We reached the stairwell and run up, taking 2-3 steps at once.

We finally reached the air pump room. The ascent really exhausted us and even though I was scared shitless, I felt like I would pass out if I took another step forward. Besides, we locked it down there.

Alex sat down and leaned his back on one of the large vertical vents with a bang.

*Bang. Bang. Bang…*

&#x200B;

Oh fuck.

We locked it down there.

But we forgot the vents.

&#x200B;

Alex and I looked at each other, our eyes met, and then… the vent burst and he was gone. I only heard him scream as he was dragged back down.

&#x200B;

I feel terrible for doing this, but I just ran, I climbed the service shaft and locked the service door shut when I was finally out of this hell.

As soon as I had phone service again, my phone started beeping with loads and loads of missed calls and messages from Pavel.

“Hey Dimitri, I found this guy, he says he knows what ‘O-13’ is. Please pick up as soon as you can, he says it’s dangerous and you should stay out of it.

“This guy is calling me now, he sounds serious, please call me back at once”

“I don’t know what’s going on but he’s going there, please I hope you get this before you go down. Stay safe friend.”

There was also one message from an unknown number:

“Dimitri, this is Anatoliy Moroz, I know what you found and I’m on my way from Kiev now. DO NOT GO DOWN THERE. If you already did and you manage to get out, lock the door that you used to get in and make sure it stays locked. I will try to call you when I’m here.”

&#x200B;

So here I am, writing this while I wait. I do this to make sure that no one else repeats our mistake, since I don’t know if I’ll live long to tell anyone personally.

&#x200B;

I just can’t leave Alex behind.

&#x200B;

I have to go back.

# [Part 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/c090ig/the_chernobyl_disaster_was_a_coverup_of_something/)How it began 
https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/ci94do/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app

And what happened next
https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/cinu8u/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app

When I finally caught up with Mrs Hemmings herself
https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/cj2g4k/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app


I was in complete shock. Looking at it. At her.

Prudence had a facial expression filled with guilt and now I knew the truth I could see it. The creature was exactly how Ian had described, except with wavy ginger hair and a sadness in its beady eyes. 

This abomination was Lyla. This was how Prudence had bought her back, and this was the only way I would ever see Jamie again, a risk I wasn’t going to take. After days of disbelief the reality finally hit me like a ton of bricks. Jamie was dead and he wasn’t coming back.

“Why did you do this?” I asked, my voice shaking with horror.

Prudence scowled at me, trying to mask her shame.

“I didn’t want this. If you think this was my aim then you’re sicker than I am. I just wanted my granddaughter back. 

When she died a part of me died. My son blamed me, his wife blamed me and although he never said it, I could see in Bernie’s eyes that he did too. 

I’d pushed for her to stay, I wanted to spend more time with her. I got cocky about my ability to cope with the strange occurrences in the flats. I know what you must be thinking. But I swear I didn’t know about the sleepwalking until it was too late.

We had moved into the flat not long after my son left home to move in with his girlfriend. He’s the youngest of three and was the last to fly the nest, so we downsized for the two of us. He never knew what we were facing in that flat, or the dangers that he sent his little girl into. 

When it happened it was a few years after the fire and the troubles with the creatures. We’d struck the deal with the things in the lift and the neighbours of the burned flats had become a fixture just like the other quirks. I really thought she would be safe.”

Prudence paused to gaze longingly at the mutated little girl in the cage, the creature just twitched. In return it barred its 4 rows of teeth and made a gentle hiss.

“But how did you do this!?” I stopped her with more urgency this time, looking at rat-Lyla in disbelief. I had to get answers out of her fast. I didn’t want to spend anymore time than was absolutely necessary in this shed. 

“The gardener helped me.” She answered, her voice trembling. 

“Who the fuck is the gardener?” I grew more impatient with every new confusion she threw at me. The last thing I needed was something new and potentially malevolent in the mix. 

“I didn’t mention him in my note because he’s been gone for over 20 years, he’ll be of no concern to you so don’t worry. His damage is in the past now...

Around the time Lyla went missing the council granted planning permission for the tower block next door. But before that was built the land it sits on acted as a communal garden for ours and the neighbouring tower block on the other side. It had a regular gardener named Derek who you would often see tending the flowerbeds out front. 

Derek was one of the first people I met when I moved in.

Like I said, I had to work it all out myself and the first time the window cleaner came to the balcony I naturally reached to let him in and offer a cup of tea.

As my hand applied pressure to the handle to open the balcony door, there was a knock at the front door. I made a gesture to the cleaner to indicate that I would only be a minute and answered. 

There was Derek. He stopped me and told me not to let the man in, that I would be making a huge mistake.

I thought he sounded crazy, and I told him so, after a while of arguing I got up to reboil the kettle and let the man in and Derek grabbed my hands and shouted at me to look at the man outside.

When I turned to look, there was no man outside, but a monster. He was tall and impossibly thin, flesh and bones but somehow thinner than bones with greying skin stretched over them. He had eyes that seemed to be so deep set they went on forever, like the blackest cave you can imagine. Saliva dripped from his mouth and landed on my balcony floor, some sliding down the glass panel of the door. 

I opened my mouth to scream, but as I did, Derek let go of my hands and the monster was gone. In its place was that smug, friendly man, begging for a drink while he cleans the windows. 

It took me a minute to process it, but I know what I’d seen. That was the real window cleaner. I never intentionally opened or tried to open the door for him again. 

That day Derek didn’t stay long. He didn’t tell me what the window cleaner is, or why he visits every few days. He didn’t explain anything about the weird things that go on. As much as Derek was a part of the strange happenings he was like one that had been carved from light.

He said that he’d always be around when I needed him, that it was his job to look after the residents just like the flowerbeds. 

Over the years he appeared a few times. He was instrumental in striking a deal with the creatures. When the neighbours died in the fire he created a special display for them in the garden, and made sure that nothing planted was poisonous to the cats as soon as they arrived. He also stopped an imposter from killing Bernie at our front door.

He seemed like such a good thing for the residents. Always there to help. Offer some gentle advice or a creative solution. Someone to be trusted.

He changed when they granted planning permission for the other block though. He knew his garden would be dug up to lay foundations and his uses redundant. He became grumpy and bitter over time but no one payed enough attention to notice. Especially not when my tragedy struck.

When Lyla died I was devastated. Derek appeared to me as I sat on a bench in the garden crying. He offered to help me, to use the garden to get her back. I snapped at him. I told him it was his fault and that he should have been there when it happened to stop them. 

He worked so hard on the agreement with the creatures, he spent a lot of time with them. Lyla broke the rule and he had to allow them to do what had been agreed, he said. He couldn’t have stopped them. But he wanted to help make things right. 

I understood why he hadn’t intervened. But I couldn’t accept it, I lashed out at him. I’m embarrassed to say I actually slapped the poor man along with stamping on his freshly planted flowerbed. I was angry and grieving. 

I quickly burned myself out and collapsed into a blubbering heap on the floor. Derek attempted to comfort me but his mind was on his garden.

He said he was sorry for my loss but I shouldn’t have attacked the flowerbed. That he’d always been nice to me and I should be kinder in return.

I snapped and told him that it didn’t matter because it was all about to be bulldozed in the next few days anyway.

I should have taken more note of the way he twitched as I said that. He snapped.

He said that he knew I was angry. But there was no need to take it out on him, if I was that desperate to get Lyla back he knew a way. But it was dangerous. 

I begged. Anything I said. I would do anything. 

He told me it was simple and that all I had to do was enter the lift and offer the creatures some food whilst repeating the phrase *revertetur mortuis* during their frenzied hours. 

He said that there was no guarantee they wouldn’t be crunching on my bones before I even got the first word out but that if I succeeded I would have Lyla back. 

Of course, it was successful. There wasn’t a creature in sight as I performed the ritual as instructed. 

I thought nothing happened at first. She didn’t appear straight away, but a few days later I found her running round inside my house, she’d taken a chunk out of Damon’s ear with her teeth. I tried to kill her at first, but just as I was about to finalise it I saw in her eyes who she was. 

I tried to look for Derek but by that point the workmen had started. Nothing was left of his garden, and nothing was left of Derek. No one’s seen him since. You see, Kat, nothing in that building is totally harmless. You have to be on your guard at all times.

I’ve kept her like this ever since. You may think I’m crazy but I couldn’t kill my own granddaughter. I’m not a monster.”

Prue sighed and ushered me back out of the shed, she locked the door behind us, closing the padlock on her most hideous secret. 

I was exhausted. It was a lot of information to take in and as a result of the information I’d received, real grief for my boyfriend was finally settling in. Every hope I had was dashed. I know many of you tried to tell me in the comments that he was gone but I wanted you to be wrong so bad. 

I couldn’t bear to look at Prudence Hemmings for another moment. I made my excuses and left, morosely riding the bus back to the tower block I had once been so excited to live in. 

It was mid afternoon by time I got home. The choice between the stairs and lift didn’t strike much enthusiasm into me but I opted for the stairs, and after what I’m sure ended up being 11 flights, I made it the 6 flights up the stairs to my flat. 

I laid on our mattress on the floor and sobbed for Jamie. I sobbed so hard my throat went dry and hurt and my stomach cramped with each gasping breath. I sobbed myself to sleep. My body and mind must have given up fighting the need to rest and shut down.

When I woke up it was late, about 10pm. I wrote as much of my update as I could for you guys, hit post and just sat at the dining table with my head in my hands. 

My whole life had fallen to shit and I knew it. 

I thought about so many things, questioned why they were happening to me. I searched social media for updates on Georgia but there were none. Jamie wasn’t super close with his family but I knew it wasn’t long before they’d start to worry. Everything I considered just snowballed in my mind.

The loneliness in dealing with this situation was killing me. 

I decided to do something I usually wouldn’t. I went downstairs and I knocked on the door of flat 26. 

Terri answered. Her perfectly bobbed hair was a little unkempt and out of place, she had huge bags under her eyes and I could smell wine on her breath. 

“Are you ok Kat?” She looked concerned. I found it ironic that she looked so disheveled I had forgotten it was me who came for help.

“I’m not... I’m sorry... I know I don’t know you ..I ... just...” I could barely speak.

“Don’t worry. Prue called me. She told me everything. I’m sorry about your boyfriend, it’s a shame I never got to meet him.” Terri stared back at me with the same expression a mother would, warm and understanding. “Would you like a cup of tea, maybe something stronger?”

“I’d love a coffee please.” I answered meekly, making way way into the living room, her sofa was comfy, it reminded me of being back home at my parents before any of this started. 

Terri trotted out to the kitchen, stumbling slightly. I could see the kitchen counter from the sofa, and the empty bottle of wine that accounted for her stumbling. 

As she boiled the kettle there was a huge crash from somewhere inside the flat. I jumped, feeling startled. Terri coughed in a meagre attempt to conceal the noise.

“Excuse me for just a moment please.” She muttered apprehensively as she walked out of the living area and into the hallway containing the bedrooms. 

I heard another crash, giggling and some inaudible shouting. After a while things went quiet and Terri came back into the living room. 

“Sorry about that, kids you know.” She announced, brushing off the noises. I’d almost forgotten about Eddie and Ellie. It was late already and by the resigned expression on Terri’s face indicated that this was how all her nights began. 

I nodded. I couldn’t muster up much more of a response. I think she could see that I just needed to sit there. She got up to finish making and then set the cup of tea in front of me with 2 digestive biscuits. I hadn’t eaten properly in days and I really needed the sugar. 

It turned out me and Terri get along really well. We have similar taste in movies, music and food despite the age gap. We spoke for about an hour about random, normal stuff. It was nice to get a break from the madness. I got used to the crashing around from the twins. I even laughed a few times. I’d forgotten what that felt like these past few days.

The break didn’t last long. The next noise that we heard was louder than the first. It was quickly followed by two small children, running into the living room diving into their mothers arms. 

I was taken aback for a moment. Eddie and Ellie were dressed in pyjamas, and were still the cute children that I had met in the hallway, but something was different. Their brown puppy dog eyes had become deep voids, like what I’d imagined when Prue described the window cleaners true form. And at the ends of their fingers were long sharp claws protruding from where nails should be. 

I didn’t have time to recoil in terror at their new looks, Terri clutched them and asked what was wrong. They wailed and buried the voids where their eyes should be into their mothers shoulders. Despite their terrifying exterior, these were two very scared little kids. 

It had been a very long day and I thought my nightmare was over but it was only just beginning. Ellie mumbled into Terri’s shoulder, in that high pitched voice kids do when they’re scared.

“Mummy, were sorry, we didn’t mean to let them in. We were just teasing...”

“Shhh they’re coming!” Hissed Eddie, in the same distressed high pitched tone. 

“Who’s... what have you done?” Terri asked, colour drained from her face.

The kids didn’t get a chance to reply. Terri’s face turned paler than I thought possible. I looked up and standing in the living room doorway were about 10 people, all incredibly average looking. 

They were almost expressionless, they didn’t look angry or pleased to see us. They were dressed in non descriptive clothes. I imagined trying to describe them to one of those artists that draws pictures for the police and I genuinely don’t think even one of them had a distinguishing feature. 

That’s why it took me a while to spot her in the crowd, even though she had been glaring at me the entire time. 

Natalia.

How our confrontation went: https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/cjzfky/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_appI was lying alone in my room when I heard the voice, deep and crackly, coming from beneath my bed.

“Hey,” the voice called out.

I told myself I was just imagining it. 

“Hey kid,” the voice repeated.

I drew my knees up to my chest and ducked my head under the blanket, trying to shut out the voice and the cold wind that drifted in through the window, ruffling the curtains.

“Who are you?” I asked.

“I’m the monster underneath your bed,” the voice replied.

“You mean you’re real?” I asked. 

“What do you mean?” the monster said. “Of course I’m real.”

“Do you have a name?” I asked.

“Of course I have a name.”

“Oh... well what is it?”

“Frank.”

“Frank?”

“Yeah,” the monster said. “Is there something wrong with that?”

“No. I mean, I don’t know,” I said. “It’s just not very monster-ly.”

“Well my parents didn’t want me to be a monster.”

“Really? What did they want you to be?”

“A dentist.”

“That’s funny,” I said. I could feel myself beginning to smile.

“What do your parents want you to be?” it asked.

“I don’t know.... Hey Frank?”

“Yeah?”

“Aren’t you gonna... like... scare me or something?”

“What? Why would I do that?”

“Well, you’re a monster, aren’t you?”

“Well, yeah, of course I am, but that doesn’t mean that I scare little kids.”

“But I thought that was your job.”

“It is my job to scare people,” he replied. “But only bad people.”

“Am I a bad person?” I asked.

“No,” he said, “but you’re not the one I’m here to scare.”

“Who are you here to scare?” I asked.

“The man inside your closet.” 

The skin on my arms goosefleshed up. I wanted to ask him what he meant, but I fell silent as I heard a rustling coming from the closet. The door creaked open, and I could hear soft footsteps padding towards me across the bedroom floor. I didn’t dare peek out of the blanket. The footsteps stopped, and I could hear heavy breathing next to me. I squeezed my eyes tight.

The warm sanctuary of the blanket disappeared as it was yanked off me.

I hugged my arms around my knees and prepared for the worst. A scream shattered the night air, followed by the sound of breaking glass. I opened my eyes a crack to see a knife lying on the carpet next to my bed, blade glinting in the moonlight.

My parents rushed into the room and asked me what had happened, but I didn’t know what to say, only that someone had been hiding in my closet and they’d jumped out the window. 

My parents called 911, and the police came right away. They picked up a man called Gary Thompson sprinting through the streets a couple blocks away. He was covered in blood and broken glass. They found Gary’s car abandoned on our property, and inside they found duct tape, knives, barbiturates and a video camera. 

From what I heard Gary’s lawyer employed an insanity defense, and Gary is currently incarcerated in a state mental facility for the criminally insane. 

I never heard from Frank the monster again, but the officer who arrested Gary told me that he sleeps on the floor of the facility.

He tells the doctors that he’s terrified of Frank, the monster under his bed.

[x](http://davidmaloneystories.com)*This is not my child.*

That was all I could think. 

“Honey?” said my husband. “Is everything all right?”

“Who is this?” I said, staring at the little girl I’d never seen before, standing in my house, dressed in my daughter’s clothes. “Where is Liza?”

My husband gave me a worried look, and the girl-who-was-not-Liza looked positively terrified. 

“What do you mean?” said my husband. “Are you feeling all right?”

*Why was he evading my question? Why couldn’t he just answer?* I took a deep breath, tried to remain calm.

“I’ll be all right,” I said, “as soon as you tell me where my daughter is.”

My husband frowned, and the little girl’s eyes welled up with moisture. My husband placed a protective hand over her shoulder, and leaned down to whisper in her ear. 

“Go on upstairs, honey,” he said. “Mommy’s not feeling well.”

The girl wasted no time in doing what he said. She clutched her schoolbooks to her chest and barreled past me, rushing up the stairs. I heard the door of my daughter’s room slam. The look on my husband’s face was a mix of pity and restrained anger.

“You haven’t been taking your medication,” he said. “Don’t try to deny it, I can see it in your eyes.”

I waved my hand in a dismissive gesture. 

“I don’t need them,” I said. “They make my mind all fuzzy.”

The anger on my husband’s face became less restrained. Well-etched frown lines beneath his lips deepened. 

“Do you remember what happened the last time you said that?” he asked. 

“I...”

The suggestion was enough. A swarm of shattered and confused images flooded my mind, like the wave of nausea that comes before vomit. My husband screaming, covered in blood.

*Look what you made me do!* he was shrieking. *Look what you made me do!*

I felt the floor tilt beneath me, and before I knew what had happened, I found myself falling backwards into my husbands arms. Hot tears were streaming down my cheeks, and my body convulsed with violent sobs.

My husband gently brushed my hair and whispered in my ear.

“Shhh,” he cooed. “It’s not real, honey. I promise that it’s not real.”

I silently nodded my assent. I let him carry me up to our bedroom and lay me gently down on the bed. He walked over to the dresser where he kept the cocktail of drugs that I took every day to maintain my sanity. I swallowed them gratefully. 

Soon my mind was going fuzzy, I could feel myself becoming a pliable zombie that could be told anything, made to do anything. 

Of course I knew that it was wrong, that that girl was not Liza. I knew that it wasn’t me who had been driven insane by our daughter’s death, but my husband. I knew he had kidnapped that girl when she was a toddler, and brainwashed her into believing she was Liza.

But, most importantly, I knew that if I didn’t take my pills, if I shattered his precariously built illusion, that he would kill the girl and start all over again.

Just like he did the last time.

[x](http://reddit.com/r/lifeisstrangemetoo)I was never the type to join a sorority. My twin sister, Chel, begged me to rush with her the summer before our freshman year approached, but I think she knew deep-down I was a lost cause. I was a band geek in high school, and a band geek I intended to remain.

Don't get me wrong - this isn't some "not like other girls" bullshit. I was happy for Chel. I even got trashed on celebratory wine coolers with her when she pledged her sorority. We just had different interests. As long as she was happy, that’s all that mattered, and I know she felt the same about me.

How did I miss that she was so deeply unhappy?

She threw herself off the bell tower in the center of campus less than 3 weeks before the end of the spring semester. I hadn’t seen her in a couple of days; I was holed up at the library pulling double all-nighters to finish my final paper for Greek and Roman Mythology. I woke up in the early afternoon on a Sunday to 10 missed calls from mom and a text from Chel. 

*love u forever Lou. i’m so sorry.*

2:55 a.m. Witnesses say she jumped at 3:02.

I skipped finals, took incompletes in all of my classes, and headed home to be with my mom. Alex, our best friend from high school, offered to bail on the rest of the semester too, but I didn’t want him to lose his scholarship. Still, he made the 2-hour drive home every weekend to hang with me. We didn't talk much; it still hurt too much to remember the good times, and I didn't care much about the present. But it was better than drinking alone, and Alex was generous with sharing his weed.

My mom insisted I get back into the swing of things this Fall. I decided just to do a half-time course load, mostly focused on finishing up my classes from last semester. I moved into a solo room in the dorms that’s more the size of a closet than a real livable space. I didn’t mind being alone. I kind of preferred it that way.

Alex, though, thought that the solitude was bad for me. Or at least that’s what he claimed when he dragged me along to a Greek party last weekend. Chel was popular among the guys in his fraternity, he said, and they’d all been asking about me. Worried. I really didn’t want to go, but Alex wouldn’t let up.

“It’s what Michelle would want, Louise.” 

Asshole. Even if he was right.

That’s how I found myself last Saturday in the passenger seat of Alex’s BMW, driving out in the middle of bumfuck nowhere. I quickly realized I had no idea where the hell we were or where we were headed. I’d never gone to a frat party with Chel - navigating a sea of sweaty dudes who smell like PBR isn’t my ideal night out - but I was pretty sure most frat houses weren’t 45 minutes from campus, tucked away off a dirt road that didn’t even have a name on Google Maps.

I picked at a fraying thread on the hem of my sweater, one of Chel’s. It was bright green and haphazardly cropped at the waist in a homemade chop job. It wasn’t my style at all, and I never would have worn it before Chel...before she was gone. But that night, wearing it gave me confidence, like she was there with me.

“So....what’s the deal with this party anyway? Or are you driving me out to the middle of nowhere to murder me?” 

Alex rolled his eyes and fished a piece of black cardstock out of the mess of napkins on his center console. The paper was heavy, expensive, with gold-embossed letters glittering in a scrolling font:

*You Are Cordially Invited*  
*The Sisters of House Omega welcome you to our Fall semester Culling.*  
*Attendance is mandatory.*  
*Only the true of heart will remain until dawn.*  
*Will that be you, Alex?*

“Did all the guys in the house get one of these?” I turned the paper over, where an address and time was listed. County Road 5. Midnight.

“Yeah, ‘bout a week ago? We’re still trying to figure out who’s hosting.” 

“It’s not this Omega sorority?”

Alex laughed at me, not unkindly. “There’s no such thing, Louise.”

I frowned. A party in the middle of nowhere, hosted by nobody? I was already starting to regret abandoning my resolve to live the semester as a hermit.

“None of this is creeping you out? What does it mean by ‘Culling,’ anyway?” 

“Ah, it’s just for dramatics. See who can stick it out all night, ya know? Maybe there’ll be a prize. And you know what?” He grinned and slapped me on the thigh. I slapped him back. “We’re not gonna pussy out. We’ll be the winners, last ones standing, just like old times. You with me?”

“I turn into a pumpkin after 2.”

“I’m serious, Lou.”

“So am I, *Alexander.*” He knew I hated being called Lou. Chel always called me Lou. “Besides, are they even going to let me in? I didn’t get one of these.” I shook the invitation in his face. 

I was starting to have a really bad feeling. If I’d known about all this weirdness beforehand, I would’ve already been in bed. Tossing and turning on my lumpy twin mattress, brainstorming ways to beg Professor Dickson for yet another extension on my first paper, sounded better than stumbling into the plot of *Texas Chainsaw Massacre*.

“C’mon, Louise, if it’s lame, we’ll bail. And they’ll definitely let you in. I mean, you look just like her, they’ll -”

“Feel sorry for me?”

I took grim satisfaction seeing the smile slip off his face. 

“No, absolutely not.” His lips pulled down into a frown and I looked away. “Louise,” his large hand grasped my fingers gently. His voice had gone soft.  “I just mean that everybody loved Chel, and they’ll love you too. Just like she did.” 

I looked out the window and blinked hard once, twice, before clearing my throat. 

“Fine. But the *second* I’m ready to leave, we’re leaving, prize be damned.”

Alex squeezed my hand and let go. “Deal.”

We continued the drive in silence. Alex drummed his fingers on the steering wheel and I scanned the empty fields on the side of the road. We’d pulled off on the county road over 10 minutes ago; we’d almost missed the turn-off, which was only marked by a small, weathered wood sign, embossed with a gold Omega symbol. There was still no sign of a party.

“Alex…”

Alex shifted in the driver’s seat and hunched over the steering wheel, squinting into the darkness.

“Yeah...it’s uh...I feel like we should have seen it by now.”

He laughed, high-pitched and thready. I continued unraveling the loose thread on the hem of Chel’s sweater.

The BMW crested a large hill, and I let out a breath I hadn’t known I was holding. A large, white farmhouse stood in the valley below us, a fleet of Land Rovers and Mercedes parked haphazardly in the grass out front.  Alex laughed - much more genuinely, this time - and patted my knee as he parked next to a Lexus.

“Relax, it’s gonna be fun.”

I mustered up a smile but didn’t say anything. Alex grinned and hopped out of the car. I peered up at the house. The facade was bright and cheery, freshly painted with bright blue shutters flanking the windows, the front door a bubbly yellow. The interior, glimpsed through the open blinds, looked warm and inviting, and I could already feel the bass beat of a shitty pop song vibrating softly in my chest. It all looked pretty innocuous. Maybe I could have a good time. For Alex. 

*For Chel.*

The loud clunk of the passenger door opening startled me. Alex arched his eyebrow, forearm braced on the roof of the car.

“Are you coming, or were you planning to wait in the car all night?”

I rolled my eyes and unbuckled. I socked him on the arm as I climbed out of the car.

“Let’s have some fun or whatever.”

I didn’t need to worry about getting in the door. There was nobody checking invitations. We were greeted by a loud cheer of “Alex!” when we entered the living room, the party well underway.

A few guys ran up, thumping Alex on the back and nodding my way in polite acknowledgement. I was suddenly enveloped in a bear hug by a man whose name I couldn’t remember, overwhelmed by a cloud of Axe and sour beer-breath.

“We’re so glad you could make it, Lou. We miss Chel so much.”

A chorus of drunk voices chimed in, booming in the small space of the foyer.

“CHEL!”

Sour-breath let me go to pump his fist in the air, and the boys all started chanting Chel’s name. I couldn’t decide whether I was endeared or disgusted. Alex flushed and elbowed one of his brothers in the ribs. I was about to give him shit when another, much more slender arm wrapped around my shoulders.

“Oh, Louise! I didn’t know you were going to be here.” 

Anna, the president of Chel’s sorority, had to crouch down to hug me. Her words were slurred, her movements languid and clumsy, but her big brown eyes were clear and focused when she pulled back. Anna had always liked Chel, took her under her wing when she first started pledging, and she’d always made me feel welcome in the house. So it was out of the ordinary that she looked concerned, rather than pleased, to see me.

“Uh...yeah. Alex said it would be cool?” I glared in Alex’s direction. He just shrugged.

Anna’s brow furrowed, but before she could answer, another voice chimed in, rich and melodic.

“Oh? I didn’t realize this was Alex’s party.”

Anna froze, and her eyes widened. Slowly, she turned to face three of the most beautiful women I had ever seen in my entire life. Despite their striking appearance, I don’t know that I could describe any of them now; it’s all kind of fuzzy in my memory, but I do know that they were supermodel tall, willowy, with bright eyes that seemed to stare right through you. One of the women - sparkling green eyes boring into mine - spoke again in the same resonant tone.

“Anna? Who’s your party-crasher friend?”

She smiled when she said it, and her tone betrayed no ill will, but I still shrank back behind Anna instinctually. I looked around again for Alex, but he had wandered off already. That set off distant alarm bells in my head, after all his promises that we would stick together, but I couldn’t focus on anything but the woman in front of me. Anna grabbed my hand and squeezed it tightly.

“Oh, uh...this is, you remember Chel, the girl I told you about? This is her sister, Louise, and...well, I  think Alex just thought...”

Another of the three women, grey eyes this time, stepped around Anna in one smooth motion, interrupting her rambling. She grabbed my hand out of Anna’s and clasped it between both of her own. Her skin was cool, almost cold, but her grip was soft. I thought I was just rocking a stupid crush at the time, but the world seemed to tilt off center when she bent down to meet me at eye-level, voice whisper-soft yet strong enough to carry over the house music thumping through the floorboards.

“Darling, I’m so sorry about your sister, but I’m really not sure this party is your scene.”

Anna looked downright panicked by this point, falling all over herself to apologize to the trio. I scanned the crowd and, aside from Alex and a couple of his fraternity brothers, I only saw one other person at the party who looked familiar, a girl from Chel and Anna’s sorority - Beth? Stacy? - who I knew almost nothing about. Chel had never introduced me to her. A distant part of me registered that I should be embarrassed, or, that if Anna was panicking, maybe I should be too. Instead, I felt a strange sense of calm, content to follow wherever that voice might lead me.

“Of course, I didn’t mean to cause any trouble…”

The third woman stepped forward and rested a graceful hand lightly on my shoulder. Bright blue eyes danced kindly. I couldn’t look away.

“No trouble at all, sweetheart, just let me walk you to your car.”

Anna looked on helplessly as the two women guided me slowly to the door. A tiny splinter of logic somehow managed to pierce the haze that had settled over my brain.

“I don’t have a car. Alex drove me.”

Grey-eyes and blue-eyes looked at each other for a few minutes, seeming to have a silent conversation. Blue-eyes finally sighed and turned back to me. 

“Well then, I guess there’s nothing for it. Want to keep me company in the kitchen?”

I could feel the dopey grin splitting my face, but I couldn’t do anything to stop it. I nodded a bit too enthusiastically to be cool. Blue-eyes laughed; it sounded like bells. My mind sunk deeper into the fog.

It didn’t even cross my mind to go find Alex. I forgot about Anna’s frantic worry from just moments before. I let blue-eyes take my hand and lead me further into the house. I felt safe while I was with her. A peace I hadn’t felt since Chel’s death washed over me.

The next day, as the memories came back to me in flashes, I would realize how... *off* everything was. The whole house had this shimmery glow about it, like something out of a dream.  Alex’s fraternity brothers and the handful of girls from Chel’s sorority drank from seemingly bottomless red Solo cups and danced feverishly in the living room, pressed tightly together in a writhing mass; the rest of the partygoers did shot after shot in the kitchen, a never ending supply of vodka and tequila flowing freely, poured generously by the mysterious Sisters of House Omega. The Sisters themselves, each as stunningly gorgeous as the last, stood around the party’s periphery, laughing easily at the revelry without actually partaking in any of it themselves. All the while, those piercing eyes swept over the party with a calculated, unsettling intensity. 

Hindsight, of course, is 20/20. At the time, I was too swept up myself, too enraptured by ocean blue eyes, to notice anything odd.

I wish I could remember her name. Blue-eyes. In spite of everything that happened, I still find myself yearning to know more about her. She pulled me into a cozy bench seat in the corner of the kitchen, away from the worst of the noise. She tucked a stray hair behind my ear with long, graceful fingers, and the whole world fell away. She asked me to tell her all about myself. So I did.

I poured my heart out. I told her about what it was like coming out in high school in a small town in the Midwest, and how supportive Chel always was, even when Alex wigged out and didn’t talk to me for a month. I told her about my dreams of becoming a songwriter and making a break for the coast, about how that dream died with Chel because I couldn’t imagine anybody else singing my songs but her. I told her about all of my hopes and my desires, about my guilt at moving on to live a life that Chel and I had always planned to live together. I told her about my deepest fear: that I don’t know who I am without my twin sister, my other half. That maybe without Chel, I’m nothing at all. 

Looking back on it, I can’t remember what blue-eyes actually said to me throughout all of this. She certainly didn’t give away anything about herself, who she was, where she came from - not even her name. But I remember this overwhelming sense of comfort, of her telling me, maybe not in so many words, that I was *somebody*; I was important, I mattered. Even though she didn’t - couldn’t have - known me, somehow she *did*, and she loved me. She held me as I laughed and cried, and it felt like she was laughing and crying with me, feeling everything I felt just as deeply. 

The next part gets even fuzzier. At some point, blue-eyes took my hand and invited me upstairs. Usually this is the part where I lose my cool, especially with a woman so gut-wrenchingly beautiful, but the nerves never came. I felt like I was floating all the way up the stairs, to her room, to the edge of her twin bed. When she finally kissed me and pressed me back into soft sheets, galaxies exploded behind my closed eyes.

It didn’t go any farther than that, but it was somehow the most intimate experience of my life. I have no idea how long we stayed there, arms around each other, lips sliding together softly, sweetly. At some point, she pulled away to give me another of those deep, searching looks.. She opened her mouth as if to speak when, somewhere in the house, a clock started to chime midnight. 

Her head snapped toward the door. She ducked her head and sighed.

“Wait here, Lou.”

I nodded; it wasn’t a question. There was nowhere else I wanted to be. With one last press of her lips to mine, she was gone.

I flopped back onto the bed, idly wondering how long she would be gone and what we might get up to when she got back. Before I could follow that train of thought too far, a high-pitched, harsh shriek rent the night, painfully loud even over the pounding baseline from downstairs. More inhuman, screeching voices soon joined in.

I shot up in bed just as the dance music cut out with the painfully grating sound of feedback from the speakers. There was a series of terrible, thundering crashes, and a chorus of panicked screams sounded from the partygoers below.

The peaceful veil clouding my thoughts lifted in an instant. It finally caught up to me how *wrong* the situation was. I didn’t even really remember coming upstairs, and I hadn’t seen Alex in hours…

*Shit, Alex is down there.*

I ran to the door, but it wouldn’t budge. Distantly, I thought I could hear Alex screaming my name, scared and in pain, and I started slamming my body into the door, calling out for him until my voice was shredded. I looked around frantically for my phone, but it wasn’t anywhere in the room. I couldn’t remember where I had left it. Footsteps pounded down the hallway outside, a terrified scream coming closer, abruptly silenced when something slammed into the other side of the bedroom door with a wet, heavy thud. I stumbled back until my knees hit the edge of the bed. 

I sobbed and made a break for the windows instead. I was just about to take my chances jumping from the second story when a small TV in the corner of the room switched on, static buzzing at the highest volume. Half-wild, I thought briefly of chucking the whole TV through the windowpane before the blurred pixels started to resolve into a familiar face.

“No…”

There on the TV, impossibly, was Chel. My escape plan was quickly abandoned. I reached out to the screen with shaking fingers, as though I could reach through the cold glass and touch her face. 

The scene on the TV started to play. I couldn’t look away.

Chel was at a party in what I recognized as the basement of Alex’s fraternity house. She was trashed, drink sloshing over the rim of her cup onto her sweater. The sweater I was wearing that night. Alex stepped into frame, laughing, and poured more liquor into her cup.

“Easy, Chel, you’re going to lose the rest of your drink!”

“Can’t have that!” whooped a frat brother in the background. Alex turned and shot him a glare.

“When are the other girls gonna get here?” Chel’s voice was slurred, mumbling. “Is Lou still coming?”

A chorus of giggles sounded from the small handful of girls in the background. I recognized Beth/Stacy as one of the onlookers. Alex looked back at the crowd and swallowed. He smiled wanly at Chel.

“Yeah, Chel, she’s on her way. Listen - how about we play a game while we wait for her?”

My stomach felt like stone, bile clawing up the back of my throat. Distantly, I could still hear the rampage continuing in the house around me. Wails of pain and fear, shrieks of rage and triumph, and under it all, a thick, fleshy ripping sound. 

“A game?” Chel looked at Alex with unfocused eyes, brow furrowed. Something was seriously wrong. Chel never got that drunk.

“Yeah, it’ll be fun!” The men were circling up around Chel on the TV. The hair on my arms and neck stood up. Somebody in the real world was pounding on the door to the room, begging for help, but they sounded distorted and far away, like my head was in a fishbowl. 

“I don’t know, Alex, I don’t feel so good.” Chel swayed on her feet. Alex was practically holding her upright. 

“It’s OK, Chel, just one quick game and then we’re done, OK?” 

Alex was smoothing Chel’s hair away from her face, almost tenderly. The ugly, sinister anticipation in my gut was building. Chel and Alex always had a bit of a thing, but this didn’t seem like their usual flirting; it was a mockery of the sweet way Alex usually treated Chel. His eyes were filled with an odd mix of determination and regret, lust and anxiety.

The Chel on the TV was too far gone to have any of those same misgivings. Chel was always too trusting of people, quick to see the good in everyone. She smiled broadly and dropped her head onto Alex’s shoulder, wrapping her arms around him in a loose hug. Alex’s frat brothers were circling like sharks. I wrapped my arms around my own waist and fell to my knees, tears streaming down my face.

“Spin the Chel!” somebody yelled. Chel looked up, confused, and Alex grimaced and spun her quickly in a circle. She stumbled into the arms of another fraternity brother. She tried to push at him, but her movements were slow and weak. The guy forcibly kissed her, and then shoved her back toward Alex, who did the same. This continued, Chel tossed about like a ragdoll, sobbing my name in fear and confusion. She looked so lost, so *young*. I quit watching as soon as more hands started grabbing at her, pulling at her clothes. It wasn’t hard to guess what happened next.

I covered my ears and hunched in on myself on the floor, screaming, begging for it all to stop. 

I don’t know how long I stayed there. I didn’t even notice that everything had gone quiet until I heard the click of the bedroom door opening behind me. It was loud as a gunshot in the sudden silence. I stood up slowly and moved toward the door in a daze.

I stepped forward and barely registered the sick squelch of the rug under my feet. Red soaked the floor and the bottom 18 inches of the wallpaper, splattered in wide strokes on the upper walls and ceiling. A pile of gore that had once been a person slumped at the top of the stairs. A river of blood ran down the center of the staircase, thick and dark, flowing like a grisly red carpet to the open front door.

I stepped around mangled limbs and stringy viscera as I made my way carefully down the stairs. My mind was completely numb to the carnage; the sound of Chel’s helpless tears still filled my ears. Two steps from the front door, a faint voice gurgled to my left.

“Lou…”

Part of me wanted to ignore him. To just walk back out into the night, down County Road 5, back to my tiny, uncomfortable bed in my shitty dorm room, where I would fall asleep and this would all have been a nightmare. 

“Please*,* Lou.”

Movements rigid, I forced myself to turn toward the living room. My breath hitched in spite of my detachment.

There, on the floor in the middle of a sea of shredded bodies, was what was left of Alex. His blond hair was tinged pink with blood. One of his eyes dangled loosely from its socket; both legs were missing below the knees. He dragged himself toward me with his right arm, nails cracking against the hardwood floor. His left arm, flesh ripped down to bone and sinew, reached out for me, pleading.

I didn’t move. I couldn’t. This was Alex - my best friend since kindergarten, Chel’s prom date, my first and last kiss with a man. This was *Alex*. The man who threw my sister to the wolves. Who raped her. 

The reason Chel was dead. 

“Did Chel say *please*, Alex? 

Alex choked on a bloody sob. I could see the guilt and shame awash in his one good eye.

“It wasn’t s’posed...go that far.” He coughed; blood spewed in a chunky froth across the hardwood. “*Please*, Lou, ‘m sorry.”

Groaning in agony, Alex inched closer to me. I remained still, body frozen with indecision.

“Shall we spare him?”

Ice trickled down my spine. The voice belonged to blue-eyes, there was no doubt, but it was different; a sonorous, echoing whisper, sighing on the wind like it came from everywhere at once.

A long-fingered hand settled on my shoulder. In the corner of my vision, I saw shiny curved, black talons resting near my collarbone. Just around the corners of the living room entryway, beyond my line of sight, I could make out the shadows of huge wings. Feathers rustled, claws tapped and clicked on the hardwood floor, impatient. Alex looked toward the noise, face twisted in fright. Blue-eyes squeezed my shoulder gently.

“I’m sorry, child. You weren’t supposed to be here. But we wanted you to understand.”

Alex looked at me again, pleading. He opened his mouth to speak, but I beat him to it.

“He’s all yours.”

As whatever monsters lurked in the shadows began to advance, the hand on my shoulder turned me away and steered me toward the door. Smooth, black feathers filled my peripheral vision, a large wing curled around my frame to block the sights and muffle the sounds of my former best friend’s demise. I stepped into the cool night air and closed my eyes. Lips brushed tenderly across my temple. 

“Be at peace, dear one.”

Everything went black.

I woke up late last Sunday morning, back in the dorms, tucked safely into my bed. For a couple of hours, I almost convinced myself I had dreamed the whole thing. Every trace of the House Omega party has been scrubbed from existence - all of my text messages with Alex about it were gone, none of the sleek, black invitations remained. I thought briefly, hopefully, that maybe it had all just been a grief-induced nightmare.

Until the news broke that Alex’s entire fraternity and a handful of Chel’s sorority sisters had disappeared into the ether overnight.

The police have no leads. I know they won’t find any. I drove back out to County Road 5 a few days ago, after half a week of fielding concerned phone calls from my mom. There’s nothing there; just an empty field with an abandoned, decrepit farmhouse rotting in the prairie sun.

Alex’s mom has been calling me, too. To see if I’ve heard from him, if I have any clue what happened. I haven’t told her the truth. I’ve decided that I won’t. Sometimes lies are kinder. She doesn’t need to know what kind of monster her son was, what kind of monster he was killed by.

I spent most of the day today at the cemetery. I sat cross-legged in front of Chel’s headstone, tracing the letters of her name and thinking of everything I should have seen earlier, everything I missed. A shadow fell over me, breaking my reverie. 

“Mind if I join you?”

I squinted up into the afternoon sun. It was Anna. With everything else that had been going on, I had almost forgotten that she had even been there that night. I guess I had subconsciously catalogued her as one of missing. Apparently, officially speaking, she was never at the party either.

She helped fill in some of the gaps.

“Chel came to me, right after it happened,” Anna said, voice tight. She sat down beside me in the grass, close enough our thighs were touching. “I was furious, ready to call campus police, but she begged me not to. The boys, and some of our so-called sisters, had taken video of the whole thing, she said, and threatened to expose her if she got ‘too sensitive’ about it. I promised her I wouldn’t call. I wish every night that I had anyway.

I had decided I would connect her with campus resources instead, you know? Support groups for survivors, counselors, that kind of thing. I convinced myself it was good enough. But before I could make it happen she..” Anna choked on the words. She cleared her throat and breathed out harshly through her nose. “Well, I was too late. I would apologize to you, but an apology isn’t good enough.”

“You have nothing to apologize for, Anna. You tried to help her.” I squeezed her hand. She squeezed mine back.

“Still, I felt like I had to do *something*.” Anna stared at Chel’s headstone, eyes hard. “People like the men and women who hurt your sister, they think they’re invincible. Untouchable. And they’re not entirely wrong these days. With enough money, you can get away with anything, right?” She laughed, dry and humorless. “So I knew I had to reach out to a higher authority.”

“What did you do?”

Anna smiled grimly. “My family worships the old gods.” I shivered at that, a chill dancing across my skin. “I called upon a long-forgotten sisterhood, ancient and hungry. If I could deliver them the guilty parties, they promised they could deliver justice.” Her expression softened as she finally looked at me. “You were never supposed to be there, though. Oh, honey, I am so, so sorry.”

I didn’t tell her it was okay, because it really isn't. But I appreciated her apology nonetheless. I nodded and squeezed her hand again, blinking back tears.

“So...what now?”

“The deed is done.” Anna stood up and dusted the grass off of the back of her leggings. “They’ll have moved on.” Anna looked at me, long and hard, and bit her lip. She nodded to herself, and reached into her purse. “They did ask me to make one last delivery, though.”

Anna pulled out a very familiar piece of black cardstock, embossed with gilded lettering. She handed it to me. I took it with a trembling hand.

“There’s no pressure, and no expiration date,” Anna said. She started to go, but turned back one last time with a sad, sweet smile. “I really am sorry, Lou. For everything. Chel was the best of us.”

I waited until her figure faded into the distance to look down at the paper in my hands. It was a new invitation, to me, this time:

*Louise Teller*  
*True of heart and strong of will,*  
*The Sisters of House Omega invite you into our fold.*  
*A black candle to summon us; a white candle to turn us away.*  
*We will heed your call.*

I thought of Chel, crying and confused, stumbling in a dark basement. I thought of Chel, the last time I’d seen her in life, head thrown back and laughing. I thought of Chel, cold and still in the ground beneath me. I crumpled the invitation in my fist.

It’s quiet tonight; not even a breeze rustles the dying leaves. And yet, a soft wind is disturbing the flame of the black candle I’ve placed in front of my open window. A low, sweet voice floats on the breeze, speaking an old language, and feathers flutter in the dark just past my line of vision.

I was never the type to join a sorority. But I think there might be something to this whole sisterhood thing after all.[Part One](https://redd.it/brco33)
**** 
[Part Two](https://redd.it/brsj8v)
**** 
[Part Three](https://redd.it/bsg2az)
**** 
[Part Four](https://redd.it/btkvkl)
**** 


I spent the next five days watching Rachel die.

From the outside, just watching the monitor, it didn’t seem that different than what I had been watching for the past three years.  Rachel slept, she watched T.V., she read, and she painted.  But there were signs if you were looking for them.  She seemed tired and tense, and she had taken to sleeping more.  And occasionally, just every once in a while, she would glance up at the camera—at me.  It was then that I could see the fear and sadness in her eyes.

Inside…well, inside I felt like a burned out house collapsing in on itself.  At first I refused to watch, to do anything they wanted me to do.  Solomon didn’t get mad at me, but just shrugged.  He said while cooperation was preferred and could go a long way toward making my stay with them more comfortable, it wasn’t required.  

If he was right, Solomon said with a thin smile, things would play out as they were meant to, regardless of what I wanted or thought I chose.  Either way, he added, the video was about to start back playing and would not stop for another five days.  Whether I wanted to spend that time getting to see her again was entirely up to me.

I tried to not watch, but a part of me knew from the start I was going to.  Maybe I would find some clue that they were lying about her being dead.  Or Rachel could give me some advice or warning about what I needed to do next.  I didn’t know.  What I did know is that I couldn’t miss the chance to see her again.  And despite knowing in my heart that she was dead and everything on the video had happened a long time ago, I still felt that by watching I was with her somehow.  

She had been taken away from everything she knew when she was barely grown, trapped for years just for being special.  Experimented on.  Treated like property.  Kept from ever having friends or family or a life.  And yet through all that, she was still beautiful.  Not just on the outside, but on the inside too.  I had spent years watching her, getting to know her in a thousand tiny ways that so few people ever truly know each other.  I had seen her kindness and grace in her actions, even when she was fighting against the people holding her.  I had watched her strength when she woke up day after day in her prison and never gave up.  And I saw the beauty of her soul in her paintings, full of swirling colors and…what was the word…wonder.  She was able to paint these things she saw with such care and love, despite living in a world that had abandoned her so completely.

Well I wasn’t abandoning her.  I would watch every bit of the video I could manage.  Try to burn into my memory every frame of her I saw.  Not for them and their stupid project.  But for me.  And for her.  I may not have much left to do in my life before they lock me away somewhere or kill me, but I could do this one last thing.

Rachel wouldn’t die alone.

****

I watched nearly all of it, stopping only to eat quickly and use the bathroom until the last two days.  I would ask the guards to pause it, but they would only shake their heads and say Solomon said it had to play normally until it was finished.  By the fourth day, I was in a stupor.  I had already dozed some the first three days, but when I woke up on the fourth day, I could tell a few hours had passed.  There were two trays of food on the bed, one breakfast and another lunch.  I looked back at the screen in a panic, worrying I had missed something, but Rachel seemed to be just waking up too.  I noticed her putting her hand to her stomach as she got out of bed and felt my own stomach twist.  She was already hurting.  Rachel glanced at the camera and tried to smile before moving to set up a new canvas for painting.  

This was the second of three paintings she did in those last days.  The first had been the inside of an old-fashioned movie theater from the viewpoint of someone sitting in a back row.  On the movie screen was just the image of a sledgehammer propped against a brick wall.  I didn’t understand what it meant, and I found myself scanning the picture for some message or other clue.  Eventually I found what might be one, though I didn’t understand it either.

Rachel must have come to understand they knew what she was doing with the paintings and didn’t want to stop her, because these last three she set up much closer to the camera.  I was still squinting and studying the painting closely when I realized the flipped up seats in the next row up had brass number plates along the front edge of the seats.  Though they were upside down from the viewpoint of the painting, the angle was good enough that once I noticed them I was able to read them.  

**2…43…26…89**

I didn’t understand any of it, but I committed it all to memory, focusing all my attention on the painting until she finally took it away.  Even that early on I could tell painting was taking a lot out of her now, and like I had for so long, I found myself talking to her, telling her to go rest before I remembered her body in the next room.  I almost stopped then, but no.  Maybe she couldn’t tell I was talking to her, or maybe she could.  Either way, me talking to her couldn’t hurt, and it made me feel a little less lonely and sad as I watched her.

The second painting, the one she started after I woke up from falling asleep for a few hours, was stranger than the rest.  It looked like it was in a room with curved walls made of tree roots, and in the center of the room was a little table made out of the same stuff.  Some of the roots around the room were a deep red, but other parts, including the table thing, looked burned and black.  I looked closer and saw that I could see a person’s shadow over the table—hands holding some long oval-shaped bundle.

I studied it for a long time, going over it again and again in my mind after she took it away.  I couldn’t make sense of it.  Of any of it.  I wasn’t smart enough, and I was failing her.

Rachel slept for a long time after that painting.  Then she got up on the fifth day, her last day, and immediately started working again.  This time she was painting faster, and while I saw her wince occasionally, she never lost her look of determination as she slashed lines and colors across the canvas.  When she was done, Rachel picked up the painting and turned it toward the camera, giving me a small, tired smile as she was blocked from view.

It was looking out from the front porch of a house somewhere.  It was out in the country, and the morning view of the yard and the land beyond were wonderful, but closer-up the painting was of two hands.  Holding onto each other tightly, their interlocked fingers seemed to glow red and orange in the light of the rising sun.  I found myself crying as I looked at it.  

Part of it was because I didn’t know what it meant, and I felt a growing sense of desperation at the thought that Rachel’s last works might be wasted on me.  Part was because I knew it had been five days, and I could sense I was close to the end.  To her end.

But there was something more to it than all that too.  The last painting…even with everything else in my head and my heart pulling me down…gave me hope.  Hope of what, I didn’t know.  But I started to think that maybe the only message Rachel had for me in that last painting was that somehow, somewhere, everything would be okay.

Outside the edge of the painting I could see motion in the room.  People hurriedly coming in with some kind of medical equipment.  And then the monitor went black.

****

“You’ve done well, Thomas.  Very, very well.  For the last five days of video, we had charted one thousand and forty-seven microvariations in Rachel’s behavior that we believed might correspond to your behavior, your reactions, and your emotional states while watching the video.  Like before, the two of you remained in sync as though you were in the same room.  It really is remarkable.”

I sat staring at Solomon.  I listened to what he said, but I didn’t care.  I just wanted it over.  Whatever this was, I just wanted it over.

Clearing his throat, he went on.  “That’s why we’ve decided to move the implant from Rachel’s body to your own.  That’s one of the many reasons we’ve preserved her so.  The foreign body was still showing signs of life all this time, but just barely, and we were afraid to attempt removal.  Our hope is that, given your connection to Rachel, it will accept you.  Perhaps even thrive in you more than it ever did our girl.”

I was suddenly on my feet, and it was only the raising of Solomon’s gun that stopped me from attacking him.  “Don’t you fucking talk about her like that.  Like any of you gave a shit about her.  I’ll fucking kill you.”

Solomon’s face darkened slightly as his lips thinned.  “No, you won’t.  But if idle threats make you feel better, go ahead.  It will only make things harder, not easier.”

Feeling a stab of panicked fear, I sat back down.  “What is this thing you’re going to put in me?”

The man looked at me for several seconds before responding.  “I’m tempted not to tell you after your stupid—and frankly, hurtful—outburst.  But I’ll be the bigger person.”  Letting out a small sigh, he went on.  “Thomas, somewhere there is a tree.  A very special tree.  We suspect it is the same tree that Rachel painted for you that time, though we cannot say for sure, as we have never been able to find it.  It is either hidden away very well or it is able to hide itself from those it wishes.”

I just looked at him, trying to kill him by just wanting it to be so.  “In any case, we have the next best thing.  An ancient clipping from the tree.  Secured at great cost and sacrifice, and studied for a long time without much success.  We have, however, in recent years been given…advice, that this clipping could be grown in the right soil.  We thought that soil was Rachel, but while it did develop further inside of her, she died before the necessary growth was finished.”

Leaning forward, he smiled at me.  “We have it on fairly good authority, however, that you might succeed where she failed.”

****

I fought them when they came, but it didn’t matter.  I woke up some time later with a dull ache in my chest and a small, already healing scar on my upper stomach.  I didn’t really feel that different other than the little bit of pain, but I knew that would change with time.  Maybe I had more time than Rachel, or maybe I had less.  It didn’t matter.  I just…

*Wait, what was that?*

There was some kind of soft voice…coming from where?  It wasn’t in the room.  It was in my head.  I felt a thrill of excitement.  Maybe this was Rachel’s voice.  She had somehow stayed in the tree thing they had put inside me?

But no.  I had never heard Rachel’s voice, but I sensed this wasn’t it.  This voice was too delicate to really be heard or understood, and it reminded me of music coming from a distant room that you felt in the back of your mind without realizing it.  It was a…a melody, a kind of song.  But it wasn’t Rachel’s song.  I realized with a shiver that it was the song of the thing inside of me.

At first I was afraid, but that didn’t last long.  It wasn’t trying to hurt me.  It was trapped here just like I was.  *But*, it started to sing, *it was time for us to be free.*

I stood up and walked to the door, and as I did so, the lights went out.  The door in front of me clicked, and when I reached out and turned the knob in the dark, it opened easily.  How was this possible?  And if it could do this, why hadn’t it helped Rachel get out?  There was no answer, but there was also no time.  I could already hear boots around the corner as the glow from flashlights began to light up the far end of the hall.  

They would drag me back in there.  Chain me up or take this thing back out of me before we could get away.  If I was ever going to get out, it had to be now.  The voice was singing again, pushing me to go further into the dark, to run until we were safe.

So I listened and I ran.

****

Every door unlocked for me, every turn kept me barely out of sight.  The people looking for me were barking orders over a radio, asking someone what was the hold up on the generator kicking on.  Whatever the response, the hallways stayed dark as I drifted through them blind but not falling, lost but not being found.  

When I reached the final door, I opened it into a bright afternoon.  My lungs burned a little at the first fresh, unrecycled air I had breathed in a week.  Blinking, I waited for the voice to tell me where to go, but it had fallen silent.  I closed the door as panic began to rise in my chest.  All this and I would get caught because I didn’t know where to go.  I was outside a plain brown building in the middle of nowhere.  There was a road going off to the right, and to the left there was…

*Rachel’s forest, from her first painting to me.*

I knew it was the same forest immediately, and not just because of it matching the painting so closely.  I had some strange sense that felt like a kind of magnetism, or how birds know which way to fly.  Looking around for a second, I felt like I was being pulled when I looked again at those woods.  This was right.  Somehow, I knew this was the way I needed to go.

So I went.

I had made it to the edge of the forest when I heard the noise of men coming outside the building.  I thought about hiding, but I knew it was a bad idea.  They would just catch me, and I felt a drive to go deeper into the woods.  I plunged ahead, running at close to a reckless speed but never tripping or stumbling as I went.  I would occasionally hear a noise behind me as they spread out to search, but the sounds grew fainter as I ran.  I almost thought I had lost them for good when I heard a short cough that was quickly muffled off to my left.  Someone had gotten close without me knowing it. 

Panicking, I looked for any places I could hide.  There were only bushes and trees and…over there.  A well.  Not just *a* well, but Rachel’s well, with the same worn, grey stone walls capped with a weathered wooden lid.  I felt a moment of happy recognition, but then it faded away.  How did that help?  They’d check the well if they found it, and I didn’t have any way to get down in it without getting hurt or stuck.  Then an idea stuck me.

Crouching low and staying to the brush, I moved to the well and gingerly pushed on the lid.  At first it resisted, but when I pushed a bit harder, the wooden circle slid aside enough that you could clearly see someone moved it.  Glancing around, I eased back into the bushes as I heard soft footfalls approaching.

“We need to check this out.”

“You think he went down the well?  Better hope not.  He probably broke his neck if he did, and then its our asses.”

I could see the two men approaching.  Both of them were wearing dark body armor and carried assault rifles.  The older of the two shrugged back at the other one.  “Better that than he was hiding in there and we *didn’t* check.”

Looking irritated, the younger man nodded.  “I’ll look.”  He went over to the well and shoved the wooden lid aside, causing it to clatter to the ground.  Hitting a button on his rifle, a flashlight sprang to life on the barrel.  He started to shine it down into the well as the other continued to look in every direction.  I was worried he would see me if I moved, but I couldn’t wait.  I just had to stay calm.  Think slow and move fast.

I kept expecting to hear them yell, or feel something or someone strike me in the back, but nothing came.  As the afternoon light began to dim, I saw the trees thinning ahead.  I was approaching a road.  It looked like a normal, public road too, with several cars passing one way or the other as I walked out of the forest and up the hill to the asphalt.

The idea of hitchhiking, especially this close to where they held me, was frightening, but I saw little choice.  I was wearing sweatpants and a t-shirt they had given me and my own shoes, but I had no money or ID or phone.  My only chance was to get far enough away that I could try and get help.

I jumped slightly at the hiss of hydraulic brakes as a large semi rolled to a stop next to me.  The passenger window rolled down and an older man with white hair and a greying mustache leaned over and peered down at me.  

“You look lost, son.  You need a ride?”

I looked down at the door of the truck.  It had a logo that said “Martinez and Sons Construction and Hauling”  Below it was a cartoon man hitting a wall with a sledgehammer.  Looking back up, I smiled at him.

“Yes sir, I do.”

****
I woke up five hours later as we pulled into a truck stop somewhere in Nevada.  I had planned on staying awake the entire trip, but that had only lasted a few minutes before exhaustion overtook me.  I glanced over at Oliver Martinez and he gave me a toothy grin.

“I’m tired, but you were plumb tuckered out.  I’ve got to fuel up, shower and get some grub.  I’m going on to California after that.  If you want to ride further, just be back here in an hour.  Sound good?”

I nodded and thanked him again for the ride as I got out.  I felt groggy from sleeping, but otherwise okay.  I just needed to decide whether this was a good spot to ask for help or if I should ride with Martinez further.  He seemed like a very nice guy, and he would probably try to help if he could, but I wanted to avoid putting more people in danger if I could help it.  Looking around, I saw we were in a fairly nice little town.  I decided I would go look around for a few minutes and then decide what to do.

I was only three blocks down the street when I saw the flickering lights in the distance.  It was a movie theater.  As I got closer, I felt my chest tightening.  It was the one from Rachel’s painting.

****

“Hey there.  Welcome to the Phoenix.”

The guy standing at the candy counter of the theater looked a little younger than me, and while he seemed friendly enough, he also looked slightly concerned.

“If you’re here for the horror double-feature, I’m afraid the second movie is about thirty minutes in.  I can give you a half-rate if you want to see it though.”

I shook my head and tried to not look as strange and crazy as I felt.  “No, that’s okay.  I…well, I recognized this place from a picture a friend of mine painted.  So I came in to ask if you knew anything about her.”

He raised his eyebrows and shrugged.  “Okay, weird.”  He smiled and added, “Weird but interesting.  Who is she?”

I swallowed.  “Her name is…well, it was, Rachel Donovan.”

I expected him to look surprised or excited or angry, but I could see right away the name meant nothing to him.  Shaking his head, he shrugged again.  “Sorry, that doesn’t ring a bell.  I’d say you could ask the owner, but he’s on vacation this week.”

Nodding, I searched my mind for something else to ask, some way to make this place matter the way her other paintings had.  “Is there anything unique about this place then?  Its history or something?”

The man grinned.  “Buddy, you’re clearly not from here.  This place is super boring.  Not just the theater, but the whole town.”  Frowning in thought, he added.  “The only thing I know about the history of this place is that there used to be a house here that burned down.  This was like in the 1920s or 30s when this wasn’t even a part of town.  Couldn’t tell you the first thing about it beyond that, but I still bet it’s the most interesting thing that’s ever happened here.”

I let out a disappointed sigh.  “Okay.  Well, thanks.”  I turned to leave when the guy called out again.

“Hey man, sorry I couldn’t help more.  If you come back, I’ll get you a discount on a movie.  Half-off.  If I’m not working, tell them Marshall said it was okay.”

I waved and tried to smile as I headed for the door with a heavy heart.  Why did you lead me here, Rachel?  What’s here that will help?

I was outside again, staring up at the theater’s bright blinking signs as though they were going to give me some kind of secret signal, when I noticed movement out of the corner of my eye.  There was an alley that ran along side the theater and went behind it to…something.  Whatever was back there, the light of a distant security lamp cast shadows along the wall of the alley, and those shadows were moving.

Instead of feeling afraid, I felt excited as I started down the alley.  Rachel had led me here, and I just had to trust that there was a reason for it.  Keep looking until I…

The shadows were made by leaves blowing in some wind I couldn’t feel.  As I got to the far end of the alley, I saw there was a small back yard behind the theater surrounded by a chain link fence, and on the other side of that fence was the tree from Rachel’s painting, with its deep red twisting bark and foam of green leaves waving to and fro in the night air.

I felt a surge of warmth in my chest as the distant singing began again.  This was the place.  The special tree that could not be found unless it wanted you to find it.  It sat at the edge of a small overgrown lot surrounded on all sides by buildings and yards, somehow forgotten when whatever this land had once been was divided up, and despite its location, I had a strong sense that I was the first to see it in a very long time.

Climbing the fence, I felt a jagged wire dig into my leg and rip my pants as I fell over the top.  I was bleeding a little, but I hardly noticed.  I could smell the tree now, and it was a rich, good smell unlike any I had smelled before.  Reaching out to it, I felt the singing grow louder as I touched it.  I felt stronger and less afraid then, and when I saw the light opening up at its roots, I didn’t tremble, I smiled.

There was a hidden tunnel under the tree.  A tunnel filled with sweet-smelling air that was like the tree smell but also different.  And the tunnel wasn’t dark—no, not at all.  It glowed with its own golden light that called to me, urged me forward.  Rain was beginning to fall as I looked around the dark lot.  I had the thought that I was leaving this world behind.

And I found I didn’t mind that much at all.

The tunnel had continued to grow, slanting down gently and tall enough that I walked in without stooping.  The roots of the tree went on and on, woven through the dirt walls as I went deeper.  I looked back and saw the tunnel had closed behind me, but I wasn’t surprised.  The way forward was the only way that mattered.

I walked for what might have been hours, but I never felt tired or hungry.  And I never worried I was lost, though I had no idea where I was or where I was going.  Still, I felt a surge of happiness and excitement when I turned a corner and saw something in the tunnel ahead.  As I got closer I realized it was a brick wall, but just as I began to think I had found a dead end, the wall faded away, revealing a dark room.

I paused at the edge of the tunnel, looking out at the floor of what looked like a basement.  It was empty, but in the light from the tree I could make out something scratched into the floor.  It was the number two.  I felt my pulse quicken as I thought back to Rachel’s painting with the theater seats, and then I stepped out into the room.

It was the empty basement of a house, and as I went up the stairs and opened the door, I saw that the rest of the house was empty as well.  No lights were on, but bright sunlight poured in through every window and in the distance I could hear what sounded like small waves crashing on a beach.  I wanted to go out and see where I was, but I forced myself to check the house first for any people or clues.  But there were none.  The house was utterly bare of any sign of people other than the number scratched into the floor below.

My nose tingled with salty air as I stepped outside.  The house was near the beach on what I soon figured out was a small, deserted island, and I realized with little surprise that I recognized the house from Rachel’s painting.  As I stepped off the porch, I saw no signs of people, but I wasn’t entirely alone.  Because sitting some distance from the house, was the tree.  

I knew it couldn’t be the same tree as in the abandoned lot, but at the same time I knew that it was.  Or at least a different part of the same tree that made the tunnels and appeared in my old world and whatever place this was.  

Because I had started having that thought as soon as I stepped out of the house.  I didn’t think this was my world.  Not exactly.  I could see a larger island some distance away, and it might have people on it.  Hotels and cars and planes.  Or it might not, as those things might not exist here.  Either way, my newfound intuition was growing stronger, and I could tell that the…what was it called?  The con…no, the texture of things was different somehow, if only a little.  Not bad or scary, just different.

Still, after a couple of hours exploring the island and checking the house, I began to feel terribly lonely, even with the tree nearby.  I decided to go back into the tunnel and keep going.  The basement wall faded away as I walked up to it, and I entered the tunnels again.

It was only a short time later that I found my second version of the house.  Much like the first, the wall faded away into a basement, but this one was far from empty.  It was a workshop of some kind, full of tools I wasn’t familiar with.  I glanced down and saw “43” scratched onto the floor.  Who was doing that?  And why?

I was going to explore the house, more carefully this time, as it looked like there were people here, but then I froze.  Propped against the brick wall, next to a small stack of boards, was a sledgehammer.  Trying to be quiet, I crept over and picked it up before heading back into the tunnel.

****

When I was little, before Daddy died, he had loved to hunt.  I never went with him and didn’t remember much of what he hunted, but I do know he had an old hound he’d had since before I was born.  The dog had only loved him—well, him and being on the trail of something.  When Rocker (his name was Rockerfeller) got a scent, it was like he was in a trance.  He would go and go, this way and that, and to look at him, it looked like he was having a fit—both lost and certain at the same time.  But whatever Rocker knew or didn’t know, he always found what he was looking for. 

I felt like Rocker now.  I was moving faster and faster as I went down this turn and that.  I felt like I was on the trail of something or traveling on memories I didn’t have.  Gripping the sledgehammer tightly, I could hear the rising hum of the distant music in my head as I turned the last corner, and then it fell silent.

There was another brick wall, and as I approached, it fell away.

It was another basement room, but this one was much smaller.  It contained a table, a clothes chest, and an old metal bed that had been broken apart.  At the far brick wall, a woman was using one of the metal legs from the bed to attack the wall and whatever lay behind it.  I felt my head began to swim as I looked at her from behind, and as she turned to look at me, eyes wide with surprise and fear, I felt the sledgehammer slip from my grip as I stumbled back against the now solid wall.  I could barely breathe at all, but I managed to get out a single word.

“Rachel?”

The woman looked at me, her expression less fearful but still guarded.  She had the bed leg partially raised in warning.  [“Yeah?  Do I know you?”](https://redd.it/8uj33q)

****
 
**** 

**** 

**** 




It was her, but it wasn’t, much like the tree on the island.  This Rachel looked a few years older, and while she looked stressed and confused at the moment, her eyes didn’t seem weighted down by the same quiet sadness I had come to recognize watching the other Rachel for all that time.  Still, I didn’t know how to answer her question and not sound creepy or crazy.  I stared at her for a second, floundering, when she asked another.

“You came out of the tree tunnel, right?”

I nodded, grateful for something I could answer easily.

Studying me, she said.  “Where did you come from?  Before the tunnel I mean.”

I flushed as I tried to think of the right words.  “Um, well, I came from Texas.  Originally I mean.”

She grinned at me for a second before catching herself and trying to look serious again.  “Yeah, okay.  But like…do you know how the tree works?  How did you find out about the tunnel?  How did you get here?”

Sighing, I rubbed my head and just started into it.

“Look, I know this will sound crazy, but I had a job watching a woman trapped in a room, and that woman was you, or another version of you, and she asked me for help, and I couldn’t help her and then they took me, and I found out she had been dead for a long time but could see me in the future and then they put something from the tree in me that had been in her that killed her and then I escaped and then I figured out where to go to find the tree from things she had painted and I somehow knew how to go in the tunnels to find different spots, and I’m pretty sure the tunnels lead to different worlds and I got this sledgehammer and then I…”

“Hold up.  God damn.  Take a breath.  You’re going to pass out.”  She was smiling again, and this time she didn’t try to hide it.  She looked over what was left of the bed to where the sledgehammer was laying on the floor.  “And did you say sledgehammer?”

****

**Whack**

“So yeah, I believe you.”

**Whack**

“I’ve been in those tunnels too.  My ex-boyfriend tricked me into moving here so he could tie me to the tree in his place.”

**Whack** 

“Well, not tie me to the tree literally.  Take his place as…what?  The tree’s buddy or something?  I don’t really know.  It’s all pretty fucked up and I don’t understand all of it.”
**Whack**

“But what I do understand is that the fucker walled me up in here.  At first, I thought I could just pry loose some bricks over time, but nope.  He put a layer of concrete on the outside this time.  Good ol’ Phil.  Or Justin.  Or whatever.  I mainly think of him as Fuckface now.”

**Whack**

“This is taking forever.”

I stepped up and put my hand on the sledgehammer.  “Let me do it for a bit.  We can take turns.”  We had cleared away even more brick than she had already managed, but the concrete wall was only starting to show small cracks.  I wanted to just keep looking at her, have her talk to me, but I knew she was tired.  She nodded reluctantly and let go of the hammer.  Before I swung, I looked back at her.  “How long have you been in here like this?”

**Whack** 

Rachel scowled.  “It’s hard to say for sure, but I think about eight months.”

I let the hammer drop down again as my eyes widened.  “How did you survive all that time?”

Her scowl deepened.  “It’s the tree.  It won’t let me die.  I just dip into the tunnel every day for a bit and I never get that hungry or thirsty.”

A thought occurred to me then.  “Why didn’t you just escape through the tunnels?”

She quickly shook her head.  “No, thank you.  I’ve had enough of seeing other worlds.  Some of them aren’t so nice.  And I don’t want to be more tied to the tree than I already am.  I just want out of here, into my own world, and then I can try and figure out how to get free of my connection to the tree for good.”  Rachel shrugged.  “I would have done it eventually with the stupid bed parts, but who knows how long it would have taken?”  She smiled again.  “I’m very happy you came to help and brought a sledgehammer with you.”

Returning her smile, I nodded as I lifted the hammer again.  “Me too.”

**Whack**

****

We were both wringing with sweat when we crawled through the hole we’d made in the outer wall.  Rachel told me that she thought her ex-boyfriend was long gone, but she couldn’t be sure, so we had to be careful.  Grabbing the sledgehammer from inside the room, we made our way toward the stairs.

The house was decorated but quiet, and we saw no sign of anyone as we walked to the front door and opened it.  Outside, the sun was coming up on a new day, and as we walked out onto the porch, I jumped a little as Rachel took my hand and gave it a squeeze.  I looked over at her.  

I hadn’t been able to help the other Rachel, but maybe that had never been the point at all.  Because I thought now she had been able to see more than just other places or the future.  She had been able to see into other worlds and possibilities. 

Like this one, where another version of her was trapped and needed help.  A place where I wouldn’t be hunted and she could be free.  In the end, even when she knew she was dying, Rachel had been determined to help us be together and happy.

The morning sun painted beautiful colors on Rachel’s face, and looking into her eyes I saw how much she was like the woman I had watched and cared about and tried to save.  The woman who, in the end, had saved me instead.  I wanted to tell Rachel so many things, ask her so many questions, but all that could come later.  Squeezing her hand back, I walked with her away from the house.

[For now, this was enough.](https://redd.it/bue253)

****

[You have a delivery scheduled.](https://redd.it/cbn7uj)

[The Ghost Tree](https://redd.it/kfvzse)“I want you to kill her,” the voice echoed. Low, monotonic, unwavering. 

In front of me was my mother, crucified haphazardly upon a ramshackle wooden cross. Rivets were driven through each palm - with rope fastenings in place around her ankles and shoulders to keep her in position. 

Her eyes, red and cracked from exposure, pulled open by tape, to reveal pupils dilated with fear. 

Her mouth was sewn shut. Muffling her tired pleas.

“This is hardly an existence,” the voice licked.

I surveyed my surroundings. I was in a small, square room, with metal walls no larger than my studio apartment. The roof, however, was missing, replaced by an empty void that seemed to stretch endlessly into the darkness above.

About five feet in front of me was my mother. Writhing weakly against her restraints. Five feet behind her, an impossibly tall ladder stretching into the abyss. 

“What are you waiting for? As if you care,” the voice prompted.

Who was talking? Where was this voice coming from? Its warm presence swaddled me like a warm blanket.

In one swift surge, the gravity of the situation dawned on me. I didn’t know where I was. I didn’t like being lost. 

I felt the kick of adrenaline into my bloodstream. My heart, beating against my ribcage. My hands, clammy. I clenched them repeatedly. Open, closed. Open, closed. 

I needed to get out of here. 

“End her.”

My gaze dashed to my right hand side to find a surgical stand stocked full of pain-inflicting paraphernalia. 

A knife. A rope. A pistol. Razor blades, full needles, strange pills and powder. 

An arsenal fit to maim, disfigure, destroy.

I reached for the razor blade. I could cut the stitching on my mother’s mouth - garner some insight into what the fuck was going on. 

My mother always knew what was going on. 

With the razor blade in hand, I walked gingerly up to my mother - whose eyes lit up as I approached. 

And through all the pain, tears and stitches, as I drew closer, she smiled. 

I held up my left hand to coddle my mother’s face, with the razor blade still pinched in my right. 

And as she nuzzled her face into my palm, I cracked. I wept harder than I’d ever wept before. Full-bodied, wracking sobs crashed over me. 

Because it didn’t matter how bad anything got. It didn’t matter how broken the situation, or how broken the person. 

My mother was just happy I was there. 

I steadied myself and lifted up my right hand, trembling as I drew closer to her face - ready to pick away at the stitches to the best of my ability. 

The first few snapped, then the next, until all the stitches had been split and I had liberated her mouth from its cage. 

I exhaled raggedly, leaning back to look deeply into my mother’s eyes. 

“M-Mum?”

But as tears fell down her cheeks, through her warm, loving smile, she uttered one word. 

“Climb.”

I peered past her towards the ladder, then looked back towards her for reassurance. It took a slow, simple nod to realise that this was what I had to do. 

And as I walked slowly towards the ladder, she murmured one last thing. 

“I love you.”

“I love you too, mum.”

I never said that enough.

Then, with razor blade still in hand, I climbed. I climbed with determination. I climbed for what seemed like hours. 

I climbed past broken rungs, and even when I was tired, I kept on climbing. 

I cried as I climbed, but I pushed through, with snot dribbling down my chin and tears clouding my vision. 

I reminisced as I climbed. I climbed through good memories, I climbed through bad memories. I climbed through the time when I had the flu and my mother came around to do my laundry, and I climbed through the time my girlfriend cheated on me. 

I climbed because I was sick of this dark room. I climbed to make my mother proud. 

And as I climbed, the darkness subsided, opening itself up to light. 

I could see the where the ladder ended now. I could see my way out. 

As I placed my hand on the last rung of the ladder and pulled myself up over the edge, I was overcome by brightness. 

The light subsided, and as I got my bearings, I found myself on my back in my bathtub, still clutching the razorblade. 

Urgent knocking on my bathroom door roused me from my daze.

“Are you alright in there? Your sister called. We’re worried about you.”

It was my mother’s voice.

I got up out of the bathtub, and placed the razorblade back on the shelf, walking towards the door. And as I flung it open, she looked at me. She looked at me and she knew. 

She held me in her arms and we sobbed. 

“I wouldn’t know how to live without you,” she whimpered.

My climb had just begun.Nobody knows what rock bottom truly is until they've hit it. 

Being abruptly fired from a job you've worked at for the past ten years, and then catching your girl cheating on you with your replacement really makes a man think. 

Hell, *my student loans aren't even paid off yet*.

What a shitshow this life is. 

After a rather boozy night that consisted of sending out about four dozen resumes and horrendously written cover letters, I passed out. 

When I woke up the next morning, I decided to at least *try* and make some money at home while waiting for an interview. 

At that moment, I thought that the best way to go about it was completing those internet surveys that yielded 5 dollar subway gift cards and other shit like that after about an hour of answering questions. I mean, I didn't have any other marketable skills that could've yielded immediate income. 

It was either that or wasting the day away playing computer games. At least I wouldn't have to pay for food. 

I did these surveys for about 5 hours before nearly passing out. It was way more excruciating then I'd originally anticipated. At the end of those 5 hours, I'd accumulated about $45 in cash and gift cards. 

$9 an hour. Not like I was making much more than that before. I was about to close my laptop up for the day and head to a bar in an attempt drown out my melancholy when I first saw it. 

It shouldn't even have been noticeable... but for one reason or another, it was. At the bottom corner of the website that I was on, existed a tiny, singular advertisement. Maybe it was the simplicity that got me. Plain black letters in a tacky font that read "Surveys for cash" overlapped a completely white background. 

At least they were direct with the message. *One more couldn't hurt*, I thought. Might as well scrape together a little bit more booze money before heading out.  

I sat back down, clicked on the picture link and prepared myself to grind through some more painstaking inquires. The first few questions were simple enough. I guess they weren't really questions, but more data collection. My name, age and occupation. I thought it was kind of weird that they also asked my height and weight, but it wasn't unheard of. 

The first **real** question was a different story though. I must have stared at it, eyes wide and mouth agape, for god knows how long. 

*What the actual hell?*

In plain English, this is what popped up on my screen: "How strong is your urge to currently look behind you?" 

There were five options below, ranging from "Not at all" to "overwhelming". 

There was no feasible reason why I should've been afraid at that moment. *But I was*. I tightened my breathing, trying to make out any subtle noises behind me. There were none. After maybe about five minutes, I worked up the courage to look. There was nothing. I sighed in relief and scoffed at myself at the same time. 

This must have been some kind of joke. However, I decided to entertain it, answering "neutral" and clicking onto the next question. This is what it read: "Why would you look behind you?" 

I smirked. *Funny*, before simply typing in a "I don't know" in the response box and once again clicking next. This was the 3rd question: "You're on a plane. Apart from you, there is only one other passenger, who is sitting somewhere behind you. At some point, you get up to go to the washroom, and find that the man is gone. You check to see if he is in the only bathroom on the plane, but he isn't. What do you do?"

Again, I must have stupidly stared at it for nearly ten minutes. Was this some kind of obscure personality test? I mean, it must have been, right? *Right?* 

I put the same answer that I used for the last question: "I don't know." It was true. I didn't know. How was I *supposed to* answer this shit? 

I click next again, now more intrigued than anything. The 4th question went like this: "You wake up in woods unfamiliar to you. It's nighttime, and the moonlight provides you with only slight visibility. About thirty feet away from you, there is a small, dimly illuminated cabin. The door is open, and a smiling woman is motioning for you to come in. Do you go? Explain why." 

This question wasn't necessarily weirder than the last one, so my conjecture that this was some kind of odd personality test was still feasible. I actually make an attempt to answer this one, something along the lines of going into the cabin because there's simply nowhere else to go. 

Once again, I click next. Probably shouldn't have. 

The questions started getting *fucked up*. They weren't too gory or explicit, not anything like that. They were just stranger. Weirder. More psychologically disturbing. If you're wondering why the hell I kept going, I can't really give you an explicit answer to that. I just felt like I *had to*. It was an esoteric, creeping sensation that I can't quite explain away. But I could never shake it. So I just went on. 

Some of the questions that stood out were:

"Suppose that you wake up one night to find an elevator in your house. During every midnight after that, it opens up for five minutes, revealing an exact copy of yourself that gets progressively more injured as time goes on. Do you keep living like this? Or do you enter the elevator once and end it all?"

And:

"You're in a hotel room but are awoken by a rapid knocking at your window. You peek through the blinds, seeing what appears to be a man missing both his eyes. He puts his mouth to the glass and tells you to kill the woman in the bathroom immediately. Do you listen to him?" 

This was one of my least favorites:

"You are watching home videos with your mother. One of the tapes include footage of her being murdered by a masked intruder. Your mother simply laughs at this footage without saying anything. In your opinion, is this a cause for concern?" 

In addition to this insanity-inducing shit, there were some rather disconcerting events happening in *real life* as well. I received a knock at the door about thirty minutes in. I looked through my peephole to find a guy standing there, frantically shaking his head and mouthing "no" while making direct eye contact with me. He looked terrified. Obviously, I didn't open up. 

I received about ten phone calls from somebody named "the auditor" on my caller ID. They left a message every time, but each one was just a recording that consisted of somebody saying numbers through heavy static. Actually, it sounded more like *screaming* now that I think about it.

About an hour into this thing, and I was on the verge of a mental breakdown. I was petrified of looking behind me, even though there was no indication that anything should've been there. I heard some soft scratching coming from my vent at one point, so I moved my couch over it. 

Eventually, I reached what appeared to be the end of the survey. However, it wasn't a question. It was simply a statement. 

"Don't let them in. They're not to be trusted." 

Almost as if it were on cue, I heard more knocking at my door about five seconds after reading this. As slowly and silently as I could, I moved over and looked through the peephole once again. It was a different person than the one I'd seen earlier. She was a woman, looking to be in her mid twenties. She was wearing a thick blazer, despite it being around 90 Fahrenheit outside. She was also wearing sunglasses, so I could never really tell where she was actually looking. She eventually took a piece of paper out of her pocket and slipped it under the door. 

I look down and read it. 

"It's lying. Leave your apartment immediately." 

It's been about half an hour since. I can't bring myself to look at the computer screen nor at the woman outside. She's still there. I can see the shadows of her feet from underneath my door. I heard my bedroom window open a few minutes ago, but I've since jammed the door shut with a chair. I can hear some kind of distorted muttering coming from behind it now. 

Maybe rock bottom wasn't so bad. 

*But what the fuck am I supposed to do here?* How it began 
https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/ci94do/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app

And what happened next
https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/cinu8u/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app

When I finally caught up with Mrs Hemmings herself
https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/cj2g4k/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app

And when the trouble really started 
https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/cjintp/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app

What I learned 
https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/cjzfky/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app



I sat all morning thinking about everything, cup after cup of coffee in front of me to keep me awake. Once the postman had left and I was alone with my thoughts they just continued to get louder. 

I thought about Natalia and the cult. About the kids and their nighttime antics. About the committee meeting. Jamie and how much I missed him, Georgia and my burning guilt and Mr Prentice, who was finally making those aforementioned animal noises.

Most of all I thought about the note left for me on move in day. How it had changed everything. My whole life was different now, I was alone and it felt like my new home was attacking from every angle. 

I re read the note a few times over my coffee. I worried about my rent, it was tight but manageable. School is currently out in the uk but as a training teacher assigned to a school I still get paid a small amount through the summer. The rent is low and with a second summer job I can just about make it without Jamie. 

It sounds strange. But it felt nice to worry about something normal for a minute; even if I should have been worrying about my survival and the many entities currently trying to kill me. 

I didn’t get to stew for too long, I had to get ready for the committee meeting. After the events of the night before and my growing mistrust of prudence it was imperative that I got the neighbours on side if I was going to achieve anything like my goals of eradicating the imposter/cultist neighbours. 

The meeting was at noon in flat 31, there was a poster on a communal notice board by the entrance that I was glad to spot, Terri hadn’t mentioned the time when we met and all our meetings since had been a bit hectic to discuss it. The poster promised tea and cakes and my stomach rumbled at the thought, I hadn’t eaten properly in days.  

At 11.55 I left the flat, and wandered out into the corridor. I’d never seen so many neighbours. Mr Prentice, however, was still making that awful noise and I watched in disbelief as every single person in the corridor walked past his door as if it was silent. 

I did my usual deliberation on whether to take the stairs or lift but yet again the stairs won. I still couldn’t bear being where Jamie died and all these extra flights were keeping me fit.

Flat 31 belonged to an older lady named Molly Thompson and her husband Eric. She had a blue rinsed head of curls attached to her head and had gone to the effort to make homemade batten-burg cake. Other neighbours had bought along baked goods as well. It reminded me of a school fair.

The flat itself was decorated for the 70s, with plenty of china cat ornaments littered around. I sat down on a dusty plastic garden chair, one of many that Molly seemed to have acquired and laid out for the residents pouring in. I hadn’t seen community spirit like this in my life. 

I smiled as I saw Terri, Eddie and Ellie wander in. It was nice to see some familiar faces. I had noticed people looking at me, wondering who I was. It probably wasn’t often they got new neighbours. Eddie came running up to me, swung his arms round me and sat down in the rickety garden chair next to mine. It was so sweet. Terri smiled at me and took a seat the other side of mine, Ellie sat next to her brother. The brown puppy dog eyes were back. No claws.

“I’m glad you came!” Terri said to me, loud enough to hear over the voices of the other neighbours. “I really want you to see the good side of the block. We don’t bite really!” She laughed nervously as she realised the irony of her statement. 

“Terri I need help, we need to stop those people from coming back again and from terrorising people. The block can’t go on like this.” I wanted to make the purpose of my attendance clear to her, it was time for things to change. 

“But if you don’t let them in then they don’t bother you. I’ve spoken to the kids, they know not to do it again, that those people are dangerous.” She paused for a moment and sighed. “Although them running away didn’t help, the kids think they’re indestructible now. They’ve been telling me all morning that they’re going to kill the bad guys.” 

She looked so resigned. But it was true, they did run away from the twins. Maybe there was something in that, I knew they could die I just had to work out how. But as the thought crossed my mind and I looked at Eddie and Ellie, I couldn’t imagine taking the risk.

I could’ve flat out gone back and asked Prudence. But to be honest I didn’t want anything to do with her. She gave me such a bad feeling. I was doubting everything she told me.

“It doesn’t matter if you can keep them away. We can’t all live in fear. Yours aren’t the only kids in this building.” I knew this from surveying the room. “But I bet not all the kids here are as ... special ... as yours. What if another family burns to death because their kids were hyper one night.”

I could see this struck a chord with Terri. She looked at me with glassy eyes as if on the verge of tears. 

“You’re right. Molly’s the chairwoman and she can be a little strict but you can bring it up under any other business.” She spoke with a lump in her throat. “Here you go by the way.” She handed me a piece of printed paper. 

Any other business felt a bit lacklustre but it would do. As long as it got discussed. 

I turned my attention the the piece of paper, it was the agenda for the meeting. For something written so formally it appeared farcical. It seemed other flats and floors had different but equally strange issues to mine. 

There were only 6 items on the agenda for the meeting with AOB as the 7th. They were as follows. 

*1. Welcome and introductions with apologies for absence.*

*2. Replacing of the flickering lights on floor 11, it seems to incite vicious behaviour from the pets and elderly of that floor.*

*3. Serving a formal residents letter of concern to the man who doesn’t move from the bottom of the stairwell on floor 5.*

*4. Finances - budgets for general maintenance and the annual barbecue.*

*5. The stairs with no grip leading up to floor 14 at the very top and the health and safety hazards this presents.*

*6. Soundproofing of Mr Prentice’s flat, number 48.*

I was comforted to know that I wasn’t alone in dealing with all these strange occurrences. I was also chilled to the core to know for certain that it was the entire building that was more than a bit odd. 

What really struck me as odd is that when I thought about it, I had seen that man on floor 5 when going down the stairs. But I’d never noticed that it had been every time, or that he had never moved, until this moment. 

The meeting begun with a loud and dissatisfying clink. 

By this point the tiny, 70s themed flat was packed. Garden chairs had all ran out and people were standing. Molly Thompson stood up from her floral patterned arm chair and bashed a teaspoon against the outside of her cup. 

She reminded me of a very strict, disciplinarian school teacher I had worked with during my university placement. She commanded quiet in the room. 

“I think we should get started everyone!” She shrilled, her voice growing louder with every word until the crowd came to a silent hum.

“Right, firstly, we are not going to skip the introductions today. Apologies have been given by Jo and Steph of flat 2 and yet again by Mr Prentice. We have a new face in the room as I’m sure many of you have noticed.” She gestured to me and looked in my direction but didn’t really make any eye contact. She was just talking about me as I sat in the room. Eventually she addressed me directly. 

“Stand up dear, introduce yourself. We’re pleased to have you here.”

I was deeply uncomfortable. I could feel some sort of panic coming on. I never liked standing in crowds very much. But I stood up anyway. 

“Ermm, hi. My name is Kat. I live in flat number 42, I moved in with my boyfriend Jamie but he was killed in the lift by the weird rat creatures you people have living here. The people that claim to live in the burned out flats won’t leave me alone and one in particular seems to want me dead. Oh, and that window cleaner outside my flat makes me want to scoop my own eyes out with a spoon every time he knocks on the door. Nice to meet you all.” The crowd had gasped a little.

I sat down. Instantly mortified, I don’t know what happened, the normality and structure of the meeting overwhelmed me. There’s something about a sense of order and normality amongst chaos. It does something to your brain, and for me, for the first time in this whole journey, it sent me into a meltdown. 

I sobbed as I hit the chair, both in pure mental exhaustion and disappointment that I had blown my chance at building any sort of army against Natalia. Terri rubbed my shoulder. Molly broke the awkward silence that had blanketed the room. 

“Nice to meet you Katherine, I understand life in this building can be a little overwhelming. We did ask the previous occupant to let us intervene when you moved in but she was insistent. In hindsight we may need to review our policies on new tenants. I am so very sorry for the loss of your partner. The lift is a most unfortunate situation.”

She had been in positions of power in her life for certain, she responded professionally but coldly, there was no feeling in her condolences. She came off like a corrupt politician digging themselves out of a hole. She did decide to skip the introductions after my outburst.

I also hate it when I’m called Katherine. My parents named me Katie and I shorten it to Kat. Her presuming it was Katherine added to her school teacher demeanour. 

She carried on with the proceedings pretty swiftly and interesting characters present at the meeting started to emerge. 

My favourite was a large middle aged Caribbean woman named Precious St Fluer who would not accept Molly’s claims that there was not enough in the budget to replace the lighting on floor 11.  

She got up and lifted her shirt to reveal a large deep bite mark across her stomach caused by her dog after a long episode of the lights flickering. When that didn’t change Molly’s answer she lifted her trouser leg to reveal a smaller, but still noteworthy bite mark on her leg, from her elderly mother who lives with her. Molly didn’t budge.

It took what felt like an eternity to get to any other business. If I weren’t so focused on my goal I would have enjoyed hearing about the quirks of the other floors, maybe tried to engage a little, but I just couldn’t concentrate. 

When the chairwoman asked if anyone had any other business she scanned the room quickly. I stood up from my chair and she locked in on me with her eyes. 

My hands were shaking and I could feel a cold sweat forming all over my body.

“Katherine, what can we help you with dear?” She asked in a patronising tone. 

“I want help in getting rid of the people pretending to be from the burned out flats. I can’t be the only person that doesn’t like living in fear.” I stated boldly, trying not to break down again.

“Dear we have had this discussion multiple times and it’s been taken off the agenda. I am aware you’re new here but there is nothing we can do about certain problems within this building and for this particular issue we would appreciate you not letting them into your home and ignoring them like the rest of us.” She snapped back. 

“But that’s not good enough! Terri’s kids answered the door last night, they’re children, it’s easily done, what if someone else’s child does it and aren’t so lucky to survive. One burned my friend so bad a few nights ago that she’s still unconscious in hospital.” This I knew from social media. 

A few people called out in agreement with me from the crowd. 

“The only one who has ever been able to deal with them is Prudence. And that difficult woman never revealed her methods. Don’t think we didn’t try. You’re suggesting a suicide mission. You’d do well to remember you are new here.” Molly hissed through her teeth. 

Did she have to mention I was new so many times. It was grating on me. 

“Well I’m willing!” Shouted Precious. She seemed stronger than the rest in her earlier rant. I was glad to have her on side. 

Where she came forward, a few others followed. Soon I had 5 people plus myself willing to form a sub committee to get rid of the cultists. Molly didn’t like it but she agreed to let us do it.

There was me, Precious and Terri along with lady named Shanti who lived a few doors from me. 

A man named Anton and his friend Leo from floor 8 made up the group. To be honest they just seemed keen to get involved with any kind of battle. Leo was the loud one, Anton was mostly silent. 

I invited them to my flat after Molly swiftly adjourned the meeting. Inviting anyone into my home made me anxious now. I found myself studying each of their faces to ensure they’re weren’t too average and I hadn’t invited the wrong people in. I was fairly certain I hadn’t. Eddie and Ellie settled in front of my tv in the bedroom so they didn’t hear our conversation. They may only be kids but I felt safer with them there. 

We discussed for hours how we could bring the imposter people into one place and kill them all. 

Leo was particularly creative, he came up with weird and whacky ways to end them; from locking them in a room and blasting with fire extinguishers until they freeze, to herding them into the lift between 1.11 and 3.33 am.

The whole time I waited nervously for a knock on the door, for them to come for us. But they didn’t. We got time to plan. But despite the time it never really took off, no idea seemed feasible. 

I shared everything I knew. My conversation with Prue, the night before in Terri’s flat... everything. Precious listened to my tales intently before speaking.

“Derek would have helped us. He was a great man, he used to turn up at my door in the dead of the night just as those lights started and take my dog for a walk.” She spoke of the gardener with a fondness. 

“Prudence told me about Derek. She said he’s been gone since the garden was demolished.” I replied flatly. 

“It was awful when he left. That woman that used to live here was nasty to him. I watched out my window as she tore up the garden. I know she was grieving for that little girl but I know Derek only ever wanted to help.” Shanti spoke up from the corner. She had been pretty quiet the whole time. “He was the whole reason we don’t have those awful creatures from the lift all over our homes anymore. My brother was killed by one before the agreement. He was 4 years old.”

I twitched as she told her story. Shanti has such sad eyes and speaking about her brother only filled them further with sadness.

“This is another thing I don’t understand. Why have any agreement, if you managed to kill most of them, why not all?” I asked, feeling anger over Jamie burn through my throat as I spoke. 

Precious laughed. Terri shot her a look from across the room. 

“No ones told you the whole story have they?” Shanti asked, a single tear running down her face. 

“What do you mean?” This was driving me insane, nothing was simple, how could I trust anyone. 

“When Prudence and some of the others killed the creatures they killed a large group of them in one hit. They had started to work out that food scraps and pet food were attracting them and they gathered all the pet food in the tower block into one empty flat on the floor the fire had happened. They creatures came in droves just like expected and they set the flat alight. Again.

“The flat was burned to ash on top of preexisting ash. Nothing could survive that.” Shanti was interrupted after this by Leo. 

“And then 3 giant rat motherfuckers literally rose from the ashes, triple as smart and strong and fucked shit up!” He said, a look of excitement on his face. 

Shanti rolled her eyes and continued. “So all Prudence did was cause a quite literally bigger problem. She didn’t kill them, all she did was help them evolve.

“There was only three of them but they learned to sneak attack. More people died than during the original infestation. They were more intelligent but not in the way it comes across when the agreements spoken about. We couldn’t speak to or reason with them.”

Terri was looking at the floor. 

“Only Derek was able to do that, he spoke to them like he spoke to the garden. He made it safe for everyone again, I wasn’t there. I was too young but there we were told he didn’t even have to use words. They understood just a series of movements and eye contact. 

“Derek explained the rule with the lift. He told us it was a gesture of goodwill. The creatures needed a home and seemed attracted to the building and we would let them live there and stop killing their kind if they would stop killing ours. But to show them some respect we would allow them a small time frame where unleash their instinctual nature. But only if someone came to them.

“There are only 2 left now. Prudence killed the other during what happened with her granddaughter. But that only made them 2 stronger. Like they absorbed the 3rd.” 

I tried to take in all the information I was receiving but I couldn’t. It was too much. 

“Derek isn’t coming back, it’s been years, this is pointless!” Terri finally erupted. Precious laughed again.

“How do you know?! You speak to dear old Prue all the time, know something we don’t?” Precious spoke sarcastically but I think she meant what she said. It was becoming clear that Prudence Hemmings wasn’t too popular in this building. 

“I don’t speak to her all the time! We just keep in contact, she was always nice to me!” Terri tried weakly to defend herself.

“That’s because you’re naive and a pushover! She used you because no one else would give her the time of day!” Precious was about to launch into a full rant on Terri. I was glad Eddie and Ellie were in the other room and couldn’t hear. I wondered if she’d seen them at night. 

I decided to stop the rant. This was becoming counter productive and we were getting nowhere with our plans. I interjected and told them all I needed them to leave so that I could sleep. Partly true, although I knew I couldn’t sleep. I had other things to do. 

They all filed out of my flat, Terri and the kids were the last to leave. She gave me a hug as she left and told me to get a proper nights rest, telling me she was always there for a cuppa and a chat. It was sweet. I felt sorry for Terri. The kids hugged me too as they left. 

I know she spoke to Prue, but I was certain that it really was entirely innocent. 

I sat in the empty flat disheartened that my assembling of an army had turned into a bickering shit show with no real suggestions on how to kill the imposter neighbours. 

I felt totally alone. I couldn’t trust Prue or Ian or pretty much anything I thought I knew. Maybe Prue didn’t even kill those neighbours. They only told me half truths about the creatures after all. 

I was left alone with my thoughts again. And after a few hours, a good one finally struck me, but I needed supplies.

I left the building and went to the nearest shop to gather the items I needed. For what I needed and the time of night I had to travel to a 24 hour supermarket. It took half hour each way on the bus. But I stayed focused. My bags were heavy and awkward on the way back to the block but if it paid off this was going to be worth it. 

I trudged up the stairs. It took me 2 trips and 24 flights of stairs instead of 14 to get everything in my flat and organise myself. 

It only took 16 and a large gym bag that was much easier to carry on the way back down, thankfully. 

I passed the man on floor 5 twice. Now I’d noticed him, he made my skin crawl a little. 

I walked through the downstairs corridor, diverting away from the main entrance and passing all the ground floor flats to the door at the back of the building.

The door at the back lead to a small concrete area with a grass strip along the side and a bench decorated with a memorial plaque. This was the blocks outside space. As is typical in the city the whole bench was covered in graffiti. The memorial was unreadable. 

I got to work. I dug the strip of grass, turning soil with my new equipment. I had never been green fingered and to be honest the shrubs I had bought had been so heavy I had grown to resent them a little. I worked for an hour and a half. I was sweating and night had come, it was pitch black and I was using my phone torch to see. 

I had almost given up until I got up from my crouching position to stretch my knees. I reached my arms out, put down my shovel and took a seat on the bench. 

I hadn’t seen him arrive but the man was already sat there. He wore a flat cap and a jacket, despite it being the middle of summer and a beautiful night. He just smiled warmly at the shrubs for a moment without a word. Eventually he spoke. 

“I’ve missed this place. Names Derek.”

Our journey: https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/clvga9/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_appA little background first. I was serving a 15-year sentence in a penitentiary in southern Arizona. What I was in there for isn't important. During my stay there, there were countless things that happened that no one could explain, and even more that no one wanted to know more about. 

It all started with a prison legend. Supposedly, years ago something awful and unexplainable happened in the prison. Every morning we'd be woken up, and expected to stand near the front of our cells while guards visually confirmed we were present and accounted for. Apparently about a year before I got sent there, the most brutal and unexplainable thing happened during one of these routines. A man who had a cell to himself looked very off during this check. When a guard pulled over another guard to help him check it out, they found it wasn't actually the prisoner they were expecting at  all. It was a totally different man. This man, was wearing the skin of the other man over him. Loosely fitting, draped over him, apparently looked like a real monster. The scariest things were though, was the guy wearing the skin was NOT an inmate. They had no idea how he even got into prison, let alone a cell. Whats worse is that they couldn't even figure out who the hell he was. He wasn't documented anywhere. And whats worse than that? They never even found the body of the man of the skin he was wearing.

Pretty grisely stuff, I know. And I realize that's not the go-to definition of a skinwalker, but that's what the prison called him. The Skinwalker. Didn't help that the guy never talked apparently. Anyway, thats what started the whole skinwalker superstition around the yard. Apparently the guy got shipped to a different spot about a month after it happened, and just about everyone in genpop felt all the better for it. I heard about the story on the second day of my stay. Hell of a story to hear to place in your home for the forseeable future.

Now onto the real shit though. Sure, that guy was The Skinwalker, but all he did in the long run was get an old lifer Navajo inmate to tell everyone about actual skinwalkers. It seemed like a lot of the prison culture actually revolved around them. 

Now, apparently, skinwalkers are tricky to point out on the spot, but if you manage to survive around one for more than a minute or two, almost everyone can tell the mannerisms are all off. They can mimic human speech but not replicate it. They twitch manically. They have an unnatural gait while walking. But apparently they got better with experience. The old Navajo guy - his name was Carl - said that he was sure there was an actual one among the prisoners. Slowly picking us off over the years. He called it "The Grandmaster Skinwalker" at one point. Apparently he thought it had human mannerisms down so well that you might not even be able to tell if it was your cellmate for a day or two. It had to be good he posited one night. He would expect a skinwalker to jump at any opprtunity for a kill. But this one realized it had a revolving door of people to kill coming to it, and masterfully bided its time, as Carl thought, for years.

A lot of guys found humor in it. A lot more were really on edge about it. Every once in a while in prison, people snap. Sometimes you'll find your cellmate swinging in front of your bunk, strung up around the neck by his pant leg. Sometimes you just can't take it anymore. But in our yard, people tended to snap in a very special way. It wouldn't be an outburst at dinner, or a silent suicide in the night. Guys would just stop talking. Hunch over and shuffle around. Any friendships they had would be mostly out the window. They would turn into a loner during rec time, they would let their hair hang in front if their face. 

No one liked to talk about it. Like if they did, it would happen to them next. I felt the same way. I didn't know if it was a skinwalker, or just people going crazy. But I didn't want to find out. It wasn't clockwork or anything, but every time someone snapped in this way, it wasn't more than a couple weeks before they were "shipped off" or "transferred" to God knows where without anyone else knowing beforehand.

Then there was the nighttime occurances. Short, loud bursts of sound echoed through my cell block during all hours of the night on a regular basis. It sounded like a mix between a pigs dying squeels and nails on a chalkboard. Just another thing no one liked to talk about. Even scarier were the shadows and footsteps. The block was dimly illumanted in the night by a few lights hanging from the ceiling outside the cells. I myself saw shadows flit across my walls on a regular occasion, when there were definitely no guards near my cell. One time near the end of my sentence, I woke up, looked at my back wall and found a perfect silohuette of a person standing there, but when I looked, my bunkmate was asleep, and no one was outside my cell.

And the footsteps. Everyone hated the fuckin footsteps. They were the scariest part. In the night, sometimes, more rarely than the shadows, you would hear ungodly fast footsteps. They sounded like wet feet slapping on tile floor. Whatver caused them would fly from one end of the block to the other in a dead sprint. Whatever it was, it was inhumanely fast. If you happened to be awake before it started, by the time you heard the footsteps on one side of your cell and whipped your head around to see the thing run by, it sounded like it was 3 cells past you. Everyone hated the footsteps. I agreed, I thought they were the worst.

I was released from that place about a month ago, and I have more stories than I can count. I swear it was nearly my turn. About a week before I was discharged, my cellmate, and a good friend of mine "snapped". In the same kinda way. I didn't sleep for an entire week. Well I did sleep of course but never for more than a few minutes at a time. Never turned my back on the guy. The scariest thing? I woke up one night to him somehow snaking his body through the bars of our cell. For reference, I couldn't get anything past my shoulder through them. The worst part though, he was coming back in to our cell. 

On the day of my release I didn't say a word to him. Just left. He seemed fine with it, so, so was I. I had made it through, 15 years of prison fights, gang disputes and for all I know, skinwalker abductions. I left through the front gates, a free man. As I walked along the fence for the rec yard, I spotted my cellmate, standing off on his own, like he had for the last week or so. I shook my head, not even really sure if it was him anymore. I took one last look over the yard, this time from the other side of the fence. I wish I hadn't.

There, standing off on his own, on the other side of the yard, was Carl. Slouched over, eyeing the other inmates, and twitching manically.My father named me Laika because when I was born, my grandfather told him to treat me like a bad dog. To Father, *Laika* was synonymous with *dog*. He used the name to remind me of my place in the hierarchy: lesser. Beneath. Inferior.

Nothing but a dog. 

My father meant to humiliate and degrade me with such a name, but he honored me instead.

You see, Laika was a stray dog from Moscow. On 3 November 1957, the Soviet Union put her on Sputnik 2 and launched her into space. She was the very first animal to orbit Earth.

The Soviets knew how to put a rocket into space, but they didn’t know how to bring it back. This made Laika’s mission a death sentence. Shortly after reaching orbit, the interior of Sputnik 2 became catastrophically hot – far too hot for mammals to tolerate. Mere hours after launch, Laika died an agonizing death. She perished the same way she’d lived: lesser, beneath, inferior. Abandoned. Unloved.

Nothing but a dog.

I spent many hours imagining her terror, pain, and loneliness. How would it feel, spending my last hours hurtling through divine darkness in a metal bucket?

What must it be like to not understand what I was seeing, or why it was suddenly so loud and so hot?

What must it be like to not understand why – after being plucked from cruel streets and dropped into a bustling world of kindness – I was now alone? Perhaps I would think I’d been a bad dog. Perhaps I’d think this was my punishment.

Punishment is my mother tongue. I know what it was like to be punished for transgressions I cannot remember or understand, to be hurt so badly my heart rate triples and my mind flies out the window and soars into the stars, retracing Laika’s doomed flight while my husk squirms and weeps on the floor of a dirty house sixty-eight miles below. 

Even so, I adapted to punishment. As I said, it eventually becomes a language. Given enough time, anyone can learn a language.

What I could not adapt to was fear. 

As a child, I was afraid of everything. You see, in the deepest, most forgotten parts of the world, there are things that most people cannot believe and even fewer would understand. Old ways, old things, old truths. 

And old monsters.

Monsters like my father and my grandfather. 

How can I describe this in a way you will believe? Maybe I can’t. Maybe I shouldn’t try. So instead, I will describe my grandfather.

He was called Paval. By the time I turned nine, he had gone through six bodies. By this, I mean he inhabited them. Using a variant of blood magic perfected by my forebears across many centuries, he leapt from body to body.

He was not a spirit; he had a corporeal body of his own, a twisted, monstrous thing covered in scars and hard, glittering skin, a body that could shrink to the size of a garden snake or expand to the size of a house.

But for all its marvels, this body was weak; sunlight burnt its eyes and blistered its flesh. So it entered other bodies, like a hand inside a puppet, and wore them until they rotted away. I will never forget the sight of him – of many hims – in different bodies as flesh degraded and fell away in wet, discolored strings. Or the way his eyes – hard, round yellow eyes – glinted deep within their stolen sockets.

Grandfather preferred the bodies of men, but sometimes chose women or children. Once, he even wore the body of my mother. I was very young then – perhaps three – and the sight of her familiar form standing before the fire sent me into such transports of joy that I bawled from sheer ecstasy.

Then she turned around, and in her bruised sockets I saw my grandfather’s eyes: flat, glittering yellow. Like rotted gold.

I reared back, screaming.

My father, who had been stroking a pair of old baby shoes, looked at me with contempt so deep it scorched my heart. “Shut up, dog!”

I cringed. This was a mistake; his contempt exploded into disgust. He shot out of his chair and stomped upon me. Dirty, squirmy pain exploded across my abdomen. I hobbled away, whimpering, and hid under the stairs.

I lay there alone for many hours. Eventually my mind left my body and soared into the sky, a reverse dive into a sea of stars. I drifted away, dreaming of diamond-colored constellations and red nebulae. At my side was a curly-tailed dog with a striped face. My namesake. 

Laika.

When I woke, I *felt* her: furry and warm, chest rising and falling under my hand. I opened my eyes. For just an instant I saw her in the shadows. Then she shrank away, sinking into the ground. I tried to grab her, but the floor swallowed her. My fingers closed on cold, hard floorboards. 

I covered my eyes and wept.

Several months later, Grandfather-Within-Mother gave birth to a child. A baby boy with yellow eyes and my father’s curly black hair. Mere minutes after the birth, Father picked up the baby and took him outside. He returned an hour later, empty-handed.

Spurred by horror, I immediately ran out into the night. The cold was brutal, at once invigorating and exhausting. I searched until I found the baby, whimpering weakly beside a snowdrift. He was still covered in birth blood.

I named him Alexander and brought him home.

When I walked in, Father immediately slapped me. I reeled back as stars rocketed across my vision. “Never,” he hissed, contempt dripping from every syllable, “never disobey again. Give him to me now.” He reached for Alexander, but Grandfather stopped him.

I looked up, and swallowed a whimper. Grandfather stared back at me through my mother’s rotting face. The mouth – puffy and discolored, with an oddly detached look – quirked into a smile. “No. Let the dog keep her pup. We have other concerns.” 

They certainly did; they worked together, and they worked constantly. Father kidnapped victims, and Grandfather used them. Whenever Father brought a new victim to the cabin, Grandfather used his hands – long, hideous things marked with scars and covered in strange, glittering flesh – to tear out the victim’s tongue and crush their feet. 

Then he would wait until nightfall – because remember, sunlight burned Grandfather’s eyes and blistered his skin - and carry them to his Chapel.

His Chapel was an ancient stone structure at the base of a wooded hill. Within the chapel were three red windows and six rough-hewn pews. At the end of each pew sat desiccated corpses, facing the altar like sentries.

I hated Grandfather’s chapel; the very air weighed upon me whenever I entered, crushing my heart and poisoning my lungs. The worst part was the fear: electric and paralyzing, inescapable.

Luckily, I was just a dog, and dogs do not spend much time inside chapels. But dogs hear screams. Even screams from far away, echoing down forested mountains long into the night. 

Grandfather did not often leave his Chapel, but when he did it was always in the wee hours of the morning. I know this because my father and I were required to hold vigil until he walked through our door. Whenever Grandfather came back from his Chapel, he looked human again: smooth skin, wide smile, good proportions. Sometimes he looked a bit like Father. Sometimes he looked like his victim.

It was as incomprehensible to me as outer space would have been to Laika. 

The stream of Grandfather’s victims never ended. Vagrants, the elderly, the travelers, orphans fleeing violence. There were so many.

So, so many.

If it weren’t for Alexander, I would have withered into nothing. He was more than a brother to me; for all intents and purposes, he was my son. Neither Father nor Grandfather cared for him. They didn’t even feed or clothe him; I had to feed and dress him with what little I had. 

Despite my best efforts, he never learned to speak. That isn’t to say he couldn’t communicate – he could, with gestures and facial expressions and nonsense syllables – but language eluded him. But it was all right. He grew into a sweet, curious boy with freckles and long, delicate hands. Over time, his terrible yellow eyes mellowed into a clear, bright green. He was my life. He was my heart.

But he wasn’t enough.

One night, as a little girl’s screams came shrieking down the mountain from Grandfather’s Chapel, I finally went to my father.

I lay prostrate at his feet, which is how he taught me to approach him. The wooden floor was rough and painfully cold under my fingers. “Why, Father? Why do you do this?”

He sat in his chair, watching the fire. In his hands he held a pair of white baby shoes. “Because your Grandfather and I must live, little dog.”

“Will I have to do this to live?”

“Yes.”

“Then I don’t want to live.”

“I understand,” he said. His grip tightened on the shoes. “But you don’t have a choice.”

I choked back a sob and waited for the dismissal; I could not come to him without crawling, and I could not leave until he told me so.

Instead, he said, “Stand up, Laika.”

Hearing my name was like being doused in ice water. He never used it; by that point, in fact, I’d almost forgotten I had a name.

“I said, stand up, Laika.”

It was a struggle to obey; fear made my bones rubbery and my muscles weak. 

Father held out the baby shoes. “What do you see?”

“Shoes.” My voice quavered. “Old baby shoes.”

“Those shoes,” Father said, “belonged my sister, Alexandra. I loved her more than anything. More than life. More than my parents. More than your mother. More than you. She was my heart.”

I watched him. The firelight threw his face into relief, creating crevasses out of wrinkles. His curly black hair shifted like smoke, and his long, sharp nose looked strange and monstrous. Paralytic electricity swarmed my skin, so much like the Chapel that I could have wept.

“On my twelfth birthday,” Father said, “your grandfather boiled a pot of oil and called Alexandra to him. She and I were going to pick wildflowers later, so she was dressed in her finest clothes: a blue dress and white shoes. These shoes.” 

Father did not speak for a very long while.

“She was my heart,” he finally repeated. “When my heart broke, I broke. It made me like Grandfather. Someday, I will be just like him. I will live forever. You will, too.” 

That night, I had a nightmare of a little girl with sunken yellow eyes melting into blisters as my mother’s rotted body doused her with boiling oil. 

I woke screaming.

Moonlight streamed through the window, drenching my room in celestial silver. My heart thumped so wildly that I could see my nightshirt moving. It wanted to escape. I wanted it to escape, to, because without it I would die, and when I was dead I could sail the stars with the other Laika.

Small, warm hands touched my face. I turned, expecting Alexander. Instead I saw my nightmare. 

Great inflamed blisters bubbled and burst, sending rivulets of pus down her tiny, raw face. The skin around its mouth had burned away, leaving neat rows of milk teeth fully exposed. Burned scalp and dull bone glinted through black, curly hair. A blue dress clung to her body. Oil dripped from the hem, soaking my blanket.

“Don’t cry,” she whispered.

Alexander stirred between us.

“Get out,” I whispered.

The girl’s blistered chin quivered. “But you made me come here. Please let me sleep.”

“All right,” I whispered, because I did not know what else to say.

The girl burrowed under my blanket. I watched, aghast, as she threw a bony, burnt arm across Alexander and drifted to sleep.  

That night, I did not sail the stars with Laika. Instead I sat awake, watching the apparition with mingled excitement and fear.

Just before dawn, my door creaked open. I tried to shield the girl as my father stepped into the room. 

“What is that?” he asked sharply.

“Please,” I whined. “Please, don’t.”

The girl shifted, and – incredibly – began to shrink. Her body flattened into nothing, leaving her dress crumpled on the floor. That sank away, too, leaving the cold, empty floor in its wake.

“*What was that?*” Father screamed.

“I saw it in my sleep –”

“*Her!*” Father roared. “*Her*, not *it*!”

“I s-saw her in my sleep,” I stammered helplessly. “When I woke, she was here.”

Sweat gleamed on Father’s skin, reminding me of stars. “Get dressed. You must see your grandfather immediately.”

I fell to my hands and knees and crawled to him. 

“No,” he said. “Stand up. Bring the boy.”

Alexander wept angrily when I picked him up. I ignored him and followed Father into the dark forest. The full glory of early spring bathed the landscape: pale beams of light shafted through the canopy, cutting the thick shadows with gold. Vermin crept through the undergrowth, and deer watched from a distance. The forest was always full of animals; Grandfather was no danger to the birds or beasts, after all.

Soon the Chapel came into view: an ancient little church with a black spire, red windows, and frost-encrusted stones. 

Father ushered us inside. The moment I crossed the threshold, my skin began to crawl. Dread and fear swept over me. Alexander burst into tears.

Father shoved me toward the altar. Out of the corner of my eye, I saw the sentry corpses twitching. Chests rose and fell in jagged, senseless rhythms. One especially tall corpse with long copper hair turned as I passed.

I covered Alexander’s eyes and stopped at the altar.

Shadows thickened and writhed against the back wall. Back in the pews, bones clattered and dried joints creaked.

Something blinked in the darkness behind the altar: great, flat eyes like golden moons, shining in the cold shadows. 

Grandfather.

“The dog,” Grandfather intoned, “and her pup.” He snarled: a deep, bone-shaking rumble like that of a tiger. Teeth glinted in the shadows, a shining ivory arc wider than Father’s entire head.

“Paval,” Father said urgently. “She had a nightmare. When she woke, it followed her out of the dream. It came alive. I saw it.”

“Oh,” Grandfather murmured. “*Oh.*”

“Our little dog has talent after all,” said Father.

“All good and well,” said Grandfather, “*if* she loves her pup. Do you love your pup, dog?” He reared up from the shadows, twisted and sinewy and utterly inhuman. “Do you love him? Or do you feel *obligated* to him?”

I opened my mouth to answer. Instead, I burst into tears.

Grandfather laughed, a low roar that shook dust from the rafters overhead. “A weak bitch indeed. Our hope is in the boy, Mikhail. It was always in the boy. That is why we made him. Now go.” Those great yellow eyes flicked to the pews. “I do not like to tempt my sentries. Not when they are hungry as they are.”

Fear and disbelief battled across Father’s weathered face. “Do you not understand what I’ve told you? She creates life from thoughts.”

“A poor substitute for what we require. Leave, Mikhail.”

“But – ”

Grandfather rocketed out of the shadows, a rippling mass of glittering skin and malformed limbs, and knocked Father to the stones.

The corpse-sentries uttered a deep sigh and continued to twitch.

“Never,” Grandfather snarled. Sunlight poured through the crimson windows, imbuing him strange hide with a red glow. He looked like the sky. A starry piece of outer space. “Never defy me.” 

I waited breathlessly for Grandfather’s eyes to burst and his skin to sizzle – he was, after all, exposed to daylight – but it did not.

Many moments later, Grandfather struck Father across the face and whipped back into the darkness.

We left. Father did not speak again until the cottage came into sight. Then he grabbed me and dragged me off the path.

“Listen,” he growled. “Listen well. I can protect you from him. And…” He looked down at Alexander, eyes blazing with disgust. “When the time comes, I can protect you from *him*, too.  But only if you help me.”

“Why should I need protection? He’s small, and loves me as a mother.”

“Do you remember the story of Alexandra?” Father asked.

I nodded.

“Your story is coming. Only Alexander will be me, and you will be Alexandra.”

My heart fell to the cold earth. I carefully pressed Alexander’s head into my shoulder, shielding his face from Father. 

“Listen, dog. When next you dream of my sister –” His voice broke; he pulled away and ran his fingers through his hair. Tears shone in his eyes, which were huge and miserable over his quivering mouth. “When she comes again, bring her to me.”

“All right, Father.” I had never seen him weep before; the sight was frightening and curiously thrilling. “I will.”

Father nodded curtly, then left. I nearly followed, but thought better of it. Instead, I stayed in the forest with Alexander.

As the morning brightened and birdsong swelled to a symphony, I set Alexander upon the narrow path. He ran forward, humming a tune of his own composition. Shadow and sunlight dappled his skin, turning him into a woodland sprite. The trees were in full bloom: petals drifted down like snow, carpeting the earth in glistening white.

Alexander pulled ahead. After a while, I couldn’t hear or see him; he’d drifted away, slipping into the deep shadows.

Panic overtook me. “Alexander! *Alexander!*” I rushed ahead, grimacing against the pain in my chest. My heart thumped wildly, so hard I could see my shirt move; it wanted to escape again. “*Alexander!*”

He darted from between the trees. I halted, overcome with relief so powerful it took my breath away. Petals covered his head and shoulders. As I watched, one drifted down and settled on his nose. Wide green eyes glimmered above it, bright as the promise of spring.

For the first time in my life, my heart was so full that I wept.
 
That night, Alexandra came to me again, blistered flesh dripping down her face. Her eyes had melted away, leaving raw, swollen masses of flesh in her melted sockets.

Remembering my instructions, I sat up. “Father,” I quavered. Alexandra reached for me blindly, ruined hands closing on shadows. “Father!”

Father burst into my room, gasping. “Alexandra!” He shot forward, arms extended as if to sweep her up.

She turned.

Father froze.

Alexandra tottered toward him. “Mikhail,” she whined. “Mikhail, my eyes hurt.”

Father collapsed and covered his eyes as Alexandra approached. She left a trail of pus and oil, shining like a tiny river in the moonlight.

“Mikhail, my hands hurt.”

Father wheezed miserably.

“Mikhail, my skin is on fire and drips away.” She stopped before him and crouched. Father whimpered and whined like a beaten dog, twisting away from her hands. 

She set her small hand on his cheek. Father squalled and writhed, but couldn’t break away from her. “Mikhail,” she wept. “You are just like him now.” She jerked and began to shrink, to sink, disappearing into the floor. The moment her hand fell away, Father leapt to his feet and ran.

After that, he did not ask to see Alexandra.

This is good, because I did not see her in my dreams after that. I only saw Laika. I spent most nights drifting among the stars with that dear, doomed dog at my side. Imagined or not, the sights were glorious: incomprehensibly beautiful star formations, planets, great multicolored expanses of celestial mists.


Sometimes I woke, bleary and incoherent, and felt her fur against my skin. But by the time I opened my eyes, there was nothing.

One winter morning, I woke very early. My stomach growled immediately, and no wonder; Father hadn’t fed me for days. I’d fed Alexander with table scraps and tree bark. 

That, I decided, would change today.

I crept into the kitchen. There wasn’t much; there never was. But I scraped together what little I could, and turned around.

My grandfather sat at the table, great golden eyes shimmering in his terrible face. “Little bitch. What have you done to your father? He no longer hunts. He no longer eats. He no longer obeys.” 

I felt like I was back in his chapel: crushed by darkness, heavy with dread, on the verge of panic.

“Your ability,” said Grandfather, “has not been seen on this earth for a thousand years or more.”

Of course the ability wasn’t of earth; I’d no doubt come across it while sailing through space and breathing stardust. “It’s just nightmares.”

“No. You take the dark things of the world – the fear, the hate, the pain - and channel them into physical form. And that is just the beginning. You will be able to do anything. You will make bodies. Permanent, perfect bodies for me…and for you.”

The relish in his voice made me sick.

He said, “Our women have always been weak and talentless. I thought the same of you, little bitch.”

Tears pricked my eyes and my bones thrummed as if struggling to break through flesh and run away. But it was no use; destiny had already bloomed between my grandfather and I, heavy and foul with the promise of despair. 

Grandfather whispered, “Listen closely, for you will only hear this once: *I was wrong.*”

He left. I ran to the window and watched him hurtle through the trees as sunrise threatened. Back to his Chapel. 

I waited until the sun was up. Then I ran to my room, bundled Alexander in every bit of clothing I could find, and left.

We followed the path for many miles. Our home was hours and hours from the nearest town; we wouldn’t reach it until long past nightfall. I could only hope that Grandfather wouldn’t notice our absence until the following day. It wasn’t an unlikely hope; Grandfather spent most of his time in the Chapel.

The second this thought crossed my mind, a glittering dark shape leapt out of the trees and knocked Alexander from my arms.

I caught a blur of twisted limbs and nightmarish hands, of great yellow eyes like flattened moons. Alexander screamed as a torrent of blood splattered across the snow. It sank quickly, melting red canyons through the pristine white.

Grandfather at me, narrow sides heaving. Then he leaned down and tore out Alexander’s throat.

I screamed. Birds took flight and mammals ran through the undergrowth. The piercing note echoed off the mountains. The pain within it should have ended the world, but there was no one to hear and no one to care.

Grandfather grinned. Alexander’s blood and sinews clung to his teeth.

I broke. 

I felt it; the crushing weight of sorrow, the almost physical sensation of my spirit tearing and bleeding out into my guts.

I fell to my knees and cradled Alexander’s head for hours.

My father finally found us around nightfall. He had a heel of bread and an oily chicken leg. He pressed them both into my hands, then left. 

I tore the bread into pieces and dropped them, one by one, into Alexander’s mouth. When he did not wake, I burst into tears and hurled the chicken leg into the woods.

The moon rose into the cruel, dark sky. Stars glimmered through the bare branches over head, creating a breathtaking fractal pattern.

I flopped down beside Alexander, pulling him to my body. He was cold. Terribly cold. I held him anyway, keeping my eyes trained on the stars. My mind detached with great difficulty, like it was trapped in tar.

Finally, it wrenched itself free and sailed upward, disappearing into a silvery sea of sky and stars, rocketing ever higher until I saw the Earth spinning below.

Laika’s rocket zoomed past. I reached out and caught one of the metal bars near the nose. I could sense Laika within: her terror vibrated through the craft and leached into my bloodstream.

“It’s all right,” I said. “It’s all right, Laika. I’m here. When you land, I will help you out and we will play together.”

Her fear diminished, and so did her pain. So did mine. Together we sailed the stars, looking upon the Earth and marveling at the incomprehensible beauty around us.

I woke cold, sore, and in more pain than I can describe.

I sat up. Alexander’s stiff body broke away from mine. I reached for him blindly. A thin scrim of ice covered his eyes. The wound in his throat was an open horror, one I couldn’t look at for long.

I drew my knees to my chin and wept. 

After a while, something warm bumped my hand. A wet nose touched my palm. I knew what I would see long before I opened my eyes.

Laika’s striped face and dear curly tail made me smile, even through my tears. Stars glimmered through her fur, gently pulsing pinpricks of light.

 “What is this?” Grandfather’s voice echoed through the trees.

Rage flowed through my blood, exquisitely corrosive. Hate, I learned then, is pleasurable; it is fury and it is the basis of power. 

Grandfather erupted from the darkness, scaled skin shimmering like a river under the moon. “You waste your talent,” he sneered, “on a mutt. Not even your own pup! No matter. I will correct you.”

Laika reared up and leapt, snout piercing one of Grandfather’s flat moon eyes. He screamed and shook his head back and forth. Laika fell to the snow, twisting, and quickly righted herself. Then she bit his foot. Her teeth sank through that impenetrable, immortal hide like butter. 

Laika was not large enough or strong enough to kill him, but she tore holes in him the way a match scorches holes in paper. Soon Grandfather was on his knees, mere feet from Alexander’s corpse.

Laika came to me, panting, and collapsed in my lap. She bled from a thousand wounds: some small, some undoubtedly mortal.

“Good dog.” My voice broke. I stroked her gently, willing those wounds to close. I was a monster. I’d used Laika just like the others had; calling her down on false pretenses, filling her with hope, before throwing her into the void. “Good girl. Good, good girl.”

I looked up as Grandfather’s good eye slid to my dead brother. Something dark bloomed there: a wicked, corrupted hope. He curled in on himself, twisted body shrinking to a withered husk, and slid down Alexander’s throat. 

I screamed as Alexander’s body twitched and juddered. Then he sat up, bones creaking and frozen sinews cracking.

He smiled. His eyes shone like molten gold in a forge. 

Laika attacked again. Alexander’s face curled into a snarl as she bit and tore his skin, exhibiting an energy at odds with her awful wounds.

I watched, helpless and hopeless and hurting, wishing I could detach and fly into the stars once more. Except there would be nothing there for me now; I’d called Laika down from the stars and doomed her.

The snow crunched behind me. I whirled around. Father stood there, watching me with contempt. In his hands was a sleek, gleaming shotgun.

Relief and horror engulfed me. This was the end. My mind would detach, forever this time. The fear would finally end.

Laika bit down on Grandfather-within-Alexander, who hit her. She whined, but held fast.

Father stalked past me and cocked the gun.

“No!” I screamed. “Don’t hurt her! *Don’t hurt her!*”

Father pointed the gun at Alexander’s head and fired. Blood and viscera and dark, glittering flesh exploded across the snow.

Father fired again, then reloaded, and fired again and again. Alexander’s head evaporated into red mist. Finally his body lurched, and Grandfather – small, bleeding, scaled Grandfather – slithered out of his throat.

Laika caught and held him. Father pressed the barrel of the gun against his good eye and pulled the trigger as the sun broke over the mountains.

Father stepped back. I reached for him, drunk on hope and gratitude, but he recoiled from me. In his weathered face, I saw despair and rage…

And contempt.

He kept his eyes trained on mine as he placed the gun in his mouth.

“No!” I screamed.

He pulled the trigger. Half his head evaporated, leaving a glistening mass like a fleshy geode. His body stumbled forward a step, then crumpled to the snow. 

It took a very long time for the sun to burn Grandfather down to dirty oil.  Laika held on until the last scrap of skin melted. Then she stumbled to me and collapsed. 

I stroked her until her body shrank and sank into the ground, leaving nothing but a scattering of tiny, dim orbs: the stars I’d seen in her fur. I touched one. It was pleasantly hot. I gathered them up and slipped them into my pocket. I went to Alexander’s body – ravaged beyond description, broken in ways that did not see entirely real – and sat with him until nightfall. Then I stood and walked away.

And life went on.

At first, I brought them back from my nightmares  – Alexander, Father, Grandfather, even Alexandra – but I quickly taught myself to starve and eventually kill my ability. It is not a good power; it is born of rage, despair, selfishness, and fear. 

And I cannot tolerate fear.

Besides, dogs do not have such awful powers. It is good to be a dog, because they are not necromancers. They are not monsters. They are nothing more or less than the simplest and most loving of creatures.

That is why I will always be Laika the dog.
“Want to get high tonight?”

Scott was bordering on junkie status, and I was always wary about spending time with him, normally in the filthy apartment of some dealer friend while he shot up. It seemed like he was bordering on a collapse, and I was scared of doing the same.

“I don’t know, what are you thinking?”

On the other hand, I had been despondent since breaking up with Ruth. Maybe something to take my mind off the pain would help. I knew she was better off without me, I was just holding her back.

“Meet me at Jared’s, he said he wants to try something new.”

This made me feel a little better. Jared was probably the nicest dealer Scott knew, and his stuff was generally sourced well, plus his apartment was at least somewhat clean.

“You know I don’t fuck with needles.”

“Yeah man, it’s fine, nothing like that.”

I showed up at 8 with three beers in my system that had failed to calm the nervous energy I was feeling. Whatever, it’s fine. It’s going to be fine.

Jared was happy to see me and poured me a whiskey. I felt a little weird and sat down at the table.

He put three black pills down in front of us. “I got this from a trusted contact overseas” he began, “said it’s like nothing else.” He smiled, “Thought the three of us could test drive it before I put in an order, see if it’s really worth it. Stuff is called ‘forever.’”

Scott laughed and downed a pill. Jared and I followed suit. I sat down and stared at the tv, waiting for it to kick in.

It was fine. I felt really mellow, and sort of like the room, and me with it, was stretching in a weird way. We all wound up falling asleep. I woke up the next day feeling fine, and we parted ways. No big deal, certainly nothing life changing.

Years passed. I never left town, never really did anything. Could never kick smoking cigarettes either. Wasn’t a surprise when the doc told me the blood I was coughing up was cancer. Shit. Too late to do anything. I was alone when I took my last breath.

I woke up back in Jared’s apartment, sun streaming through the window.

What the fuck.

I hallucinated an entire, sad life? What was that drug? I mumbled something at Jared and Scott and walked outside. What a weird dream.

I decided I could do more, maybe that was a wake-up call. Applied to a job I didn’t think I was qualified for and got it. Stopped screwing around. Quit smoking, married a nice girl. Had a kid who loved to play ball outside. He didn’t even see the truck coming the day he chased his ball into the street, but I did. Probably never moved that fast in my life. Fast enough to push him out of the way. Not fast enough to get myself out of the way. Oh well, what a way to go, protecting someone you love.

I woke up in Jared’s apartment.

Fuck me.

What the hell was happening? I had to short circuit this, I must still be tripping. I decided to throw myself off the bridge down the street. When I got there, I found I physically couldn’t do it. Something stopped me. So killing myself was out. I had to go home and figure this out.

I wasn’t paying attention as I walked up the stairs of to my apartment, if I had I would have noticed the neighbor’s kid had left a toy car on one of them. When I slipped and tumbled I knew it was going to be bad.

I woke up in Jared’s apartment.

Maybe this could be fun? However long this lasts, I can do anything and it’s not real? Like lucid dreaming but it lasts for decades?

I tried a life of crime. Got shot coming out of an electronics store. Not cut out for that, it hurt like hell.

Screwed around, partied too much, overdosed, back to Jared’s when it all goes to hell.

I had lived ten or twelve lifetimes when I saw her, Ruth. It might seem weird to have forgotten her, but you have to remember we had broken up probably 300 years before. She was older, divorced, sad. She married the wrong guy after our breakup, got abused for years.

I was so depressed after our talk I just walked for hours thinking about how sad her life had turned out, I had thought I was helping her. Found myself in a rough neighborhood, when I got jumped I didn’t hand over my wallet. That was a mistake.

I woke up in Jared’s apartment.

This time I could fix it. I bought a bunch of flowers and went to Ruth’s. She took me back. We got married, had a family. We traveled the word, best friends. It was incredible. The best life I ever had. I died a happy old man, surrounded by family.

I woke up in Jared’s apartment.

I bought a bunch of flowers and went to Ruth’s. If I’m stuck in this groundhog day shit, I know what to do. You know what isn’t boring? Living the best goddamn life you can. Twice. Three times. Ten times. The rough edges get smoothed away. You learn when bad news is coming, when you need to sidestep a bad argument. Just absolute happiness. If you get to choose happiness you choose it, every damn time.

Then one day we were in Paris, celebrating our 30th anniversary. I’d taken this trip with her 20 times. She walked down to the café to get me some breakfast. A car jumped the sidewalk and killed her. That had never happened before.

The next lifetime was worse. We made it 12 years after our wedding before she got some weird flu variant and died.

The next one she was diagnosed with cancer a year after marriage, we never had kids.

The next one her building had burned down the night I spent at Jared's. I stood outside with flowers in my hand, staring at the smoking ruins.

A filthy old homeless man walked up next to me as I stared in disbelief. “Thought you could cheat it did you?” he said. “Thought he wouldn’t notice? But he did.” He started laughing as he walked away. “But he did.” I watched him as he walked away, he turned back from time to time to smile at me.

My lives turned dark. Friends were killed in horrible accidents. Serial killers struck peaceful towns and ravaged the families of those I loved. Overdose, disease, murder, death. Everything was wrong.

The world turned too. Dictators came to power. Wars broke out. Hatred rose. Cities burned. Countries shattered. The world bled.

The old man would appear from time to time, though centuries would sometimes pass between sightings. He always laughed at me, told me that “he” had me now. Always smiled at me.

I drifted, from one dying port town to the next, finding work where I could, drinking away  shitty lifetime after shitty lifetime.

I was sitting in a bar in the capital of East Scotland, watching some cable news about a genocide in some country that hadn’t even existed in most of my lifetimes.

The bartender laughed and I looked at him clearly for the first time. It was the old man. He smiled at me.

“Who the fuck are you?” I growled.

“I’ve seen him longer than you, he sees you now.” He laughed again.

“Where do I go to find him?”

He laughed. “Go to Samar in the Philippines. Not now, in your your next life, when you are still young. Find Biringan. He waits for you there.”

He smiled at me, and I stumbled for the door. I lived another dozen years before a boat I was on went down in a storm.

I woke up in Jared’s apartment. This time, I immediately started looking for a way to get to the Philippines. I sold my car and walked to work for six months, eating the cheapest food I could find.

I arrived confused. Turns out Biringan isn’t a real place. Or maybe it is. I found work under the table, making money however I could. I asked about the invisible city of local folklore. I asked questions about the lore behind it, I learned how many people who have seen it are victims of demonic possession.

I searched for it, every chance I got. Years passed by, I lived an invisible life, like the invisible city I sought. The world rotted away, but I still searched.

One night I was walking home and a car stopped next to me. I heard a familiar laugh through the window. I looked in and saw the old man. He smiled at me. I got in the car.

We drove for hours. The gas gauge never moved. Finally in the distance I saw a gleaming city of light. He pulled over and gestured.

“You have to walk from here, he is waiting for you in the center of the city.” He smiled.

I got out and walked. It felt like I walked for days but the sun never came up, and I never grew thirsty. I walked into a gleaming, deserted city. I felt drawn to a giant tower in the center of the city. It glowed with a light, despite having no windows or obvious source of illumination.

I was not surprised to find a single door at the bottom of the tower.

I entered and began to climb. As I went I heard a voice, deep and old. I couldn’t make out the words. I climbed forever, finally reaching a door. I opened it and stepped inside, facing a giant black abyss.

The voice was everywhere now. Every word ripped me apart.

“I watched you cheat me. Did you think you could live your lies forever?”

I screamed.

“You’re with me now. Forever. I destroyed this world.”

The abyss closed and I realized I was staring at a giant mouth. It opened again. I thought of Ruth. The world went black.

I woke up in the hospital.

Scott jumped up from the chair in the corner. “Oh dude I’m so glad you’re awake.”

“What happened?”

He looked over his shoulder. “We were just about to take those pills and you threw up all over them and then collapsed. You had a crazy fever.”

I looked around. “How long have I been out?”

“Four days. Ruth keeps chasing me out of here, thinks I did this,” he glanced at his shoes, “nurses don’t like me much either.”

“Why is Ruth here?”

“She’s your emergency contact dude, hasn’t left your side even to go home and sleep, she’s just getting coffee now.” He paused and shifted awkwardly. “Do you have any cash? Jared is kind of pissed you puked on his stuff.”

I heard an excited shriek and barely managed to turn my head as Ruth launched herself at me.

I was in the hospital for another four days before getting discharged. Doctors couldn’t figure out what was wrong with me, said it must have been a freak infection.

Getting discharged was great. Ruth was picking me up and bringing me to Scott’s so I could go with him to his first NA meeting. Seeing me almost die scared him and he was trying to straighten himself out. Then Ruth and I had a special date planned, things were getting figured out, we were thrilled for another chance.

I walked out to the curb and waited for Ruth to pull her car around. I stood there in the sunlight, feeling alive for the first time in, I guess, millennia.

A nurse rolled another patient in a wheelchair out to the curb, locked his wheel, and walked outside. I felt the breeze on my face and smiled.

The old man in the wheelchair laughed. I stared at him and he winked. “He let you go, make sure he doesn’t get his teeth into you again.” Then he smiled at me.

This time I smiled back.



[-NM](https://www.reddit.com/r/nmwrites)***yourfaceyourporn.mov***

My wife tells me she’s cheating on me about halfway through dinner.

I work my way through the potatoes, the beans, and most of the meat before replying.

“Who?”

“That doesn’t matter.”

It very much *does* matter, I think. I imagine a 6’4, muscular, chiselled Greek God of a man fucking my wife. I think about the way he holds her – *is he gentle? rough?* – and the noises she makes for him – *is she quiet? does she scream for him?*

“Michael.”

I’m working on the last of the chicken at this point, wondering if she’s ever fucked both of us in the same day-

“*Michael.* Listen to me. I want a divorce.”

I watch her for a while, her jaw, the hollow of her neck:

“Is he better?”

“What?”

“Is he better than me?”

She purses her lips. I think she’s going to tell me that he’s just different, that she’s sorry it had to be like this and that she still loves me, really, deep down, that it was a mistake and no-one could be better than me, but instead she replies.

“Yes, Michael. He’s better than you.”

She tells me that she’s staying in the house until she finds a place to rent whilst we sort this out. I say that maybe I should have the bed, and she tells me that, *trust me, you don’t.*

“In our bed?”

“Sleep on the couch, Michael.”

And so that’s where I find myself, working my way through a bottle of expensive Scotch I’d saved for a special day, and browsing the internet. My browsing is aimless, filthy, meandering – I lurch from website to website going nowhere. That is, until I see an ad.

&#x200B;

**YOURFACEYOURPORN**

*Do you want to live out your most disgusting, most depraved fantasies? Do you want to* ***see*** *yourself do it?*

*Using state-of-the-art deepfake technology we’re able to show you what your deepest desires actually look like. See them played out across the screen – the things you’ve only spoken of in whispers, that you’ve never even admitted to yourself.*

*Take control of your life. Be the best version of yourself you can be.*

*This is your face, your porn, your reality.*

&#x200B;

I’m in a *fuck it* sort of mood, more than a little drunk, and I think that this might be the best way to get back at her. I don’t even have to leave the comfort of my home, and I can see what I’d look like doing whatever I want. All those things I never told her, the things she’d never do – I can *see* it.

The ad is blank aside from the text on the white screen, that, and a tacky gif of red lips blowing a kiss, before running their tongue along their teeth.

I watch the mouth on the ad blow kiss after lurid kiss at me, and start to feel convinced.

They’ll superimpose my face, convincingly into any situation, and I’ll watch myself carry out my darkest, deepest desires.

There are different packages: celebrity, fetish, slice-of-life, narrative, and on and on -  but one in particular catches my eye:

**“Surprise me.”**

And so, squinting so that I can read the numbers on my credit card, I subscribe. I fill out a quick form, what I’m into, my kinks, my age, name, that sort of thing. It then requires me to take a video of my face from different angles, then makes me cycle through a few basic facial expressions, takes a sample of my voice saying a few basic sentences.

Not long after, I pass out.

I awake to a vicious hangover, and a notification on my phone. An email containing the first video.

&#x200B;

*yourfaceyourpurchase.mov*

*it’s really me! or at least, it looks exactly like me. it’s night, and fake-me seems to be followed by a camera. fake-me spends the evening going into various shops around town and buying tape, and an apple from each store. he seems to make the cashiers nervous, and one girl even starts shaking whilst she tries to find the code for the tape when it won’t scan. he is impatient, raps his knuckles on the desk, calls her a bitch under his breath as he leaves.*

*wide-shot: he walks down the street past the glass window – the cashier is crying silently inside.*

&#x200B;

That’s it. I try to click forward, to see if there’s anything else, but that’s it. I watched the whole thing expecting it to be the build up to *something* but no, instead, all I see is something that looks exactly like me drive around town and buy apples and tape. I try to see if I can find the website again to cancel my subscription, but I can’t find anything. I try and look through my history, but it’s not there – in fact, there’s just an empty gap between 1 and 3am.

Whilst it isn’t porn, the technology behind it is still amazing, the person on the screen looks exactly – *exactly –* like me.

I don’t go to work. I watch TV, drink beer, smoke inside. My wife – and she is still my wife – complains.

I don’t listen.

Around 6pm I receive another email.

&#x200B;

*yourfaceyourgums.mov*

*the camera is focused on the me-that-isn’t-me sat at a table. he’s answering questions. it’s my voice! my voice! he says he is sorry. he says he does not know, no, he never knew. he is fiddling with something in his mouth. above his teeth. he has never heard that name before. he says if they insist but it’s not like he’ll like it. the voice behind the camera laughs.*

*close-up of his mouth: there is a thick, black hair protruding from his gum, just above his teeth, and he is trying to wiggle it loose. it isn’t working. until. until it does, and he pulls out a knot of tangled hairs from his the pink of his gum, and they keep coming and coming and coming until there’s nearly a foot of hair, and with each tug it wobbles his front two teeth a little.*

*he says this has never happened to him before. the voice behind the camera laughs again.*

&#x200B;

I don’t sleep that well that night. Something about the videos has unsettled me. They’re *too* realistic, and, watching that fake-me fiddle with his gums made my mouth hurt. I say nothing to my wife when she comes in, make no effort to tidy the take-away boxes from the table. She looks at me for a long, long time, as if something is building up inside her, some thought or opinion about me she’s always wanted to tell me, and I watch as it almost bursts out her lips – and then, nothing.

I hear something looking through our bins as I try to sleep. A raccoon? Someone homeless? They disappear when I get up to look.

The notification wakes me up: another video. I try to reply to the address that’s sending me these, telling them I want them to stop, but the email bounces back. I have no choice but to watch.

&#x200B;

*yourfaceyourtrash.mov*

*the me-that-can’t-possibly-be-me is eating at a new table. but the whole table is covered in trash, dirt, empty cans, pizza boxes, rotting fruit, bones, tiny crawling things etc. etc. there are flies buzzing aimlessly about. he is shovelling as much as he can in his mouth, coffee grounds spill down his chin and he coughs. he keeps looking to the left of the camera after swallowing. he winces, pulls something from his mouth: a razor.*

*he has bitten a razor.*

*his blood is dark and thick, and mixes with the coffee grounds that dribble down his chin so that it looks lumpy and black. it coats his shirt, and his hands as he attempts to wipe his face.*

*he looks to the left of the camera again, and continues eating.*

&#x200B;

At this point I consider deleting my email account. Something is *wrong* here, there is something in these videos that’s beyond unsettling. I don’t remember pulling half those facial expressions, and his reactions are just like mine. It’s too real.

That’s *my* wince. That’s the wince of pain I know I do when I stub my toe, or stand on a thumbtack, or bite my tongue.

But when I get up to fix myself a drink I find my wife’s car gone, and I know that she’s with him, with this guy she’s fucking, and I feel a stab of self-loathing that goes so deep it pierces my stomach and makes me retch.

I watch the video again.

Evening comes.

&#x200B;

*yourfaceyouranger.mov*

*he is carrying a bunch of grapefruit in his arms in the street. a small, old man bumps into him and the fruit go flying. they make this wet pop as they hit the floor, and in the noise you can hear the fibres that held the fruit together tear. the man is knocked over. the-me-that-looks-too-much-like-me sees someone nearby drinking from a thermos, and, grabbing it, empties the scalding water all over the fallen man’s face.*

*close-up: the-me-that-shouldn’t-be-me spits on him, and winks at the stunned crowd watching. the fallen man moans, and spasms.*

&#x200B;

I don’t know why, but I sort of *like* this one. The noise of the fruit is so satisfying, so visceral, and there’s something triumphant about the way fake-me snatches the boiling water and pours it over the man. Fake-me is in control.

That evening my wife tells me that she doesn’t think she ever loved me, not like the way she loves her new man, and that come to think of it I’m not much of a man at all. She says this whilst I try and wipe ketchup from my shirt, but only succeed in getting some on the couch.

When she goes to bed upstairs I watch *yourfaceyouranger.mov* over and over again.

I doze.

With my eyes half-open, the-me-that-isn’t-me, the fake-me winks at the camera.

My heart gets faster. I pretend to be asleep, and keep my eyes open just a sliver.

&#x200B;

*fake-me walks away from the crowd, right up to the camera. knocks on my screen a few times with his knuckles. it sounds like glass. he watches through the screen, smiling. his eyes are on me, I’m sure of it. he pushes his face against the camera, against my screen, and stares right at me.*

*there is something behind those eyes, behind that face.*

*something dark, and waiting.*

*he keeps watching me.*

&#x200B;

I think he knows I’m awake.

We stay like that until morning.

&#x200B;

*yourfaceyourneighbour.mov*

*he knocks on mrs. tay’s door. he is holding an apple, and tape. she invites him in. he enters, the camera follows. in one movement he stuffs the apple in mrs. tay’s mouth and forces her to the ground where he binds her arms and legs with tape. someone from off camera hands him a hammer.*

*wide-shot: mrs. tay struggles on the floor. the-me-that-watched-me looks through her records, puts one on. it’s old and slow and the vinyl crackles as he drags her into the basement. the video continues for half an hour more, until the vinyl has finished and there is just a loop of a faint crackle, and then there are two thuds, a snap, and it ends.*

&#x200B;

I can see someone’s car I don’t recognise in my driveway. It looks expensive.

I go to investigate, but can’t find anyone near it, and so I decide to go and check on Mrs. Tay. I stumble down the street in my dressing gown, face covered in patches of stubble, and knock on her door. No-one answers.

Bill Roberts walks past, and I wave at him.

“Seen Mrs. Tay today Bill?”

He shakes his head. I can tell he’s trying not to react to how I look, trying to be polite.

“Haven’t seen her in a week or so Michael.”

A pause. He’s finding the right words – I can tell.

“You doing okay? You don’t look so good.”

“Never better.”

The combination of emotions I’m feeling is hard to put into words. I am elated; there is a version of me, online, who is in control, and is acting.

I am, also, terrified. Whatever it is on that screen knows about me, knows something about my life. I don’t know if it is here, in this reality, or if it is just peering in. Either option makes my chest tight.

I’ve drunk the house dry, and have to make several trips to stock up on liquor. I even call a few old contacts and manage to get some pills, although I promise myself I’ll only take them when things get really, really bad.

&#x200B;

*yourfaceyourtrial.mov*

*the shortest video so far. the-me-i-wish-was-me pushes against his jaw, probing. slowly, surely, he slides his hand under the skin of my face, until I can see the outline of my fingers under the skin, like five giant malformed veins. he wriggles the fingers and the skin comes away from my face, my ring finger emerges from my eyelids. he pulls the hand out and it is covered in some sort of embryonic fluid.*

*he winks at the camera.*

*(at me?)*

&#x200B;

I try the same thing that evening after I’ve shaved, pushing my fingers into my face as if the skin is going to slip and I’ll be able to do what he did, but nothing happens. My long nails cut the tender, freshly-shaven skin, and I end up just moving my face the conventional way; I smile, then frown, then stick out my tongue, then puff out my cheeks.

Once I’m convinced my face still works, I go to bed.

I think my wife sneaks him in the back door: her lover, her casanova.

I can hear them fuck, I think. I can’t wait for morning, can’t wait for a new .mov. I watch *yourfaceyourtrial.mov* on repeat to help me sleep, and when *he* is convinced I’m asleep he comes right up to the camera again, but this time he fiddles with the edges, as if testing the boundaries.

&#x200B;

*his breathing gets deeper, lustier, he cannot find a way out, so he just watches, cycling through expressions the way I did, convinced that I am asleep.*

*(am I?)*

When I wake up, there is a note from my wife telling me that she’s moving in with him for a while.

There is a voicemail from work telling me I’m fired, and that there’ll be no severance pay.

&#x200B;

*yourfaceyourjunkies.mov*

*he (I?) finds a couple of junkies on the outside of town. he shows them a huge stack of cash and they both nod. they have about 6 teeth between them and walk with a pronounced stoop, taking him to an abandoned building on the edge of town.*

*he says go in ahead of me I’ll be right in. they pause for a while, trying to work out what the catch is, why this seemingly average guy would offer all this cash up front, but he hands them both small foil packages and they quickly dash inside.*

*as before, he slowly slips his hand under the skin of his face, working it up and up and up, until both hands are completely under the skin –*

*the camera pans down, to the rusty gate that borders the property.*

*he hangs something from the gate, before walking down the overgrown path into the house.*

*it takes me a while to realise that the thing hanging from the gate is a face.*

*my face.*

*like a mask, the mouth and eyes are empty, and the skin flaps like a heavy flag in the breeze.*

*there is the sound of cars driving past every few minutes – then, two noises like grapefruit bursting, fibrous and wet and sudden*

*he walks back down the path, and puts the face back on.*

&#x200B;

I do not manage to see what lies under that face, but I desperately want to.

I think my hair is falling out.

I take a long walk around the block. When I return I find my wife staring at my laptop as if she’s seen the devil. She turns to me, slowly.

“What the *fuck* is this, Michael?”

The laptop is positioned behind her back, so I can see the screen and her at once. I remember the contents of *yourfaceyourjunkies.mov* and start to panic, if that fell into the wrong hands, with no context-

“I can explain – the videos, they’re not me, all of the places, the situations, they’re fake, I think-“

She shakes her head.

“What situations? Jesus. Michael - it’s just hours and hours and hours of footage of you whispering to the camera. It’s just your face. What’s fake about that?”

I can tell she’s a little scared, her disgust at me slowly morphing into something uglier, nastier. She takes a couple of steps back, as if seeing me for the first time. Behind her I can see the-me-that-isn’t-me, the fake-me smiling at the camera on screen.

The footage is paused, but he’s still moving, closer and closer to the camera, his eyes wide and with a rigor-mortis smile – a smile as if he’s just learned how to control the musculature of his face perfectly – and he’s holding a finger to his lips.

*Shh.*

She takes another step back. I try and warn her but no words come. Instead I’m frozen in fear, seeing the fake-me grow closer and closer to the camera, to the screen as her backs turned and-

He’s pushing against the glass of the screen, trying to find a weak point, a crack that will allow him to move from his reality into ours-

She can’t take it anymore, she turns around and without looking at the screen she picks my laptop up and smashes it on the floor.

“You’re sick.”

She leaves.

The thought of the screen smashed for some reason terrifies me. It’s as if whatever barrier was between me and that *thing* is broken, and although I can’t see anything I feel him leaking into our world, like the soft hiss of gas through a broken pipe, or air escaping a valve.

I take the laptop to be fixed – pay extra to make it happen as fast as possible.

As soon as the screen is fixed I take it home, desperate to turn it on, to see if there are any new videos – to check on the old ones.

I try loading *yourfaceyourpurchase.mov* – the first video I was sent.

A familiar scene plays, except there’s no fake-me. It’s the exact same footage, I’m sure of it, but the me-that-isn’t-me isn’t there at all. The cashier still weeps silently, but it’s not due to any version of me scaring her.

I try loading *yourfaceyouranger.mov.*

The same. The exact same video but the fake-me isn’t there. The man still falls over, coffee is still poured on his face, the crowd still reacts – but there’s no *me.*

*Yourfaceyourjunkies.mov* is now just footage of two junkies walking to a crackhouse, and entering it. They still don’t leave, but there is no face on the gate. Nothing. No sign that I was ever there.

The house suddenly feels so empty.

I can hear the faint *tap-tap-tap* of the branches against the upstairs window. The gurgling of the drain. The way the old wood creaks ever so slightly with age.

I am alone.

And I know then that the reason he’s not on the screen because he’s here.

With me.

As I feel sweat start to run down my back, I receive one final email.

&#x200B;

*yourfaceyourturn.mov*

*wide-shot: me, but the* ***real*** *me this time. alone. the room is full of trash, rotting food, empty beer bottles, liquor bottles smashed on the floor, pill bottles, crumpled clothes. the* ***real*** *me holds up a hand, waves it.*

*this is live. this is real time. this is happening. now.*

*the room is dark. objects are obscured. in shadow.*

*something moves behind the window.*

*a curtain rustles.*

*bottles clink.*

*he is in here, somewhere.*

*watching.*

*waiting.*

*I am alone with myself,*

*& I have all the time in the world.*

[x](https://www.reddit.com/r/max_voynich)I’m not sure if this will help anyone, but if my story saves even one person from the nightmares I now endure, I will consider it a win. I have borrowed a phone that was smuggled in here, and the orderly, that now monitors every move I make will be coming shortly, so I must be brief. 

A few days ago, I was laying in bed scrolling through Reddit, like I always do to make myself sleepy, when I came across this story that sent shivers up my spine. 

After I was done reading, I thought to myself, “wow, that was terrifying,” and then scrolled to the next one. Big mistake. 

Twenty minutes later, I heard a scratching noise coming from my bedroom door and I froze. Confused, as I live alone, I turned on the lamp next to me and looked towards my bedroom door. 
 
*silence.*

After a moment, I decided it was my mind playing tricks on me. After all, I was reading scary stories in the dark. Probably not the best thing to do before bed, but hey, who doesn’t love a good spine-chilling story before they close their eyes. 

I went back to scrolling through r/nosleep when again, I heard a long scratch on the door. I slowly got out of bed and tip-toed over to the noise. Grabbing the door handle, I gently opened it and peeked into my living room, only to find it vacant.

I quietly closed the door and turned to walk back towards my bed, when my closet door flew open! Now, I don’t know about you guys, but when it comes to fight or flight reaction, I seem to choose the option that leaves you frozen in place with your eyes closed. A defense mechanism instilled in me from childhood and stories of the boogeyman. 

After a moment, I decided to open my eyes and cautiously look towards my closet. I physically heard the clock that was placed on my night stand stop ticking, and that’s when I met him. 

He was almost 8 feet tall, standing on long spiny looking legs, with impossibly long arms that seemed to stretch on forever. What I could see of his body looked to be covered in deep dark cracks. He was wearing a long hooded cloak that touched the floor, as black as midnight on a moonless night, that slightly revealed his ruby red eyes. 

Wh- who are you? I said with a shaky voice.

He never physically moved his mouth, but I heard him speak into my soul with the most sinister voice, “I am Mr. Lakavote and I am here to right your wrong.”

Petrified, frozen in place, I tried to ask him what wrong I had done, but before I could finish he was right in front of me. His breath smelled of rotting flesh and death itself as he breathed down my face. 

He reached out and ran his long boney fingers across my cheek, and instantly I knew what he could do. I felt my eyes being ripped from my head and the burning sensation that followed. I began to scream, but no sound came out. I was stuck in my own personal hell as darkness surrounded me. Alone and afraid. I wanted to die. I wanted the agony to end.

Again, I heard his voice as if it were my own thoughts, “I am the keeper of votesss, you know what you did. You will right your wrong or I will take your eyesssss, along with your eternal soul. You have 24 hoursss.” 

Just as fast as he had appeared, Mr. Lakavote had vanished. 

I did not sleep the rest of the night. I had visions of the horror, I had just endured that left me sweating and cold at the same time. Had I dreamt the whole thing? Could my mind even make up something so sinister and evil? And the pain, oh Lord the pain I felt, I have never experienced anything close to that kind of suffering in my entire life.   

The next morning, pacing my apartment, I tried my hardest to think of what I had done wrong. Did I forget to vote in our recent election? Had I missed an employee poll at work? What the hell had I not voted on that was so important that my soul depended on it? 

Trying to clear my head, I decided to open Reddit, as it always seemed to make me feel better and relaxed. While I was scrolling, I passed the story I had read the night before. The one that had made the hair on the back of my neck stand. 

That’s when it clicked. I had scrolled to the next one before I gave that story the upvote it deserved. Instantaneously, I clicked on the up arrow and waited, hoping with every part of my being that, that was the answer. Was I playing a guessing game with my life? 

I waited the whole day, I didn’t eat, I didn’t move, I barely even breathed. I thought about writing to my family and sorting my goodbyes out but, I felt too incredibly empty to conjure up the words. No one would believe me anyways. 

As the sun slowly set, I decided I might as well wait in my room and hope that I had redeemed myself, or possibly chance losing my eyes and my soul. The thought of that alone made me vomit into the trash can next to my bed and tremble violently with deep, petrifying terror. 

When my 24 hour mark finally came, I closed my eyes, held my breath, and waited. Prayed. Begged, that my soul would be saved and all would be forgiven. 

*silence*

Then, I heard the breathing, I smelled the rotting flesh, I felt all the hair on my body raise. When I finally opened my eyes, I felt a chill that froze me to the bone, as if I was sitting inside a freezer meant for the dead. There he was, right in front of me. His eyes had turned to sapphires as he stared into my soul. 

“Don’t let it happen again”, he bellowed in a voice that to this day still haunts my dreams. Then he was gone. 

I know some of you won’t believe me. Hell, I’m not even sure if I believe myself. As the doctor here says, “it’s all in my head”. But, for the love of your eyeballs and your soul... do ***NOT*** forget to vote while you are reading stories on Reddit, or you too will have the “pleasure” of meeting Mr. Lakavote for yourself. 







[Part One]( https://redd.it/brco33)

**** 

I thought about the camera above me and took my hand away from my face.  I rolled back to the desk and sat there, trying to stop from shaking, trying to make myself take a breath.  Think about it slow.  The first thing was, should I hit a button?

The red button was for an emergency.  If she *was* a prisoner or something, and she was trying to escape, they might think that was an emergency.  But no one had been hurt that I knew of.  And I think Mr. Solomon meant save that for something that was like a police or ambulance emergency, not something like this.  But what about the green button?

This was definitely something “noteworthy”.  Not only that she was asking for help, but that she was asking *me* for help.  

I made myself stop for a moment.  I couldn’t know for sure she was asking me.  I had gone to school with several boys named Thomas.  It was a common name.  But the chances of her painting that name when I was working here?  I didn’t want to be silly, but I wasn’t trying to be too…what’s that word.  Mom used to say it when she read her angel books.  Skeptics.  I didn’t want to be a skeptic either.  I had to believe it was probably meant for me.  And that was something they would want to know.

But should I hit the green button?  My hands were drifting toward the metal box on the desk, but I hesitated.  I didn’t like breaking rules, and I was scared of what would happen if I broke these.  If they really were holding her prisoner, then they were probably very bad people.  But I didn’t know that.  Maybe they were good and *she* was bad.  But I just…

I looked back at the monitor for the first time since reading the words.  Rachel was already moving the paintings back off the sofa, as though she knew the message had been received.  A canvas in each hand, she glanced up at the camera as she moved across the room, and it felt like she was looking right at me.  My chest tightened as my hands moved away from the buttons.  

No.  I didn’t think she was bad.  I had watched her for years.  I felt like I knew her, would know if she was bad.  Strange as it seemed, in a way she was my friend.  And I was going to try and help her.

**** 

I spent the rest of my shift trying to act normal and think of what to do.  I knew whoever else was watching might have noticed the paintings or seen how I acted, but I couldn’t worry about that.  I would try to play it cool and try to think how I could help her.

The only people I had actually met connected to this job were a couple of people when I filled out the papers and then Mr. Solomon when he showed me the model room and told me the job.  I had no way of contacting any of them except through the buttons.  My checks were deposited electronically and I had never run into anyone else who worked at the surveillance room.

That thought made me stop a second.  I had always thought it was weird that I never ran into someone when I was coming or going—the person I was taking over for or the person who was taking over for me.  I had always figured there must be other people, other surveillance rooms even, and they just scheduled us so we didn’t run into each other.  And I still thought there were others.

Part of why I thought that was because it seemed like I wasn’t the only person who used my surveillance room.  The water cooler, the toilet paper, the soap, they all seemed go down faster than I think I was using it by myself.  If that was true, maybe I could figure out who they were, and maybe they would be safer to talk to than whoever it was that I worked for.

I got off work at eight that night, and instead of grabbing some food and going home, I drove my car around the block and then parked down the street from the building where I worked.  Nothing had changed while I drove around for a minute—no new cars had parked or anything—and if I was right, they didn’t send anyone to replace me until they were sure I was gone anyhow.  

So I sat and waited.

I was tired and the street was pretty empty and boring, but I was too excited and scared to fall sleep.  Every time a car passed or someone walked down the sidewalk, I tensed.  I kept imagining a SUV or van pulling up behind me.  Men getting out and pulling me from my car, taking me somewhere like where they had Rachel to kill or torture me.  Half a dozen times I almost cranked up and drove away, but every time I would think of her alone in that room.  She had no one but me to help her, and I had to try.

Two hours later, a fat balding man parked and started heading for the building.  As soon as I saw he was able to unlock the door and enter, I opened my car door to go talk to him.  Then I stopped.  I needed to be smart.  I didn’t know where they were, but I was sure there were hidden cameras in the locker room and outside the building.  If I go running in there and confront that guy, they’ll know for sure that I’m up to something.

Sighing with frustration, I shut the door back and waited until his shift was over.  I considered tailing him like in the movies, but I was scared I would just lose him or he would call someone for help.  So I waited until he was walking back to his car after a six hour shift, hopefully far enough away that the cameras wouldn’t see.  And then I met the man I came to know as Charles Jefferies.

**** 

“Hey…Hey, man, can I talk to you for a minute?”   His back was to me and he just waved his hand absently without looking up.

“Sorry, I don’t have any money.  Have a good…”  He froze as he glanced back at me while talking.  “Oh God.  No.  No.  You need to get out of here, kid.  We aren’t allowed to talk.”  I could tell he was scared, but I couldn’t risk letting him go yet, not after all this.  I stepped up and pushed the door back shut as he was trying to get into his car.

“So you know who I am?”  I tried to not sound mean, but I could hear how mad I was in my voice.

He yanked at the door again, but I was still holding it, and I was stronger than he was.  After a second, weaker tug, he turned around, his face strained and tired-looking.  “Yeah, I know who you are.  You work here just like me.  And I’m telling you, we aren’t supposed to be talking.  We aren’t supposed to meet, ever.”

I frowned.  “Mr. Solomon never told me that.  He never said it was one of the rules.”

The man shook his head.  “Mr. Solomon.  Yeah.  Well there are plenty of rules they don’t tell you.  I bet they didn’t tell you what you were going to be watching before you started, did they?”  When I just lowered my eyes, he went on.  “Yeah, me either.  I’ve been at this job for ten years.  I’ve seen other people come and go, usually because they broke one those rules they never mentioned.  The only reason I’m still here is because I keep my head down and my mouth shut.”  He wagged a finger at me.  “You should do the same, if it’s not already too late.”

I felt my stomach curling into a cold knot.  “Too late?”

The man rubbed his face.  “Kid, do you think they don’t know we’re talking?  Do you think anything happens that they don’t know about?”  He looked back toward the building, a look of sadness and fear in his eyes.  “Hell, for all I know, you’ve already killed us both.”  Shaking his head, he pushed me back and started opening the door.  “Either way, I’m done risking it.  You need to stop asking questions and just do your job.  It’s a lot healthier.”

With that, he got into his car and shut the door.  I didn’t try to stop him this time.  Even though I had already been worried about what he was telling me, hearing it confirmed was paralyzing.  What exactly was my plan?  He probably didn’t know any more than I did, and even if he did, what could I do with anything he told me?

I walked back to my car with a heavy heart.  I was still afraid, but more than that, I was sad and ashamed.  I wanted to help Rachel, but I wasn’t sure how.  I wasn’t giving up, but as I drove back to my apartment, I couldn’t think of what I should do next.  This wasn’t a movie.  I wasn’t a hero.  And the only ideas I had left were to either go to the police, who might be controlled by whoever I worked for, or try to get proof of her being held prisoner myself.

As I parked my car and walked into my apartment building, I made a decision.  Unless I thought of something better overnight, I would do both ideas.  Tomorrow I would break the rule about carrying anything in.  I’d use my phone to record a video of the surveillance room, of Rachel and how she was trapped somewhere, and of me telling everything else I knew.  And I would email it to every newspaper, website, and internet channel I could think of.  I’d then go to the police and give them a copy too if I could make it that long without getting caught.  Maybe if I did all that, even if they got me, someone would help Rachel.

I was filled with worry and dread at the idea of being hurt or killed.  A part of me kept saying I should just do as I was told and hope that it all went away.  But I couldn’t live with myself if I did that.  Even if I messed up, I felt like I had to try.  I was so preoccupied that I didn’t hear the person coming up behind me as I unlocked my apartment door.

“Thomas?”

I turned around and felt my legs weaken as I stumbled back against my door.  I had to be dreaming or crazy.  I grabbed the door knob for support as I looked at the woman in front of me.  It couldn’t be her, but somehow it was.

[“Rachel?”](https://redd.it/9ndww5)

****

[Part Three](https://redd.it/bsg2az)My work friends and I were out at our favourite pub last night. Not a really fancy place but, you know, cheap beer and close enough to home that I don't have to drive. The night started out normally enough, the four of us crammed into a small table off in the corner, mostly talking shop and shitting on our boss. Being this was the middle of the week there weren't too many other people around, maybe around eight or nine others in the whole place. Everybody just kinda keeping to themselves, sorta people you'd expect to see in a pub on a Wednesday.

Anyway, from where I'm sitting I have a pretty good view of the TV behind the bar. Jessie the bartender is kinda lazily flipping through channels and passes by our local news channel. There's a brief burst of orange and red on the screen which I register as a fire happening somewhere, which then disappears as Jessie switches over to the next channel. Something about the image looks oddly familiar though.

"Hey Jess, can you switch that back?" I call out to her.

The news comes back on, and suddenly I recognize the building in the frame. It's *my* building, and it's burning.

"Holy shit," I say, loudly enough that a few people follow my gaze to the television. "That's my apartment!"

The crowd in the bar falls kinda quiet, everybody staring up at the screen now. The screen shows a wide shot of the outside of my building. The camera must be set up on the north end of the block because I recognize a lot of shops on the ground floor - property management, dry cleaner, convenience mart, etc. The top left corner of the building is aflame. It's not a huge fire by any means, but it looks like a few units between the top four floors or so have already been engulfed by the flames. 

"Jesus, man," one of my coworkers says. "That, uh...that sucks." There's an uncomfortable murmur of agreement that passes around the table. I mean, I don't blame them, I wouldn't know what to say in this situation either. "Yup," I agree, just as awkwardly. Thankfully, my apartment is only about half way up and located on the west side of the building. I  cross my fingers, hoping my stuff will be okay.

The camera cuts to a reporter on the scene. He's standing a little further away; looking at the shops in the background I can tell he's across the street on the north-west corner of the building. "Fire fighters are expected on the scene any moment," he's saying, "and hopefully they'll be able to contain this horrible inferno before it spreads any further. As I was saying before, it's very fortunate that everyone was able to evacuate the building before things got too bad, or who knows what tragic events may have unfolded."

"He's really laying it on thick," my other coworkers jokes. I chuckle a bit. All things considered, at the moment it really didn't seem all that bad.

But then, a few moments later: "Uh...hang on," the reporter on TV says, "We're getting some updated information. It seems...hang on one moment, while we readjust the camera." The previously locked down camera starts to shift, the angle focusing on an area of the building about half way up the west side. All the lights in the building are out except for one. I feel a weird creeping sensation as I start counting the windows from the bottom.

Five up, two over. That's my place. *I swore I turned that light out,* I think at first. Then I see it.

There's a...person, standing in my window. The camera is zoomed out too far to make out any features, but it definitely looks like a man and it's definitely standing in my apartment. I watch petrified as the camera zooms in closer, the reporter babbling on about "the overlooked, ill fated soul still trapped in the blazing such and such." As the image gets closer, I start to make out more details.

The person is...dancing. Or something. I don't really know how to describe it, but he's moving around a lot, and everything he's doing has this bizarre rhythmic quality to it. He starts waving his arms in the air, back and forth, back and forth, and then he's waving them up and down at his sides. Then he's banging both fists on the glass. Then he's waving his arms over his head again, back and forth. Everything he's doing is to the exact same tempo. 1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 2, 3, 4. He starts jumping up and down, waving his arms over his head like he's trying to get someone's attention from a long distance, but everything is to the exact same rhythm. Over and over again. 1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 2, 3, 4.

"What in the fuck," I say, my voice a hoarse whisper. And then the camera gets a little closer, and finally we can make out the person's features. 

It looks almost exactly like me. It's wearing the exact same clothes that I'm wearing now, clothes I changed into moments before leaving the apartment earlier. Its face looks almost exactly like mine as well, except for its eyes. Its eyes are far too big for a normal person. It also has this almost comical look of horror on its face...I don't even know how to describe it. Imagine if someone were pretending to look scared, but as a joke. It would have almost seemed funny if the circumstances were different, but instead it was just extremely unnerving.

No one in the bar is talking now. Everyone is fixed on the TV. The "person" is still swaying and waving around, beating its hands on the glass or jumping in circles. I almost don't hear the reporter mention the fact that firefighters have rushed into the building and are now heading for my floor. *Oh god,* I think, without really understanding what was happening. *Please don't go in there.*

I stare transfixed at the screen. From this angle you can just barely see the top of my front door through the window, not too far behind where this creature is flailing around. Right now it is holding it's face in his hands and shaking it's head from side to side as if saying no. Suddenly the door behind it bursts open as, presumably, the firefighters have entered my apartment. 

The creature stops moving. For a second, I see its expression change. The comical look of horror is gone, replaced by a huge smile filled with enormous, pointed teeth. Then the lights go out.

We all just sat there, staring at the screen as the camera slowly zoomed out from the now dark window. No one says anything as we all quietly pay our bill and leave. I went directly to my sister's place across town and asked to stay with her. I told her there was a fire at my apartment and that's it. When I tried to find footage from the news online later that night, it seemed like they had edited that last part out.

I don't know if any of you on this subreddit know what that thing was, but I hope they didn't put out that fire. I hope they let the whole fucking place burn to the ground.Last time: https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/ckw07c/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app

I sat silent for a moment in shock that my plan had even worked. It seemed almost too simple, too easy. But here he was.

Derek had a kindly face, wrinkles around his eyes and cheeks only added to the softness of his expression. His white hair poking out from beneath his flat cap stood out in the dark night.

“That’s a lovely little patch you’ve planted. I can look after it if you like, I used to maintain the last garden here.” He said, breaking the silence that had followed since his initial words. 

“I know who you are. We need you.” Was all I could manage, the mental exhaustion and fatigue from the whole experience had built up, but his arrival was like finishing a bad day working at school. I felt like I could relax again, even if only a little. 

“Whats your name darling?” He asked.

“It’s Kat. I live in flat 42 now.” His face lit up as I confirmed my flat number. 

“Prudence has gone?” He asked.

“She’s gone. But the whole place is a mess, so many things are happening and the residents are suffering.” I answered. 

We chatted for what felt like hours. Outside with nothing but moonlight. He told me how he used to consider the building part of the garden, a place for him to maintain, the residents just like the plants he looks after. 

I explained my whole experience since moving in. I told him about Jamie and I sobbed. Derek held me as I cried and made me feel safe, something I had forgotten the feeling of since receiving Prue’s note. He didn’t interrupt, he just listened.

I told him about Natalia and the cultists, the problems they had been causing. He was particularly heartbroken when he heard that they had used Eddie and Ellie for entry. He had gone before they were born, but remembered Terri as a child and how sweet she was, he was pleased when I told her what a sweet adult she had become. 

My claims that Prudence was the only person who knew how to kill the imposter neighbours were met with a skeptical expression which gave me some hope.

Derek listened to my entire tale with barely a word. When I finished he stood up and asked me to follow him. I was confused, but I did as I was told. 

He walked me to the entrance of the lift. I lifted my arm to check the time on my watch. We had been outside for quite some time and the idea of the creatures being inside made my heart pound and my stomach turn. 

“You are safe. It’s 12.32am, there’s no need to worry or to check your watch.” And with that he pressed the “call lift” button. Despite his insistence that I was safe my stomach continued to do gymnastics.

It felt like forever before the lift finally made the clunking sound that meant it had reached the bottom. I felt my whole body shaking violently as the doors opened, I don’t know what I expected to see, we were in the safe time zone but every time I looked at the life I pictured Jamie’s dead, crunched up body. 

“Step inside.” He said.

“I can’t. Please don’t make me.” I begged

“I won’t let anything happen to you. But you need to see something.” There was such sincerity in his eyes as he spoke. I had never trusted someone so completely so quickly, but every fibre of my being told me this man was entirely good. 

I stepped inside the lift.

Derek stepped in behind me, placing a comforting hand on my shoulder as I hyperventilated. He gently turned me to face the panel of buttons that control where the lift stops.

“What is wrong with this panel? Do you see it?” He asked cryptically. 

I studied the panel. Read all the numbers, counting them. I couldn’t see anything wrong. I tried. I really tried, but nothing seemed out of place at all. Everything you expected to find was there and nothing more. I shook my head, barely regaining my composure.

“Can you take us to floor 9 please?” He smiled slightly as he made the request. 

I looked back to the panel to press the button, but floor 9 didn’t exist. I was so confused, I had counted the numbers, I was sure of it. Derek must have made it disappear. But the panel didn’t look any different to before. I can’t explain it, looking at it, I would have sworn blind nothing was wrong with it even once I knew, but floor 9 didn’t exist. Derek could see my frustration. It was like the building was now playing tricks on me. 

He walked me out of the lift and sat me down on the bottom of the stairs before he finally began to speak.

“The building is like a living organism. It can seal off parts of the world, and it can open up others you never could have imagined. When those awful people burned that whole floor of residents I was devastated.

“Some wonderful people lived in those flats, both of the usual and unusual variety. But those people had no limit to their cruelty. Whole families burned alive, it was a tragedy that made me so angry. 

“I felt so guilty when it happened. I can predict what some of our more tricky residents are going to do and make sure I’m there to help. But those people were nothing to do with this place. I couldn’t see what they were planning, so I couldn’t stop it.”

At this point I noticed one of the hairless cats had sat between us, Derek looked at it with tears brimming in his eyes, he stroked it and it moved on to his lap. Dereks fingers didn’t burn at all. He continued.

“When it happened the building used its defence mechanisms and sealed off the entirety of the floor. It stopped the fire from spreading and kept the perpetrators there, to die by their own hands.

“The building only allowed the floor to be unsealed once they were dead. 

“It took about a week before those awful people turned up again. Asking for sugar at people’s doors, the first few let them in. It was so difficult, so many residents burned alive that I was having to use their remains for my garden just to hide the dead. The entire community were terrified and grieving for those that died. 

“No matter how hard I tried I still couldn’t predict them, or see them, so I took Prudence, who at the time seemed a perfectly reasonable woman, to the burned out floor.

“Floor 9, however, had been sealed again. There was no button in the lift, and it always skipped on the stairs. Only no one had noticed. This building really is a magnificent creature.”

I stared at him in amazement through the whole story, I was exhausted but my brain was working in overdrive to process what he was telling me. I had started to stroke the cat too, my fingers did burn, but I didn’t flinch, I found it’s company comforting. He carried on. 

“I went back later that night and took the stairs again, alone this time. I think my intentions were clear and the stairs allowed me access to floor 9 for the first time since just after the fire. 

“I bought Prudence to the floor within the hour. The stairs had stopped skipping floor 9 for me, although I later learned that when Prudence had tried alone she was not allowed access.

“We explored the floor, walking amongst the remnants of our dead friends belongings. Eventually, we came across one of the soulless arsonists, roaming the halls. It appears that’s where they spend their time when they aren’t out terrorising the residents trying to claim more victims. 

“He was disturbed and disoriented to see anyone not like them on that floor. He twitched a little and spat out the sugar line as if it was an automatic response, I almost felt sorry for him. He claimed to come from flat 66. More were approaching behind him. 

“Prudence was terrified, she was starting to sweat profusely and back away from the man, but it didn’t cool her down, he was burning her slowly. I felt nothing; See, the stranger things in life just don’t seem to affect me, I’ve never known why. Sometimes I even just know how to deal with them, like it’s programmed into me. On this new playing field, in their domain. I knew what to do. 

“I grabbed the man and ran him down to flat 66, 4 doors from where we were standing. I threw him into the flat and waited. The other arsonists were approaching.

“The man tried to exit the flat, that was doorless after the wooden doors all burned to cinders in the fire. But as he reached to door something stopped him. He couldn’t leave, no matter how hard he tried, or how much he screamed. 

“Prudence lit up, she grabbed hold of one that had tried to kill her friend, Molly. She remembered the flat number she had claimed to be from and repeated my actions, with a lot more sweating and some winces of pain. It worked again. 

“Prudence wanted to go after the rest, but as they got closer I could see the blisters forming on parts of her body, I dragged her out of the hallway and back into the stairwell. We ran. 

“She begged me to take her back, kept telling me that the stairs wouldn’t let her, that it was too dangerous. The residents had started to learn not to let them in and we had no casualties at all after we trapped the first two. Don’t get me wrong, it’s a problem I was intending to deal with, but it was around that time that we first learned the council would be building that monstrosity over the top of my garden.” He gestured to the window that just showed some of the neighbouring tower block.

“This left me not at my best, my intuition was failing me when a few months after that, I allowed Prudence and Molly to heard the creatures from the lift to floor 9. It’s one of my biggest regrets. I should never have walked them up there. But I didn’t know she was going to burn them all. She didn’t give me a chance to reason. 

“I became mistrusting of everyone and distracted. Not long after I went away for a long while. So I guess the arsonists remained and now they’re threatening you.

“Tomorrow I will go. I will fix the mess I left behind. I am so sorry it’s affected you so badly, I’d love to meet these twins. They sound incredibly brave.”

“They are.” I finally interrupted, “And I want to be there tomorrow. I want to lock Natalia away for good.”

“I can’t allow it. You’ll be attacked.” He cut me off entirely. I let it drop instantly but in the back of my mind I knew I would be there, no matter what. 

I went to sleep that night with my mind reeling. I wondered where Derek slept and if he even needed to. 

The next morning I left my flat early, passed the man on floor 5, and sat at waited on the steps at floor 8. I tested it of course, and just like anticipated, ascending any higher took me straight to floor 10. Or 11 depending on if you hit a skip. So I returned to floor 8, and I waited.

Derek hadn’t indicated what time he was coming. But I was ready. I would wait all day and night if I had to. But luckily I didn’t.

Derek was climbing the stairs at around 11am, I had already been there for 3 hours but it had been worth it. He looked particularly unimpressed to see me. His face still looked kind though, even with the sour expression. 

“I can’t stop you can I?” He sighed, sounding resigned in his tone. 

“Not for anything.”

“You have to promise to stay back. If you get your girl approaches you can do what you need to do, but you have to stay back.” He pleaded.

I nodded and stood up. We ascended the stairs and for the very first time in my new life here I saw the big plastic sign saying 9. The floor that didn’t exist. 

As we pushed through the door it was like entering an entirely new world. Everything was black. Burned to carbon. You could smell nothing but charcoal. Literally nothing but empty shells of homes and flakes of what used to be sentimental objects remained. It was devastating to witness. 

If you’ve ever visited a mass grave site you’ll understand partly how I was feeling. It was sickening, to think of all the lives needlessly lost. But I didn’t get time to think.

Natalia walked towards me. Flying down the hallway. 

“How the fuck did you get here?!” She screamed. Her eyes were wide and angry, I started to feel hotter already. 

Derek grabbed my arm and pulled me next to him. Making sure to keep a tight hold of my arm. 

“Where do you live?” Derek asked her, I started to back away as the sweat dropped from my brow. I desperately wanted to shout out the number, but I couldn’t. I was so hot, I wasn’t functioning properly, everything became so overwhelming I couldn’t remember what Georgia had said, what flat Natalia had claimed to come from.

“I’m not that stupid. I saw what happened to them.” She gestured over her shoulder to what must have been flat number 66, where a man laid on the floor, breathing but looking broken. Just existing in that room. Prudence had been creative with the truth yet again. She didn’t kill them, you can’t kill them. 

What had Georgia said? I racked my brains as I felt the skin on my face start to sting. I imagined her melting away, it was happening to me. I was next. 

And then, as my hair started to singe at the ends, it came to me. 

“71!” I screamed as loud as I could. I could barely see as Derek grabbed her and ran towards me with her. She was clawing at his eyes and face screaming at him to let go. But he didn’t burn. He just kept hold of her. When he approached flat 71 he beckoned me over. 

“You do it. Then get off of this floor.” He was blunt but reasonable, I complied. 

I pushed hard. There was nothing but anger in her eyes, she pushed my face hard with her hand as I got her to cross the boundary into flat 71. I felt my skin sizzle and blister. My whole face was in agony, but I didn’t stop pushing.

Watching Natalia try to fight her way out of a door that didn’t exist was both satisfying and humorous. The others had started to approach at the sound of the commotion. I lingered, hoping to watch her suffer but derek shot me one look and I knew. It was time to go, 

I ran out the corridor and back into the stairwell. I stopped for longer than I probably should have. But I knew I might not get to see that 9 again and it would be worth it. I waited for Derek on floor 9s stairwell. I couldn’t help but imagine the cultists burning to death the first time around. 

I could hear angry screams faintly from inside the corridor, they made me worry about Derek but I knew that really I didn’t need to. It took a while, but he eventually left the corridor and joined me in the stairwell. 

He didn’t say anything, he just looked at me and the third degree burns across my face. He didn’t need to speak, I knew he’d fixed the problem. 

We walked silently back down the stairs towards my flat. I looked back up at floor 9, knowing the building would seal it off for good. It took a few floors to reach floor 7 and I invited Derek in for a cup of tea. He rejected it, saying he wanted to go visit some old friends.

Despite my injuries I couldn’t help but smile, something I’d done was going to help these residents. I stood at my door and watched Derek walk away, pleased that there was some true good in this building. 

After a few steps down the hallway, Derek started to fade, almost like a cgi ghost in a movie, every step he became more transparent. I felt my stomach turn again, like it had outside the lift. I ran out to follow him. I called after him but by the time I had reached where he’d been he was gone. I walked the entire corridor to the window at the back. I looked out the window into the small concrete heavy garden and hoped to see him sat on the memorial bench.

I didn’t see him, instead I saw Prudence. Hacking at my tiny planted patch with shears.

How it ends: https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/cmykhy/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app“Huh?” I asked, pulling off one side of my headphones.

*“I said I like your boots,”* the man repeated.

“Oh, thank you.”

*“I had a bunch of pairs exactly like ‘em for years and years—a good workin boot, ya know?”*

“They definitely are, I use them every day on the job.”

*“Where’s that at?”*

“Turner Construction.”

*“Ah, yes, yes. You’re building that big ole’ thing up on East Avenue, ain’t ya?”*

“Yes, sir. It’s going to be one of the biggest in the city.”

*“So it seems. I used to do construction too, ya know? That was way back in the day. I started back when your mama was probably a toddler.”*

“Oh, yeah? With a company, or freelance, or…?”

*“My papa had a small construction and carpentry business. He hired me on when I was, oh, maybe 15 or so. That was all the way back in 1962! We built houses, mostly, a couple small apartment complexes—nothin as big as what you’re working on.”*

“Did you like it?”

*“Boy, you bet your ass I did. Workin all day was a free gym membership! Ha! Plus, all the perks that came with it.”*

“Perks?”

He smiled. *“Can ya keep a secret, boy?”*

“Yes, sir.”

*“You ever play in a construction site as a child? When I was a lil’ one, me and my buddies would sneak into houses being built and explore ‘em. Maybe break a couple bottles here and there.”*

“Yeah! My neighbors and I used to do that when I was a kid. My house was one of the first built in our neighborhood, then the rest came later. We probably explored every house on the block before they were finished—when they were just wood skeletons—maybe breaking a couple bottles too, to tell you the truth.”

*“Of course ya did. Who wouldn’t, given the opportunity? But that’s all the childish stuff. The real perks came later in life, when I was an adult.”*

“Oh?”

*“Oh yes, boy. Imagine this. The year is 1980 with no cell phones in sight. You talk up a pretty lady at the local bar and hit it off. You tell her about your new construction project, and she wants to go see it.”*

“Uh huh.”

*“Well then ya take her there! You and her all alone in a skeleton of a home, as you said.”*

“Wouldn’t it be a little more private back at your own house?”

*“More private, sure, maybe. But much messier.”*

I paused. “How so?”

*“Well, you don’t just take a girly down to a construction site at night just to get your diddly fiddled with. You take her for... ya know.”*

“No, I don’t know.”

*“For the easy disposal, boy.”*

“Disposal…?”

*“Ya cut the girly up, or do whatever your preference is. Ya do whatever ya wanna do with her, and ya put her under the house. Ya bury her and your stained clothes under there too. Once the job’s done, no one’ll ever see that stuff again. It’s gone. Eventually, a brand new house is sitting on top of your deed.”*

The bus rolled to a stop.

*“Well, this is my stop.”* He stood, patted my shoulder, and I recoiled. He walked off the bus.

The only thing running through my mind was a memory. I was a kid, no older than six. My friends and I were playing hide and seek. I hid in the crawl space under my front porch, and when I was hiding, I found a pair of boots half-buried in the dirt.

The exact same type of boots I was wearing then, on the bus. The exact same type of boots we’d found in the crawl spaces of every house in our neighborhood.Last time: https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/clvga9/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app


When I saw her out the window, garden shears being gripped by both hands and a maniacal expression on her face, I just stood still. 

I was frozen to the spot in shock. I felt no pain at all from the burn on my face, everything was numb. The relief of eradicating the imposter neighbours and the joy at finding a friend in Derek was hacked away in an instant. Just like every leaf from my shrubs. Why would she do this? What had I ever done to her? 

Every question possible crossed my mind. I could feel the frustration bubbling inside me, everything about this place just threw up question after question and for every answer I got, there were ten new questions waiting to be asked. At that moment in time though, only one was truly important. 

How did Prudence know? 

I thought about Terri and her telephone conversations. I didn’t want to think that the sweet lady I thought Terri had turned out to be would do that, but it did cross my mind. I thought of Ian the postman, I’d had bad vibes from him for a while, maybe he’d seen Derek coming up the stairs while on his rounds that morning.

I stood there frozen pondering all these things until I saw Prudence collapse onto the memorial bench sobbing, head in her hands. She was surrounded by the remains of my attempt at a garden with the shears laid out on the floor. 

The stairs were kind to me on the way down, it took 4 flights to make it to the bottom. I ran down the corridor and out the back entrance of the block, no idea what I was going to say. 

“Prudence!” Was all I could manage. Nice one, Kat.

She sat bolt upright before turning and standing quicker than I thought it possible for an old lady. 

“You evil, stupid little girl! Do you have any idea what you’ve done?!” She screamed, so much animation in her face that the spaces between her wrinkles pulsated like veins on an angry weightlifter. 

“Me?! You think I’m evil! You left that shitty note hidden, missing everything I need to know and got my boyfriend killed! And what you’re doing to your own -“ I screamed, tears beginning to roll, before she interrupted me. 

“Don’t you dare talk about her!” Her voice cracked and she broke down again, this time falling to her knees, twigs and leaves sticking to the bottom of her dress. 

I didn’t know what else to do. So I sat down on the floor. I knew that it was probably a bad idea, this woman couldn’t be trusted and I hadn’t forgotten that, but seeing an old lady crying on the cement floor still made me feel awful.

“How did you know about the garden?” I asked her calmly, trying to change my approach. 

She shoved a crumpled up piece of paper into my hand, she didn’t look at me, her eyes remained on the floor. 

*Dear Prudence,*

*I couldn’t exist knowing what I’d done.*

*I should never have told you about it.*

*The last two won’t grow stronger, she was never theirs to begin with. But I have to end her suffering.*

*I’m sorry.*

*Derek*

I knew what he had done as soon as I finished the note. Lyla, or what was left of her, was gone for good. Of all the creatures only Jamie’s killers from the lift remained. That’s how Derek had spent the few hours I’d slept between our encounters. 

“This is all your fault.” She sniffed. “My whole family are gone because of you.”

That hurt a lot. I trembled as I tried to speak but I always really hated confrontation and I could feel myself starting to glitch. 

“H..how can you say that! I saw... her and she was trapped in a tiny cage eating dog food and small animals. Your family died in that lift. Just like my Jamie.” I may have struggled to get my words out, but I wasn’t about to let Prudence Hemmings blame me for her decisions. Lyla was better off dead than what she was, however awful that may sound. 

“What happened to your face?” Prudence growled at me. “Take you to visit floor number 9? He did this to her in the first place, not me! And now he’s disfigured you!” She was spinning things. I could feel throbbing as she mentioned my face, I really should have had medical attention. 

“This isn’t his fault! You messed him up and he did that to her because of you! You told me that yourself.” I tried ferociously to defend Derek but something inside me still felt uncomfortable about what he had done. I couldn’t help it, Lyla was an innocent little girl who shouldn’t have been punished for Prue’s mistakes. This whole thing was such a mess.

“I was grieving! And then I had her back for all those years, and then I lost Bernie, and then my home and now I have to grieve for her all over again.” Prudence continued to cry, but softer. I looked around at the chaos she created and up at the block my boyfriend had died in and rolled my eyes in disbelief that she could be so selfish. She continued.

“Let me tell you about Lyla. She was a beautiful little girl. As I mentioned before, I have two other older children, they’ve had many other grandchildren, however I hadn’t spoken to my eldest two in years even before what happened with Lyla. 

“Lyla was my first opportunity to get to know one of my grandchildren. Bernie adored her too, always reading her stories and sneaking her sweets. 

“I begged my son to allow her to stay. My children were all incredibly ungrateful, they had it easy growing up and still resented me. I gave them a good, strict upbringing but they didn’t appreciate it. They said I was a cruel mother. Lyla’s dad was the only one I spoke to, but our relationship still wasn’t that of a typical loving mother and son. But she was a second chance. 

“It was a miracle when he agreed. I was more shocked he had convinced his wife to allow it. That awful harlot of a woman never liked me, although I didn’t like her either. 

“They refused to speak to me after everything, I haven’t heard from them since. They had more grandchildren I’ll never meet. I knew at the time my relationships with any of my children were over for good. So when Derek gave me a solution I took it.

“I wasn’t entirely truthful when we first spoke. I said I hadn’t wanted this, but I was desperate. There was never a way to bring her back safely. Derek explained what she would become to me. He was initially trying to put me off even trying to get her back. I knew exactly what I was getting myself into. 

But I couldn’t pass up the idea of my beautiful little Lyla, needing her grandma forever. I suppose I was too ashamed to admit it before. But why should I be ashamed?

“My altercation with Derek happened after she was back, when he tried to kill her the first time. Spouting the same things on that note, what kind of monster wants to kill a little girl? That’s why I trashed the garden. He said he wasn’t coping with the news of the new block when he suggested it, that he shouldn’t have told me it was even possible and she had to die. I hid her until the bulldozers came in. 

“When he disappeared I thought I was safe to spend the rest of my life with her. 

“Bernie hated me. Spending time with Lyla was all I lived for, I grew to love her how she was.”

I felt sick. Listening to Prudence talk bought up so many repressed feelings about Jamie. I hadn’t had time to grieve or process anything, I missed him terribly. My old life and my old future felt a million miles away.

I was relieved to know that Derek hadn’t tricked Prudence, or even intended to create rat-Lyla. He was truly good.

“But she didn’t get to have a life. You lived for her but she wasn’t really living. How could a sane person do that to their own flesh and blood?” I retorted.

“You have no idea. This place can make you do irrational things! But she had a life! She had me. It’s all she needed.” She was certainly right about the building and irrational actions, the pain intensifying on my face throbbed in agreement. But I was still convinced she had lost it Dr Frankenstein style where rat-Lyla was concerned. 

She had stopped crying. Her rage levels were rising again. I tried to tell her that it wasn’t really the child she’d known, but she seemed to have grown an entirely new attachment to the creature that replaced what she lost. 

Every rational argument I gave was met with increasing levels of screaming. She got less coherent as she went on. The argument was going nowhere, we went back and forth for what felt like forever.

After a while she started to get closer to me. We had both stood up by this point and despite her haggard and frail appearance, Prudence was truly frightening. She looked unhinged. 

Her words were no longer going in, I was overwhelmed and had too many thoughts rushing through my mind to process her ranting. I took a few steps back clearing a small distance between us. 

By this point, out of the corner of my eye, I could see neighbours in windows of the block, watching the altercation outside, Prue’s screaming had bought a lot of attention. It was bright and I couldn’t see well but I turned to scan the windows and did recognise Eddie and Ellie watching from their bedroom, trying to wave at me. 

They frantically waved and pointed, I tried waving back and gesturing to them, but they kept pointing at me.... why were they pointing?

Then I heard it, the garden shears scraping against the ground as Prudence picked them up and charged towards me. “You ignorant little bitch! You aren’t even listening. You’re don’t deserve my home! You killed her!”

The twins had been telling me to turn around, I shouldn’t have taken my eyes off her. 

Luckily, unlike my earlier shock when I had first seen her, I didn’t freeze. My fight or flight instincts kicked in and I ran faster than I ever have before. I burst back into the building and heard neighbours on the bottom floor lock their doors in a symphony of bolts clicking. 

I couldn’t blame them. Prudence wasn’t far behind me and I wouldn’t want to take her on in her current state if given a choice. But it didn’t stop me pounding on their doors begging someone to call the police, although something told me that in this building that wasn’t going to happen. I ran up the stairs, still being followed by her. 

By the second floor most were still locked but a few had come out of their homes, armed with a variety of heavy objects. Even in a crisis, I couldn’t fault the community spirit here. I ran another flight of stairs that became two but still lead me to floor 3 and then to the back of the corridor. I pounded on Terri’s door.

My heart was racing but when I turned Prue was nowhere to be seen. I was hoping the people who came out on floor 2 had stopped her but something was odd. I hadn’t heard any commotion. This wasn’t the end of it.

Eddie and Ellie hugged me tight as Terri let me in and bolted the door shut quickly behind me. I told her about what had happened. She couldn’t believe what Prue had done. It turned out no one knew about Lyla. 

I was edgy for the first hour. But Prue had disappeared. Terri helped to clean up my burn and put some cold compress on it. She offered to take me to the hospital, but I couldn’t. 

I was too shaken up from what had just happened, I couldn’t face trying to explain how I’d sustained my injuries and I still hadn’t reported Jamie missing. He still hadn’t had any messages from his family, and work had given up calling, but his friends had started. They were harassing me non stop but I had been too distracted to come up with a decent lie.

It had been a week since I moved in and it wouldn’t be long until people realised something was seriously wrong. My conversations with my family had been short, with me insisting they didn’t visit until we were “unpacked and set up”. 

On top of a murderous old lady and an untold amount of abnormal issues the real world problems were starting to creep up on me. 

I sat with Terri for hours, drinking tea and chatting to her. It started to get dark and Eddie and Ellie came into the living room after playing in their room for a while. The voids replaced the big, brown puppy dog eyes again and their claws looked especially sharp, but to me they were still adorable. 

Their transformation prompted me to head back to my flat, it was late. I needed to work out what to do next and how to dig myself out of this giant hole. I couldn’t just keep planting gardens. I needed to do this myself. 

I wandered up the stairs, they went on for a while, but nothing too horrific. I passed the man on floor 5, nodding politely and continuing my ascent. I wondered if he’d received the letter of concern yet, he was a little unsettling. 

When I got to my floor Mr Prentice was making his animal noises again. I smiled, which hurt my face. After all the madness I was starting to find the seemingly benign horrors of this building oddly comforting. 

I reached my flat and turned the key in the door before bolting myself in like Terri had. 

I could feel something wasn’t right the moment I entered. The flat was in chaos, which was nothing new because we had only moved in a week ago and I had been too preoccupied to unpack. But things were out of place, the organised chaos wasn’t how I’d left it. 

Then she strolled out of my kitchen. Prudence Hemmings. She was carrying a large carving knife in her left hand this time, she had prepared for her attack. She smiled at me and lifted her right hand, jingling a set of keys that she had entered with. 

I turned to unbolt the door but she grabbed me from behind before I could turn the handle to open it and held the knife to my throat. 

“I will kill you for what you’ve done.” She whispered into my ear. 

Without a second thought I leaned forward just a tad and swung my head back as hard as I could. I couldn’t believe that it worked but I must have broken her nose. Prudence dropped the knife and clutched her face, blood streaming between her fingers. 

I went to grab the knife but she was closer and doing the same thing. I had no other option but to run again. I grabbed the door handle and turned it to exit the flat as she tried to stab me. I was mostly out the door, but her arm was close enough to reach my side, and I felt the knife pierce the side of my torso.

I was in searing pain but I didn’t stop running. As I stepped outside my flat I could still hear Mr Prentice’s noises flooding the entire hallway. It gave me an idea. 

I ran towards his door, Prudence stabbing at me frantically with blood gushing from her nose. A few got me as I stopped outside flat 48, the pain was awful and I could feel myself starting to drift out of consciousness, I was losing a lot of blood. 

I would give my last breath to end Prue. So running on nothing but adrenaline I knocked hard on flat 48, and shouted.

“Mr Prentice, can you help me?”

It was a shot in the dark, I didn’t know what would happen but I had to try something.

She had stopped stabbing at me, she was enjoying watching me bleed out slowly from the wounds she had already inflicted.

I was incredibly weak, and I lost consciousness not long after that, but before I did I heard heavy clunking from the inside of flat 48, chain locks being released and bolts being undone. I watched with blurry vision as a large creature, that I can only describe as a cross between a bull and a wolf, charged out of the flat and trampled the old witch to death. I heard hear bones crunch just as slipped away. 

I woke up in the hospital a day later. My parents were there as were the police, apparently I had been found just outside the tower block with my handbag missing, by a neighbour who had been watching from a window as it happened. 

The police told me that the person had seen the mugging out of their window. They had seen two men approach me and Jamie, splash something in my face, attack us, and when he tried to fight back, they bundled my boyfriend into a car, which the police had been searching for to no avail. He was officially missing. 

I was baffled, but grateful that Jamie’s disappearance wouldn’t be blamed on me. I went along with it and made out that he had ghosted work to enjoy our first week living together. 

I had been stabbed 4 times but thankfully in all the right places, if there is such a thing as the right place to be stabbed. I lost a lot of blood but I was going to be fine. They were all shallow. They assumed my burns were chemical and happened during the mugging too. 

The police promised to keep us updated but they still can’t find the car. They never will. I wish the story the police had been told were true, it left some hope for Jamie. 

My parents weren’t keen on me returning to the flat after what happened, they said the area was too rough, and that I was living proof it wasn’t safe. They offered to collect my stuff for me. I insisted though, told them that I wanted to see how I felt and they couldn’t force me not to.

I was released from the hospital two days after I woke up in there. When I arrived at the flats, it was strange. It felt like home. Despite everything, something about this place drew me to it. 

I took the lift for the first time since Jamie had died. I had to, I wasn’t recovered enough to conquer too many stairs just yet, and I couldn’t guarantee they’d be kind to me. I smiled at the lack of a button 9 and winced at the thought of the creatures. 

As I reached my corridor I saw Mr Prentice walking along with his newspaper and milk in a bag. He turned to me and smiled.

“I wasn’t sure you’d come back. It’s nice to see you’re up and walking.” He made small talk as if I hadn’t seen him literally trample a woman to death a couple of days prior. The whole experience had been so disorienting that I started to wonder if I really had been mugged and had dreamed the note and everything that’s happened since. Then he said something that confirmed everything was real. 

“I never liked that woman. But you’ve got a real friend in the lady downstairs.” He winked at me and turned the key in his door. 

I got into mine and sat down on the second hand sofa. I felt empty but relieved. With Prue and the imposter Qneighbours all gone the only threat left were the creatures in the lift, who were only a threat between 1.11 and 3.33.

Maybe I could start to live a semi peaceful life in this place. 

Terri knocked on the door, my handbag, that I had left at hers before Prue attacked in my flat, on her arm. Mr Prentice was right, she was a good friend. 

I thanked her for what she’d done and for what she’d told the police. She said it was pure luck that she found me, she had been walking up to return the bag and found me and Prue sprawled out on the floor. I asked what happened to Prue’s body and she just pointed in the direction of flat 48. 

“He was eating it.” She said.

It’s been a few days now and I’ve decided to stay. I can’t imagine going back to complete normality after everything I’ve been through and I’ve grown quite attached to some of the buildings quirks. 

I tried replanting the garden with the help of the twins. I ripped a few stitches doing it and Derek never came. I think he’s gone for good.

I’m ready to fully embrace life here. The last few days have been hard but there’s some time to breathe. Along with the time to breathe, came the time to grieve and I’ve been grieving badly for Jamie.  

This leads me to the last thing I have to tell you. 

Last night I laid in bed, plagued with thoughts of Prue and everything that had happened, but what I couldn’t get to leave my mind was how much happiness it bought her to have Lyla back. It infected every part of my thoughts. I know you all warned me not to, but I did it. I repeated the ritual. 

I haven’t caught him yet, but I’ve heard the scratching. [Jamie’s back.](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/h86ihe/the_previous_tenant_left_a_survival_guide_the/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app&utm_name=iossmf)How it began 
https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/ci94do/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app

And what happened next
https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/cinu8u/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app

When I finally caught up with Mrs Hemmings herself
https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/cj2g4k/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app

And when the trouble really started 
https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/cjintp/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app


When I first saw Natalia all I could picture was Georgia. The way her skin melted off her face, the smell of her hair burning and the sound that she made. 

I didn’t have time to count but there were more than I originally thought. I figured these must have been the 15 people Prudence talked about, entering the flats that burned before it happened. I already knew that Natalia was one of them. 

Eddie and Ellie clutched Terri’s skirt, trembling with fear. I wanted to help protect them, but I still couldn’t help but tremble a little myself every time I caught a glimpse of those hollow voids where their eyes were. 

“Hi Terri, the kids said we could borrow some sugar?” She asked menacingly, grinning at the frightened family stood next to me. After a moment or two of intense staring Natalia finally addressed me. She appeared to be the spokesperson for the group. “How’s your friend doing? It was a shame we had to end our visit. I was enjoying her company.”

“Don’t speak about her! She’s got nothing to do with you, you sick bitch!” I screamed at her, I couldn’t bare looking at her face again. “You don’t scare me with all your freak friends. I’m not going to let you hurt this lady or her kids!”

Natalia chuckled. I gulped. 

I may talk a good game but I am no hero. Mere days ago I was just a young girl excited to move in with her boyfriend and now here I am. My boyfriend’s dead, my flat is like living in my own personal horror movie and I’m standing up challenging demonic flame neighbours to defend demonic looking children. 

But when I said she didn’t scare me, I meant it. Something inside me was eradicating any fear of these people, I just wanted to protect the residents. Life really does throw curveballs. 

“I know you aren’t scared. I saw it in your eyes when you stuck that big knife in my throat. That’s why we’re here.

“My brothers and sisters are not freaks. You’re the freaks! Thinking that your lives have meaning. We watch you people go about your day to day lives and your mundane routines and nothing really changes. Your lives are pointless and disposable.

“That’s why we set the fire, all those years ago.”  She chuckled throughout her words. There was an animation in them like she was a psychotic cartoon character, finally catching its prey after 138 episodes of chasing. 

“Those people weren’t disposable...” Terri mumbled, barely a decibel higher than a whisper.

“What was that Terri? Did you have something to say.” Natalia went from psychotic cartoon to school bully. She made my skin crawl.

“I was only a child, but those people were friends of my parents, they were good people.” Terri said with slightly more confidence. 

None of the other people had moved. They just stood there staring. 

“Why would you burn people alive? What can you possibly gain?” I interjected, taking a slight step between Natalia and Terri and the kids. I could see she was getting ready to go for them and I couldn’t let it happen. 

“We were living with the great leader, Michael. All of us. Living in the righteous manner that he had directed us to live” She gestured to the people around her. The name Michael appeared to inspire some sort of emotion in the group. 

“Michaels brother Jonathan lived here, on the floor we burned. He let us hang out there sometimes, but he didn’t live the righteous way that we did. He didn’t like our beliefs, but he took us in when we lost the place we were staying because of the growth of the group. Him and Michael rarely saw eye to eye. They argued passionately. 

“Our group never believed in living within the constraints of societal norms and we were up at all hours, we came and went as we pleased, embracing freedoms and listened to music as we did introspective work.” 

Terri shoved the kids further behind her and snapped, infuriated. 

“You were a group of entitled, bratty hippies following some middle aged, mentally ill twat. Listen to yourself! The stereotypical cultish drivel coming out of your mouth right now!” Terri cried. I was shocked at her outburst. Although I couldn’t have agreed more. It did sound like cultish drivel. It made me so angry that this was what an entire floor of people died over. 

As Terri ended her rant the curtains hanging on the window behind her burst into flames. I jumped and felt my heart skip a beat. 

“Don’t insult us. I’m sick of hearing simple minded people call us a cult.” Came from the back row. An average looking man with dark hair and jeans had piped up, smiling and watching the curtains burn. He had done that. They were all capable of what Natalia had done to Georgia at the very least.

For the first time since the people had entered Terri’s flat my nerves of steel had wavered. I realised that we were only alive because they were allowing it so far. We were in big trouble.

Terri swiftly shut up and Natalia continued her story.

“Michael was the true leader. Not like all the fakes you hear of in the news. The people you’re talking about. He was teaching us to build a world of peace and harmony. But he didn’t deny that in order to do that you had to eradicate the non believers. He taught us to embrace the bad in us. To harness it so that we could do extraordinary things.” She smiled wickedly as her hands glowed hot coals as she spoke. 

It may have sounded like cultish drivel but Michael being a total faker wouldn’t explain their powers. 

“Things went wrong when someone went to the police after Michael and Jonathan had a terrible argument one night. When the police arrived Jonathan told us to go. 

The group had been planning to leave this building anyway. We’d had nothing but interruption and trouble in our time here, this place is weird. But we had nowhere immediate to go. The police already disliked us after overcrowding the last property. We didn’t need any more attention. 

“Michael was furious. We brainstormed in a field for hours who could have done it. I personally suspected the next door neighbour, Mavis. The woman was so nosey, always knocking and asking us to keep noise down, interrupting our spiritual sessions. 

“Michael couldn’t make a certain judgement on the person who had done it. All we thought we were sure of was that they had to be on the same floor. So he instructed us to go back that night and eradicate the whole floor and every non believer who lived there. 

“As you know, we obliged.” This incited sick laughter from the crowd. I waited, forcing myself to let her finish. Buying time. 

“We took pleasure in their screams, in watching every man woman and child go up in flames through their front door windows. It was the first time we’d unleashed all that energy and we felt so powerful!

“But then as we left the burning hallway behind us and entered the stairwell, this building found a way to fuck us over one more time. 

“I couldn’t give you a number on the amount of times we tried to run down those stairs, leave our glorious victory behind us and return to Michael. It didn’t matter how many times we tried. 

“We couldn’t make it past that floor, the stairs wouldn’t let us. It didn’t take long before the fire reached the stairwell we were trapped in, burning us all, along with the non believers. We died just in time for the fire engine to arrive. 

“We may have been dead but we didn’t disappear. We couldn’t leave the building, we were stuck just wandering it, in and out of the burned flats and hallways but not allowed anywhere else unless we were asked. It was awful. We didn’t try to cause any trouble at first. We waited for Micheal to come and find us, instruct us. 

“Two months passed and he hadn’t come. Instead came confirmation. A newspaper put through the door of the building. Headline news. 

“*Tower block resident Bernie Hemmings information vital to imprisonment of local cult leader on drug charges.*”

I gasped. I couldn’t believe I hadn’t found that when I was researching Prue. But I suppose local news wasn’t so heavily online back then. Natalia saw my shocked expression and grinned wider than before.

“The old bat didn’t tell you that then?” She asked, although it wasn’t really a question. “That her stupid husband is the whole reason we’re here!” 

“We started to really cause issues then. Did anything within our power to fuck the whole building over. But it didn’t take them long to work out that we had to be asked to come in. 

“We only stopped when Prue worked out a way we could die a second time, and that we wound come back again. She killed two of our group. She was the only person that could stop us. We couldn’t do shit with her around. We stopped and reached a stalemate. Then she moved out. We were going to honour that stalemate. Until you stabbed me. Prue’s gone. It’s fair game in here now.”

As Natalia got angrier a member of her group started getting agitated, they all soon followed like a hive mind, working as one, the stillness became chaotic, with all of them moving and making noise. 

I didn’t notice at first when one started walking towards Terri and the kids, but I noticed when it got near.

It was a teen girl, slender and pretty, but still unsettlingly average. As she got within a metre of the family Ellie suddenly went rigid. The claws that replaced her fingernails grew longer and sharper, with jagged edges from growing so fast. The voids deepened, if that was even possible. 

She opened her mouth to reveal rows of sharp teeth, blood caked where the tooth meets the gum where they had grown too quickly as well. Ellie jumped. She reached out towards the girl and slashed her face with the claws, leaving deep gouges across her eyes.  She clung on to the girl using her claws as wall pegs keeping herself at eye level. 

Eddie controlled the crowd. His own claws grew and he ran towards them, sending them scattering out of the flat, random bursts of flames erupted everywhere. Lighting up the whole room. 

Shit had hit the fan. The two demon children were successfully fending off a group of 15 dead superhuman cultists. Natalia ran from them too, but kept her eyes locked on mine as she did. As she ran from the flat she spoke to me. 

“This isn’t over!” She screamed, and I knew that it wasn’t. 

I stayed on Terri’s sofa that night, we organised all the burned items in the house and threw things out before we crashed out in the early hours. The kids claws retracted and they returned to their earlier state. Causing mischief in the hallways. They were too young to really understand.

I didn’t sleep much. Nothing new. 

When I woke up Terri was still asleep. I didn’t want to disturb her so I walked back to my flat, desperate to avoid anything strange on my way. The stairs must have noticed, because they didn’t skip on my way up. 

I hadn’t checked the time when I left Terri’s but I reached my door at the same time as a familiar face. Postman Ian was stood there, dropping letters on my doorstep. 

“Hey, love!” He shouted as he noticed me. 

“I need to talk, can you come inside, just five minutes? Please?” I practically begged him at the doorstep.

I told him everything that had happened the night before. How Natalia was out for revenge and I was the object of her rage. I begged him to tell me how to kill them, but he claimed he didn’t know. He said if kept my doors locked and didn’t let them in then I’d be fine. 

He looked shirty as I mentioned killing them. Didn’t even suggest asking Prudence how to do it. Something was telling me there wasn’t much point.  He seemed so disingenuous.

I wanted to trust him. So badly I wanted to trust him. I had been so vulnerable with him over Jamie.

But if Prudence Hemmings could forget to mention what Bernie had done, and conveniently never pass on the method to kill these awful people, leaving them around to terrorise her friends and neighbours... then could she be a liar too. Could I really trust Ian? 

When he provided no answers and no real help something inside me told me that I needed to get him out of my flat. I needed to rethink. Start working things out on my own. I made excuses to Ian and sent him on his rounds. 

Prudence left me these rules, but she left so much out. How do I know I wasn’t always a pawn in some sick game. Her fantasy life as a puppet master, setting me up to fail. She’s kept her granddaughter in a cage for years. Maybe she enjoys suffering. 

I wasn’t going to give up easily though. Natalia wasn’t going to win. 

I decided then and there that I needed to attend the committee meeting today and start building an army against Natalia. I didn’t need Prue’s help or her methods. With enough manpower I could do it myself. 

This was war.

The next steps : https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/ckw07c/the_previous_tenant_of_my_new_flat_left_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_appYou’ve heard of them. They started as a tool to help calm autistic people and people with anxiety and insomnia. Over the past few years they’ve grown into a popular household item, and with good reason. They’re comforting. 

We’d pay just about anything for some comfort. Do you ever notice how that’s most of what we spend our money on now, us single guys? Why do we constantly crave to be comforted?

My life wasn’t particularly uncomfortable. Not then. I had finally gotten back track with reality after the disappearance of my wife and kids two years ago. I’d sold our little house in the suburbs, gotten a cheap apartment close to my job, attended all the therapy appointments the police and caseworkers recommended, and gone back to work. I still couldn’t sleep for more than an hour or two a night, even with the medications they gave me, but that was okay. The worst of it was over. Shock and grief can only last so long. 

I got one anyway; ordered the thing off Amazon. In queen size, like all my bedding, even though my queen no longer slept in it. 

It arrived ridiculously late. I’m a Prime member, and I selected the free two day shipping. But it at least had gotten there, so I didn’t send a complaint, despite the state it was in after its long journey - not in the familiar smiley cardboard box, but in a shapeless lump haphazardly placed halfway on my front doorstep, halfway in the parking lot. It had been clumsily wrapped in brown paper and tied with a string, and possibly kicked the whole way here, from the look of it. 

“It’s like a quaint, rustic thing,” I announced (to nobody in particular) as I dragged it into my apartment. “A present from grandma, back home, uh, on the ranch!” 

But even talking to myself couldn’t convince me. It looked like a bomb, delivered straight off the set of an action movie. The package was beaten up, stained, and the rough jute string was frayed and nearly falling apart. It looked singed in several places, too. It took me two hours, three gin and tonics, and a hearty microwave dinner to work up enough courage (or suicidal depression) to actually open the thing. 

The blanket was bundled into a poorly-folded cube, held together by another length of the same string that had bound the paper. I wasn’t impressed with its packaging, but the blanket itself looked alright - plush, quilted blue microfiber with thick seams - and felt like it was the right weight. It smelled normal; you know that clean but vaguely chemical-ish odor new blankets have. 

I checked the tag, wondering if I ought to clean it, but the ink was smeared and blurry. It seemed risky to throw it in the washing machine without knowing the correct settings to use, so I just threw it over my duvet and went about my business. 

At around midnight I decided to give it a try. I had nothing left to lose; I’d spent hundreds of dollars on my bed over the past few months; the newest and best quality memory-foam adjustable cooling mattress, thousand count Egyptian cotton sheets, customizable-filling pillows, and none of it had brought me a single good night’s sleep. Honestly I expected the same to happen that night, but it was fun to pretend. 

I slid between the cool sheets and pulled the blankets up over me. The new blanket was a bit lumpy, but I knew from reading reviews that this was normal due to shipping, and would smooth out over time. The weight was immediately noticeable, and to my surprise, I felt...comforted. 

When I closed my eyes, I imagined my youngest two had crawled into bed with us, and were laying on top of me, suppressing giggles as they tried not to wake me up. An artfully folded section of the blanket at my back became the familiar bulk of my wife beside me, and when I opened my eyes again it was ten in the morning and I was late for work. 

I’ve never been so thrilled to receive a write-up. 

That weird chemical smell didn’t really fade, though, and gradually it became more noticeable. By the end of the week I could smell (or imagined I could) the strange, neutral odor on my skin, even after a shower. By the end of the month, it had become unbearable. 

I took it to a dry cleaners, thinking that I’d been lazy because I was so enamored over my renewed relationship with sleep. I was ready for the elderly Korean woman behind the counter to judge me over the stink. I had my excuses rehearsed; work was crazy, I’d had it in my car and forgotten, and I’d had Indian food for lunch and forgotten the leftovers in my car over the weekend, which had amplified the smell. 

But I didn’t have a chance to recite this story. She only waved a handheld metal detector over my blanket and said, “Filling wrong. Can’t clean. Try spray with Fabreeze! You can get on Amazon!”

I couldn’t imagine what about the filling could be wrong, and I told her so. Sure it was still a bit clumpy from shipping, but Amazon had listed the filler as polypropylene, and all the reviews recommended dry-cleaning. 

“Metal,” she explained, then shooed me out the door with twenty pounds of smelly quilt in my arms. 

Another month of beautiful, comfortable sleep went by before I couldn’t live with the smell anymore. People had begun to comment on it at work. Megan, my manager, had tactfully suggested I check my laundry machine to see if maybe a rat had gotten in there and died or something. That was my last straw. 

I came home determined to get rid of the blanket and buy a new one. But you know what happens when you lose your entire world, with no answers? You start to cling to things. You hoard them. Because you can’t lose the comfort they bring you. 

I tried six dry cleaners before I found one who spoke enough English (through a heavy Boston accent; but you can’t have everything) to explain it to me. 

“Sometimes they fill these with glass beads,” he said. “The factories that make the beads, they‘ll lose a screw or some metal filings in the batch, and it all goes into the blanket. Machines in factories, you get me? Yeah, so what you can do is cut the seam a little and dump the balls into a bucket or the bathtub or something. Throw the blanket in the wash, hang it up to dry. Then you just pour ‘em back in and sew it up.”

I told him I didn’t know how to sew. 

“You can get a funnel off Amazon for a few bucks,” he said, and shrugged at me in a particularly apathetic sort of way before turning back to a pile of stained panties. 

I did exactly that. They took a week to ship it, which was annoying, but it was a bank holiday that Monday so the delay made sense. 

Armed with my funnel and a bucket, I pulled the edge of the blanket over the bed and cut a tiny hole into the seam near the corner. I expected the beads to come pouring out in a clattery flood as soon as I dropped the corner into the bucket. Instead there was a single, loud thump as a lump of something metallic hit the plastic. 

I peered into it and saw a gold circle. A wedding ring with a fingerprint carved into it, and an inscription on the inside that I couldn’t see because a chunk of meat and bone were still inside it, but I knew what it said. It said “to love’s eternal glory”. It was my fingerprint on the band. 

My mind went blank and I lost control of my legs, forcing me to sit heavily on the edge of my bed. The motion tugged the blanket over another few inches, and more of the filling came out. This wasn’t a flood, it was more of a...heave, like the blanket was vomiting up pieces of crumbling, dry flesh and bone. Like a cyst being squeezed, thick clumps of horribly recognizable stuff squirted out into the bucket. My oldest son’s teeth clattered loudly against the sides, and I saw flashes of silvery fillings from the cavities caused by gum disease he’d inherited from his mom. 

There was a scrap of almost-bleached-white Hello Kitty band-aid wrapped around a tiny knuckle joint, and I remembered how my daughter had scraped her finger knocking loudly on her brother’s splintered bedroom door, and how she’d smiled through her tears when she saw the special, fun band-aid her daddy had put over the scratch. 

I’d been sleeping for two months beneath the heavy weight of a thousand mummified pieces of my wife and children’s bodies. 

The cops couldn’t trace the package, even though they tried. The security cameras in my apartment complex showed an unmarked brown van with no license plate, which dumped the package directly from the window onto my front step. There was nothing to track. 

Amazon’s lawyers provided evidence proving they’d packed and shipped the correct (boxed and labeled) blanket. Let me be fair to them; I must say that they offered me a prompt refund. 

In store credit. 

But I won’t be buying anything off Amazon ever again. I’ve gotten rid of my Echo; that was the first thing I threw out, along with all my new bedding, and I canceled my Prime membership. Just for good measure, I threw out my smartphone and smartwatch as well. Amazon and smart technology are convenient and that’s great, but it’s not worth the risk if things like this can happen. 

It’s the only possible explanation, after all - how else could they have found the bodies?[Part One](https://redd.it/brco33)
[Part Two](https://redd.it/brsj8v)

****



She hesitated a moment before breaking into a smile.  “Is that what you call me?  I like it.  My name is actually Melanie though.”

I felt my face reddening.  Of course her name wasn’t actually Rachel.  That was just something I made up in my head.  Still, my embarrassment couldn’t keep up with my confusion and joy.  “Is it really you?”

She nodded.  “Yeah, it’s me.”

Rachel…Melanie grunted as I stepped forward and started hugging her.  Laughing, she hugged me back for a moment, but then she whispered in my ear.  “Thomas, we need to talk, and not out here.  Can we go inside?”

I broke away and nodded, wiping at my eyes as I tried to finish unlocking the door with a shaking hand.  My heart was pounding and I still felt like I was in a strange and wonderful dream, but when we had gotten inside and sat down on my living room sofa, I forced myself to focus on the biggest question I had.

“How?”

Melanie had still been smiling as we sat down, but now she looked worried and sad.  “Thomas, that’s what I’m here to tell you.  Things aren’t like you think they are.  They never have been.”

I frowned, a new line of fear cutting through my happy haze.  “What do you mean?”

She held the bridge of her nose for a moment, looking down like she was trying to figure out how to say…whatever it was she had to say.  “Thomas…you’re part of a psychological experiment.  I’ve been a part of it for longer than you have as one of the actors, and I still don’t know all the details.  I’m pretty sure it’s run by some government agency, and I know they’re investing a lot of money and time into it, but for what reasons…that I’m not so sure.”

I realized I was wringing my hands.  No, that wasn’t right.  It couldn’t be right.  This was some kind of trick.

Melanie went on.  “What I do know is that you’re being watched as a long-term subject.  They have constructed this whole scenario where you do a secret job watching someone…me…who looks like they might be trapped.  They give you instructions and a way of making choices.  You’ve got buttons or something you can choose between, right?”

I nodded weakly, my tongue thick in my throat.  “Yeah.  A red one.   And a green one.”

She sighed and nodded.  “I think they’re testing how much you’ll obey.  What choices you’ll make based off of your morals, your intelligence, and your fear.  It’s interesting, or at least I thought so when I first joined up six years ago.  They’ve never officially given me many details, just the overall gist.  But people talk.  The other actors and me, sometimes we hear things, and we gossip.”  She smiled sadly.  “That’s what caused me to start feeling bad.”

I interrupted.  “Other actors?”

Melanie’s eyes widened.  “Oh shit, yeah.  Sorry.  I think they still call him Mr. Solomon?  And there are others too.”  When I just stared at her, she went on.  “Anyway, for a long time it was just the normal job, right?  I spend six hours a day acting like I’m this trapped girl, mainly faking painting or watching t.v.  You know, boring stuff…”

I couldn’t help but interrupt again, hating the hurt trembling in my voice.  “You fake the painting?  You aren’t really painting those wonderful pictures?”

Now Melanie looked embarassed.  “No, sorry.  I can’t paint a bit.  I’m a pretty good singer though.”  She tried to smile, but faltered.  Reaching forward, she touched my arm.  “That’s why they always have the paintings turned where you can’t see them.  They’re already done beforehand.  All you ever see is some blank canvases and…well, when they *want* me to show you something.”  Her expression darkened as she went on.

“That’s why I had to break the rules and contact you.  When they started doing this hidden message, mind game bullshit, I got worried.  Worried you would take it too serious.  That you could get hurt, or even hurt yourself.  As soon as you left your shift tonight, I talked to one of the guys in the video department.  He told me about how you had reacted.  Showed me how you were still parked down the street from the building.  I drove over—the bedroom set is in a building outside of town.  I saw you sitting in your car, and I almost approached you then, but I was scared of getting caught and fired.  So I parked and waited until I could follow you somewhere else and let you know I was okay.”

She blinked back tears.  “I’m ashamed to say I almost left a couple of times.  I don’t want to lose this job, and I tried to tell myself you would be okay after a day or two.  I could get them to change the script enough that you felt like I was okay and wouldn’t worry too much.”

I felt an angry heat growing in my chest.  “Well, that’s nice of you.”

She looked up, her eyes red.  “I know.  I’m a shit.  I’m so sorry.  I was being selfish and cowardly, but I didn’t actually leave.  And then when I saw Charlie leaving the building, saw you running over to talk to him, I knew they were escalating it even further.”

“Charlie?”

Melanie rolled her eyes in frustration.  “Shit, yeah.  Sorry.  Charlie Jefferies.  He’s another actor.  In an earlier version of the experiment he actually played Mr. Solomon, but they decided he wasn’t scary enough, so now he’s usually in one of the suits.  He’s actually done that for your version a lot, you just can’t recognize him under all that get-up they wear.”

I kept curling and uncurling my hands on my lap.  It was all too much.  I felt like a pinball going between anger and relief and embarassment and confusion.  “So all that stuff he told me?  That was all just to scare me?  See how I’d react?”

She nodded as she sniffled and wiped her nose with the back of her hand.  “Yes.  I’m sorry.  That’s why I knew I couldn’t wait any longer to tell you.  I could see how worried and scared you were going back to your car.”

I pulled my arm back from her touch.  “Well, thanks I guess.  At least you stopped me before I went to the police and looked like a joke in front of them too.”  I just wanted her gone, her sympathetic, pitying eyes off of me.  “Thanks for stopping by and letting me in on it.”  I tried to make my voice sound hard and unfeeling, but it came out watery instead.  Standing up, I turned away from her so she couldn’t see as I started to cry.  “If you don’t mind, I…uh…I need time to think about everything.  It’s…a lot.”

A moment passed and then her hand was on my shoulder.  “Thomas, you don’t have anything to be embarrassed about.  They are very good at what they do.  All you did was what you thought was right.  Because you’re a good man.”  I shrugged.

“I thought that you were in trouble and I wanted to help.”

She gently turned me toward her, and when I looked up, she smiled and sniffed again.  “I know, but you need to realize, most people wouldn’t have tried to help.  Not when it meant giving up their job or risking themselves like that.  Not for a stranger.”

I wiped at my face as I looked away.  “Well, I still feel dumb, but I’m glad it’s not real.  I’m glad you’re okay.  That we both are.”  I paused and caught her eye again.  “We are, aren’t we?  Safe, I mean.”

She hesitated before nodding.  “Yeah, I think so.  Like I said, they have a lot invested in whatever this is, and the fact that they’re willing to go as far as they have with you makes me wonder, but I’ve never seen any signs of anyone getting hurt.  I think the worst that could happen is one or both of us gets fired.”

I felt my face getting red again.  “Oh, don’t worry about that.  I’m going to quit tomorrow.  I’ll finally get to hit their damn buttons.  Maybe both of them.”  I started to smile, but then I saw the look on Melanie’s face.

“Thomas, please don’t do that.  I don’t think they would hurt us, but if you up and quit, they’ll figure out I’ve talked to you.  I don’t think they watch us all the time, but I don’t know what they can find out.  You know, tracking cellphones, spy satellites, whatever.  I’m taking a big risk just being here, and I don’t want them catching on.”

I took a step back from her.  “So you want to keep getting paid to trick people like me.”

She reached out and grabbed my right hand.  I had been clenching it unconsciously, and it relaxed at her touch.  “No, I don’t want to.  But I wasn’t expecting this.  How the experiment has changed, getting to actually meet you…I can’t do it long-term, but another month or two to save up money?  Now that you’re in on it and won’t be scared or hurt by it any more?”  She smiled.  “That I can do.  That we can *both* do.  We can keep going like normal, take some more of their money, and then one of us can quit.  The next month, the other one can.  How does that sound?”

I shrugged uncertainly.  It made some sense, and once I had calmed down, it would probably make more.  She gave my hand a squeeze.

“And when this is all over, I want to get to know you better.  I know I’ve been playing a role, but for the most part, that’s been me you’ve been watching all this time.  I think it’s only fair I get to see more of you too.”  She blushed.  “Assuming you’re interested in that.”

I felt my hand growing clammy in hers as my stomach fluttered.  “Well, I mean…yeah.  Yeah, I would really like that.”  Swallowing, I added, “How long do we have to wait to see each other again?”

Melanie grinned at me.  “Work another month or so.  Save what you can.  And then quit.  I’ll wait another two or three weeks, and then I’ll do the same.  And then…”  She looked up at the ceiling as she pondered it for a moment, and I was struck again by how beautiful she was, even if she was a little different in person than I had imagined.  ”…three months from tonight we’ll meet right here.  I’ll come over and we can start getting to know each other better.  How’s that sound?”

Returning her smile, I nodded.  “That sounds great.”  

****

When she left a couple of minutes later, part of me hated to see her go, but another part was relieved.  I was so exhausted, and while I was so happy she was okay and we had finally met, I felt like the burned up wire in an old lightbulb.  I needed time alone.  Time to think and calm down, and most of all, time to rest.

I didn’t really even remember falling asleep, and when I woke up, I realized my alarm had been buzzing for over thirty minutes.  I jumped up and raced to get to my shift at work.  As she had been leaving, Melanie had stressed again how we needed to act completely the same.  That meant not freaking out, but it also meant not acting like everything was okay either.  If I suddenly showed no signs of being worried about her, that would tip them off too.  I promised and she left after a brief hug and kiss.  Remembering that now, through the haze of my tiredness the night before, it felt like a dream.

Still, I went into the surveillance room with a much lighter heart.  I didn’t have to worry or feel guilty any more about not helping her, and there was some satisfaction in finally pulling one over on the people that had tricked me for so long.  Besides, in three months I would be done with this place and get to see Ra…Melanie again.  In person, at least.

Because I got to watch her on the video feed as soon as I came into work.  She was asleep when I first got there, and I found myself wondering if she was as tired as I still felt.  When she woke up later and started reading a book, I found myself beginning to smile and had to stop myself.  I should still be worried acting, not smiling like I had a crush.  I had to do better so Melanie didn’t get in trouble.

An hour or so later she started working on another of “her” paintings.  Watching her work, I was amazed at how real it all looked.  It was hard to see everything from my angle, but I would have sworn she had paint on those brushes and was really painting whatever was on the canvas.  I found myself feeling proud of her.  She really was a great actress.  Not only didn’t I see her giving any clues that we had met or talked, but she really did seem different in the room than she had in my apartment.  I supposed that was what she had meant by “playing a role”. 

I was almost at the end of my shift, and while I hated to leave her, I had to admit that I was ready for some more sleep.  Trying to guard my reactions all day had been exhausting, and I was dreading the next few weeks.  But then I realized she was done painting.  I expected her to just go and do something else, but instead she picked up the canvas at its edges and carefully walked it over to the sofa.  Her body was blocking it at first, but then she stepped aside.

It was a painting of a massive tree.  The bark was a dark red, with a huge twisting trunk that broke off into a dozen branches.  Those branches were covered in leaves that were so deep green they almost reminded me of storm clouds more than the top of a tree.  Like all the paintings, I felt touched by it, even now that Melanie had told me she didn’t paint them.  The images themselves, combined with the colors and the small details…they really were amazing.  

Just like this one.  If you looked close enough, you could see that there were several small blackbirds in the branches of the tree.  It was funny, but they almost looked like they were…

It almost looked like they were made out of words.

I felt my heart start to hammer and I forced myself to stay calm.  No point in being silly.  I knew it was all a game now, and I just had to play my part a little while longer.  Still, the worried me would want to know what the words said, so I might as well try to read them.  I squinted, following the birds right to left and top to bottom.

**That**
&nbsp;

**girl**
&nbsp;

**isn’t**
&nbsp;

**me**
&nbsp;



I looked away from the painting to see Rachel staring up at me.  She looked terrified.

[*Oh no.*](https://redd.it/9ndww5)

****

[Part Four](https://redd.it/btkvkl)Part 2 - https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/c521t1/i_work_at_nasa_we_made_alien_contact_last_week/

I can't tell you who I am, and I can't tell you the name of the program, but what I can tell you is that if what they say is true, we're in trouble.

Now, we didn't make contact in the way you would think we would. We didn't beam out an episode of The Office towards Andromeda and hear back from alien critics. And we definitely didn't meet them face to face. We found another way to communicate. Something, apparently ancient humans had figured out as well.

There are countless dilapidated ancient structures around the world, and some of them, not all, but some, were communication arrays. At least a handful on each continent. I'm sure you'll be able to think of a few after I describe what we did.

We've been working on this technology for a while. There has been a long standing theory that sound has a much larger part in the universe than just being random vibrations. That the universe is simply a bunch of vibrations and sound, and if you find a way to manipulate those vibrations properly, you could do things that seem impossible. We proved that yesterday. 

By creating an extremely, extremely, EXTREMELY, precise echo chamber, and playing certain frequencies into it, at precisely the right volumes, and the exact right timings, we broke some sort of barrier.

Nothing really happened, visually at least. We had run countless tests like these with tiny, minute differences, and this one seemed pretty mundane. There was a slight unnatural thrumming, the glass between us and the echo chamber shook in regular intervals as if we were playing a bass heavy song too loudly. The first thing that tipped us off that something was happening was that once we turned the speakers off, the thrumming didn't stop. My three coworkers and I could all feel this thrumming in out chests still, kind of like being next to a very loud drum. We talked for a moment, before we all fell silent.

There was something else now. It wasn't a voice. It was, some sort of, intellegent vibration. I can't explain it. It was like a voice was inside my chest, but it wasn't speaking, I could just feel what it was saying. My cohorts and I debated on the exact wording afterwards, but we all agreed on the overall messages each time. 

Like I said, they weren't really talking, so I'll do my best to phrase it in ways that get across what they said, in the way they "said" it. 

"Wooooaaaahhh, you guys are back?" Is what I felt in my chest. My colleagues and I stared at each other in utter confusion. One of the spoke up. "Hello?" He asked hesitantly. There was a silence for a moment, before the thrumming spoke back. "I think I have it set right now, say that again?"

"Hello?" I repeated back to it in place of the other scientist. 

"Yep, there it is." He said quickly. "You guys figured it out again! That's crazy!" It exclaimed. This wasn't what I was thinking the first human/alien conversation was going to go. I wasn't even sure that this was first contact at this point though. "Who is this? What is this?" I asked loudly into the open air of our control room.

"I'm not sure if I'm allowed to give you details like who we are, but, what this is, is the ultimate form of communication in our universe. Your ancestors figured it out briefly too." With some quick deduction on how it was wording things, I think each of us figured out what we were talking to was alien in origin around the same time.

"Where are you from?" I asked. "You have to be close." Hell, with the way we were talking back and forth, they had to be REALLY close. It takes communications to Mars a few minutes to get there, just because that's as fast as light is. If we were talking this quickly back and forth they basically had to be on Earth.

"I guess you wouldn't know. We didn't tell your ancestors. We didn't think they'd get it. Let me do some math real quick." It was about a minute before it spoke again. "What you see as your observable universe, thats not the whole universe. Not even close. Multiply that by about 15, and thats about how far we are away. And theres a lot past that." 

We all looked at each other. It was speaking utter bullshit to us now. That was impossible, we'd never be able to communicate, ever. Physically impossible. We explained that to the chest-voice, and we were met by an equal level of confusion. "Why are you still using light as a yardstick?" It asked incredulously. Suddenly, its voice grew slightly dire. "You're still not advanced enough. You don't even know." 

"Know what?" One of my friends asked.

"You are dead center in the Life Abyss. There is no life on any planet around you, for more than ten of your observable universes around you in any direction. Its a universal mystery how you're even alive." It spoke grimly. Never in my life had I felt smaller, more insignificant and more alone. It continued. 

"And there is a reason for that."I recently went through a pretty nasty divorce, but I got the only thing that mattered out of it: full custody of my 4-year old son.


Lost nearly everything else in the process so we had to relocate to a new house with barely any luggage or furniture.


Truly a fresh new start.


I heard him call for me during our first night at our new home. It was a little after midnight, I think. I went to check on him to see what was wrong and sat by his bedside.


He was wide awake and asked me to check the closet for monsters, which wasn’t surprising given the circumstances.


He’s still just a little kid, and without even taking into account all the crap he’s been put through thanks to my shitty marriage, moving into an unfamiliar, barely furnished home must be a lot to take in for someone his age.


And you know how they say that your brain always stays half-awake when you’re sleeping in a new environment, right?


That’s all pretty much what went through my mind in a flash as soon as my son spoke.


It was no big deal. It was all normal, I thought.


But something else almost immediately clicked inside my brain, before I even got to look at where my son had pointed to while he made his innocent request.


Something was wrong.


I turned my head and looked, and it took everything I had in me to not give in to fear and terror, all for the sake of my son.


When you become a parent you have to protect your children no matter what, always putting yourself in harm’s way if necessary and spare them any and all kinds of things that might hurt them.


That’s why I didn’t freak out. I couldn’t, not when we had barely just started our new life. I had to protect him, and at that point in time as I sat on his bed I only knew one thing:


We had to leave the room.


We had to leave the house *immediately*.


“Alright champ, of course” I said, faking bravery.


Then I made a request of my own as I lowered my voice and got closer to him:


“Hey, how about you step outside for a minute? If there’s a monster in there, I’ll have to kick its *BUTT* all over your room!”


He chuckled and said “*okay*”.


I made sure to put some extra emphasis on the word “*butt*” because it’s something that always cracks him up when I say it. Fortunately he got stuck on that and not the fact that I was indirectly admitting to the possibility of there actually being a monster.


As soon as he left the room my mind raced as it started to put together the best and most efficient route to take him out of the house while picking my car keys and phone on our way out.


When I heard the closet doors slowly creaking open behind me I knew it was time to go.


I jumped out of the bed, exited the room and grabbed my son. We were out of the door and inside the car and moving in under a minute.


I told him I couldn’t sleep so we were going out for some ice-cream to celebrate. He was a little taken aback and asked “*celebrate what*”, to which I replied “*just us two together, I love you buddy.*”


It was by no means a lie, but I just had to make sure that he was alright and wouldn’t think of anything else as we literally fled our new home.


As I mentioned earlier, the house was a new environment for the two of us. I’d been there a couple of times before, cleaned it all up by myself and assembled what little furniture we had, so I knew for a fact what belonged where and what didn’t.


And I know his room didn’t have a closet.I’ve been involved with water search and rescue for twelve years now. I’ve seen a lot of upsetting and even unexplainable things in my time, but those pale in comparison to what I saw recently. Water search and rescue is often a depressing job. When someone gets lost in a forest, they can still be found alive days later. But when we get a call, it’s almost always body recovery. People don’t last long in the water.

I can’t tell you exactly where, but I live in a northern territory known for its water sports. Fishing, kayaking, diving - whatever it is, our waters probably have a solid reputation for it. Despite that, this area isn’t some kind of resort. The waters here are cold and oftentimes vicious. Search and rescue operations here can be grueling and not many stick with it. There are a few older guys who have been doing it longer than me, but I’m one of the most experienced around.

Like I said before, this job is more body recovery than anything, especially here. We save more live moose from the water than live humans. And when we get a call about a missing child…well we’d be better off just giving our condolences. That’s just how the waters are here. Our small town has one of the highest drowning rates in the country. But we look anyway, and usually we find a body.

I’ve considered quitting many times in my career. Most people quit after their first recovery. In training, we try to emphasize just how much water can distort a corpse, but nothing can prepare you for the harsh reality. It’s not uncommon for us to find bodies bloated beyond recognition. Sometimes they barely even seem human. A lot of divers don’t last long after seeing something like that. But I continued to do it after all these years. I figured if I didn’t then no one would.

However, the things I saw last week have made me reconsider that decision.

I got the call around 11 A.M. A father had taken his ten-year-old son fly fishing. At one point, the father managed to stab a hook all the way through his finger. He went back up to his truck to get a first-aid kit. The boy was gone when he returned a few minutes later.

When I first heard the story, I hung my head in silence for a moment. It had been raining heavily for almost a month now, and the waters were running faster than ever. To make things worse, it was unusually cold for the season. A number of people had gone missing in recent weeks. Many of them had yet to be found. I had little hope of finding the boy alive.

Me and a couple of other divers were at the site where the boy went missing within an hour, and a larger search and rescue team located a few towns over was headed our way. We talked with the father and even searched the forest for a bit, hoping that he had just wandered off. But eventually we realized that we would have to begin searching in the river.

The moment I got in the water I knew the boy was gone. The current was worse than it had ever been, and even I had difficulty navigating the icy river. We looked for hours in the surrounding areas, and even expanded our search once the larger team had arrived. The boy was nowhere to be found.

I was surprised. I hadn’t expected to find him alive, but I had at least anticipated finding a body. However, there was no trace of him. The sun got low and the air grew colder. We were considering calling it off as nightfall approached and resuming the search the next day when I discovered something.

There’s a lot of creek beds around the river. Many of them have dried up as a result of encroaching vegetation or manmade efforts to divert the water. We usually don’t pay any attention to them. However, with all of the recent rain, I noticed that one of the larger creek beds had begun flowing again. A surprising amount of water crashed through it, easily enough to carry a young boy.

The creek ran directly across a bend in the river, connecting it at two points. I followed it and realized that the boy could be located outside of our initial search area. As I approached where the creek reconnected with the main river, I felt a sinking feeling in my gut.

There’s a place in the river where not even search and rescue divers are supposed to go. It’s known as Badwater. This area lies on one half of the river and runs for about 100 yards. It’s near a densely vegetated area, so we don’t often have to worry about people swimming there. But a lot of disappearances occur in the surrounding waters. Despite that, I’ve been warned not to dive there since I began doing search and rescue. Supposedly the undercurrent is so strong that even the most experienced swimmer would be swept away in an instant. “Don’t go near Badwater.” It was a mantra of the older divers.

The creek ended exactly in the center of the Badwater region. As I reached it, I stopped and chewed my lip thoughtfully. If I went back and reported this to the other divers, they would tell me to let it go. They wouldn’t let me dive there. But deep down I felt like the boy’s body must be tangled up in some weeds nearby. If only I could find it. I hated the idea of that kid being stuck down there, slowly bloating and rotting away while his parents sat at home wondering where their boy had gone.

Badwater didn’t seem to be that bad. I’d seen rougher waters before, but I knew looks could be deceiving. Just below the surface it could be flowing faster than I ever imagined. And I’d be swept away in an instant. Besides, I wasn’t supposed to dive alone. I almost turned back, but something made me stay. I stared into the river for a moment, thinking about the boy. Then I put on my gear and dropped into the icy waters.

The first thing I noticed was that the current actually seemed pretty weak. As a matter of fact, it was weaker than the rest of the river. The water was extremely deep there, and I could see only blackness below as I dove. I kicked deeper and deeper, thinking that the current might pick up lower down, but the opposite seemed to be true. The water was almost completely still.

I went even deeper until finally green shapes began to materialize in front of me. I thought I’d finally reached a bed of weeds. But, as I kicked lower, the truth came into full view. I felt vomit come up at the sight, an odd and dangerous sensation when you’re wearing a scuba mask.

Countless arms stuck up from the ground below. I thought I had come upon a trove of bodies, but the disgusting reality became even more apparent only a moment later. The arms grew directly into the ground. They even had roots that spread out from the base. It was as if someone had cut off hundreds of arms at the shoulder and planted them there. They were green, and I watched as they clutched at the water around them. They varied in size and seemingly age. Grotesque baby hands sprouted near the bottom, and they opened and closed their fists hungrily.

It was then that I saw the boy. His eyes stared sightlessly ahead as those grotesque arms pulled his dead body downward. It seemed they had just gotten ahold of him. The arms yanked at him, burying him in the surrounding sediment. They pushed and writhed and squirmed until he was securely buried up to the chest. I stared in mesmerized horror.

That was when the other bodies came into focus. There must have been at least four more, all in varying stages of decay. Some were bloated beyond recognition, only bulky, white masses that protruded loosely from the riverbed. I once again felt vomit rising in my throat and swallowed it back down. The fucking hands were feeding off the bodies, using them as fertilizer.

The moment I clambered out of the water I tore my mask off and retched. I couldn’t stop thinking about those disgusting bodies, those grasping hands. They were like some sort of carnivorous plant, yet they were so humanoid. I vomited again at the thought.

I frantically ran back to our base camp and pulled one of the other divers aside. Moose was the most experienced person on our team. He’d been diving for over twenty years ever since moving here. I told him about what I saw. When I  finished, he stared at me in cold silence.

“I told you never to go near Badwater.” His voice contained an iciness that even his thick Louisiana accent couldn’t conceal.

“That’s what you’re concerned about?” I was incredulous.

He placed a hand on my shoulder and squeezed tightly. “Don’t tell anyone else about this. If the others find out you went into Badwater…” He trailed off and thought for a moment. “Well, it won’t be good.” He shook his head like a disappointed father.

“But what about those things?” I tried to keep my voice down, hoping no one would hear us. “How many people have died because of those fucking things?”

“Shut up.” Moose said. “We have an agreement. There’s a reason they only grow in Badwater. Don’t fuck this up.”

I started to say something, but the words caught in my throat. He was keeping something from me.

He sighed and I saw something like sadness behind his eyes. “Sometimes you have to decide between lesser and greater evils. Even the best possible decisions can still keep you up at night.” He went silent for a moment and only stared at me. “Don’t tell anyone about this. Maybe one day you’ll understand.”

He walked away after that and called off the day’s search. Despite what I’d told him, we continued to search for the next two days. By the third day we called it off completely and gave our condolences to the family.

I don’t know what the fuck is happening. Moose has been acting different towards me ever since. There’s an iciness to him, but every now and then he’ll shoot me a knowing glance, like we’re in on some secret together. I’ve noticed the other older divers acting strangely too. What did he mean by agreement? What the fuck were those arm things? I’m considering quitting and moving away from here. I can’t live with the knowledge that those things are down there, slowly feeding off the body of a young boy among countless [others](https://reddit.com/r/travisliebert).

[Part 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/dmg9c8/ive_been_a_search_and_rescue_diver_for_12_years/)I have been a nude model for 2 years. It started off with sexy cosplay, then I photographed Suicide Girls style, and finally, when I had people up to pay enough, solo porn.

I used to live in a crappy kitchenette, but once I was successful enough, I was able to afford a nicer place. Things got better when I moved in with my new roommate, but also weirder.

I’m not using our real names or our artistic names here because I’m scared as fuck.

My new roommie, Savannah, was a cheerful and sweet girl. Her perky personality had flocked plenty of followers and fans, way more than I had myself, and she was making some good money; for instance, she was a homeowner at 22.

Her place was huge, and she decided to rent her extra room for an attractive price, as long as the other resident was fine with her vast collection of sex toys being displayed in the living room.

I thought that was hilarious and we immediately hit it off, so the other resident became me. The fact that we were both nude models helped our friendship, but to be fair I had met some other girls in my field before, and most of them were a stick in the mud.

Savannah was nice, tidy and amazingly respectful of my personal space. She didn’t act like she owned the place, even though she literally did. I had spent a good few months before things started to go south.

“So, Ayla”, Savannah approached me over breakfast. “Would you be willing to collab with me? I have a request for a private two-girl job and I thought it made sense to invite you first since it will be so much easier to arrange our schedules.”

I wasn’t doing much, just my nightly streaming, my regular sets and my sets for patreons. I asked more about the job.

“Well”, she laughed. “I have to tell you it’s one of a kind. It’s nothing dehumanizing or anything, but it’s weird as fuck. This guy… he jerks off to shadows. He wants us to pretend we’re fucking them.”

“Fucking the shadows?!” I asked, and laughed loudly. She confirmed, laughing too. It was insane, but relatively harmless, like when some guy paid me 5 grand to legally bind me to not show my feet to any other man but him for a whole year. So I only take my socks off to shower and it’s been months since I don’t go to the beach.

When Savannah told me how much the client was willing to pay for such a thing, I was immediately in.

“It will be so embarrassing, but kinda fun, right?” I said.

“Yeah, and with that I can finally stop taking private requests and focus on other things”, Savannah replied, happily. She’s sort of a do-it-all artist – model, photographer, painter and so on.

A few more e-mail exchanges with [shadowfucker@\[redacted\].com](mailto:shadowfucker@[redacted].com) and he had approved of me and discussed the details with Savannah. He wanted two videos a week – on Mondays and Thursdays, and each should be at least 30 minutes long.

A very reasonable request, considering that, with my share of what he was paying, I could drop everything else and still live comfortably.

He would send us the equipment before the first week, then outfits every two weeks.

I was the one to receive the large box from UPS, as Savannah wasn’t home. I knew she had a P. O. box to avoid disclosing her real address, but this one came straight to our place.

Weird, but considering how big this client was, I could understand her making an exception for him, and didn’t say anything about it.

Later that day, we opened the box. It contained some light strobes, a few large but hollow wooden and metal objects, eight sets of costumes – wigs included –, a photograph and a small package marked *otherworldly condoms*.

“Wow, imagine being this lunatic!” Savannah grabbed the little package laughing, then opened one of them.

They looked nothing like regular condoms; they were more like those plastic bags you use to freeze stuff, but the material was so much thinner and slightly iridescent.

“That’s probably something he made up to make it more realistic, right?” I asked, then read the instructions aloud. “When having sex with the shadows, make sure to protect your whole groin with otherworldly condoms. They can unfold to thrice its size.”

The outfits were actually cute and we spent some time deciding when we were going to use each of them; the client had perfectly guessed our sizes.

Then the photograph finally caught my attention.

It showed the right way to arrange the equipment on the room, but funnily enough, the room depicted was incredibly alike to Savannah’s studio – our third bedroom. Unlike me, she didn’t often film/shoot in her own bedroom, preferring to use a mostly neutral room where she could set up scenarios or just take cleaner pics and videos.

I couldn’t help but feel that the picture had been taken exactly in her studio – *at the very place we lived.*

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

The day of our first video came – a Monday. It didn’t take us more than 15 minutes to set up the whole equipment on the studio exactly like the picture showed. The objects projected large shadows on the room, and the lights were set to slowly move on their own, so our interaction with the shadows was like the strangest sexy dance – but at least we weren’t standing still for half an hour pretending to fondle the same empty spot.

Despite thinking that it was wacky, Savannah was a professional and she diligently used the otherworldly condoms as requested. I used them as well, and for 35 minutes, we pretended to fuck shadows.

I felt utterly ridiculous, but being used to doing solo videos, I pretty much knew how to do it. The color of the lights and the outfits really helped set a soothing mood that made it all less shameful.

Savannah then turned off the cameras and looked at me.

“It wasn’t awful, was it?”

“It was okay”, I agreed. I could make a fool of myself for some good money.

“Do you want to shoot a second one and end this week early?”

Before I could reply, her phone buzzed loudly.

*From: <Unknown Number>: Remember, shoot twice a week. Separately.*

We stared at each other in confusion.

“Maybe there’s a mic hidden in the equipment?” I suggested. 

We searched the whole room but found nothing.

I didn’t think much about it. Rich people are controlling. They know things, always. The client knew when we were going to film the first video, and of course he figured we would consider doing everything on the same day instead of having to disassemble the set and reassembling it again.

I went about my day, and nothing strange happened. Savannah seemed much more alive because now she had time for her hobbies, and I was doing well enough to start sending my family some money, something I had wanted to do for a long time.

We were to send him the first video on the day we recorded the second and so on. On Thursday, Savannah told me the client loved our first video, and looked forward to the next. To get us a little more comfortable with our weird thing, we had some wine and put on jazz music.

This time things went smoothly, but I kept hearing some humming while we pretended to fuck the shadows. I was sure it wasn’t coming from the music.

I asked Savannah and she didn’t hear anything. “Maybe you’re a bit drunk? Slow down on the wine next time, home girl!”

For our video number 3, I was completely sober and asked Savannah to do it without music. She agreed, and in the total silence, I still heard the humming.

It was a humming that wasn’t there before, and it didn’t come from the light strobes either. I was so focused on it and intrigued that my face looked really unsexy and Savannah’s editor called to ask if there was an issue.

“She just keeps listening to some humming. Yeah, I’ll tell her to see a doctor. Think you can mostly show her from behind? Cool, you’re an angel!”

Savannah looked more worried about me than anything else, so I promised to see a doctor. Maybe something was wrong with my ear – even though something only felt off while we filmed the videos; at least now I could afford some high-quality healthcare.

Between the filming of videos 3 and 4, I got my ears checked, but they were perfectly normal. Savannah reiterated that it was totally cool if I wanted to give up on this freaky fetish-video thing and she would get another girl for that, no hard feelings.

But I didn’t feel like the videos were the problem. There was just this weird *thing* I couldn’t quite understand.

On video 4, Savannah was tipsy and seemed to be really enjoying herself. I felt a little guilty that she was clearly overcompensating for the fact that I was worried and gloomy on the previous video.

The humming evolved to whispers. And for the first time, I heard – no, it was more like understanding for the context, with the intuitive side of my brain – a few words.

*“I actually like this.”*

At last that’s what I foretold that the whispers said. It probably sounded more like *sfslsosls dlsowllss swowllls*.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Once again, I didn’t tell anyone. I was almost convinced that I was actually being crazy. It was just an eerie feeling because I was stripping to and groping empty spaces twice a week.

On the Friday after recording video 4, we got a new box with outfits. There was another photograph, instructing us to rearrange the lights and boxes to, I imagine, create different shapes with the shadows.

I couldn’t restrain myself this time.

“Savannah, don’t you think this pic looks exactly like your studio?”

“Yeah, that helps a lot, right?” she smiled, and then slowly realized what I meant, her smile withering. She grabbed the photo from my hand. “Oh, now that you said it, it’s quite alike. But of course no one broke into the house, right? I think that’s a standard room.”

But she sounded shaken.

I think that’s the reason why she completely forgot the otherworldly condom.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

We made the preparations as usual; changed the setting as the photo instructed, dressed up, put on our wigs and make-up. 

The whispering immediately started, and for a moment I got lost in it, trying to understand. A buzzing sound, then another.

*“There’s food today.”*

*“It tastes good.”*

Then Savannah screamed.

I didn’t realize she wasn’t wearing the otherworldly condom either – not until I saw her groin covered by the blackest of blacks, then her legs disappearing into the darkness of the shadows.

Like she was involved by long and thick pieces of deep-black fabric, her torso and head disappeared too. She didn’t seem to be in pain, but in shock – everything was so quick and uncanny.

I reached out for her, but there was nothing there.

My hands grasped thin air.

I immediately turned off the light strobes, turned on the normal lights and moved all the boxes around. They were still hollow as ever and Savannah was nowhere to be found.

I then searched the whole house fruitlessly. 

It’s ludicrous to say that, but shadow-people took my friend.

I sat on the floor and cried, worried about Savannah and about what I would tell the police about her disappearance.

I was a mess, and decided to cancel my live-streaming that night for personal reasons.

As soon as I opened the browser, an e-mail notification popped on my screen.

*From: <*[*shadowfucker@\[redacted\].com*](mailto:shadowfucker@[redacted].com)*>*

*It’s not your fault that your friend neglected my one rule.*

*I like you, Ayla. The editor tried to cut off your face from the last couple of videos, but I do realize you are accomplishing something I was never able to: learning the shadow-people language.*

*Keep working for me and all your financial concerns will be taken care of, especially regarding your teenage sister and her two children. I’ll deal with everything regarding Savannah as well.*

*Find me a new second girl for the videos, the cash and outfits will keep coming. It’s up to you to instruct her to always use the otherworldly condoms – I don’t mind feeding them*[.](https://www.reddit.com/r/PPoisoningTales/)I used to look out the rusted iron bars of my window and dream about being a bird.

The chain that shackled me to my bed was just long enough to reach the windowsill, and so every night after my father would visit my room I would lie awake and wait for the first rays of light to creep over the horizon, then walk over to my window to listen to the morning’s first few notes of birdsong.

Their melodies were so beautiful, I knew that they must have been singing about places far away and wonderful, about sailing on the wind through endless blue skies, looking down at the treetops that dotted the land below.

Then, one morning as I lay in bed, something impossible happened. I had fallen asleep the night before, and would have missed my morning birdsong but for a tapping on my window. I rubbed the sleep out of my eyes and sat up to see a crow sitting outside on the sill, tapping my window with his beak.

I crept over to the window and smiled at the bird.

“Hello, Mr. Crow,” I said.

“Hello little girl,” said the crow.

I stood there dumbfounded for a moment, not knowing what to say. Finally, after what seemed like an eternity, I forced myself to speak.

“You know how to talk?” I said.

“All birds know how to talk,” he replied. “It’s just that not all humans know how to listen.”

I pushed my window open a crack until it hit against the bars. The bird cocked its head in curiosity.

“Why are you in a cage?” it asked.

“I think it’s my destiny,” I said. “It’s always been this way.”

“You look rather thin,” replied the crow. “Would you like something to eat?”

My stomach gave a weak growl.

“Yes,” I said. “That would be wonderful.”

Without another word the crow took flight. A few minutes later he returned with a small branch of figs. The crow watched me as I greedily devoured the fruit. After I had finished he stared at me for a moment before speaking again.

“I didn’t know they put people in cages,” he said. “Do you think they mistook you for a bird?”

“I don’t think so Mr. Crow,” I said.

We whiled away the rest of that day talking. The crow told me all about what it was like to fly, how there was no better feeling in the world. He told me about the far away lands he had visited when he was a young bird and could still make the journey north with the changing of the seasons. Finally, evening came and the crow said that he had to go. The next morning he was back, however, with two more branches of figs.

I thanked him for his generosity, and we talked another day away. That day he even sang me a song. He didn’t have a voice for singing, but I thought his song was beautiful anyway.

We passed the entire fall that way, and the bird’s visits became the only bright spot in my life. He brought me not only figs, but cherries and walnuts too\-\-anything small enough for him to carry.

Soon, however, winter came, and with it the frosts that destroyed the figs and cherries that the crow had used to bring me. His gifts became fewer and fewer, and I could tell from his tired voice that he was flying farther and farther away to get them.

One morning, when the first snows of winter had fallen, the crow asked me a question.

“What would you do to leave this place?” he asked, cocking his head to the side.

I thought for a moment, but I wasn’t sure how to answer. Finally, I told the truth.

“I would do anything to leave this place,” I said. “Anything at all.”

The crow solemnly nodded and said, “The frost isn’t the only thing that winter brings.”

He flapped his wings once and jumped from the windowsill, and I didn’t see him for three days. I began to fall into a deep depression. Every morning I would still listen to the birdsong, but it sounded forlorn and empty without my friend there to listen with me.

The morning after the third day my crow friend returned. It was so beautiful that day; the sun had come out from behind the clouds to melt the snow\-\-one of the last green days before winter came in earnest. As the shadow passed over the valley in which we lived, I first mistook it for a storm cloud, but then I heard the sound. It was loud enough to crack the sky, but it wasn’t thunder\-\-it was birds.

Thousands upon thousands of them descended on our house. A whirling storm of beating wings and shrieking caws, they crashed into the walls and windows, pecking at them with wild ferocity. The house shook under their assault, and their calls were so loud that I didn’t even hear the windows breaking.

They were not so loud, however, that I could not hear my father scream. It was over in a matter of minutes, and the key to my shackles slipped under the door. I rushed over and picked it up with trembling hands, sliding it into the metal cuff around my ankle and turning it.

The cuff came loose with a heavy click, and for the first time I was free.

The key to the door slipped under the jamb as well, and I opened the door to the rest of the house. The place had been all but destroyed. There was splintered wood and broken glass everywhere, and in the center of the living room was what remained of my father\-\-a pile of bloodstained feathers.

The birds had all flown off, but Mr. Crow sat on top of the living room fireplace, regarding me with a curious look.

“Now you can fly free, little girl,” he said. “No more cages for you.”

“Thank you, Mr. Crow,” I said. “Will you come with me?”

Mr. Crow shook his head.

“I am an old bird,” he said. “And my journey is coming to a close. But yours is just beginning.”

Mr. Crow flapped his wings and took flight, and I never saw him again. As I stepped out of the front door my bare feet touched the grass for the very first time, and I could smell the flowers on the breeze as it drifted over me.

At that moment, though my feet were firmly on the ground, my heart was soaring through endless blue sky, far above the world that I had left behind.

I still wake up every morning to hear the birds sing, and when the first few notes break the silence of the early dawn, I think of Mr. Crow and smile.

[x](http://facebook.com/lifeisstrangemetoo)Well then… here we are.

I have to be honest; when I posted the first of these logs from my bedroom in North London, I didn’t think it would go very far. After all, why would it? I wasn’t a regular contributor to this site, nor a seasoned veteran of the paranormal. I was just a man who missed his friend, seeking a few words of wisdom from an online message board, open to the idea that it wouldn’t lead anywhere.
 
Suffice to say I couldn’t have been more wrong.

Over the past two months, the incredible advice I’ve received from this forum, and the amazing leads you’ve sent my way, have opened up entire worlds of possibility. It’s thanks to all of you that I’m where I am now; sitting in a rental car on a quiet street in Phoenix, Arizona, posting the last of Alice’s records.
 
I realise I’ve written more than usual for my part. Apologies for this. If you want to skip straight to Alice’s section, that’s fine.
 
Otherwise, please consider this the prologue to the epilogue.
 
It’s very, very early in the morning over here, with only the gravest of the graveyard shift out on the streets. By all rights I should be in bed, and not wasting petrol on an aimless drive through the city. The ritual helps me think however, and I’d recently been given a lot to think about, courtesy of a young woman at a local bar.
 
She was a forum member, who’d contacted me over Direct Message. When we met up earlier in the night, it was clear she’d done a great deal of research; charting every mirror shop in Phoenix in an attempt to reconstruct the route Alice took on February 7th 2017.
 
We spoke for quite a while; about the game, about Alice, and about life in general. Once closing time rolled around, she handed me a printout of the most likely route, with all the key locations circled. Then, in the final minutes before we parted ways, she nervously asked me two questions. The first put me in a rather sour mood.  The second provided the fuel for my 3am drive.
 
Question One; Are you sure she wants you to find her?
 
I’ve been hearing the same query from a few of you recently, especially since Part 9 was posted. People commenting that Alice made a clear choice when she left Rob behind in the silent city. That I was searching for someone who wasn’t seeking return.
 
I’d like to take a moment to respond to this, as I responded to it earlier tonight. To be clear, the Alice I know wouldn't do that. She was planning to come back, she’d told us as much. I’m not going to waste your time with my theories, but we’ve seen what the road can do to people's minds, how it can carry them away against their better judgement. I understand why it's being asked but if those sorts of questions are all you have to offer, I’d kindly ask you find another way to help.
 
Question Two was less clear cut; what are you going to do now?
 
It’s something you guys have also been asking me, but that was the first time I’d heard the question out loud. In the awkward silence that followed it became obvious to her, and in some ways to me, that I didn’t yet have an answer.
 
I decided to take a drive while I figured it out… I’ve been in my car for the rest of the night,
 
After an hour of aimless meandering, I realised I was close to one of the marked locations; the alleyway where Alice first entered the underpass, the point at which she first disappeared into the road. Turning into the side street, just after a large intersection, I was briefly relieved to see no sign of the tunnel. The part of me that still hoped this game was a fiction swelled at the sudden lack of evidence. My reaction was short lived of course, as I quickly realised that the tunnel wouldn't have shown itself to me anyway. Even if the game were real, I’d hardly been sticking to the rules on my way here.
 
There was no denying that the place resembled Alice’s descriptions however, and with a long time to go until I’d feel remotely tired, I decided to work my way back along the route, retracing Alice’s steps towards Rob Guthard’s street.
 
OK so I have to admit at this point, I suffered from a momentary lapse in intelligence. In a fog of distraction, residual jetlag and general dullardry, I drove for longer than I’d care to admit under the misconception that I *wasn’t* playing the game. I thought this because I was heading in the opposite direction, and had started my run with a right hand turn, when the rules explicitly state that you begin by turning left. Of course, as I’m sure all of you would have realised immediately, that didn’t mean I was out of the game, it just meant I started playing with my first left turn, one road later.
 
Alice was always the smart one.
 
What I’m trying to say is that, due to this fairly mindless oversight, I wasn’t exactly looking out for the Woman in Grey as I drove past what should have been her corner. There wasn’t a mirror shop this time of course, that’s only the 34th turn when you’re coming the other way, in fact I’m not sure which of the many passing streets it was. It is strange though, as I think back through my journey, I feel like I would have noticed her. The streets were practically deserted, so much so that any pedestrians stood out immediately. I know I should’ve been looking more closely but, if you asked my honest opinion… I don't think she was there at all.
 
The moment I realised this, I felt it again; the faint perverse, hope that I’d been misled, that the entire story was nothing more than a twisted, elaborate fabrication.
 
It wasn’t long until I passed an old mirror shop and, 34 turns later, arrived on what must have been Alice’s starting street. It was an inner-city neighbourhood whose residents were all fast asleep. From the moment I realised that the game was in play, I’d been thinking less and less about this particular road, and more about the one directly after it, resting just beyond the crossroads. I’d come halfway across the world on the strength of Alice’s account, but I’d seen no first hand proof of the Left/Right Game. If the whole thing was a hoax, then the next road should just be another street. If it was real, then I’d know soon enough.
 
I crawled up to the junction with my heart in my throat. With every inch of road that passed under my tyres, I found myself hoping more and more that it wouldn’t be true. Let someone be playing a prank on me, let the logs be counterfeit... let Alice be anywhere else but on that road.
 
I took the corner in a wide arc, parking myself in the centre of the crossroads, my headlights facing down the next turn.
 
Ahead of me was a quiet residential street; lines of neatly parked cars, rows of well-kept yards and squarely drawn windows. Yet at its centre, in utter defiance of the modest surroundings, the road sank into a deep and dimly lit corridor, cutting beneath the street, and disappearing into complete darkness.
 
I’d always known it was true.
 
In the presence of grim confirmation, the question I was asked earlier that night started to ring in my ears, as if echoing out of the tunnel itself. After an entire night’s driving, after two full months of searching, I still didn’t have a response.
 
In the end I just left the engine running, as if turning it off would somehow be a sign of retreat, and decided to type up the notes you’re reading now. I thought maybe the process of putting it all down on paper would bring me clarity, and leave me with either a note of farewell or a note of apology to Alice, for not having what it took to find her.
 
And now… here I am; still undecided, still writing, still sitting in this rental car on a quiet street in Phoenix, Arizona.
 
Though perhaps the street’s not as quiet as I thought.
 
I’ve just looked back to the previous road, down the street where Alice began her journey. As I type this very paragraph, I can see a figure standing on the sidewalk, just outside one of the houses. It isn’t the woman in grey this time.
 
Though it’s almost too dark to make out, I can tell the figure is an older male, well built and imposing, the rugged features of his weathered face half lit by moonlight. I’ve never seen this person before, yet he bears a striking resemblance to another man; a man whose description has been well recorded within the pages of Alice’s logs.

He watches me in silence, staring through the window of my still running car.

I wonder if he can help.
 
[Part 1](https://redd.it/7asz8x)
 
[Part 2](https://redd.it/7bkk41)
 
[Part 3](https://redd.it/7cf4h8)
 
[Part 4](https://redd.it/7dmuvp)
 
[Part 5](https://redd.it/7fdu9c)
 
[Part 6](https://redd.it/7h9jzb)
 
[Part 7](https://redd.it/7jabqd)
 
[Part 8](https://redd.it/7loh1l)
 
[Part 9](https://redd.it/7q3x6e)
 
*****
 
The Left/Right Game [DRAFT 1] 20/02/2017
 
The Left/Right Game was once nothing more than a 9-page document, peeking out of a yellow envelope, resting quietly on my desk.
 
I remember reading it on my lunch break.
 
I remember it made me laugh.
 
The submission had arrived with the first post, quietly making its way around the office, treated by everyone as a short-lived novelty of little journalistic value. The story was easy to dismiss, appearing all too similar to the rambling ghost stories and blurry UFO sightings that filled our mailbox on a daily basis, and which most of the senior staff had learned to instinctively ignore. Doomed by association, the document was quickly passed over, my desk merely a pit stop on its way to the rejection pile.
 
I was curious however and, after an uneventful few months in my new role, I had no compunctions about fishing from the scrap heap. Placing the envelope in my satchel, alongside a misfit crowd of similar rejects, I slipped away to a local coffee shop, reading it in an armchair by the window.
 
Somewhere around page three, between the description of the game’s rules and the exhaustive list of “Required Skills”, my mouth started to curl into an irrepressible smile.
 
They’d been gloriously wrong about this one. It wasn’t some paranoid diatribe, nor a sensationalist plea for attention. Within those pages lay an introductory glimpse of a man’s passionate obsession. As I read on, something about his earnest eccentricity, incredible thoroughness, and unquestioning confidence made it impossible to put down. When I turned the final page, reading the last of Rob Guthard’s charming and refreshingly well formatted submission, I knew that this was the story I wanted to tell.
 
Later that day, I found myself in the editor’s office making a case for it. They didn’t quite see what I saw, but I was intent to win them over regardless. I told them the story would be characterful, colourful, thought-provoking and, at the very least, that I wouldn’t be gone long.
 
It’s been twelve days since then; ten since I first entered the Wrangler in Phoenix, Arizona, five since I commandeered it myself, leaving Rob behind in the silent city. I haven’t updated much recently, save for a regular set of notes made for my own benefit. In all honesty, after I finished writing up my account of the city, I was struck by an overpowering sense of needlessness. There was no one left to receive these logs, no friends to proofread, no editor to hand them to. It seemed pointless to maintain the same prosaic format as before.
 
I still largely agree with this assessment. It’s only due to a set of exceptional circumstances that I’ve chosen to type up the following account in full.
 
Whoever this reaches, I want to thank you for reading up to now.
 
I’m quite sure this will be my final instalment.
 
*****
 
The moon has broken, and in my entire life, I’ve never witnessed an evening so still.
 
The air is cool and quiet, and the Wrangler cuts cleanly through it as I glide down a stretch of even tarmac. The scene is defined by calm and absence. Not a cloud in the sky, not a solitary whisper of breeze, not a single blade of grass stirring on the dark green banks beside me.
 
Yet even on a night as peaceful as this, I can’t help but feel far away from home. The city had served as a turning point in that regard. Before we reached those titanic monoliths, the landscapes we passed through generally resembled the world I once knew. A few obvious exceptions aside, there was nothing about the environments that looked truly divorced from reality. That’s all changed now. The aberrant aspects of this new world are unignorable, constantly hanging at the corner of my eye, passively injecting a sense of wonder and disconcertion into the otherwise silent night.
 
A few days ago the moon started to crack like old porcelain. I hardly noticed at first, my eyes fixed on the road as it loomed above me, quietly splintering into three jagged pieces. As of tonight, the empty space between each fragment has significantly increased. If I focus on the sky for a little while, I can almost see them falling away from each other, charting infinite and lonesome trajectories through a barren cosmos, against a backdrop of foreign constellations.
 
The stars themselves fall further than they should. The night sky travels down past the horizon and continues below it, wrapping underneath the grassy bank. It’s as if the road, and the narrow plains on either side, are suspended in the middle of a vast abyss; a platform in the middle of open space.
 
At least that’s what I thought it was at first. It didn’t take long before I noticed the broken moon was appearing twice in the sky, both above and below me. A pair of orbiting satellites; identical and in perfect alignment. That’s when I realised that there were no stars below me. I was merely staring across a flat surface so flawlessly mirror-like as to cast a perfect reflection of the heavens above.
 
I was driving through the centre of a lake.
 
The water is impossibly still. Since leaving the shoreline proper yesterday night, I’ve seen neither a wave, nor a ripple across its placid surface. It’s also undeniably vast, reaching beyond the horizon in every direction and continuing further still. Without being sure how I know, I’m aware that the waters carry on for an unspeakable distance, that I would sooner reach the stars themselves before setting foot on its opposite shore.
 
I lean over and switch gears. The act of driving the Wrangler was a daunting one at first, but after the first two days I’ve managed to make do. An old scarf wrapped tightly around the steering wheel serves as a makeshift handle, allowing me to navigate corners one handed. I don’t have an elegant solution for the gearshift, but I’ve quickly grown used to the process. If I’ve learned anything from the road, it’s that grace is the first casualty in the fight for survival. Adaptability, no matter how clumsy, outlasts it at every turn.
 
A few minutes later, the Wrangler pulls up to a spacious verge. A large circle of land surrounded entirely by dark waters. At the far end, the grass seems to fall away, dropping sharply into the lake with a dead stop. The road continues of course, but it's the only thing that does. With nothing on either side, it forms a narrow bridge of perfectly flat asphalt, raised on a bed of mud and rock.  
 
I press my boot onto the brake pedal, easing the Wrangler to a steady halt at the centre of the clearing. For the first time today, I open the car door and climb out of my seat. The dull tap of asphalt shifts to a soft rustling as I make my way over to the lakeside.
 
There’s something on the shore, a barely discernible object, almost entirely concealed by a shock of verdant undergrowth. It’s a miracle I’d managed to spy it from the road, though perhaps something about the stark uniformity of the landscape had made it stand out. 

As I advance towards the water, and the object draws near, its indeterminate form solidifies in my mind.
 
It’s a human arm, reaching out from the water and onto the bank. I crouch down to examine the few pertinent details. The fingers are still embedded firmly into the soil. The thumbnail is broken, coloured by a peeling coat of faded varnish. There’s a pallid, emaciated quality to the skin, spreading down the arm until it disappears beneath a thick, woollen sleeve. At the point it meets the surface, the water soaks into the fabric, turning it black from the original grey.
 
With a sad exhalation, I rise to my feet and lean over the water’s edge.
 
The body of Marjorie Guthard lies against the silt, her cheek resting on the lake bed, her wide bewildered eyes staring out into the open lake. She’s been almost perfectly preserved. Save for the striking tautness of her skin and its mottled, grey pallor, she looks exactly like the woman I saw on the 34th turn, who’d tried to repel me from the road, who’d spoken of a lake drinking her wounds clean.
 
It seems her ramblings weren’t completely void of fact. It’s clear to see that Marjorie has been exsanguinated, so completely in fact that the only evidence that blood ever flowed through her veins, is a large dark stain across her shredded blouse.

It doesn’t take long before the perpetrator makes itself known.
 
As I stare into the water, a steady stream of formless whispers sink up through the depths of the lake. The softly spoken murmurings drift up to my ears, taking root in the back of my mind and instantly blooming into a flurry of deeply persuasive promises.
 
I find myself entirely transfixed by the still water, as a myriad of generous offerings unfold in throughout my consciousness. The whispers suggest an end to the phantom pains in my absent arm, perhaps even a completely restored limb, stronger than it had been before. Furthermore, it shows me a glimpse of its incomprehensible span, its furthest bank reaching across countless worlds, its deepest point lying below everything. I’m offered total knowledge of every league, every fathom, every inconceivable shore.
 
My hand reaches down as the whispers continue, every bargain steeped in sweet beneficence. A moment later, my outstretched fingers brush against the soft grass, and wrap around Marjorie’s exposed arm.
 
Digging my heels into the ground, I lean myself backwards and pull. The water ripples and splashes as I drag Marjorie’s lifeless body slowly onto the bank. I feel the voices in my mind grow louder, erupting in anger as I back away from the lake.
 
The promises had been convincing, each quiet solicitation undeniably persuasive. But after seeing Marjorie’s wretched fate and the look of eternal betrayal in her vacant eyes, I found myself aware of a subtle undercurrent behind every syllable, a sense of desperation and timeless hunger emanating from beneath the lake’s surface. I already have a clear understanding of what would have happened if I’d lost myself to those waters. I suspect it’s no coincidence, that of the countless shores it showed me, all of them appeared to be deserted.

Marjorie wouldn’t have stood a chance. She’d left the forest alone, grievously wounded and without a vehicle. She’d walked the whole way here, bleeding endlessly, the road’s rejuvenating power battling every moment against her body’s natural inclination to die. I suspect the road’s influence wasn’t strong enough, and when a whispering voice promised, ever so sweetly to mend her, she would have been in no position to refuse. 
 
Her other sleeve brushes against dry land, her body leaving the water for the first time in decades. I keep pulling until my boots hit asphalt, laying her down on the grass just beside the Wrangler.

After a moment of sober vigil, I walk to the back of the car and fetch Rob’s foldable spade.
 
A long few hours follow. I’ve never dug someone’s grave before, and my injury is hardly conducive to the task. My fleece tied around my waist, pearls of sweat running down my brow, I manage to slowly chip away at the damp earth. Five hours later, my back cramping, my hand raw from gripping the shovel, I attempt to lower Marjorie into the rough pit with some semblance of grace, her legs dropping limply into the soft soil despite my best efforts.

It takes over an hour to shovel the soil back. It’s a sobering and ugly task. As a layer of dirt covers her face, I realise this will be the last time a living person lays their eyes on Marjorie Guthard. Burying her suddenly feels disrespectful, as if it’s an act I don’t have the right to perform. 

Once it’s done, I drop onto my knees, a dull ache in my muscles as I smooth out the disturbed ground with the back of the shovel.

**MARJORIE:** You.

Even before I turn to face her, I can hear a scowl in her voice. There’s an odious depth to that one acrid syllable, a potent witch’s brew of contempt and accusation that feels like it’s been festering in her drowned lungs for decades.

Reluctantly, I rise to my feet and turn around, finding myself face to face with the woman I just buried. She looks different now, her clothes are dry, her skin clear, with nothing to be seen of the deep, dark gash in her blouse.

**AS:** Marjorie.

Unlike the empty vessel below us, the woman in front of me is by no means at peace. She shakes and wretches with the same indignant fury I witnessed when we first met. When she speaks, her words shudder under the weight of her own turbulent emotions.

**MARJORIE:**  I chased you. I ran to you. I… I gave him up for you.

**AS:** I’m… I’m sorry Marjorie, I don’t know what you mean. Tell me what you mean.

**MARJOIRE** The things I saw, things so beautiful. And I saw her, walking alone through the new worlds. I gave everything up for you!!

I don’t know quite what to say. It’s pointless to ask her what she means, to try and understand her frenetic ramblings. In the end, I can only try to speak her language.

**AS:** Marjorie I… I didn’t mean you to.

Marjorie’s trembling breaths burst into a despairing fit of laughter.

**MARJORIE:** Oh… oh yes you did. Yes you did. And now… now you’re here.

Marjorie’s wild and volatile demeanour shifts once more, her laughter degrading further into a desperate crying panic.

**MARJORIE:** And what do I do now? What- What do I do?!

Marjorie cringes with the terror of the self-imposed question, placing her head in her hands and repeating it over and over again. As I watch her wrestle with despair, I’m struck by an idea I’ve never before considered. The disconcerting notion that, in death, we are not transported to a set destination by some ethereal attendant. That in fact, nothing is decided for us. Perhaps the manner in which we spend our afterlife is down to us, a decision we have to make ourselves.

Marjorie is standing over her own lifeless body, still lost, still entirely unmoored. 

There's no sign of boundless paradise, inescapable damnation or everlasting nothingness, and the common thread they share, a final release from the weight of our own agency, is similarly absent. Perhaps we never get that freedom, perhaps we continue like we always do, accompanied by all our imperfections, uncertainty and discontent. 

Perhaps we must choose our eternity.

After all my time on the road, that’s possibly the most terrifying notion I’ve encountered. 

**AS:** He never stopped looking you know.

Marjorie snaps out of her wretched despair, instantly aware of who I’m referring to, staring up at me with an expression I’ve never seen her wear before. 

**AS:** I saw him, walking on the road. He didn’t stop. He was never going to stop. I think he was looking for you Marjorie, he still is. 

Marjorie stares through me. For the first time since we met on that quiet Phoenician corner, I can see the faint spark of something other than misery and rage across her tear stained face.

I hold her gaze for a moment more, before pulling my phone from my pocket. In a single sweep of my contacts, I delete every number except for one. A number I pulled from the Nokia during our second night on the road. A number that connects to a lost wanderer of the road.

**AS:** I don’t know if this can help but… stranger things have happened.

As she stares up into my eyes, I feel like we’re finally meeting for the first time. Without a word, Marjorie reaches out a quivering hand and takes the phone from my outstretched fingers. 

Before I can say anything more, Marjorie Guthard is gone.

A few moments later, a refreshing breeze lands against my cheek, a soft zephyr, cooling my still warm face. It’s a welcome sensation, and the first movement I’ve witnessed in the air since I set out onto the lake. Wiping the sweat from my forehead, I stare quietly along the bridge, the breeze picking up around me.

It’s a subtle wind at first, brushing stray hairs across my forehead, chilling the perspiration on my neck. Yet as I reach my hand out, and feel the air slip between my fingers, I’m witness to a steady rise in both strength and magnitude.

The sound of the wind grows from a whisper to a howl, Seconds later, the hanging sleeves of my fleece begin to stream sideways. My hair lifts from my back, billowing in the throes of a developing gale. 

I back up against the Wrangler’s hood as the air finally erupts into a roaring, cacophonous cyclone. My hand reflexively seeks the sturdy frame of the Wrangler, my fingers wrapping around the grille, my arm tensing as the unrelenting wind threatens to drag me from the road.

Squinting through the violent tempest, I focus on a single point in space, just above the threshold of the bridge.  In the midst of the storm, a jagged line of white hot light bursts out of the ether, tearing through the night’s fabric, a crackling fissure that widens and yawns, forcing apart the curtains of reality as they frenetically struggle to recombine. 

Staring through the shuddering fracture, I’m subjected to the briefest glimpse of a boundless, and impossible vista. It is a faraway place in both distance and time. An achingly beautiful and gloriously terrifying dreamscape, enduring on the majestic shores of infinity. Every moment there spans a millennium and unfolds in countless directions at once. Every passing shadow holds a darkness beyond measure, their edges burned by the glare of a waking sun which looks across every conceivable world with a hollow, rancorous intent.

In the midst of this maddening landscape, a singular entity approaches, gliding towards the portal with the clear intent to pass through. As it breaches the shuddering gateway, and the wind dies down around it, I stare up at its grand celestial form.

The being is unlike anything I’ve ever seen; composed entirely from electric arcs of brilliant, magnesic light which burst from a volatile and blinding central core. It sounds like a lightning storm, its plasmatic tendrils snapping and crackling, bursting chaotically through the night air before collapsing in on themselves. As they fall back into the creature’s centre, they emit pale clouds of vaporous fractals that fade softly into the air.
 
Somehow, even as my eyes barely adjust to the stark light, I realise that the entity usually burns much brighter. It's dampened its glow for my benefit, so that it can appear before me without scorching my eyes from their sockets.

**AS:** It’s you… isn’t it. You’re the voice I’ve been hearing. You’re the one who brought me here.
 
The bristling maelstrom of light hangs in the air, crackling and shifting, its transient limbs strobing with chaotic incandescence. Part of me wants to hide, part of me wants to run, but neither are an option anymore. Releasing my hand from the Wrangler’s grille I take a single step forward, standing on my own and staring up into the entity’s smouldering core.

**AS:** Can I get an interview?

The creature doesn’t react. In the following silence, I feel it observing me. When it finally responds, its voice ruptures the night, echoing through my skull.

**VOICE:** There is little time, but you may ask what questions you have.

Each reverberating syllable forms a string of literal shockwaves in the surrounding lake, emanating outwards from the being in a perfect circle. I watch the waves roll into the distance, showing no sign of ever diminishing, and I think about what question to ask first.

In the end, it comes to me quickly; a promise is a promise after all.

**AS:** What happened to Marjorie? Why did she do what she did?

The being pauses, as if considering its response. When it does reply, it speaks with a calm sobriety.

**VOICE:** She glimpsed an echo of the future, dreamed of the road, of the things that it passes through.

**AS:** Like whatever’s through there?

I gesture through the gateway, which is now almost entirely blocked from view by the creature’s spiralling form.

**VOICE:** She dreamed of untold frontiers. She saw a lone woman walking them. Over time, the fulfilment of that vision became everything to her.
 
**AS:** But it wasn’t her… she thought she was seeing her own future… but it was-
 
**VOICE:** It was you.

Those three words, as they burst into the open air, casting three narrow waves across the boundless water, hit me with a deep and heavy force. Unbeknownst to myself, decades before I was even born, Marjorie had been driven insane by dreams of maddening grandeur, of a life of boundless possibility and true significance. She had given everything up to chase a shadow… a shadow that eventually turned out to be mine.

I hadn’t just pulled Rob into this game, I was the reason for everything. I was the cause for the tragedy that befell his entire family, 
 
**AS:** She didn’t just dream those sights. You influenced her. You let her see them… the same way you made Rob see me in Aokigahara. You pushed and you prodded wherever you needed so that I’d end up here. Are you the reason Bobby got the rules in the first place?
 
**VOICE:** Yes.
 
**AS:** But… why? You toyed with so many lives across… across decades. Why me? Why does it matter that I travel the road?
 
**VOICE:** Because across all humanity, across every conceivable permutation, you are the one who makes it the furthest.
 
It speaks plainly, as if the statement were a foregone conclusion. Yet its words strike me into silence.

The creature continues.

**VOICE:** I’ve watched you work your way here, through skill and through tenacity… and undeniably through luck. You were brought here because of these qualities, and they will carry you further along the road than any other.
 
**AS:** Then why didn’t you just bring me here? All that influence and you didn’t lift a finger… after everything that happened-
 
**VOICE:** Events transpired as they needed to.
 
**AS:** As they… needed to?! People died! Marjorie. Bobby. Ace. Apollo. Eve. Lilith. Everyone. They’re all gone. Do you not care at all?

In response to my words, the entity remains silent for longer than usual.
 
**VOICE:** I care more than you know. There are things greater than your understanding, forces that exist beyond the realms of your comprehension that you would consider a threat to everything you hold dear. My actions were guided by a higher standard of knowledge. Your protests are predicated on false understanding.
 
**AS:** You’re saying I don’t understand death?
 
**VOICE:** You don’t.
 
**AS:** ... That still doesn’t make it right.
 
**VOICE:** Regardless, my influence is necessary. That which is necessary must be.

**AS:** What even are you?
 
**VOICE::** I cannot answer that question in any way you’d understand.
 
**AS:** That's not good enough.

The creature doesn’t respond, as if it doesn’t feel it needs to. So far it’s returned my every argument with impenetrable certainty. From the domain it occupies, knowing what it knows, my arguments must seem entirely facile. Even if it did feel the need to justify itself, after seeing the place it hails from, I wonder if there’s any way I could ever comprehend its motives.

Still, that doesn’t mean my arguments are invalid, and the creature’s lofty dispassion does little more than stoke my desire to oppose it.

**AS:** And what if I don’t want any part of this?

**VOICE:** You are travelling the aberrant strand; a singularly stable flaw in the fabric of reality. As it carries you further from the world you know, you will be freed from the influence of the old laws. You have already noticed the effects in those who settled the road, those who were lost to it and in yourself; energy without consumption, knowledge without requisite experience. You are shedding entropy, and causality and in time you will reach realms of understanding you cannot currently fathom. You will find answers to questions you never thought to ask. You will discover absolute truth. For this reason, you will carry on.

**AS:** That’s the only reason?

**VOICE:** Do you need another?

It doesn’t come across as a question, but rather another blunt statement of fact. I understand the effect it’s speaking of. Ever since the city, I’ve been encountering vague notions and fragmented ideas that occur to me randomly and without announcement. New avenues of thought leading to revelations that would otherwise lie beyond my mortal reach.

I’ve started to comprehend things I could barely have conceived of back home, and though the onset of these notions had been terrifying at first, they grow less so with every passing day.

**AS:** No… no, I don’t trust you. I don’t-

**VOICE:** Your trust is immaterial. You will travel the road regardless.

The creature’s already stark glow starts to intensify.
 
**VOICE:** I’ve watched you, on every turn … across every moment of your journey.

One of the creature’s countless protrusions lashes out at the empty air, forming another harsh, glowing fissure. It wrenches itself open in a few stilted jolts, a transparent, almost crystalline membrane stretched across the gap. Through it, I can see myself, in the centre of a cornfield, examining a block of C4 explosive.

It’s as if I’m staring into the past through a jagged shard of one-way glass.

**VOICE:** I’ve watched you questioning.

Though we can’t be seen through the aperture, I see the glasslike membrane shake with the force of the creature’s voice. As the window collapses, I can see the rows of corn thrown into a frenzy.

A second arc lashes out at the sky, forming a second aperture. This time I’m expecting the sight before me. I see myself, crying in the forest… a silent radio by my side.

**VOICE:** I’ve watched you struggle.

The second window closes. The creature has made its point.

**VOICE:** I’ve watched you fight… to make your way here.

**VOICE:** You will not turn around. 

**AS:** You make it sound like I don’t have a choice.
 
**VOICE:** You do have a choice Alice, but you have already made it.

As much as I’ve grown to detest the creature’s presumption, in that moment, I know it’s right.

What it’s saying is true. I’ve done things I never would have imagined in order to get where I am now. In fact, if this being hadn’t arrived at all, I’d already be heading out over the bridge. 

I’m not proud of what drives me; that same, ugly impulse that led me to refuse Rob’s offer of return, that made it so easy to leave him behind in the silent city. But there’s no denying the impulse is there. It’s been with me the whole time, long before I ever arrived in Phoenix, Arizona… and it’s buried deeper than I’ve ever wanted to admit.

**AS:** Can I… do I get to say goodbye?
 
The entity says nothing. It hangs in the air, flickering and coursing with rupturing bolts of light. The next thing I hear is a faint mechanical hum emanating from the Wrangler behind me. Turning around, I pace briskly back to the car, opening the door and reaching into the passenger seat. My notebook is booting up, seemingly of its own accord.
 
Picking up the laptop, I lift the lid as I march back towards the bridge. I stare up at the silent being before me. When I look down to the laptop, my email client is already displayed on the screen.
 
**AS:** How… how long do I have?

**VOICE:** Long enough.
 
The entity begins to regress, its arcs diminishing as the being at its core turns away. Its message has been delivered. There is nothing more to discuss. 

As it passes through the gateway, into an unknowable world far removed from my own, I call out after it.
 
**AS:** I’m still not certain I trust you.
 
The being focusses on me once more, as the fracture begins to close. A final set of waves pass across the surface of the lake as it solemnly replies. 
 
**VOICE:** … I remember.
 
A moment later, the being is gone.
 
I stand motionless in the middle of the road, the entity’s final remarks washing over me, its curious choice of words echoing in my head. In the renewed silence, the faint stirrings of an overwhelming and terrible revelation start to form in my mind.

It could have simply said that it knew of my mistrust, that it heard the overtones in my voice, saw the disdain across my face or otherwise sensed it in the space between us. Instead, the being spoke as if my current feelings were a memory, dwelling somewhere within its depths.

It was undeniable that my time on the road was changing me, but in all this time I’d never truly considered how those changes might evolve as my journey continues. 

I’d never thought about what I might gain, what I might lose… or about what I might inevitably become.

A short while passes before I lower my eyes from the empty space above the bridge, to the screen of my notebook. Lowering myself down, I cross my legs and rest my back against the Wrangler.

If you’ve been reading from the beginning, you’ve finally caught up with me.

I hope you’ll allow me a few personal messages.

To Rob. I hope you’re able to read this someday, and I am so, so sorry for everything I’ve done; for everything I may do. I hope you understand that I didn’t know, and that none of this was your fault. You did the best you could, and the days I spent with you were the most significant of my life. It was an honour to know you and I hope that, among these pages, you find the answers, and the peace, that you deserve.

To my mum and dad, I’m sorry I won’t be sending this to you. In the end, I was carried along this road by a profound selfishness, and I just can’t bring myself to face you. I can’t imagine the pain I’ll be putting you through, and I won't try to justify my actions. All I can say is that I love you and I’m sorry that my last act towards you was one of cowardice.

And finally to you; the person to whom this message will be addressed. I’m sorry. I always thought I’d see you again someday, that the roads I took would eventually lead me home. That doesn’t look so likely now. Though I could say a lot to you, I’m not going to.

But I wish we could have been friends for longer.

It feels like a lifetime since I first arrived at Rob Guthard’s quiet street. I remember the uncertainty as I waited for him to open his door, with no concievable idea what was about to transpire. 

Like so many other things, that’s now changed. Despite being in an entirely new world, further from home than anyone’s ever been, I know exactly what’s going to happen next.

I’m going to take a drive. Take a left, then the next possible road on the right, then the next possible left. I will repeat the process ad infinitum, until I wind up somewhere new. 

And from there I’ll keep driving, beyond worlds, beyond time, beyond the bounds of my imagining. To a place where the lake runs dry, where the broken moon drifts away, and the stars disappear in the rear view.

To a place where everything has fallen away, and the road is all there is.*The Ocean has its silent caves,*

*Deep Deep, quiet, and alone;*

*Though there be fury on the waves,*

*Beneath them there is none.*


---


Over the course of the last few weeks of training I’d memorized nearly every facet of the *Tuscany* - every dial and every readout and every knob and screen and nuance of structure - and the quality of the personal submarine’s craftsmanship never ceased to astound me. It was a remarkable feat of engineering, this little beast; designed with such care that even the equipment on the hull could withstand more water pressure than the sea could muster up at any achievable depth. It was my Pegasus. My Trojan Horse; my very own *Apollo 11* - and inside this matrix of layered syntactic foam I would follow the ballasts to the gratuitous and unexplored depths of Higgin’s Maw. 


I began the separation sequence, and the deep-diver fell away from the escort and dipped beneath the surface of the Pacific with silence and grace and a few knots of speed, and then I was consumed in a whole new world - albeit one I’d frequented - that of the sea. Schools of fish swam on by me, and when their cloud passed through a sunbeam it glinted silver, and beneath them swam rays that rolled their wings to the beat of the current, and out in the rocks crawled the crustaceans and sat the plant life that spruced up all the white-washed stones there like holiday ornaments. But I had an appointment to keep, and the oxygen tank was a demanding clock, so I dove right on past the old reef and out into the open waters where the seabed couldn’t be seen for many, many miles yet. 


*”The Maw,” Reuben had said. “Fifty thousand feet below the surface, Booker. Fifty* thousand. *Do you know what that means?”*


*”Means its a whole hell of a lot deeper down than the Challenger Abyss.”*


*He’d nodded at that. “Are you ready to make history?”*


Was I? I thought I was. I’d prepared for this lonely dive and nothing else, for some years now. It was the culmination of a lifetime of work and study in the field, and so tight was its grip on my mind that I often dreamt of it in my sleep; of what I’d find at the bottom, and what it would mean. *And what monstrous things might take offense to my presence there.*


No. *No.* I shoved that thought aside. *Tuscany* was all the protection I needed in that regard; it offered technology on the bleeding edge in lieu of a heavy hull, and that was enough to withstand enough water pressure to crush bones beneath skin and inches of steel. What animal had jaws more powerful than the ocean itself at fathom?


So I hit the thrusters, and down I went, like a bullet to the pitch. I eyed the depth meter as much as I did the sea. One hundred feet. Two hundred. Sharks and turtles and uncountable fish swept past me. Three hundred feet. Five hundred feet. Seven hundred. A thousand. Twelve-fifty - *the inversed height of the Empire State building.* Fifteen hundred. Sixteen. 


The water began to blur and grain up and darken as the sunlight struggled to push on through. Two thousand. Twenty five. Three thousand. Thirty two - *where the light no longer shines.* 


And soon all the light I had to spill glow to the path ahead and down, were the lights of the *Tuscany.*


I continued the descent for hours. The pressure meter ticked up in spasmic bursts, but up it went, up, up, up, soon ticking past the point where the weight of the sea would’ve crushed the steel of another vessel. One mile down. One point three. One point six - *where even Sperm Whales hit their lowest dive.* I could now claim with confidence that no mammal on earth was as deep down at that very moment as myself. And still I dove. Two miles. Two point one. Two point two. 


The water was as black as space now, except for where the lights of the *Tuscany* pierced through it, and the thickness of the fluid made it look like ink or oil or some kind of alien sludge that smeared up against the reinforced windows and slimed its way across the hull. Things were tight down here, despite the vastness of it all, yet still I dove. 


Thirteen thousand feet. *The Abyssal zone. Pressure stands at 11,000 psi.* I saw an Angler float by, and it was startled by the sheer volume of light spread by the *Tuscany* that dwarfed its own bioluminescent glow. It swam away, and I dove further. Fifteen thousand feet. Three miles. Three point one. 


*Now things get interesting.*


Mankind had visited these depths almost infrequently enough to count the expeditions on a single pair of hands. I was now ranked among an illustrious few explorers, and although I wasn’t the first to hit these marks, I’d hit the deepest one yet before this journey was over. I was determined and I was capable. So I checked the depth chart. *Sixteen thousand, two hundred eighty one point four feet.* Nearly halfway to the world record. The *Tuscany* continued its dive.


Twenty thousand feet down. *The Hadal zone. Pressure here is eleven hundred times what it is at the surface.* Twenty two thousand feet. Twenty six. Twenty nine thousand - *The height of Mount Everest.* Thirty. Thirty point five. Thirty one - *the same distance from the surface as a commercial airliner at the peak of its flight.* 


The Challenger Deep, what had previously been the lowest recorded place on the seabed, sat at roughly 36,000 feet below the surface, in the depths of the Mariana Trench. No light from the sun had ever come close, and to the best accounts life existed there, but only sparsely, and the pressure is unspeakable. 


But I was going somewhere vastly deeper, even, than that. 


*”All we know is we found a canyon,” Reuben had said. “Dwarfs the Grand - sitting dead center in the Pacific seabed. ‘Bout twelve hundred kilometers west of Hawaii, and another nine hundred south, and, near as we can figure, some fifty thousand feet straight on down.”*


Thirty six thousand feet. I was now tied for the world record. 


“*Fifty thousand feet?! Why the hell are we just now seeing it?”*


Thirty six five. I did it. My heartbeat swept up to a faster rhythm. I was officially a world record holder; no human being in recorded history had been as deep below the surface as I was at that very moment. 


*“New seabed scanning technology helped. Gave us a more detailed topographical map of the hydrosphere than we’ve ever had before, and once we got back the results, we took a look, and there it was. Just waiting for us. Inviting us down.”*


Thirty seven. 


*”So what’s down there?*


Thirty seven three.


*”Hell, Doctor. If we knew that we wouldn’t be sending you, would we?”* 


Thirty seven nine.


*”I suppose not.”*


Thirty eight.


Thirty eight five. 


---


*The awful spirits of the deep*

*Hold their communion there;*

*And there are those for whom we weep,*

*The young, the bright, the fair.*


Higgin’s Maw, according to the best information available to me at the time of departure, is a pit, roughly a full kilometer across. It begins at approximately forty six thousand feet below the surface and is estimated to bottom out at Higgin’s Deep, a small valley that sits at its base, some five thousand additional feet below that. The Maw is the largest and deepest such formation in the hydrosphere, and yet its dimensions and location are the only things concretely known about it. That, of course, is where myself, and where the *Tuscany,* come in.


Forty three thousand feet down. I hit the floodlights underneath the *Tuscany,* and the glow washed over an alien landscape that likely hadn’t seen light in over a billion years. There were mountains here - *mountains* - ones that rivaled the Alps, and wild arches and plateaus that stretched far off to a murky horizon before being shrouded by seawater. 


I even saw *life* down here in the depths. A squid-like thing of simply monstrous size swam on by my boat. It stopped for a moment, and during that moment I thought it might take offense to me, but after looking hard at the *Tuscany* and brushing a tentacle down the port side it swam off in search of other things. 


“Atta girl.”


I descended further. 


Forty four thousand feet. Forty five. 


And then, all of a sudden, there it was. *The Maw.*


My mouth hung by the jaw as the sheer scope of the beast came into view. It was a breathtaking sight to behold; a monstrously large and equally dark hole in the crust of the earth that plummeted to inconceivable fathoms. I descended a bit further - forty five five, forty six thousand feet - and *Tuscany* fell into its yawn. Somehow things were even blacker in the depths of the thing, even though sunlight had long since been blotted out. 


Forty six five. Forty seven. Forty seven two.


I began to become aware of a low current pulling me downward. It wasn’t particularly powerful, but it was unexpected and it was therefore alarming. And yet I couldn’t bear to pull myself back up. Not yet - *I’ll turn around if it gets bad* - so down I went, deeper and deeper and deeper still into the cavern. 


Forty eight thousand feet. Forty eight five. Forty nine. Forty nine one. 


And then I saw it. A glow. 


I squinted and dimmed my lights to confirm the intuition. *What in the name of God…?* It was there indeed, a dim reddish-purple, then green, then purple again, and then blue, floating on a mist of current some few thousand feet down. I resumed the dive to chase it. Forty nine five. Forty nine seven. Forty nine nine. The glow, whatever it was, was getting deeper, and wider, and brighter. Soon it filled up the whole path down and ahead. I dimmed the *Tuscany’s* under-lights to their lowest setting, and by fifty thousand feet I could see that the glow was coming from somewhere not directly beneath me, but off to the left and around a wide corner. 


*This cave isn’t a straight pit.* And sure enough, the hole bottomed out here, and then opened up to its left. 


*Holy God. Holy* God.


It was a cavern chamber, at least a full kilometer up and deep and side to side and across, and only the enormity of its radius maintained the darkness of it despite the presence of thousands of floating bioluminescent pods that pulsed purple and green and blue and red and dimmed in the interim. I took the *Tuscany* in deeper, and her cameras whirred to life. 


---


*Calmly the wearied seamen rest*

*Beneath their own blue sea.*

*The ocean solitudes are blest,*

*For there is purity.*


The cavern became darker still when the pods faded into the water behind the ship. But there were more things to be seen here than rocks. *Tuscany,* about a quarter hour after entering the chamber, soon floated on by a bizarrely rope-like plant of utterly impossible size; one that appeared to stretch nearly across the height of the cave and grew wider at the base, although the bottom of it was shrouded in blackness. I took the submarine in for a closer inspection, and hit her lights to their fullest setting. 


*Clack.* 


My heartbeat slammed. There were suction cups on it. Each one as big as the *Tuscany* herself, and they writhed and pulsed across and down the full length of what was now very clearly a *tentacle.* In a panic I shoved *Tuscany* back and away from the thing, but when I tried to turn her around, the base of the hull collided with the beast and stuck fast to one of the cups. I gunned the thrusters and could hear a wet tearing sound as the machine ripped itself free from the cup’s grasp. 


But then the tentacle came to life. It whipped and whirled and smacked around the cavern, and pressed itself to the roof, and then it fell down, deep beyond where the darkness blanketed the floor. 


“C’mon, baby.” I hit the thrusters again, and *Tuscany* rocketed off the way it came, through the darkness and off towards the pods, whose glow I hoped would afford me an opportunity to shut the lights off the ship and make my escape. 


If I were so lucky. 


But very soon I began to hear and *feel* the movement of something unspeakably *titanic* rolling across the floor of the chamber. It rumbled and thundered, and shuddered and shook, and soon clouds of dirt and rock flew up out of the black pitch and blanketed the view forward and I could hear boulders smack against the ceiling of the cave before sinking again to where they'd been. 


*GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGRRRRRRRRRRRRRRAAAAAAAAUUUUUUUUGHHHHH!!!!!!*


“F-fuck!!” The sound had erupted across the entire breadth of the cave at once. My eardrums nearly burst and likely would have, had it not been for muffling of the explosion provided by the walls of the *Tuscany.* The submarine shook, too, but she held up her integrity well enough to for me to fly on past the floating pods, some of which were now knocked about on their sides and rolling, and back towards the yawning mouth of the tunnel that would take me back out into the open deep s-


*SMACK!!*


The *Tuscany* buckled and rolled with an impact. The Tentacle, I realized, had shot up from the ground and hit the bottom of the ship between her ballasts, but luckily it knocked her with force up towards the tunnel. I rolled *Tuscany* with the hit and managed to regain some control, and I boosted the thrusters into the turn and up again, now back into the Maw. Then I began to climb. 


Fifty two thousand feet. Fifty one five. Fifty one. 


*”So what’s down there?*


“Come on, baby. Come on. Don’t you fail me now. Don’t you *fucking* fail me now.”


*”Hell, Doctor. If we knew that we wouldn’t be sending you, would we?”* 


Fifty point five. Fifty. Forty nine nine. Forty nine six. *Tuscany* ascended with panicked speed, and all the while she did it I could feel the rumbling of the Tentacle’s pursuit in the walls of the Pit. It smashed its way on through the tunnel, and whipped and thrashed, but *Tuscany* was too quick a runner. *Forty seven five. Forty seven. Forty six eight. Forty six four. Forty six thousand feet and climbing high.* 


*”I suppose not.”*


*Tuscany* burst out of the Maw and was about to rocket straight on back up to the surface, but then the Tentacle flew out beside her nearly smashed in her front window. I bent the controls to the edge of their set-casing, and *Tuscany* tanked to the left and up a bit and missed the ground by inches. I hit the lights again to navigate the labyrinth of rocks as I struggled to remount the climb. 


But in the light of the ship I saw it; these weren’t rocks after all - *they were other ships.* Massive vessels, Imperial warships from ages past, bent and crooked and broken at the bottom of the sea, pulled down here by whatever it was that now threw its back to my devouring. 


The Tentacle smashed along behind me. Mainmasts and battlements and flat-decks and rusted iron and wooden boat hulls were splintered up and tossed to the winds of the sea, never again to reconvene. I took *Tuscany* through this nautical graveyard with far, far too much speed for my safety. Under ship towers we went, and through cannon mounts and past the blades of dead engines and around upended rudders. 


The cacophony of my flight and the destructive path set by my hunter awoke the life in the place. Fish washed out of holes, and cabins, and captain’s quarters and deep-deck stair flights and soon joined me in my effort to escape. 


But it seemed there was no escape to be found here. The entire ground for countless miles shook and rumbled with seismic force. It was thunderously loud, and it picked up speed and violence with time. *Tuscany* finally flew up to miss a splintered crow's nest atop the mast by less than a foot, and finally used that directed momentum to put away distance between the seabed and herself with as many knots of speed as her thrusters would allow without bursting from the effort. The depth chart began to rise. 


*Forty five nine. Forty five two. Forty five thousand feet. Forty four eight.*


“Come on, you motherf-”


*GGGGGGGGGGGGGGRRRRRRAAAAAAUUUUUUUUUUGGGGGHHHHHHHHHHH!!!!!!!!!!*


The water itself seemed to shift with the sound. And then, out of nowhere, *Tuscany* was no longer the only thing spilling light to the Abyss; an orange glow flashed across the sea and for an instant illuminated nearly the entirety of its vastness. Then it blinked, and then flicked on again and stayed active. I shut off *Tuscany’s* lights to preserve every molecule of power for the ascent. 


*Forty four two. Forty four. Forty three seven.*


Beside me in the glow I could make out other creatures retreating, too. Ones of spectacular size, again, that mankind had never catalogued and that I, sadly, would not have time at all to study. There were city-bus sized manta ray shaped things, wrapped up in clouded wisps of transparent jelly, and even that squid the size of a building, all flying upwards in a mass panic. I led the charge. 


*Forty three one. Forty two eight. Forty two three. Forty two.*


*GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGRRRRRRRRRRRRRRAAAAAAAAUUUUUUUUGHHHHH!!!!!!*


I looked behind me and down through the rear window. The Maw had moved. It was alive. *God almighty. I was in the Leviathan’s throat. I was in its fucking throat!* I saw its Tentacle tongue lash out of the Maw and collect enough fish to feed a small town. *Tuscany* rocketed ever upwards as the Leviathan whipped even larger Tentacles behind it and gained speed with the force of a hurricane. 


*GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGRRRRRRRRRRRRRRAAAAAAAAUUUUUUUUGHHHHH!!!!!!*


The Leviathan opened its Maw yet again and spewed forth its tentacle tongue, and with it it whipped up several Olympic swimming pools’ worth of water into a gale-force maelstrom. The Mammoth Squid was caught in its fury, I saw, and then it vanished into the pit forever when the Maw snapped shut with a thunderous, echoing *snap.* 


*Tuscany,* meanwhile, continued to rocket upwards, and managed to escape the whirlpool by a foot. 


*Thirty nine five. Thirty nine. Thirty eight seven. Thirty eight two. Thirty eight thousand feet, and climbing.*


But the Leviathan pursued me relentlessly, riding on the flood of its own current. Its tentacles - each dozens of feet across and a mile long, beat the water back and tried to gain speed for their host. 


*GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGRRRRRRRRRRRRRRAAAAAAAAUUUUUUUUGHHHHH!!!!!!*


*Thirty seven five. Thirty seven. Thirty six four.* 


*Tuscany* had proved her worth with speed, and the pressure gauge now fell in jumps. It remained in the red and would for some time, but it was falling steadily, even as the depth chart rose. 


*Twenty nine thousand feet. Twenty eight three. Twenty seven five.*


*GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGRRRRRRRRRRRRRRAAAAAAAAUUUUUUUUGHHHHH!!!!!*


But the Leviathan hadn't given up the chase. Not yet. I could *feel* it doubling its efforts. The displaced water rocked the *Tuscany* and she buckled and rolled in the synthetic current. Then I heard the Maw open up behind me and the water begin to whip and swirl itself into a frenzy by the oceanload. I punched the thrusters to breaking point. 


“Come *on!!*” The encasing syntactic foam was pressed to its limits; the reinforced glass began to chip every so very slightly, but the chips broke into cracks and those cracks began to crawl across the width of the windows. I checked the gauges. Twenty thousand feet. Nineteen eight. Nineteen four. Nineteen three. The ascent was slowing. *Come on, baby. Come on. Come on, come on, come on. Please God. Be with me now. Be w-*


*GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGRRRRRRRRRRRRRRAAAAAAAAUUUUUUUUGHHHHH!!!!!!!!!*


In the orange glow of the Levianthan’s eyes I could see how quickly the water was slipping by *Tuscany* and getting swept up into the maelstrom. The submarine began to sway port to starboard and shudder and shake. *Seventeen four. Seventeen thousand. Sixteen nine. Sixteen three. Sixteen one. Sixteen thousand.*


I watched the gauge with a nauseating desperation. 


*Fifteen nine five. Fifteen nine two.*


I could feel her slowing to a crawl. *Come on. Come on. Come on!*


*Fifteen nine two five. Fifteen nine four. Fifteen nine six. 


“Shit!!” And that was it; *Tuscany* was caught, and no sooner did the depth chart begin to slip then did I feel the whole submarine lose all sense of control and tumble backwards and around. I was thrown out of my seat and smacked my nose against the roof of the pilot sphere. Blood exploded, and it drenched my shirt and sprayed the glass and the entirety of the control set. 


I grabbed my face and began to apply pressure to slow the blood loss, but *Tuscany* again flipped ballast over ballast to starboard in the whirlpool and spilled me into the hatch ladder. I felt my shoulder dislocate and my kneecap smack into the bottom rung. My head swam, and still *Tuscany* tumbled backwards. The cracks on the windows spread faster. 


*Sixteen three. Sixteen four.*


I could *smell* the inside of the Maw though the hull of the ship. 


But then, all at once and not a moment too soon, I got an idea. It wasn’t a particularly good one, but hell if it wasn’t better than nothing - I managed to limp and tumble my way to the controls and grip the handles as the ship rolled. *Wait for it. Wait for it. Wait…*


*GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGRRRRRRRRRRRRRRAAAAAAAAUUUUUUUUGHHHHH!!!!!!!!!*


*Now!* The sound of the roar was so close every last control surface in the sphere rattled in its case. My eardrums rattled, too, but then I flared up the thrusters again, full blast and at an angle, and the *Tuscany* shuddered and flipped and shook and, with fortune, fell straight out of the maelstrom with inches to spare. I felt the edge of the Leviathan’s Maw graze the starboard side, and the impact again sent me into the roof while the ship rolled end over end over end again. I smacked my ribs up on a dip in the alcove and fell back down into the seat, head first, and then out onto the floor. 


*GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGRRRRRRRRRRRRRRAAAAAAAAUUUUUUUUGHHHHH!!!!!!*


I managed to right myself with my good arm and get my bearings. I was free, but only just; the *Tuscany* banked and tumbled again and rolled, slower now in the absence of the whirlpool’s flood current, but not yet in control of its pull. I tried to steer away, but it was useless; the ship flipped around the back of the Leviathan’s titanic Maw and up over its head as the beast flew on by underneath me like a freight train. And for the first time since catching the monster’s eye I began to fully appreciate the magnitude of its size. 


It’s back was an endless, snake like and sharp-finned spine the size of a minor mountain range, and only quick maneuvering moved *Tuscany* away from the jagged back fins that chugged up towards me and sliced open the sea itself. They missed me by feet, and the blast of the current they’d swept up sent the submarine reeling backwards, off a bit further and into relative safety. 


*GGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGGRRRRRRRRRRRRRRAAAAAAAAUUUUUUUUGHHHHH!!!!!!!*


I quickly dimmed the lights to their lowest setting and caught my breath, as the full form of the Leviathan washed on past me. It stretched far away into the abyss below, for well over a mile, and dragging away behind it were thousands upon thousands of tentacles, a forest of the things, each the size of a six lane highway and tipped with razor sharp hooks and a flurry of wing-fins. It took a full three minutes for the beast to pass by me fully. And then it curved around in the other direction, and swam off in search of other things to devour. 


*Gggggggrrrrrrrrraaaaaaaaaaaaaauuuuuuuuuuuggggghhhhhhhhhhhhhh!!!!*


The form soon slipped away into a shadow. And then it was gone. 


---


I surfaced hours later, having allowing the battered *Tuscany* to take its time with the journey. She was solely responsible for my escape - my quick thinking be damned. *A marvel of engineering indeed.* 


Once I did break the surface I disbursed a distress beacon and then promptly collapsed from exhaustion. Evidently, I was picked up by the Coast Guard some hours after that, a few hundred miles southwest of Hawaii, and pulled from the near-wreckage of my submarine and taken to a hospital on the mainland. It was there that I woke up a full day later. 


As I recovered I heard some isolated chatter of tremendous seismic activity near where I’d been, and how the whole ocean floor had changed and moved and shifted form. But I couldn't care less. I told the bastards what I knew. And on top of that, they have the *Tuscany* and they have all the recorded evidence, and you now have this written account. What everyone does with this information now, is entirely up to them. 


All I know is that I won't be doing any more diving any time soon. I’ve come to a realization: that mankind has more than enough space to expand throughout and live upon and thrive in above and near the surface, and on land, and in the skies and soon, hopefully, out there amongst the stars. 


But there are things in the sea that hold ownership of the deep. And perhaps it's best to leave it that way. [For all our sake.](https://www.reddit.com/r/TheJesseClark/)


*The earth has guilt, the earth has care,*

*Unquiet are its graves;*

*But peaceful sleep is ever there,*

*Beneath the dark blue waves.*

*- Nathaniel Hawthorne*

---

[Part 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/6qcezs/the_deepest_part_of_the_ocean_is_not_empty_part_2/)

[Related](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/7304b2/the_deepest_part_of_the_earth_is_not_empty/)

[Facebook](https://www.facebook.com/thejesseclarknosleep/?ref=aymt_homepage_panel)

Dad shut himself inside his bunker at the beginning of 2020. He said the world was about to end and when we didn’t believe him, he told us to wake up. It was raining that day. I remember focusing on the water hitting the windowpanes while my sister tried to change Dad’s mind. I knew it was no use. He was too stubborn to listen to anyone except maybe Donald Trump. WHO had just declared that COVID-19 had pushed the world into a pandemic. Dad wanted us to join him and when we told him no, he called us brainwashed.

He purchased the land before I was born. Only because of the dilapidated military facility that came with it. It was abandoned sometime in the 60s, I think. My sister was there from the beginning, even before Dad’s obsession pushed Mom away. It’s hard for me to imagine what he was like back then. Mom says he was a gentleman. But they married young, and a person can change a lot during those years. And so did Dad. All I remember from him during childhood are the weekends at the bunker. Constantly renovating it and stockpiling it with everything he would need to survive down there.

We couldn’t stop him. He wasn’t the best Dad, not even a good one, but it was sad to see him go all the same. He was excited, even though he thought that civilization was about to collapse. I guess that happens when you’ve spent your entire adult life preparing. We had to set up an old radio to keep in touch with him. He didn’t trust mobile phones. We didn’t hear from him often, just once a month, sometimes less. The last time he radioed in, he said he had found a hidden door. He was going to see where it went. That was three months ago.

“You think he’s okay?” my sister said. “He wasn’t in great health. I *told* him.”

We sat in the car, on our way to check up on him, driving through the heatwave.

“His radio might have broken down,” I said. “Let’s not assume the worst.”

But I felt worried too. There was something strange about that hidden door, and his tone when he mentioned it. It didn’t sit right with me. But maybe it was just the heat and the endless desert around us that played tricks on my mind. I couldn’t really tell.

&#x200B;

\*\*\*

&#x200B;

It was dark when we arrived. Dad’s truck stood where he had left it, beneath some tarp that blew in the chilly, sand-carrying wind. We turned on our flashlights and walked to the cliff above the bunker. The steel door was made to withstand a nuclear blast. Luckily, I owned the only spare key in existence. Before I used it, I banged on the door as hard as I could and yelled for Dad. I worried he would mistake us for intruders and shoot us. If he was confused, and if it was dark, it was a real possibility. I banged again and yelled at the top of my lungs:

“Dad, are you there? It’s me, Josh! Eveline is here as well!”

“I don’t think he can hear you,” Eveline said.

I nodded. “Dad! I’m going to open the door now!”

I was seventeen the last time I was here. Back then it was the Muslims that were going to end civilization as we knew it. Before that, it was the Russians. Now it was China. There was always something threatening his beloved freedom, and yet he was never truly free. My sister put her hand on my wrist just as I was about to unlock the door.

“You know,” she said. “Maybe we should just call the authorities after all and–”

“No,” I said. “He’ll fight them.”

I unlocked the heavy door. A rancid smell escaped the darkness inside. It was the odor of death. I recognized it from when Dad tried––and ultimately failed––to learn how to hunt and let a reindeer carcass rot on the property for weeks. My sister had already stopped visiting him by then. I didn’t tell her what the smell reminded me of. She covered her nose with her shirt. We descended the spiral stairs. It creaked for each step we took, almost as if it was about to fall apart.

I tried the light switch at the bottom. The click echoed throughout the long corridor leading to the living area. Nothing happened.

“Hm.” I realized that the batteries, which he charged by the use of an old exercise bike, were dead. That meant he was most likely dead as well. “The generator could be broken,” I said. “But… Maybe you should wait back here, just in case… you know.”

I pointed my flashlight in front of me. The light was too weak to reach the end of the corridor. On the way here I had felt ready. I felt sad, the kind of empty sadness you feel after the death of a parent that was never any good, but I didn’t feel worried. Now, on the other hand, while staring into the dark corridor that I used to run through as a kid… I was afraid. The fear reminded me of how my childhood night terrors used to start. They always crept up on me in the darkness, grew with the grotesque shadows on my bedroom ceiling.

“I’m not letting you go in there alone,” Eveline said. “We stay together.”

We walked into the darkness. The foul smell intensified for every step we took, and so did my heartbeat. I was glad my sister didn’t stay behind. The bunker seemed so much smaller than I remembered it, much more cramped. The asymmetry between my memories and reality made everything feel off somehow, just as if the bunker was merely a model of the real thing. But it wasn’t. I had just grown up.

The Confederate flag greeted us at the end of the corridor. It hung on the concrete wall. It looked pale in the hotspot of the flashlight, almost like a phantom. And, of course, in many ways it was. A ghost from a time long ago. Or perhaps a corpse brought back to life. An abomination. It reminded me of Dad more than anything else.

“You have to be seriously confused to praise freedom as much as Dad and hang that symbol of lesser freedom in the world on your wall,” Eveline said.

“He wanted to protect his freedom so much that he built a prison for himself.” I removed the light from the flag, leaving only darkness. “You bet he was confused.”

We entered the main chamber. It was overfilled with litter and clutter. Empty cans––both the food and beer kinds––lay scattered across the sticky floor. We had to take large steps not to step on any of the trash.

“That’s weird.” Eveline pointed her flashlight at the small dining table. “Look.”

My hair stood up on my neck before I even realized what she meant. The table was set for three people. I didn’t say anything for a moment, trying to process what I was seeing, and just when I was about to speak my sister interrupted me:

“Who the *fuck* was here with him?”

“We don’t know–” I began. “I mean, he might have left the old plates on the table and–”

A sound of something falling to the ground came from one of the other rooms further into the bunker. I pointed my light in its direction but couldn’t see what made it.

“Dad!” I yelled. “It’s me, Josh! You there?”

No response.

“I’m afraid,” Eveline whispered. “Something isn’t right.”

I only vaguely heard what she said. My focus was on something else. Something on the wall on the other end of the room.

“That’s not supposed to be there.” I slowly walked toward it. “That must have been what he talked about over the radio.”

Dad had hacked away a layer of concrete, for whatever reason, and uncovered a rusty, metal door behind it. It stood ajar. A lukewarm, musty breeze came out of it. My sister walked up to me as I carefully pried the door open with the back of my flashlight. I felt my heart in my throat. I could hear my sister begging for us to leave, almost in tears. But I needed to know what was behind that door. It was imperative to understand what had happened here. I needed to know. I needed closure.

“What in heavens name…” Eveline looked over my shoulder. “Why is this here?”

Behind the door was a room about the size of a broom cupboard. It was unremarkable except for a circular hole in the middle of the floor. I shone my light into it, but I couldn’t see the bottom. Just as I thought it was big enough for a person, my sister said:

“Do you think he fell?”

Drops of sweat from my forehead fell down the pit. I felt dizzy and stepped back, afraid I would fall inside. My sister picked up a can filled with some rotten beans and threw it down the hole. It clattered against the walls as it bounced from one side to another. The sound faded away until we couldn’t hear it anymore. There was no indication it touched down at the bottom. I stretched out my hand and held it above the opening.

“It’s warm,” I said. “The air, I mean.”

“Maybe he fell.” Eveline stepped back, almost as if she were convinced. “Can we please get out of here?” She reached for my arm. “We can return with the police. Please… Josh?”

“It wasn’t dark when Dad found this,” I said. “He would have seen the hole.”

“Josh? Please.”

“Just give me a moment to think.” I walked toward the hallway that led to the other rooms, desperately hoping to find him. For some reason, it was important for me to see him. To be able to leave without wondering. I needed to know that he was truly dead. “I just want to–” I stopped myself after I accidentally pointed the flashlight on the floor in the middle of the hallway, revealing a pair of feet. “I think I found him!” I ran up to the body.

“Wait!” Eveline yelled and reluctantly followed me to avoid being left alone.

It wasn’t Dad. I screamed upon the realization. My mind couldn’t comprehend what I had just seen. I spun around and tried to run away, completely acting on instinct, and crashed into my sister. She grabbed me, kept me still, and as she looked behind me, down at the dead body on the floor, she began to cry while her hands trembled uncontrollably against my shoulders.

“Oh my God,” she said. “How… how is it possible? It’s you!”

“Let’s get a fuck out of here,” I said. “Move!”

There was nothing that could explain this, and the more my mind tried to––moving in an endless loop doing so––the dread grew inside me. I only got a glimpse of the body before I panicked, but my sister was right. The half-rotten face was the same as mine, with a bullet hole in the middle of the forehead.

We stumbled our way through the living area, tipping over chairs and kicking cans all over the place, and just as we were about to get out of the mess a familiar voice echoed through the hallway we had just escaped.

“Josh!”

It was Dad. We both stopped in our tracks.

“Is that you? Josh!”

“Dad?” I yelled back. “What the fuck is going on here?”

“Don’t worry!” It sounded like he was at the other end of the bunker, possibly inside the storeroom. “I killed the son of a bitch, put a bullet right between his eyes!”

“Come out from there!” I yelled. “We have to leave, it’s not safe here!”

Silence.

“Something is wrong,” Eveline said. “I don’t think–”

“Dad!” I yelled. “Come out!”

“I can’t move!” Dad said. “I’m stuck under a shelf! I’ll need your help, son!”

I turned to my sister. “Go back up. I’ll get that old bastard out of there. We’ll be right behind you, okay?”

“Think, Josh!” Eveline begged. “You think he’s been stuck under a shelf for–”

I should have listened, but even after what we had just seen I just couldn’t bring myself to even consider something as outlandish as what my sister was suggesting. It was simply too far-fetched, too unbelievable to penetrate all my layers of presumptions about reality. It couldn’t be, it just couldn’t. Hence, I ran back to the hallway, yelling for my sister to get back up to the surface and wait for us there.

“I’m coming, Dad!”

I only slowed down to carefully step over the corpse that bore my face. Perhaps, I thought, it was just a coincidence. A burglar that just happened to look like me. After all, the face had begun to rot. It wasn’t obviously me. I felt stupid and I almost convinced myself that it was just my childhood fear of the dark coming back to life down here. And then, just as I was about to walk past the small composting toilet that stood inside a small room at the end of the hallway, I stopped. Shivers spread across my entire body, paralyzing me. Dad sat on the toilet. His gun still hung from his trigger finger and his brain was splattered across the wall behind him. He had his journal in his lap, covered in blood.

“Josh!” Dad yelled from the darkness. “Help me!”

I was frozen in place, both by fear and confusion, unable to make any decisions.

“Come on, Josh!” Dad kept yelling. “I need your help, son!”

My mind was racing. There was no way of knowing who was who. When I heard Dad’s voice yelling for help while watching his dead body, nothing but absolute terror revibrated inside me. I slowly reached for the journal in Dad’s lap and grabbed it, hoping it would shed some light on the situation. I was just about to open it when my sister screamed. I ran back, this time jumping over my doppelgänger's body, and found her looking at something at the corner of the main chamber.

“I told you to–” I said, but changed my mind. “Are you okay, what happened?”

“It’s–” she cried. “It’s me.”

Crawled up in the corner was her naked, dead body. Her head had been twisted in such a way that the neck had been broken.

“There’s something seriously wicked going on here,” I said. “Dad shot himself in the head, a long time ago by the looks of it, and yet he keeps yelling for help. Let’s get back to the car, now!”

&#x200B;

\*\*\*

&#x200B;

We drove away from the bunker as fast as we could, leaving whatever was still alive down there yelling for help. My sister insisted on staying at my place for a few days. I didn’t mind having her around. We shared an experience no one else could relate to, and we needed each other to overcome the trauma.

It took a day for me to build up the courage to open Dad’s journal. It began with his usual deranged conspiracy theories. I flipped past them. At the end, he had only made short notes.

&#x200B;

*Found a hidden door.*

&#x200B;

*Deep pit, possible the remains of some old black project.*

&#x200B;

*Eveline and Josh woke me up. A “surprise visit”. Didn’t hear them enter. Strange.*

&#x200B;

*Had dinner with them, something seems off.*

&#x200B;

*It isn’t them! They tried to make me* \[Illegible\]*!!!*

&#x200B;

*God help me, it isn’t them!*

&#x200B;

*I shot the son of a bitch right between the eyes!*

&#x200B;

*Hiding in the bathroom now, this will probably be my last entry.*

&#x200B;

*God forgive me.*

&#x200B;

Chills went down my spine as I read the last entry on the blood-drenched page.

&#x200B;

*I never got the other one. She’s still out there somewhere. I only got one bullet left. I won’t allow her to do that abhorrent thing to me. Forgive me.*

&#x200B;

My sister has been cooking for hours. She just called for me from the kitchen:

“Josh? Come here, I want to show you something!”

[OD](https://www.reddit.com/r/tobiasmalm/)**I am a firewatcher. Upon moving in to my station, I found the following pages typed on my desk. I am not the author of the following. I am transcribing exactly what I found, dated 1989:**

---------------

----

I’ve been located here for 185 days, according to my calendar. I’m stationed up in the northwest of the United States with two other guys—Clark and Thomas. 

185 days. That’s five days longer than our stint here should’ve been. Normally, they rotate us out every 180 days. We were supposed to be picked up by Helicopter 5 days ago.

I started writing this logbook, journal, whatever, because we’re overdue for evac. Or so we think. Maybe we messed up the calendar somehow.

Our main radio stopped working on day 179.

“Get up! There’s smoke.”

Bleary-eyed, I saw Clark standing over my bunk. I could see the orange slits of light reflecting on his torso, signaling to me it was the early morning.

“Teddy! Smoke!”

“Smoke? Huh?” I said, still half-delirious.

“Yes, smoke. A really small stream of it maybe a mile southeast.” His eyes were wide and brighter than the sunlight on his uniform.

I pulled myself out of the bottom bunk and headed towards the window. I didn’t even need my binoculars to see the small sliver of smoke creating a shadow in the early sun’s light. In 185 days, it’s only the second time we’ve seen a potential fire.

For those who don’t know what a fire watchtower looks like, it’s basically a wooden cabin elevated about 100 feet in the air. Ours has a staircase that wraps around the structure beneath the cabin. I’m pretty sure other towers use ladders, but that’s beside the point.

Clark and I bunk up in the watch tower. We have a little kitchen, our bunk bed, and a 360-degree view of nothing but woods. Thomas sleeps in a tiny little cabin at the base of our tower, which is also where our main office is. ‘Office’ may be too loose of a term. It’s one desk and a typewriter used for typing out reports of what we see out here.

I rubbed my eyes and looked over to Clark, “alright, let’s go check it out.”

“No way, Teddy. No way,” he replied immediately.

Clark has been afraid to go past the outhouse since day 180 passed. He’s afraid a helicopter will come, and he’ll miss his chance to be rescued.

‘Rescued’ Clark would say. But are we in danger? Did we miscalculate the number of days we’ve been out here? We still have plenty of food. Did they forget about us? Has the apocalypse come and gone and we don’t know because we’ve been isolated?

“Okay, fine,” I agreed, “Radio down to Thomas and let him know. He should be up.”

Our main radio back to base isn’t getting a sign of life from anywhere. And if it isn’t receiving from anywhere, we assume we aren’t being heard from anywhere. Luckily, we still have our own walkie-talkies to communicate with each other.

Clark took out his walkie.

“Tom, there’s some smoke about a mile southeast. Can you go check it out?”

A few seconds passed before Thomas responded.

“After I finish wiping my ass I’ll be on my way. Unless you wanna help me with that Clarky.”

Thomas, the oldest of us, is always picking on Clark, the youngest. He doesn’t really dislike Clark. He is just easy to pick on. He’s a twenty-three-year-old college dropout. I think he studied accounting or finance or something on his parents’ dime. I don’t think he left college to be a professional firewatcher. No, I think he left to come out in the wilderness, be alone, and take a retrospective look at his life to decide what he really wants.

You only sign up for 180 days of isolation if you’re crazy, or if you want to get away from something. I’m not sure which category Thomas falls is. He’s a cryptic, brute of a man. His picture is probably in the dictionary next to “lumberjack.” He’s pretty quiet unless he has a joke to tell or something important to say. Either way, when he opens his mouth, I listen.

As for me, it’s not important why I’m out here.

“Headed out now,” Thomas radioed. 

Clark and I watched Thomas start his trek into the tree line until we could no longer see him.

Clark cocked his head towards mine.

“Teddy,” he said to me, “Thomas has been acting... different. Weird.”

I didn’t expect him to be so blunt. But I had noticed. I knew Clark had noticed, but this was the first time we spoke about it.

“I know.”

“He doesn’t seem to be bothered that we are stuck out here.”

“We don’t *know* if we are stuck out here. We could’ve scratched off the dates wrong. You know—we thought we didn’t scratch the day off yet but we really did, so we accidentally scratch the next day too.”

“I guess,” Clark said softly. I knew what he was going to say next.

“At night though—”

“Shut it, Clark.”

“C’mon Teddy! It’s fucked up. He’s fine during the day and then just, just changes. Does he have some type’a illness? It happened so sudden!”

“Maybe he does! So what if the guy goes out at night to stare at trees?”

“Trees? Stare at trees?”

“I know you’ve seen it. He goes out near the tree line and stands there for a while looking out. Sometimes hours. Maybe he does have a screw loose, and maybe he shouldn’t be out here. But I don’t think it’s the best idea to bring it up to him when we are trapped here with him, especially if he *is* insane.”

Silence fell between us before Clark responded.

“I didn’t know he stares out at the forest,” he said to me in a soft voice and eyes wider than when he woke me up this morning.

“Oh—wait, what? What were you going to say?”

“At—At night,” he stammered, “he comes up the stairs.”

I looked over to our half-open door leading out to the staircase, letting a cool breeze in.

“Wh—what do you—what?”

“He comes up the stairs, and, and just, looks at us. Stares at us.”

------------

Thomas left to go check out the smoke about an hour ago. It seems to have vanished, so I figure he handled it. 

Clark spends his days using our walkie talkies, trying every station possible to alert anyone nearby.

I just watch the forest.

---------------

It’s 11:30 PM. Thomas isn’t back. He left at about 7 AM. He hasn’t answered his radio.

Tomorrow will be day 186. We do not know if Thomas is okay, and one of us will most likely have to check the woods tomorrow—and since Clark is chicken-shit, it'll end up being me.

More disturbing though, is something Clark told me a few minutes ago—the reason I went back to the office to type this.

I was leaned back in my swivel chair, spinning slowly, making sure there were no lights or fires in the dark expanse of trees, and wondering where Thomas was. He must’ve been hurt. Even if he was lost, he’d reply on his walkie. We always answer our walkies. They’re with us at all times, even when we are shitting or showering.

Clark stopped my chair mid-spin and mid-thought. Before I could protest, he spoke.

“Listen. I need to tell you something I’ve been thinking about recently. It’s eating away at me.”

I wondered if it had to do with Thomas.

“Okay,” I said. “I’m all ears.”

“It’s going to sound crazy,” he warned.

“I bet I’ve heard crazier.”

He took a long, yet stuttered inhale, then spoke. “I don’t remember coming out here.”

My facial expression didn’t change, and it looked like he was waiting for a reaction, so he repeated.

“I don’t remember coming out here. Do you? Do you remember applying for this job? Do you remember being interviewed? Or being flown out here?”

At first, I was almost amused. 

Then as he asked those questions, I froze.

I didn’t remember.

He continued, “You know how I said I decided to leave college? Well, now that I’m thinking about it harder, I don’t know if I did. I mean I must have, right? To be out here? I must have. But all I can remember is my last day of class for the semester, and then I was here. I don’t remember anything between coming home after class and meeting you and Thomas.”

I was listening, but it probably didn’t show. I was still motionless.

I couldn’t remember. I tried and am still trying.

Thomas is missing.

Clark and I are losing our minds or—or something else.

Either way, I can’t explain it yet.

-----

----------

**There are more pages scattered about, but I haven’t figured out the order. Some are ripped and some are faded beyond recognition.**

**But there is a more pressing and imminent problem at hand.**

**About 30 minutes ago I met Gary and Harold. We have been stationed out here for the next 180 days.**

**I don’t know whether to tell them what I’ve found.**

**And I don’t know whether to tell them that I don’t remember coming here.**
You probably think that all doctors are filthy rich, because I sure as hell did in the beginning. Eight years and a fistful of premature gray hairs later, I’m just a few hundred thousand dollars poorer than “broke.” That would matter if I had a family to provide for, but the long hours in med school have led to an end of my last relationship and a countdown on the shelf life of my ovaries. 

I was in a “take what I can get and be grateful” situation. 

So when St. Francis Hospital in Charleston, West Virginia offered me a position, I packed my sad life into three bags and sought opportunity in the hills of Appalachia. Nineteen of us started in July, and thirteen have since dropped out. 

I like to think of myself as the rat that wouldn’t drown.

Some people broke inside after watching children die because they weren’t good enough doctors quite yet (everyone has to be a rookie at some point). It’s doubly hard when you have to inform the dead child’s parents, who then beg you to tell them different news, or scream that they want to die and just please kill them with whatever drug takes away the pain.

But most of my incoming class couldn’t handle the chief of medicine. 

Dr. Vivian Scritt is, without a doubt, the biggest bitch I’ve ever met. 

Now I know why.

“Nineteen of you start today, and we’ve got a pool going with bets on how long each of you will last,” she told us on Day One. “Don’t feel any pressure, folks. I’ve talked with each of you in private, and my expectations are very low.” 

She peered condescendingly over her thin spectacles, snorted, then turned around to walk away. 

“You should know when to follow me and when to stay away, because I’m not going to waste time explaining what you should figure out on your own.”

We gawked at one another, all feeling weak and small, then scampered after her. 

I was last in line, and felt out of place taking even that much.   
 
“You should have the list of expectations for St. Francis,” Dr. Scritt explained as she walked on, not bothering to look at us as she talked. “I printed eighteen sets of rules so that you would have to challenge one another for them, knowing that one of you would be left behind.”

An icy cold settled in the pit of my stomach as I saw everyone look down at a list of rules that only I did not have. 

“If you cannot follow these rules, there will be no place for you in this hospital. It most likely means that you are unsuited to be a doctor, and should consider a profession that demands a weaker mental aptitude.” At that, she turned around to face us all. “And if you think that I’m the type to give second chances after a mistake, you’re woefully underprepared for the world of medicine.” She stopped and looked at each of us in turn, apparently expecting a response that no one dared to offer.

“Well,” she shot out in exasperation, “why are you standing here? People are dying. Get to work!”

*

No one wanted to show me their list of rules, so I had to wait until one of my classmates died.

It took nearly a week. 

I was working at 3:00 a. m. because I had only been on the clock for ten hours. I was rushing into another room so that a patient wouldn’t know I was Googling his symptoms (doctors do this FAR more than you realize) when I saw Myron by himself in an O. R. 

I stopped immediately. “Myron?” I squeaked. “What the hell is that?” 

His arms were working furiously, but his back was turned toward me, so I couldn’t see what he was doing.

Something felt wrong. 

Myron was the pick of our litter. He’d been top ten in his class at John Hopkins, and he would remind us of that fact in exchange for answering the questions that we were too terrified to ask Dr. Scritt.

Slowly, I approached Myron, not wanted to startle him. “We’re really busy right now, is there something you need help with?”

He showed no outward signs that he had heard me. Instead, he kept pumping away furiously at the task at hand. 

When I was five steps from him, I could see drops of blood flying over his shoulder. 

Which made no sense, since he had been alone in the room.

“Myron?” I whispered, barely loudly enough to hear my own words.

I slowly crept around his left side, finally bringing the scene into full view.

Myron’s abdomen was split from sternum to pelvis. His esophagus spilled out, and his stomach sat on the table. A nest of quivering small intestine led from the bottom of his stomach back into his shredded torso. 

Myron showed no outward signs of pain.

He was too busy working.

He clutched his own stomach tightly in his left hand, the folds squirting through his fingers like unbaked bread. His right hand was working furiously with a scalpel, sawing his organ into ribbons. Rivers of sweat poured down his forehead with the intensity of the effort.

I tried to scream, but it only came out as a moan.

That was enough to get Myron to notice me.

Slowly, he raised his head. Slowly, he smiled.

It was not a happy smile.

With eye contact locked on me, he licked his lips, angrily stabbed a piece of his stomach, and lifted it to his mouth.

He bit.

He chewed.

Then he lunged.

But most people don’t know how to move with their innards splayed out for all the world to see, and this was his downfall. Myron’s tattered guts caught on the corner of the table, and he fell to the floor. 

Finally, he screamed. 

I had learned very early in my medical career that compartmentalization is indispensible. That instinct took over my brain in the moment, and I acted clinically.

Myron was still grasping his scalpel with his right hand. I kicked it – hard – and it flew out of his hands.

He stared at me and screeched.

With his entrails still wrapped around the table, I figured my best option was retreat. I moved to the back of the room as a doctor and a janitor burst in. 

And in possibly the most shocking moment of the night, I realized that they were *not* shocked. 

Myron was anesthetized, subdued, and extracted within a minute of their arrival. 

For a moment, I was alone with a pool of blood and diced stomach lining. 

And something else.

A sheet of paper lay on the floor, its corner just touching the edge of the creeping blood. 

Myron had dropped his list of rules. 

The practical part of my brain continued to drive me. I snatched the paper from the ground, then quickly exited the room, taking care to avoid the puddle.

I didn’t want to leave any bloody footprints in my wake. 

I knew that I had to read the list as soon as I was able to find thirty uninterrupted seconds to myself. Three hours later, I had my opportunity and ducked into a janitor’s closet. With a shaking, *exhausted* hand, I pulled the chain on a bare bulb, tried to ignore the noxious smell of leaking ammonia, and read.

-------------

**St. Francis Hospital Rules – Guidelines for new doctors**

1 – Never, under any circumstances, share your copy of the rules with anyone else.

2 – If any other doctor displays erratic behavior, leave the area immediately. Do not make eye contact.

3 – If any other doctor is approached or detained by someone in a janitor’s uniform, do not interfere. Never ask about that former doctor again. 

4 – Never touch any seemingly abandoned Reese’s Peanut Butter Cups. Those are Dr. Scritt’s favorite candy.

5 – Any child that dies in St. Francis hospital MUST be cremated within 120 minutes of official time of death. If you suspect this rule has been broken, alert Dr. Scritt, and the hospital will be evacuated. 

6 – There is no Children’s Burn Unit at St. Francis hospital. If you find yourself there, continue walking until you return to familiar territory. This usually requires traveling in a straight line down the central hallway for 47 minutes. You will not reach a wall during that interval.

7 – This rule is on a need-to-know basis.

8 – A small quantity of sulfuric acid is kept in every room. This is ONLY intended for use on patients with severed spinal cords. If they attack, a hypodermic injection of H2SO4 into the cranium is the only way to subdue the subject. 

9 – The morgue must house at least 13 cadavers at all times.

10 – If find yourself on the hospital roof with no memory of how you got there, you have only two choices. Either wait for an extraction team to find you, or jump four stories to the sidewalk on Court Street.

11 – If you see Room 1913, do not look directly at the numbers. Do not open the door. This is, by far, the most important rule.

---------------

My heart stopped when the door opened.

Dr. Scritt was staring at me. What little emotion shined through her exterior seemed to be surprise.

We both stood, frozen, for five seconds of agonized silence. 

“Dr. Afelis,” she drawled gravely, “I’m shocked.” She stared down at the bloodstained list of rules in my hand.

I reached for words. *Any* words, because literally any response would make me look less guilty than I did in that moment, staring up at my boss’s boss’s boss and saying literally nothing in my defense as she weighed my soul with her eyes.

And I said nothing. 

“You took a list that wasn’t yours, and were nowhere to be found after your coworker experienced such an *unnatural* incident.” Dr. Scritt huffed through her nose. “It seems that *you’re* willing to do the unthinkable in the name of getting what you need. And *Myron* couldn’t’ even follow the most important rule.” She clenched her teeth. “I had a four-year streak of predicting which incoming doctors will break the soonest. This will *ruin* my chances in the office pool.”

The ghost of a smile graced her lips before she turned to leave. 

“Get to work, doctor. You’ve got three hours left on your shift, and those symptoms aren’t going to Google themselves.”

I didn’t realize that I’d been holding my breath until I heard my own gasp for air.

Shaking, I slowly emerged from the janitor’s closet. I quickly stuffed the list of rules back into my pocket, reflecting on the fact that I had just achieved what *might* be considered an actual win.

Perhaps, just maybe, I would keep my head above water at St. Francis after all. 

I turned to head down the hall when I stopped in my tracks. 

Everything was unfamiliar. What the hell had happened?

I glanced all around. The design of the hallway was familiar, but everything was *off.* I could hear people talking in the rooms, but the immediate vicinity was devoid of all people but myself.

Nothing made sense.

Then I looked up.

And I’ll be honest, I peed just a little when I read the sign.

*ST. FRANCIS HOSPITAL – CHILDREN’S [BURN UNIT](https://www.facebook.com/P-F-McGrail-181784199029462/)*

[BD](https://www.reddit.com/r/ByfelsDisciple/)

[Listen](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCcn_pa1QfNMRzbTuJqXSoRQ?view_as=subscriber)

-------

[Part 2](https://redd.it/djmjk2)My wife and I are beside ourselves right now. This is the type of thing you see in the movies, but now it’s happening to us.

Yesterday evening, a little after six, my wife and I were in the kitchen cooking dinner when my six-year-old (almost 7) son Kyle walked in from the back patio. He was holding a folded piece of paper in his hand and had a strange look on his face. My son is constantly drawing (and loves to read and write) so this usually wouldn’t have stood out to me at all, but he’d just come in from hitting the baseball off the tee and really had no reason to be holding a piece of paper. 

My son is the type of kid who wears his emotions on his sleeve. When I asked to see the piece of paper, I could tell he didn’t really want to give it to me because he flashed his typical *I’m gonna be in trouble if I do* face. I insisted, and he finally handed it over. Here’s what it said:

>Dear Kyle,

>I know this note may sound scary,

>(your daddy will think it is),

>but grownups don’t know 

>how friendships can grow

>when kids are just left to be kids.

>And what a kid you’ve become, Kyle!

>You’re growing as fast as a weed.

>Last night off the tee

>you stroked it for three

>and your team took a two-run lead!

>Yes, I’ve been watching (a while now, its true).

>I think we would make perfect friends.

>You’re a kid through and through,

>And I am one too,

>even if just for pretends.

>The problem, I fear, is your parents.

>(I doubt they would let us hang out).

>One is just rude,

>the other a prude,

>church-going, pure, holy, devout.

>I’ve got an idea

>(can you tell my hand’s shaking?)

>for me and you getting together!

>Tomorrow at three,

>you can come and see me

>at the address attached to this letter.

>But please (pretty please!)

>don’t tell your dad!

>Your mom and he won’t understand.

>Just come by yourself,

>I’ll be dressed as an elf!

>And we can even hold hands!

>Would you like that?

>(You will! You really will Kyle!)

>We will have (my oh my) so much fun!

>So I’ll see you at three,

>by the sycamore tree,

>where our two kindred souls become one!

There was an address scribbled at the bottom of the page.

>3 Orange Circle.

I knew immediately it wasn’t a prank. 

Carrie, my wife, is the youth group leader at our church. And Kyle did just have a tee ball game last night. Orange Circle is only one street over from our street, and I'm pretty sure lot 3 is the corner lot on the culdesac, which has an empty house with a large sycamore tree in the backyard. 

Was this sicko really watching Kyle’s game? What would have happened I hadn’t seen him with the letter?

I shouted for my wife to come read it. When she did, she flipped out, and ran for the phone to call the police. 

I flipped the note over, and on the back was some more text. I couldn’t read it at first, but quickly realized it was written backwards, I’m guessing so Kyle couldn’t have read it. To read it, I had to hold it up in front of a mirror:

>And now (just in case)

>if your Dad’s reading this,

>it’s time to tell him a story.

>If your mom flaps her hole

>Or your dad tells a soul,

>I’m afraid things might get rather gory. 

>On the 10th of July, 

>1995,

>A woman named Susie went missing,

>Susie, you see,

>(unlike you and me)

>wasn’t careful about who she’d been kissing.

>I kept her a while (but old things get so boring!)

>and in time I had gotten my fill.

>I threw her away

>and to my great dismay

>the hunger I felt plagued me still.

>I tried to bury it deep down inside

>(where nothing down there can escape).

>But lately it seems

>I see Kyle in my dreams

>And that hunger can no longer hide.

>Now that you know what I’m capable of

>(more than both of you can comprehend),

> if one word is spoken,

>then children get broken,

>and Susie will have a new friend.

The police arrived in a half hour and we showed them the note. They told us to stay inside and lock the doors for the remainder of the night. The man had obviously been in our (fenced-in) back yard, which made me sick to my stomach and had me cursing myself for not installing the security camera I’d gotten for Christmas. 

Nothing happened last night, thank God.

This morning, I got a call from the detective assigned to our case. He’d reviewed the list of missing persons cases from 1995 and something had turned up. 

Suzanne Kerrington went missing July 10th, 1995, just as the note said. The last person to see her alive was a friend who saw her at the 24-hour gym they attended together. Susie had said she’d met someone new and wanted to get a quick workout in before getting ready for their second date. Susie was never seen again and the man was never identified. 

And, maybe the worst part, was Suzanne's address. 

3 Orange Circle. 

I'm supposed to meet with the detective later this evening. 

What should we do?

UPDATE: The detective just called back. They're sending an unmarked patrol car with two plainclothes officers to 3 Orange Circle at 3 p.m. today. Kyle's teachers have been notified and he's safe at school and won't be going to recess today. I'll update tomorrow with any news.

[Update 1](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/63uu1m/the_terrifying_note_addressed_to_my_sixyearold/)

***

[Download the FREE audiobook!](https://gumroad.com/l/RRPSp)
This story is a retelling of something that happened to me when I was seven years old. As the years have gone by and I’ve grown up, I’ve realized that the story cannot possibly be true, yet I can’t shake the feeling that it is.

It happened in Tokyo, in the subway station. I was standing with my father when I saw the demon, a monstrously tall and furry creature with leathery black wings and a snout like an anteater. I must have stared at him for close to ten minutes before he finally spoke, in a soft mutter that was clearly intended for his ears only.

“This human is creeping me out,” he said. “It almost looks like it’s looking right at me.”

“I am looking right at you,” I said.

The demon nearly jumped out of his skin. “You can see me?” he asked.

“Yes. Can’t everybody?”

“Not unless they’re in the fifth dimension.”

“Am I in the fifth dimension?” I asked.

“Your mind must have slipped over here by mistake. What were you thinking about before you saw me?”

I thought for a moment, and then grinned.

“Trains.”

“Oh, well trains are the link between our dimensions. I guess your mind must have just wandered over here. Either that or you’re going crazy.”

“I hope I’m not going crazy,” I said.

“Being crazy is a good thing in the fifth dimension,” the demon replied.

I laughed.

“Do you have subway lines in the fifth dimension?” I asked.

“Of course,” he said. “How else would we get to work?”

”You’ve got wings!” I said.

“Yes, but who wants to fly? Taking the train is so much faster, and if I fly to work I’m all sweaty when I get there.”

“So what do you use your wings for?” I asked.

“I put them over my head when it rains.”

“Can I see?” I asked.

“Sure,” the demon said. My hair blew back as he swooped his enormous wings over his head.

I laughed again.

“You’re funny,” I said.

The demon laughed too, but then his expression changed.

“Are you okay?” I asked. “You seem sad.”

“Yes, yes.” the demon replied, not looking at me but at something behind me. “Say, would you like to see a magic trick?”

“Okay.”

The demon reached up and tugged a big rainbow handkerchief out of his snout. He must have pulled out twenty feet before he ran out.

“That’s funny.” I laughed, but I stopped when I realized I wasn’t holding my dad’s hand anymore.

I looked around and saw the subway station had disappeared, replaced by flowing green meadows that were full of old trains.

“I can’t see the subway station anymore,” I said.

“That’s okay,” said the demon. “Sometimes it’s better to see what isn’t there instead of what is.”

“What do you mean?”

“Sometimes when I’m bored or sad, my mind slips off to the third dimension, and I see people like you.”

“That’s funny,” I laughed. “Can you go to other dimensions, too?”

But the demon didn’t answer, he was looking up at the sky.

“It’s starting to rain,” he said, whooshing his wings up over his head.

Warm droplets of rain hit my face. 

“Can I get under your wings with you?” I asked.

“Not now,” he replied. “You’ve got to go home.”

The world began to shimmer and flow together like different shades of green and golden paint, spinning around faster and faster in circles. I started to feel a little sick, and I closed my eyes. The world stopped spinning, but warm droplets of water still fell on my face.

I opened my eyes and saw my mom crying over me, but I didn’t see my dad.

“Where’s dad?” I asked her. “Did he bring me home?”

“Yes, darling,” she said, although she didn’t look at me when she said it. “He brought you home and then he had to go away.”

“Oh,” I replied. “When will he be back?”

“I don’t know,” she said.

My dad never did come back, and it was years before I found out the truth: he had killed himself that day. That morning he had written a note to my mother explaining that he intended to bring me along and step in front of the train with me. My mother found it when she got home from work and called the police, but it was too late to stop my father. The witnesses say that just before he jumped I pulled away from his hand and ran off, fainting right after. But one of the witnesses, a little boy around my age, said that he saw something take my hand and lead me away from the speeding train.

He said it was a monstrously tall and furry creature, with leathery black wings and an anteater’s snout.

[x](http://Facebook.com/lifeisstrangemetoo)Growing up, I thought everyone had a second family in their basement. In retrospect, I understand how ridiculous that sounds… but it was all I’d ever known.

I knew that every night, my dad tented the leftovers from dinner with foil, got up without a word, and carried the plate to the basement. I’d listen from my room as he lumbered down the creaking steps, held my breath to hear the muffled mumblings of his greeting.

I knew that every morning, he’d make the trip downstairs to see his second family off before work, then kiss me on the top of my head and ruffle my hair as he walked out.

I knew that each Christmas, he’d bring a sack of brightly wrapped packages downstairs in a Santa suit.

I knew that my dad had a second family in the basement, and it seemed so normal that I thought *everyone* else did too.

I’ll never forget the first time I asked my mom about them. I was young – maybe five – when I finally found the words to ask: “Mommy, why can’t I play with the people in the basement?”

My mom was the human embodiment of frenetic energy, an organic perpetual motion machine. Always pacing, or cleaning, or stirring a pot. Always with a lit cigarette tucked between her yellowing fingers.

I’ll never forget that, as that question hung in the air, she finally *stopped* for the first time. Her stillness was unsettling in a way I can’t quite explain.

“We don’t talk about them,” she rushed, chasing the hurried statement with a lengthy drag off her cigarette. She blew a plume of smoke out the opened window before leaning down to meet me at face level, her bloodshot eyes mere inches from my own. “You don’t need to play with the kids, but the kids need Daddy.”

She paused again, the haunting image of her at a standstill etching itself into my mind permanently. Finally, she muttered, “Daddy needs them too.”

That night, I heard my mom shrieking at my dad in their bedroom. I was surprised that they didn’t know that I knew, more shocked – frightened, even – to find that they didn’t *want* me to know. Most of all, they didn’t want me to tell anyone at school – anyone at all, really.

After that night, everything was different. My dad only tented the leftovers after dinner, only brought the food downstairs after I’d gone to bed. He stopped visiting them in the mornings altogether. My mom started acting differently, too. I’d always noticed that she was… distant from my dad; had always noticed how she bristled under his touch, how she stole away to the other side of the room whenever he entered. But it got worse after that… as a kid, I felt deeply guilty. I felt like I’d ruined my parents’ marriage.

But I was just a kid, and I was curious. My mom meant to dissuade me from asking more questions, but she accidentally gave away something that made me even *more* curious – the downstairs family had kids, maybe kids my own age to play with.

I wanted – *needed* to know about them, in the way that little kids *need* to understand all of the strangeness of this chaotic world, *need* to make sense of the nonsense that surrounds us daily. The nonsense that we become acclimated to as adults but struggle with endlessly as children, like a puzzle or a riddle or a word problem on a math test about buying eighty watermelons.

Another change following that critical night: the basement door was fitted with sturdy lock. Even still, I needed to know… there’s something horribly dreadful about finding out that a second basement family is abnormal, something more horrible still about not knowing who or *why.* By the time I was seven, I made up my mind to get to the bottom of it.

To avoid getting in trouble, I could only investigate when three conditions were met: I was home from school, my dad was still at work, and my mom wasn’t around to catch me. These circumstances rarely overlapped, but the first time I came home from school to find that my dad’s car wasn’t in the garage and my mom’s endless movement had driven her to the point of exhaustion, I threw off my shoes and crept to the basement door, quiet in my sock feet.

And then, I knocked.

It was a quiet knock, for fear of waking my mom from her nap, but it was a knock, nonetheless. It was more than just a knock, too, it was an initiation, an invitation, a confrontation of my life’s greatest – and most terrifying – mystery.

I jumped when a gentle knock returned from the other side. It was almost immediate… like the person on the other side had been *waiting* for me. The thought froze me in place for a moment, but I knew I didn’t any have time to waste.

My mouth felt suddenly of sandpaper and chalk, but I leaned into the door to whisper, “hi.”

“Hi.”

It was a little girl, her voice sweet yet timid. Like testing the keys on a piano for the first time.

“I-I’m Ricky. What’s your name?”

A long pause.

“Lila. My brother’s is Isaac, but he doesn’t talk so good. But he’s still little. Mommy says he’ll start talking when he’s ready.”

“There’s three of you down there?”

“Mhmm,” she replied simply, as if the entire situation felt as wholly normal for her as it had for me, on the opposite side of the basement door. “Daddy comes to visit sometimes, though, so I guess there’s four.”

My eyes widened as a flurry of questions began to sprout in my mind, but I heard my mom start to stir in her room. I sped down the hallway and into the playroom. I busied my hands with my toys, but my mind was somewhere else… the sprouts of questions continued to grow rapidly, soon overtaking my thoughts like an unruly patch of weeds.

And like weeds, the questions were stubborn; hard to – *impossible* to get rid of. The roots of the situation and its implication unraveled, stretched through my whole body. Fear planted itself firmly in my belly as I was forced to confront the possibility that I didn’t really know my dad, didn’t really know my own family at all. If my dad was Lila’s dad, too, what did that mean for me? For my family?

And why wasn’t she allowed to come out of the basement?

Over the next couple years, I stole away to the basement door in those rare moments of freedom. I got to know Lila, got to like her and eventually even to love her – she was my best friend. As a kid, I was pretty lonely; my classmates shied away from me for reasons I couldn’t quite understand, like something about me was inherently repellant to my peers. I only had one friend at school.

And at home, I had Lila.

As we spoke more, a never-ending stream of back and forth questioning crammed into the briefest moments of time, we both came to understand the differences between us, between our lives and our circumstances. The differences that at first felt so *normal* grew bigger and sharper and scarier than either of us could comprehend.

The unfairness of it all became impossible to ignore.

Lila lamented that she wasn’t allowed to go to school, that she couldn’t go outside to play or make friends or ride bikes around the cul-de-sac in the summer until the streetlamps flickered on and the cicadas started to scream. She even longed for the things I loathed most– homework, rinsing off my dishes after dinner, tidying up my room each Sunday morning.

She said she’d lived in that basement all of her life, was probably even *born* down there. She couldn’t remember anything different before being locked up in the cold and musty room.

I’m ashamed to admit this, but, eventually… I couldn’t manage the guilt I felt for living the life Lila never had, *could* never have in my mind. I was so young, so naïve… I didn’t know how to manage the situation anymore, so I did the only thing I could think of.

I stopped trying.

I stopped visiting Lila. No more secret, whispered exchanges; no more quick knocks on the door just to let her know that I was there, that anyone at all was there for her. Days and weeks and months and years trickled by with Lila never quite leaving my thoughts, but with her existence instead… *compartmentalized*.

Confined to the basement of my own mind.

At home, it was harder to keep thoughts of her locked away. When my dad brought her dinner hours past my bedtime, I’d lay awake warm in my bed. Sometimes I’d hear her scream. Sometimes I’d hear the tray clatter to the floor, the plate fracturing on impact. Sometimes I’d hear her crying – awful, painful sobs – while I assembled new Lego sets in the playroom.

Sometimes she… she would call out my name. I’ll never forgive myself for this – I hate myself for it, and I *deserve* to – but I ignored her every time.

Worst of all, though, was when she started knocking.

I was finishing up my science homework for the day when the first knock came.

A quiet knock… but a knock, nonetheless. An initiation, an invitation, a *confrontation*.

My blood ran cold as I realized where it was coming from; *who* it was coming from.

I hopped on my bike and didn’t come home until dinner was on the table.

That night, I heard my dad scream back at Lila for the first time. Yelled for her to *knock it off* with all the knocking. He took care of her, of her little brother and her mom, and that he could only do that if she stayed in the basement, if she stayed quiet.

She wasn’t persuaded, though, and her knocking only grew more frequent, and *louder*. I was about ten years old by then, so I had a little more freedom… all the freedom in the world, compared to Lila. I avoided my house at all costs, only returning in the evenings, where I’d be greeted immediately by the knocking.

By then, it was less knocking and more ramming the total weight of her body into the door. My mother took to vacuuming the house obsessively just to cover up the noise. She wouldn’t even look my dad in the eye anymore. I imagined the bruises blooming on Lila’s shoulder, up and down the length of her arm. If it hurt her, she didn’t let on.

She didn’t stop.

Sleep became a distant memory, leaving me dazed and irritable and confused and – most of all – terrified. I began showing up at my schoolfriend’s – now my *only* friend’s – house unannounced just to escape Lila’s knocking.

His parents clearly didn’t like me, and tensions rose between the two of us kids, escalating to a boiling point that ended in a fight. I slugged him in the gut, and he returned with the words that broke me – broke *everything*.

A blow far more powerful than he could’ve delivered with small hands balled up into fists.

“My mom says you’re a *bastard*, that your mom’s a *whore!*”

I had to look up the words in my dictionary when I got home.

I had to gather the courage to, once again, ask a difficult question: “Mom… am I a bastard?”

I had to watch my mom lose her momentum, to *stop* again.

I had to watch what little light she had left in her go out.

I had to sit there as she left the room, had to sit there spilling hot tears as the knocking kicked up again, each powerful thrust against the door wracking my mind, a painful reminder that Lila was coming for me.

But, my mom came back, and she returned with an old newspaper clipping in her hands, worn at the edges. She held it to her chest as she finally – *finally* – told me the truth about Lila, about Dad’s second family in the basement.

I was young, but I needed to know. My mom knew it, too.

Through choking sobs, she told me about my dad’s old family, the one he’d had and *made* before he met her. The horrible mistake they’d made, the one that gave her the best thing she’d ever had in her life but took away three others. About how my dad’s old wife was already skating on thin ice, her cries for help that went unanswered, how when she found out about what my mom and my dad were doing that what little was left beneath her shattered.

About how they couldn’t have known, but about the guilt she carried regardless – “like a heavy backpack, mom?”

“Yes, sweetie. But I can never put it down.”

That Lila was dead; and Isaac, too. That their mom had done *that* to them, and then did it to herself too. My dad found them in the basement when he got home from work. That he’d never forgiven himself, and my mom never had either. That when they reappeared back in the basement like nothing had happened, even after their bodies were taken and buried all those years ago, they couldn’t think of anything to do but to give them as normal of a life as possible.

Yet another difficult question: “but… why do they have to stay in the basement?”

I found out later that evening, when my dad came home from work and unlocked the door. Lila came out of the shadows, and I flinched instinctively as I saw her face for the first time, saw the gaping hole in her face where her left eye should have been. Isaac was little like Lila said, but the oozing wound to his jaw would have made it nearly impossible for him to speak if he had the chance to grow up.

I was scared at first, but I put on my brave face and took Lila by the hand. I played with Lila and Isaac for the first time; shared my toys with them, laughed with them. I didn’t meet their mom that day, but I would, years later. Once she and Lila and Isaac knew what became of them, she struggled to cope. She doesn’t come out often, but I treat her with kindness when she does. The woman I know her as now couldn’t imagine doing what she did.

My dad’s second family still stayed inside, but they were no longer confined to the shadows of the basement after that day. They became less of my dad’s *second* family as we all became one larger family that laughed and played and loved together.

I don’t live in that house anymore… I’m an adult now, with an enormous appreciation for all of the freedom and opportunities available to me that I once took for granted. I know my family is far from normal – even horrible and horrifying in many ways that I helped to perpetuate as a kid – but it’s all I’ve ever known. I love them… all of them.

I still visit whenever I can, for birthdays and for Christmas and for summer vacations. And whenever I do visit, I take a moment to be grateful for the fact that when I knock on the front door, [Lila opens it](https://www.reddit.com/r/hercreation/).

[X](https://www.reddit.com/r/thecrypticcompendium/)On my tenth birthday, I picked a dog from the pound. The pound had several beautiful dogs – huskies and German shepherds, sleek bluenose pit bulls and even a redbone hound – but the dog that caught my eye was a bowlegged teacup Chihuahua with wiry fur and ears that seemed to sprout from his neck.

His fur was prickly and he smelled like soggy corn chips. He also ate flies, snatching them out of the air like a clumsy frog.

So I named him Renfield.

Back then, we lived on five acres of golden forest. My favorite spot on the property was a hollow inside a wild hedge. It was the perfect hideout; you could only access the hollow by crawling along a hidden trench because the branches formed a thick, dangerous interlock on all sides.

I took Renfield inside the hedge that night. I remember the way sunlight shafted through the leaves and flowers, turning the space into a burrow of soft brown shadows overlaid with coppery light. My little dog looked up at me, eyes shining like amber in the dim. 

I petted him until he fell asleep. Then I crawled out of the hollow and called his name, intending to confuse him.

He panicked immediately, yelping and clawing madly at the impenetrable branches.

His terror felt like a gut punch. I crawled back into the hedge. The way he looked at me is burned into my memory: wide-eyed and joyfully relieved, but terrified. 

That look was all I could think of the day I put him to sleep.

I didn’t have a choice; I’d have him for eighteen years, and had medicated severe heart issues for four of those. He was in constant pain, so it was time.

But he knew something was wrong. He was so scared, and I scared him even more by crying. Tears always terrified him. 

I tried to push away the memory of that first night in the hedge, of the way I’d scared him. But I couldn’t, and no wonder. Putting him to sleep, I’d trapped him again.

Only this time, I had to leave him behind.

He was my last lifeline. I felt him slipping away as surely as a drowning man feels a wave carry away his life preserver.

My crybaby tendencies didn’t start or end with my dog. Take my dad. He’d been in a nursing home for years by that point. He developed Alzheimer’s early. The descent was brutal and swift. As if that wasn’t enough, he had pancreatic cancer – automatically terminal and unimaginably excruciating.

I stopped visiting around that time. Not because I didn’t want to see him, but because I couldn’t do it to him. Just try to imagine – you’re in horrific pain, you don’t know who or where you are, and your only visitor is a gaunt stranger who bursts into tears whenever they see you.

I scared him to death whenever I visited. I made his disorienting, painful days that much worse. Stole what little peace he had.

So I stopped.

I meant to sit with him at the end, when he’d be in a drug-induced sleep so deep he wouldn’t notice me holding his hands and sobbing. But I wasn’t there when he died. I was at my doctor’s office, digesting the news that I, too, was going to be sick for the rest of my life. 

I dreamed about my dad that night. He was trapped in the hedge and screaming for help. I tried to show him the way out for what felt like hours, but I was invisible. He couldn’t see me or hear me. As far as he knew, he was alone. Somehow, in that irrepressible logic of dreams, I knew it was my fault.

I woke up crying.

It was enough. I’d had *enough*.

I’m not stupid or naïve. Life is a tide. And the shitty truth is some of us live on a stormy coast.

I knew this.

But I wanted a break. Just a couple of hours where I didn’t feel sad.

So I went online, hoping to stumble on some kind of guided imagery technique or hypnotic ASMR. Something to create an artificially happy place, at least for a little while.

I tried everything. Nothing worked. I kept searching anyway, trawling increasingly weird websites far into the night because the search itself was addicting. Not a happy place, but certainly a distracting one.

Sometime in the middle of the fifth night, I found an ancient Geocities page titled:

*a recipe for happiness*

I clicked, of course.

*Are you tired of feeling bad? Want to cheer up? Well have I got good news for you. My friend gave me this RECIPE FOR HAPPINESS that works like a charm!*

*There are TWO PARTS to the Recipe*

What followed was a pretty standard honey cake recipe, although the last instructions gave me pause:

*Mix the ingredients together in a glass bowl, then spit in the mixture*

*Cook at whatever temperature you want for EXACTLY 20 minutes*

*Cut in half. Put half outside your door. Eat the other half during…*

*PART TWO!!*

*Take one HAPPY MEMORY and MEDITATE*

*Think of someone who makes you happy*

*Plan a perfect day*

*Go to sleep thinking about your perfect day*

*Do this and your sorrow will be eaten away!!!*

It made me smile. Eating cake while meditating on happier times wasn’t bad advice. So I gave it a try. I even spit in the cake batter.

I cut the cake and set half of it on the porch. Tendrils of steam twirled into the darkness, lit pale silver by the full moon. 

I curled up the couch to eat the remaining half. For my happy memory, I chose that first evening in the hollow: my little dog, lit to soft brilliance by the dying sun.

As for someone who made me happy, I picked my dad.

Then I planned a perfect day. Or rather, remembered it.

I’d just started my first real job, and still lived with my parents. I’d had a good day at work. My dog met me in the driveway, prancing and wiggling like he hadn’t seen me for years. Dad cooked an early dinner and told jokes while my mom played her guitar. It rained that night. We went out to the porch, watching palm trees sway as torrents poured down. My dog was scared, so I picked him up and held him as thunder roared.

Afterward, we ate brownies and ice cream. Then I settled in for the night and read a book until I fell asleep, with my dog cured at my feet.

As I drifted off, smiling at the memory, I swore I could feel him there: warm and surprisingly heavy, sprawling lazily over my toes. 

When I woke, that warm weight had shifted to my pillow.

A terrible, painful hope coursed through me, one I couldn’t even acknowledge.

I opened my eyes.

Something tiny lay on my pillow in a drying pool of blood. Fuzzy and weirdly dirty, exuding drifting grey filaments that sparkled in the sun. Three milky eyes glinted over a horror show of a snout: cracked and bleeding, bursting with an improbable cluster of human molars. 

It blinked – each eye just slightly out of tandem, opening and closing with a soft, wet *click* - and smiled. Ropes of bloody drool leaked between its teeth. It placed two cold paws on my face.

Then it lowered its mouth over my own and inhaled.

Breath and blood and every organ in my body seemed to travel up my esophagus. Like God Himself was sucking my guts through a straw.

I whipped my head from side to side as the awful bottleneck sensation intensified.  All my guts were coming up, and so were emotions - no, *memories*: half-forgotten nightmares. Painful images of my withered father. The last time I saw my mother, dressed for work and setting a bowl of oatmeal on the counter while driving rain fell.  And my dog, my poor little dog, trying to run from the needle up until the very end.  

I screamed into the mouth of the monster. I expected it to fly off, but it *inflated*: a furry flesh balloon growing, growing, growing –

Without warning, it let go.

I stumbled back, gagging. The monster – an engorged orb the size of a German Shepherd – simply smiled. Hazy morning light filtered through the window, bathing it in soft white.

Rage inexplicably built in my chest, growing exponentially every second.

“Are,” it croaked, then burped.

I wanted to kill it, to plunge my arms elbow-deep into its disgusting, distended body, and –

“Are you sad?” it asked.

A storm of emotion – rage, disgust, contempt, even hilarity – roiled through me. Overwhelming, overpowering, and paralyzing.

“No. You have no sadness.” It poked its belly with a ridiculousy small hand. “I have it.”

It took a long, long time, but I finally realized that this absurd abomination hadn’t eaten my guts.

It ate my feelings.

No sadness. No pain. No more stinging memories. Rage and confusion, sure. But underneath that was a satisfied calm akin to bliss.

I left it alone in my bedroom and went for a drive.

When I came back, I asked, “What are you?”

“A special treat,” it answered.

I decided I’d had a psychotic break, and voluntarily checked myself into a hospital. After two days of assessments, they found nothing wrong. Why would they? I was on an even keel, basking in a curiously blank inner peace.

When I got home, the monster was in my bed. Jolly, indecent roundness had withered to skeletal proportions. It looked awful. Starved. 

“I need,” it gasped. “I need, or you will suffer again.”

The prospect of returning to a life of despair, of *loss*, was crushing; I couldn’t even fathom how I’d survived it in the first, and felt I’d never be able to do it again.

So I knelt by the bed and opened my mouth. The monster latched on and inhaled. The unpleasant bottleneck sensation returned: like my insides were crowding my windpipe. And with it, memories and feelings: the rage I’d experienced upon meeting the monster; contempt at its ugliness; the fear of insanity. And more: my dog, old and grey, waddling happily after me. My father in his hospital bed, smiling uncertainly as he said my name for the last night. And more, and more –

I wrenched away, gasping. The monster smiled, fat and rotund again.

Over the following days, we developed a routine. I went to work and attended doctor appointments, even visited friends. Then I came home and let the monster extract my negative feelings. Bad client at work? Removed and forgotten before the memory could sink in. Friend who wouldn’t make eye contact? What did I care, my pet monster would take care of it like he took care of everything else.

That’s what it did, you see: removed the feelings, the vibrancy, the *pain,* from painful things. Over the course of several weeks, it removed everything; I knew, dimly, that I experienced awful things on a daily basis, but I didn’t *remember* them.

The monster removed triggers, too: before the year was up, the sight of my dog’s bed no longer made me cry. Photos of my parents held almost no interest; I flipped through them on a regular basis, skimming places and faces that had so recently crushed me.

All the while, that peaceable bliss intensified. I flitted through life in a pleasant haze of calmness. My work life improved. My supervisor started talking about a promotion because I was so unflappable, so decisive. My friends were able to look at me again. And – for the first time in months – I was confident enough to reach out to them. 

One day as I drove home from work, I realized I hadn’t looked at my photos in a very long time. It’s not that I cared, exactly. But it was a deviation. Those things no longer caused me pain, and I had nothing better to do.  So why not view them?

I got home and obediently kneeled. The monster – now the size of a horse, twisted and bent like a mutated spider – fixed its mouth over mine. I’d come to enjoy the process. It was uncomfortable and unpleasant, but familiar. And afterward, I always felt *happy*: peaceful, empty, and warm.

When it finished, I opened my mother’s photo album and began to browse.

After a while, I realized I didn’t recognize anybody. I remembered remembering them.

But I didn’t remember them.

The stout man with curly hair like mine, the athletic woman who smiled like me, and the numerous people who wove in and out of this photographic narrative…they all were strangers. 

I reached a picture of my ten-year-old self cuddling a ragged, homely Chihuahua. Ghosts of memories tickled my brain, urging me to remember, urging me to *know.* 

And I understood, finally, that I had lost something.

I don’t know why I cared. I felt so happy. Peaceful. My life was painless. I was great.

But I was also selfish. And I didn’t like the idea that the monster had taken so much.  Where was the line between happiness and emptiness? I didn’t want to be empty. I wanted to be full.

So, after many days of deliberation, I decided to make a change.

I called off work, canceled much-needed doctor appointments, and settled in to search online.

“What are you doing?” the monster asked.

“Looking up some special recipes,” I said with a bland smile.

It took seven days, but I found the original recipe. At the bottom of the page was another entry:

*a recipe for sadness*

Underneath were the words:

*If you’re really dumb, you can undo happiness =( You shouldn’t, but it’s up to you. So here.*

*Mix cake batter folloing the INSTRUCTIONS above*

*Cut your hand and drip your blood into the batter*

*Cook the cake as instructed Above*

*Cut the cake in half*

*Give half to your Happiness, and eat the other half*

*Now here’s the sad part!!*

*Remember the happy memory you meditated on*

*Remember the person who made you happy*

*Remember your perfect day*

*Choose one to forget, OR…*

*Choose to never be happy again*

*Or better yet, don’t kill your happiness in the first place!*

I agonized for days.

My monster – my happiness, my joy – continued to drain my pain, uncertainty, and fear. He quickly grew to three times his size.

Finally, I made my decision.

It would be better to live in pain forever than to forget my father, my mother, or my dog.

So I followed the recipe: sweet honey cake, poisoned with blood instead of saliva. Then I cut it in half and brought it to my monster.

I expected something awful. A fight that left my bloody shreds ground into the carpet. 

But the monster only smiled. Round, flat eyes the size of dinner plates fixed on the blood cake. “What is that?”

“A special recipe.” I gulped, but the beast was so focused on the cake that it didn’t notice. “Just for you.”

“Thank you.” It opened its mouth.

I placed the cake delicately on its tongue. It chewed eagerly, and shrank. Fat, firm sides caved, ragged rolls of empty flesh falling against its bones.

Pain built in my guts and chest, roiling and fluttering. Shivers wracked my spine. My warm, even-keeled peace shrank along with the monster that had granted it, leaving cold desolation in its place. 

By the time the monster shriveled into a flat, boneless mass of dusty fur, I was prostrate on the floor, sobbing. Memories flooded back, pummeling me, leaving me breathless with pain. They pressed against me and threatened to explode *out* of me, pinning me in place. I couldn’t move. I couldn’t even dream of moving.

I could only lay there and hurt.

After my dad died, someone told me that pain is a fugue. It’ll break apart eventually, giving way to happiness again the way a nightmare opens to the morning. But my experience is opposite. There is no fugue. Sorrow is sharp, it is devastating, it is painfully present, and sometimes there’s no way out.

The recipe writer was right. I suffer every day, more than I did before. Like the universe is punishing me for those few months of stolen peace. It’s bad. So bad that sometimes I think I made the wrong choice. 

But then I remember my dad. I remember my mom. I remember our perfect day filled with songs and bad jokes and warm, driving rain. 

I remember my dog, nestled in warm, coppery shadows.

And even though I hurt, I am okay.
[Part One](https://redd.it/brco33)
****
[Part Two](https://redd.it/brsj8v)
****
[Part Three](https://redd.it/bsg2az)
****



I had to do something, and I had to do it right now.  If Melanie was somehow a fake, that meant they must have sent her.  And if they sent her, that meant they knew.  They knew about the messages in her painting.  They knew about me asking questions.  And they knew I didn’t hit a button during any of it.

I felt panic and fear crawling up my chest, making it hard to breathe.  Standing up, I started pacing, periodically glancing back at the monitor to see if Rachel could help me, tell me what I needed to do next.  But she had laid down on her bed.  It was hard to tell for sure with her back to the camera, but I think she was crying.

No, I needed to fix this.  Get her out of there.  And if I didn’t have a better plan, I’d just have to go with the one I already had.  

Feeling the hard eye of the ceiling camera on me, I went to the door and stepped back into the locker room.  My phone was in my locker, and after messing up the combination the first time, I got the door open and got it out.  Gripping it tightly, I tried to hold it by my side casually, but I knew there was little point.  If they knew everything, I wasn’t going to be able to hide anything.  I just had to try and be fast, get some kind of message out to people that could help Rachel before they got to me.

I opened the camera on the phone as I re-entered the surveillance room and hit record.  It made a small beeping noise and once I was sure it was recording, I turned the camera on myself.

“My name…my name is Tommy.  Thomas Calhoun.  And my job is watching a woman trapped in a room.  This is not a joke or a movie or…whatever.  This is real.  For three years my job is to sit in this room…”  I moved the camera slowly around the room, taking in the door to the bathroom, the water cooler, the desk with the monitors, keyboard, and button box, “…and watch a video feed of a woman locked up in a bedroom somewhere.”  I stepped closer to the desk and made sure the monitor showing Rachel was clear and in focus.  “I didn’t know this woman was a prisoner at first…or I tricked myself into thinking she wasn’t because the money was good.  Either way, I know she is now.  She is in danger and so am I.”

After lingering on video of her for a few more seconds to make sure every detail could be seen, I turned the camera back on myself.  I had to hurry, or the video might be too big to send quickly.  I was trying to stay calm, but I felt myself tearing up as I went on, and I did my best to keep my words clear.  “Please help her.  I don’t know where she is.  I don’t know who has her, because I don’t know who I really work for.  But they are bad people and she is not safe.”

“All I know is that I work at a building at [redacted] right outside of San Antonio.  (Per Nosleep rules, to be clear this address is not real.) I only know the names of two other people connected to this place.  The man who hired me, Mr. Solomon.  And a man who might have a job like mine…Charlie Jeffers…no, Jefferies I think.  I don’t know if they are real people…I mean, I don’t know if that is their real names.  Please.  I’m not crazy.  I know how this sounds.  Just come here, see the room.  Figure out where she is and help her.  And…”

I heard the muffled sound of the outer door opening into the locker room and I frantically fumbled with the phone to stop the recording.  How do I send?  Oh no, how do I…there it is.  I hit the button to share, and felt a new panic rising.  Who should I send it to?  I had only a handful of contacts, and I just selected them all.  Maybe at least one of them would take it seriously and get help.  As I heard the door to the surveillance room opening behind me, I hit send.

**Not connected to data service or WiFi.  Please send again when connected.**

*What?  No no no no…*

I turned to see Mr. Solomon entering the room.  He was flanked by two large men in dark suits that looked like bodyguards or something.  Raising a finger, he wagged it at me.  

“No service in here, Thomas.  But then you should never need service in here, so long as you followed the rules.”

****

They took me easily.  I tried to make it to the bathroom and close the door, but the two guards stopped me and pulled me down.  They put the…what do you call them?  Zipties on my hands and feet and pulled a black bag over my head.  Then I was being carried out of the room and it felt like they must have put me in the back of a van that was pulled right up to the building.  I was laying on what felt like thin, weird smelling carpet that covered a hard metal layer underneath.

I heard someone get into the van with me, and I asked where we were going.  If they would just take me and let Rachel go.  There was a short laugh overhead and then Mr. Solomon’s voice as he told me that he would explain everything when we got where we were going.  For now, he said, I needed to relax.  It was a long drive and I would need the rest.  

I went to say more, but then I felt a sharp pain in my neck.  They had stabbed me, or…no, they injected me with something.  I was feeling so strange now, but I had to stay awake.  I had to try and get away, I had to…

****

“Hello again, Thomas.”

I blinked as I began looking around.  My mouth was dry and my head hurt, but otherwise I felt okay.  I wasn’t tied up any more--Instead I was laying back on a padded table like I’d seen when I went to the doctor.

But this wasn’t a doctor’s office.  The room was large, and aside from the padded table, it held a small bed, a desk with a computer monitor on it, and a couple of chairs.  Sitting in one of those chairs was Mr. Solomon.

I raised up slowly, blinking at him.  “Where is she?  Is Rachel okay?”

The man smiled.  “You really are something, Thomas.  Trying to be the hero, even if you don’t quite know how.  I respect that.”  Licking his lips, he leaned forward slightly.  “In fact, I respect that so much that I’ve decided to start our new relationship with as much honesty as I’m allowed.  Some of my colleagues disagree with this approach, but you know what?  Fuck them.  This is my project, and I think you deserve to know what’s going on.”  Looking more serious, he stood up, lifting the gun he had been holding casually in his lap.  “But before we get into the details, would you like to see Rachel?”

I slid off the table and nodded as I caught myself from falling.  My legs were still wobbly from whatever they had given me, but I barely noticed.  “Yes, please.  Let me see her.  The real her.”

Mr. Solomon gave a small laugh and gestured toward a nearby door.  “Yes, reality is always best.  She’s just there in the next room.”  

I stumbled my way forward, my legs getting better as I walked, and when I grabbed the doorknob, it turned easily.  I expected the door to lead to her bedroom, but instead it opened into another room a lot like the one I had been in, though the stuff in it was different.  Strange machines filled the walls, and in the back of the room was a large…aquarium?  I didn’t know.  It was a big cylinder taller than I was, and it was filled with some kind of gray liquid.   There was a shape in that liquid,

“Go ahead, Thomas.  Feel free to go have a good look.  You’ve earned it.”  I felt my stomach clenching tighter at Mr. Solomon’s words and the meanness in them.  My legs felt heavy again now, but it wasn’t from the drugs this time.

Shuffling forward, I could see the shape was a person.  *Oh no*  Or at least a body, because it was clear from just looking at it that the person was dead.  It was very well-preserved, but I could see how the skin hung wrong and looked bloated in spots.  *Oh God, no no no*  Its hair, which had been floating like seaweed in front of its face, drifted away as I reached the glass, and I could see Rachel staring out at me.

“Murderer!”  I turned on Solomon and started to run toward him when he shot me.  Suddenly I was on the ground convulsing as he stepped closer.

“Don’t worry, Thomas.  It won’t kill you.  Just make you unable to move much for a bit.”  I heard more footfalls as my body began to still.  “Get him up, take him back to the other room.”

I could barely feel anything as I was carried back to the padded table and propped up into a sitting position.  This time I was strapped down, but I guessed it was more so I didn’t fall off, because I couldn’t move anything other than my head, and even that just a little.  I could hardly see at all for crying, but I recognized the blurry shape of Solomon sitting back down in front of me.

“Before you ask…well, when you are able to ask anything again, yes, that is Rachel.  Not a fake Rachel, not a dummy, and not some kind of trick.  As I said, the time for tricks is past.  Now is the time for truth.”

Frowning slightly, he went on.  “Thomas, I understand that showing you that, showing you her body that way, might seem very cruel.  You may hate me for it right now.  I would understand it if you did.  But you called me a murderer, and at least in this specific context, I think that is unfair, because I didn’t kill Rachel.  In truth, I’ve been with this aspect of the project for only seven years.”

He gestured back to the door behind him.  “And Rachel has been dead for over eight.”

I felt my eyes widen as though they belonged to someone else’s body.  It was more lies.  More tricks.  All of it.  Oh God, it had to be.

“Do you know what remote viewing is?”  He rolled his eyes.  “Sorry, right, you can’t talk right now.  I’ll just assume you don’t.  Remote viewing is a broad term for the ability to see things that are far away from you physically, to know things you shouldn’t be able to know through your normal five senses.  Some describe it as a psychic ability, though there are several schools of thought as to how and why it works.”

His eyes fixed on mine intently.  “Because it does work, Thomas.  Various governments and private organizations have studied it for a very long time, and while publicly it is always ridiculed as pseudoscience and foolish superstition, the reality is that some people have the innate ability…that means it comes naturally…to somehow see other places.”

“Rachel was one of those people.  She came into the program when she was seventeen, having been identified via a front-facing screening process that was ran as a psychological test that paid subjects well at a time when Rachel was looking to make some money.  Three months after being identified as a good candidate, she was taken, and after the initial adjustment period, she became a largely compliant asset that quickly rose to the top of our talent pool.”

Solomon folded his hands on his knee.  “I know you cared for her, Thomas, so I think this is worth sharing.  Rachel was never treated badly, other than her confinement and the occasional test that was mildly unpleasant.  No, we all treasured her.  She was enormously talented, not just as a remote viewer, but as an artist.  That’s how she would convey what she saw, you understand.  She would enter into an almost trancelike state when she painted, and when she was done, she would have given us a painting of images and words that provided…well, it was very valuable information.”  He chuckled.  “If you ever wondered, that’s why there was always such care that the paintings were never shown to the camera.”

Picking at his pants, he went on.  “Rachel was so talented, that she was selected for a new program that we thought might greatly enhance or alter her ability.  We introduced something…foreign…into her body.  At first, nothing seemed to change.  If anything, the accuracy of her remote viewing was declining, which was a problem for us and for her.”

“But then we realized that we were reading the new paintings wrong.  She was able to see more clearly than ever--she just was no longer bound to only current events.  Now her sight transcended time.”  He paused, and I realized he was enjoying telling the story.  The bastard was having a good time, pausing to make it more dramatic.  I would fucking kill him.  “While this made some of her paintings less immediately useful, they became much more valuable as we were able to decipher them.  For a time, it looked as though everything was working better than we had ever hoped.”

His lips thinned.  “And then, one day, she showed a painting to the camera.”

“It said, ‘Please help me Thomas’.  This immediately sent up all kinds of red flags.  She knew not to show paintings to the camera, and now she was trying to communicate with someone?  We didn’t disrupt her routine, but an intensive investigation began into who she was talking to.  Was it one of her handlers?  One of the technicians?  Someone from her past life?  But nothing checked out.”

Leaning back in his chair, a look of pride grew on Solomon’s face as he continued.  “I was the one that first suggested the idea that she was, intentionally or not, knowingly or not, seeing and talking to someone in the future.  I was still an outside consultant at the time, but by that point we had more strange behaviors from her, including the second message painting, ‘That girl isn’t me’.  My theory made some sense, but it very quickly ran into a greater obstacle.”

“The introduction of the foreign material had not been as seamless as we had hoped, despite her having been stable for almost three years since it was implanted.  Whether it was due to her increasing emotional upset and stress, or simply the passage of time, she suddenly began to deteriorate.  Her work became more erratic and hard to understand as her body began to decline.  We were monitoring her health closely, but it didn’t matter.  Five days after she painted ‘That girl isn’t me’, she suddenly went into cardiac arrest and died.  Somewhat inexplicably, we were unable to resuscitate her.”

The man sighed.  “This was a great loss.  And it required adjustments of my theory.  Based on everything we knew, it still made sense that she was talking to someone.  Someone with access to the camera feed, and very likely someone named Thomas.  If Thomas was viewing that camera footage in the future, as I believed, then he must be working for us in the future.”  He gave me a thin smile.  “And whether you believe that the future is set in stone or not, I’m all for giving it a helping hand.”

“Seven years ago I began the Thomas Project.  Over the course of that time I have overseen the screening and hiring of forty-three men named Thomas at several different sites, all with one very specific job.  To watch the videos of Rachel from just before her implant to the time of her death.”

I tried to speak, but my mouth still wouldn’t work.  I wanted to say he was lying, that it didn’t make sense, that it *was* another trick…but I think I wanted to hear it more for myself.  Because I didn’t think he was lying.  I didn’t think it was a trick.  And I thought I was starting to understand.

“The point wasn’t really them watching the videos, of course.  It was how they *reacted* to watching the videos.  What they did, and how that matched up with what Rachel had done in response in the past.”

“Thirteen percent quit after the first day.  Thirty-eight percent hit either the red or the green button after the first message asking for help and saying their name.  Twenty-two percent attempted to contact the authorities before reaching the stage where ‘Melanie’ was introduced.”  He shook his head slightly.  “I wish I could take credit for her introduction, but it wasn’t my suggestion.  We assumed from the ‘that girl isn’t me’ message that there was a double of Rachel introduced to you at some point, perhaps to kill you or dissuade you or find out what you knew.  But it took a few tries until we felt it was well-refined, and as I’ve pointed out, only twenty-seven percent made it that far.  And all of them failed the next test.”  He pointed at me.

“Her name.”

“You see, the girl you’ve been watching, that talented, wonderful girl whose body is preserved in the next room?  Her name was Rachel Donovan.  I had always wondered if Rachel was merely seeing you, or if there was some kind of connection between the two of you.  When you called ‘Melanie’ Rachel, I knew that we had finally found the right Thomas--the distant point of light that our Rachel was looking at across space and time.”

I swallowed thickly and found I could feel my tongue, if only a little.  Slurring badly, I pushed out a single word.

“W-why?”

Solomon looked surprised.  “I’d have thought that’d be clear by now.  You’re our only remaining link to one of our greatest treasures.  Perhaps you have a similar ability, or it may be that she forged the link purely though her own talent and will.  But either way, you are important and you have more work to do.”  He stood up and moved over to the table where he turned on the monitor.  As it came to life, I saw it was a frozen image of Rachel’s room--a tape paused where I had left off watching.  Turning back to me, the man looked solemn.

[“You have to watch the rest of it.  Because Rachel painted you more pictures before she died, and we have to know what they mean.”](https://redd.it/9ndww5)

**** 

[Final Part](https://redd.it/bue2kk)Yes, I can see people’s auras. 

And I hate saying it so bluntly.  It makes me sound like some hack psychic who fakes the ability as a means of exploitation and a paycheck.  I’ve never made money from my ability. I’ve never taken advantage of it.  And, until now, I’ve never spoken of it to anybody.

But I really do see them, and I’m starting to view it as more of a curse.  I have a reason for typing this out and I assure you, there isn’t a happy ending.   

For me, it’s quite simple.  I see a faint light surrounding people.  Everyone.  And in that light, I can see their *morality*.  The brighter and more translucent the light is, the better the person.  The darker and opaquer, the worse.  Dim and partly translucent are morally ambiguous.   To simplify things, those are the three ways I describe them.  Dark equals evil.   Bright equals good.  Dim equals somewhere in between.  It’s strange, I’ve always viewed the people with grey/dim auras as… arbiters.  Mediators.  The people in between, who aren’t one or the other, and will always have difficult decisions to make.

I was a child when I first became aware of my gift.  It didn’t take long to figure out that the brighter auras were kinder to me and selfless.  While both of my parents are good people, my father’s aura was quite a bit brighter than my mothers.  As a result, he was always far more patient and understanding with me.   It was clear to see that my teachers and fellow students with brighter auras were usually friendlier and more compassionate.  The dark auras were the stereotypical fighters, lunch money stealers, and bullies.  I would say I was around 8 years old when I fully figured out that I have a gift that most people don’t have.  That possibly *nobody* else has.

I’ve read some of the ‘new age’ websites and alternative medicine articles that give their take on aura reading.  While I believe that the vast majority of it is bullshit, I expect there must be at least SOME other people out there with my ability.  So I don’t want to completely dismiss those people as an outright hoax.  It’s just that, for me, it doesn’t work anything like the way those websites describe.  I’ve visited numerous aura readers and psychics.  Most of them have dim or dark auras themselves, and I’m certain they don’t really hold this power.  I’m not saying all “psychics” are terrible people.  I’ve visited a few who had very bright auras.  They were unable to convince me that they really have psychic powers, but they at the very least used their deception to try and help people.  

You need to understand… I’m going to end this entry by sharing a terrifying event that is happening to me.  But before I get to that, I think there are a few more things I need to explain.  I imagine many of you are curious as to what type of aura is the most common.  I’m happy to tell you that the majority of people are somewhere between dim and bright.  I see very few dark auras.  This isn’t scientific, and I haven’t traveled the world plotting out charts and graphs, but I’d estimate around 60% of people are bright-ish.  Around 25% dim-ish.  Leaving just around 15% dark-ish.  Again, these are just estimates.  What’s the precise difference between, say, bright and dim?  I have no idea.  But rest assured, there is far more “bright” in the world than “dark”.

The next thing I’d like to discuss is children.  I can see a person’s aura right from birth, and I’ve never encountered an aura changing as someone ages.  I’m not sure what this means for the whole nature vs nurture debate.  And I’m not saying that everyone with a dark aura always behaves terribly, or vice versa.  A person with a bright aura might be born in horrible conditions, acquire a drug problem, and then resort to thievery to feed their addiction.  I think the difference is this… a bright aura thief with a horrible upbringing may rob someone, but they would never intentionally hurt someone in the process.  A dark aura thief would kill someone if they could get away with it without even a second thought.  

Another interesting note…  I find the ratio between bright/dim/dark to be similar across pretty much all human activities.  Whether I’m at a church or a death metal concert, it always seems to be around that same 60%-25%-15% ratio.  I once visited a federal prison and was shocked to see that at least half of the prisoners had bright auras.  I had to be at the prison in person to see this because I can’t see auras on photographs, television shows, movies, or even in mirrors.  I can only see auras in the real world.  Another strange thing… I can’t even see my own aura.   I assume and hope I would be on the brighter spectrum… but I can’t see it.

The brightest person I ever saw worked as a social worker.  She shone so bright that it was difficult for me to even look at her.  Based on the way people acted in her presence, I think that almost everyone around her could sense her brightness in a subconscious way.  Everyone loved her. She had donated a kidney to someone she barely even knew.  She had a special needs adopted child.  Most of the money she earned was donated to various charities.  And that’s only the little that I knew of her.  This woman shined so brightly that she scared me.  It was scary that someone could be so good.

But it wasn’t nearly as scary as the darkest person I ever saw.  I was 20 years old at the time, leaving a club downtown at 2 am.  A man quietly walked down the street.  I didn’t see him at first, but I noticed the light dimming around me.  This man was so dark that he partly absorbed the light around him.  I looked at him long and hard.  He looked desperate, cruel, and callous.  When he looked up and locked eyes with me, it made me fall back.  He smirked, as though he knew what I could see.  I saw his face up close.  I would never forget it.  And I recognized it when I saw his mugshot a few weeks later in the newspaper.  He had murdered his ex-wife and two children in cold blood.  

I think I need to get to it now.  The reason why I’m writing this out.  

I fell in love a year ago.  She didn’t shine anywhere near as bright as what I’ve seen before, but she most assuredly wasn’t dark or even dim.  She was beautiful.  Her sense of humor, her wit, her.. everything.  She was my dream woman.  And I’ve never told her anything at all about the auras I see.  I could go into far more about her but this isn’t a love story.  What’s important is this:  We fell in love.  She got pregnant.  We got married.  We were happy.  We were *so* happy.

I remember hearing the buzz of my phone two mornings ago.  I remember my excitement when I saw “It’s happening.  Come to the hospital.”  I remember my frustration when I got stuck in traffic.  I remember how long it took to find a parking spot.  I remember shouting at a nurse “WHAT ROOM IS MY WIFE IN.”  I remember bursting through a door and seeing the smile on my wife’s face.  I remember seeing the doctor, his light shining so bright, as he told me “Congratulations, it’s a boy.”

The doctor held him up to me.  

And all the light in the room dissipated.  

“No, this can’t be.”  I remember saying.    The doctor put him in my arms.  

The darkness around my son was so absolute that I could barely even see him.  He was a void.  He was so dark that the world barely even existed around him.  It was like nothing I’d ever experienced.  I started weeping.  I think my wife and the doctor thought they were tears of joy.  But they weren’t.  Lord knows they weren’t.

I think back to the dark outline around that man that murdered his family.  It was up to that point the darkest I’d ever seen.  But the darkness around my son was 100 times worse.  A *thousand* times worse.  And what could possibly be a thousand times worse than murdering your entire family?

It’s been two days.  We’re home now.  My son’s darkness is so extreme that it dims the hallway leading to his room.  My wife knows something is wrong.  I think she suspects I’m having regrets about having children at all.  If only she knew…

What do I do?  He’s my son.  Just 20 minutes ago I stood above him, holding a pillow over his face.  But I couldn’t do it.  Not yet anyway.  A man who could murder his two-day old baby boy: what color would his aura be? 

And here’s the thought that keeps going through my mind as I sit here alone.  The fathers of our worst.  The Adolf Hitler’s.  Joseph Stalin’s.  Timothy McVeigh’s. If their fathers knew what they would become, would they murder them in the cradle?  Would they have the strength to hold down the pillow as long as it takes?

I can see the door of my son’s room from my office.  The hallway seems to be growing darker.  I look down at my hands as I type this.  Maybe I’m going crazy, but there seems to be an aura around my hands and arms now.  It’s gray.  It’s dim.  Maybe it’s always been dim.  

I’m looking down at the pillow beside me.    The grayish dim outline around my hands more apparent than ever. Maybe it’s time.  Maybe this is why I have this gift.  It all comes down to right now.  

Maybe it’s time.

I think it’s time.
I remember the day I started to lose my hearing. I remember it because two things had happened the day before; I'd received a particularly painful numbing injection at the dentist's office prior to having some work done and my daughter was raped and left for dead in a dumpster just outside her college campus.


We got the call at 4 AM. Being woken like that, by a shrill ringing in the otherwise still and quiet dark, is something no one should have to experience. You know before you pick up that something has happened, that something life changing is about to be dropped in your lap, and all you can do is answer. 


"Mr. Barrister?" The voice on the other end said. "I'm sorry to call at this hour. It's about your daughter."


I'll never forget those words or the icy way they wrapped around my heart. My daughter, my baby girl. I looked at my wife, she looked back at me, and she knew. If I never again hear the sound she made then, I will consider myself blessed. 


In the flurry of packing and finding a flight to get to Emily and all of the gut wrenching worry, I didn't even notice it at first. It wasn't until we were in the air and Helena was whispering prayers under her breath beside me that I heard it; a high pitched keen in my left ear that came in what I can only describe as short beeps. It reminded me of hearing test tones. 


I stuck my finger in my ear and wiggled it around, trying to lessen the sound, but it remained, steady and irritating and beeping. 


It was pushed to the back of my mind the moment we landed, however, and we raced from the airport to the hospital, where Emily was lying unconscious with a row of machines standing vigil at her bedside. I'd seen them countless times before, I knew what they each did and why they were attached to her, but in that moment, they were strange, mechanical monstrosities that made her look so small and frail.


As we sat there, stroking her hair and telling her how we loved her, I had a flashback to the only other time Emily had ever been in a hospital. She had been six, maybe seven, and it was bedtime. She wanted to stay up longer like her older brother, but I told her to stop jumping on her bed and to settle down for sleep. I turned my back for just a minute, I don't even remember why, and she slipped. Blood was pouring out of a nasty gash over her eye where she'd struck the headboard and she was screaming.


After we'd calmed her down and got a look at the wound, we agreed she'd need stitches. While Helena got her dressed, I called the hospital where I worked as an anesthetist and got ahold of one of my doctor buddies to let him know I was coming in. Helena stayed home with our son while I took Emily in.


"Is it gonna hurt?" Emily asked from the backseat. She was staring at me in the rearview mirror, one eye covered by the cloth she was pressing against her forehead.


"No, I'll make sure it doesn't."


"How?" My little girl, ever the skeptic.


"Remember how we talked about how Daddy makes people go to sleep for his job?" It had become something of a joke in our house; better behave or Daddy'll put you to sleep...*forever*!


"Yeah?"


"Sometimes I only make *part* of a person fall asleep. That way, the nice doctors can make them better and they don't even feel it!"


"You're gonna do that to me?"


"Yep."


"And you're gonna stay with me the whole time?"


"Of course."


She barely winced when I injected the local anesthetic and then fell asleep during the actual stitches. 


Emily was a tough little girl.


She was a tougher young woman. 


It took her three days to wake up. In that time, the hearing in my left ear had started to fade until the only thing I could hear with absolute clarity was that high pitched ringing I'd first noticed on the plane.


*Beep. Beep. Beep.*


I couldn't worry about it just then, though, not when my family needed me so badly, and I didn't mention it to anyone. 


Emily's recovery was a slow process. She claimed not to remember who had attacked her and said she couldn't offer any description or statement to the police. She was tightlipped about what happened, even with her mother, with whom she'd shared everything. My carefree, forever smiling daughter was now haunted and every time she looked at me, there was such pain etched deeply into her eyes. 


I'd never felt so helpless or hollow.


After she was released from the hospital, she quietly withdrew from school and moved back in with me and her mother, where she spent most of her days shut away in her room.


All the while, the deafness and ringing in my ear continued.


*Beep. Beep. Beep.*


Still, I put off going to get it checked out. I figured it was some kind of screw up from the dentist's injection and there wouldn't be much that could be done about it anyway. It would be almost impossible to prove. 


My focus was entirely on Emily and helping her in any way I could, my own issues be damned. We got her into therapy, we researched healing techniques, we devoted ourselves entirely to her physical and mental health in every way she would allow. It took months, but she started to smile again, the night terrors started to recede, and, piece by piece, our Emily started to come back to us.


We had just started discussing whether she felt comfortable enough to return to school when things began to unravel.


Emily had come to the hospital where I worked to have lunch with me. We were sitting in the cafeteria, our trays of food untouched in front of us while we talked about what courses she might like to take. She was in the middle of telling me about a genealogy class she was interested in when she froze, mid sentence, and the color drained from her face.


"Kiddo? You ok?"


I followed her fixed stare back to the register line, where a trio of people were waiting to pay for their food, and then looked back to her.


"I need to go." She said suddenly.


"What's wro-"


"Love you, Dad." 


She practically ran out of the cafeteria.


I turned back to the three at the register. Two I recognized, the chief of medicine and an oncologist, but the third I didn't know. He was a young man around Emily's age and the passing resemblance he bore the chief led me to believe he was a relative of some sort, probably a grandson.


The longer I looked at him, the louder the ringing in my ear became.


*Beep. Beep. Beep.*


When I got home that night, Emily was sitting on the back porch, staring off vacantly while our dogs wandered about the yard. She jumped when I opened the slider and took a seat next to her.


"You ok?" I asked.


"Yeah." She said.


The silence that fell between us was a heavy one. 


"About today..." I started to say.


"Victor." She said quietly.


I didn't say anything, afraid to interrupt and cause her to shut down again.


"He goes to the same university. We had a biology class together." Every word sounded like it was being torn forcibly out of her. "We found out were from the same area so we talked a few times about classes and how you and his Grandpa work for the same place and then we...traded pictures and stuff."


"And stuff" was clearly things that no father ever wants to think of his daughter doing. I just nodded.


"It was going too fast, though, so I...I told him I wanted to just be friends again. He didn't like that. He told me if I didn't do what he wanted, he'd share the pictures I sent him." Her voice cracked and she turned away from me. "That's illegal now in a lot of places, though, and I said I'd make sure he got in trouble. He got angry."


Victor had cornered her outside a club and tried to get her to go home with him. When she refused, he became violent. He'd dragged her into alleyway and attacked her. 


"He said if I ever told, he'd share all of our texts so people would know I wanted it and he'd make sure you were fired and that your career would be over." Emily was shaking with sobs. "His grandpa's the chief of medicine, he could've done it!"


I pulled her in close and held her while she cried. 


No matter how much I tried to tell her that we needed to call the police, she refused. 


"I can't, Dad." She said. "He has texts and pictures. No one would believe me."


The next day when I went in to work, I went straight to the chief of medicine's office. I didn't know what I was going to do or say, I just had to do *something*. I had barely knocked on the door when he called me in. 


Before I could speak, Dr. Gladson looked up and said, "Oh, good, Martha found you. I wanted to talk to you about my grandson, Vic. He's having surgery this afternoon, nothing too serious, but I'd like you to be his anesthetist. I'd ask Taylor, but he's already scheduled."


I almost said no. I almost shouted that his damn grandson was a monster. I almost told him I'd sooner see him dead. 


Instead, I took a deep breath and said, "Of course."


"Good. It's at 2:30 with Dr. Lim."


As I turned to leave, the ringing in my left ear seemed so loud that it was almost throbbing.


*Beep. Beep. Beep.*


At 2:30, as promised, I was seated at the head of the surgery table behind the ether screen. Victor, a good looking kid with a cocksure attitude about him, was lying in front of me.


"Hello, Victor." I said.


"Hi."


He wasn't at all nervous, which told me he didn't know who I was. It didn't surprise me, not many people bothered to learn the anesthetist's name.


"Is this your first surgery?"


"Nope."


"So you know how anesthesia works?"


"Count back from ten, yeah."


"Yes."


I made small talk while I set up, asking him about where he went to school and what he was majoring in. When it came time to put on his mask and count down, I asked him one more question.

*10*

"I think you might know my daughter."

*9*


"Yeah?" 


*8*


"Yeah. Emily."


*7*


"Oh yeah, I think so."


*6*


"She ever tell you what I do for a living?"


*5*


"Maybe?" He was getting drowsy.


*4*


"I put people to sleep for a living, Vic." I was whispering.


*3*


"Huh?" He was struggling to stay awake.


*2*


"Sometimes permanently."


*1*


The beeping in my ear was especially loud then and, slowly, I realized that it was echoing. I looked up at his heart monitor, sitting not too far over my head, and it beeped in time with the ringing in my ear.


*Beep. Beep. Beep.*


The surgery went well for about twenty minutes, until Victor experienced a sudden drop in blood pressure. The shock to his system sent him into a violent seizing fit and the surgeon was barking orders, demanding this and that to stabilize the boy. 


But there was nothing that could be done.


Anesthesia overdoses can be such terrible, tricky things.


As the staff struggled to revive him and I made a show of doing the same, the steady rhythm of the ringing in my ear changed for the first time.

*Beep. Beep. Beep. Beeeeeeep.*


Victor was pronounced dead at 3:02 PM.


At the same time the heart monitor was turned off, the ringing in my ear ceased and sound returned to it in a loud, almost painful burst. 


I was glad for the surgical mask, then, as they covered Victor with the white sheet.


No one could see that I was smiling.My name is Lily Madwhip, and I see things before they happen.

“Don’t stare at me, assface.”

That’s my brother, Roger. He doesn’t see things before they happen. I know this because if he did, he would see what’s about to happen to him. Then again, maybe he does, but people like us can’t see things that are about to happen to ourselves. I don’t know, truthfully. All I know is that in about three minutes, Roger is going to die.

“You’re going to die,” I tell him.

“Did you just threaten me?” he snarls. Roger is six years older than me. He goes to highschool and has two best friends named Skeeter and Dustin. They like to wear shirts without sleeves that have the names of heavy metal bands on them. Sometimes they hang out in the garage and try to play music like those bands until my dad goes out and yells at them to stop. At his funeral, they’re going to wear jackets and ties and their hair is going to be combed for once. I’ll never see them after that, which is nice. I love Roger because he’s my brother, but when he’s gone things will be just a little bit nicer. Sorry, Roger.

“No,” I tell him truthfully, “I’m just trying to warn you. I love you, Roger.”

“Shut up, weirdo!” He punches me in the shoulder and I cry like I’m supposed to but it doesn’t really hurt. Mom’s head swivels around on her neck from the front of the car and gives us both that look that says she regrets having us. I know she doesn’t, but all parents think that from time to time. *I wonder where I’d be right now if I’d never had kids?*

No, I’m not a mind reader too, I just know these things.

“Will you two knock it off back there?” Mom asks. It’s not really a question though, it’s an order. Adults can give orders in the form of questions. If you’re a kid, and you try to do this, it doesn’t work. I once tried to order Roger to give me back my doll Paschar by asking him, and he laughed at me and twisted Paschar’s head off. Mom had to put it back on, but she’s never been one for toy repair, so it’s kind of crooked now. I told her I didn’t mind, that it gives him “personality”.

Mom and Dad think it’s weird that I named my doll Paschar. I don’t know why. Paschar was an angel, after all. People don’t think it’s weird if you name your doll Gabriel or Michael or Lailah, but give it the name Uriel or Gavreel or Paschar and everybody gives you funny looks.

I hug Paschar in my arms and look out the front of the car. There’s a sign that says, “REST AREA 1 MILE” and beneath it a smaller sign that says, “NEXT REST AREA 46 MILES”. At the speed my dad drives, that should take us about half an hour I think.

“Rest area coming up!” Dad says, “Does anybody need to go?”

We stopped hours back at a McDonalds and I had a cheeseburger with some fries and a small Sprite. I couldn’t finish the burger or the fries, but the Sprite made my tummy happy because sometimes I get a little carsick, so I drank the entire thing. Now I need to go, but this is where Roger dies, so I lie. “I don’t.” Thinking about having to go makes it worse. I cross my legs.

Roger notices. “Lily has to go! She’s squirming around back here! I don’t want her pissing on me!” He makes a grossed out face, and I can appreciate the genuine disgust of being peed on by someone else, but Roger I’m trying to save your life here.

Mom looks back again and I shake my head at her. “Lily, if you have to go--”

“I don’t.”

“She does! And I do too!” Roger declares.

I don't think Roger actually has to go. 

Dad turns onto the ramp for the rest stop, ending the conversation. There’s two lanes: one for the big trucks and one for little cars. Our station wagon takes the second lane and wraps back around to go up a hill to the parking lot for the rest area. There’s some sort of big rock on a pedestal with a commemorative plaque at the base with lots of names of people who are dead. Other families are going in and coming out of the glass-wrapped building.

I wonder how far we are from the nearest hospital.

“Everybody out!” Dad declares.

“Lily, hurry,” Mom says as she unbuckles her seat belt and opens her door.

I look over at Roger one last time and try to smile. He looks back at me. For a moment, there’s the faintest glimmer of recognition in his eyes. I think maybe he’s going to shut the door and stay in the car. Then he sneers at me and the moment is lost. “Stop staring at me, assface!”

“Language, Roger.” Dad says in his tone that means he doesn’t actually care, but he has to act like he does so Mom won’t get mad.

We all get out. Mom holds my hand as we cross the parking lot, even though I’m not a baby. I keep looking back at Roger and Dad and waiting for it to happen. Roger’s going to die, I know it-- I just don’t know how. Maybe that big rock is going to come loose from its base and fall right on top of Roger like a boot on an ant. I’ve stepped on ants before. I always say sorry afterward, but it’s kinda pointless by then. I wonder if his insides will squish out like they do on ants.

The rock does not squish Roger.

My mom takes me into the women’s restroom where we do our business. The toilets are those ones that flush automatically. They always scare me, like I think the one I'm on won’t detect that I’m on it anymore and flush and I’ll get sucked in. I go, but the whole time I’m waiting to hear the shouts and cries from outside. Maybe Roger gets sucked into the automatic toilet. My mom has a word for something like that-- apropos.

Roger does not get sucked into the automatic toilets.

We meet out in the lobby area where they have an information kiosk and little cubby holes filled with sightseeing maps and brochures for hotels and water parks. I want to look at one about an outdoor animal safari zoo, but Dad is in a hurry to get back on the road, so Mom drags me back out to the parking lot.

We pile into the station wagon with empty bladders. I’m feeling a bit confused because Roger is still alive and it’s been at least ten minutes since I knew he was going to die. I don’t say anything on the matter because Mom and Dad don’t like it when I talk about my “premonitions” as they call them. Also, I’d rather not jinx it if I’m actually wrong for once. Roger’s kind of mean, but he’s my brother and I love him. I hug Paschar and stare out the window as we pull out of our parking space.

Suddenly, Paschar is snatched from my arms. I turn, startled, to see Roger holding the doll out his window, waving it in his hand. He grins at me. “Hey, assface, wanna see if your dolly can fly?”

I realize this is the moment, I can’t help but say something. “This is when you die.” I tell him solemnly.

Roger’s smirk is replaced by one of anger. He lets go of Paschar, who disappears beneath the wheels of our car. In my distress, I cry out, lurching against my seat belt as if I can whisk out the window and snatch Paschar up before he’s lost forever. Mom turns and starts asking loudly what just happened. Dad turns to yell at us to stop it. Lily, stop screaming. Roger, what did you do.

Roger, what did you do.

My father is looking in the rear view mirror at what he considers his two biggest mistakes. My mother is passing her glare back and forth between me and Roger. Roger is looking at Mom and Dad and trying to put on an innocent expression as he lies and tells them that I started it. Only one of us is looking at the lane for the big trucks that we’re currently merging with at Dad’s typical high rate of speed, and that’s me. What do I see out Roger's window but a giant truck with lots of big tires and a large trailer on back barreling down at us with a driver in the cab who looks as shocked and confused as I am. I’m not screaming for Paschar anymore, I’m screaming for Dad to brake or steer or anything but he can't tell the difference between one type of screaming and the next and anyway it’s too late.

Do you know what a T-bone is? I always thought it was a type of steak. My Uncle George ordered a T-bone once at a restaurant and he got this mammoth piece of meat with the bone still in it. That’s why they call it a T-bone, because the bone is there and it looks like the letter T.

Apparently T-bone is also a type of collision where one vehicle strikes another in the side. Because the two vehicles make a T shape, just like the bone in the steak my uncle ordered. That’s what the big truck does to us, it T-bones us right before the on-ramp to the interstate.

The nearest hospital is twenty three minutes away. I would never have guessed that number. They take Roger and my dad there in an ambulance. Dad has a dislocated shoulder and a lot of cuts and bruising. Roger is airlifted to Boston Memorial. He gets to fly in a helicopter, although he isn’t conscious for it, so he kinda misses out. He dies from internal injuries before he gets there. Mom and I are treated for lots of little cuts from glass and stuff. The driver of the truck is fine but shook up by the whole thing. I hope he doesn’t blame himself for Roger’s death. That was nobody’s fault but Roger.

One of the emergency medical people who treats us on the scene finds Paschar and gives him back to me. He always finds his way back to me. The EMT asks me what my doll's name is and gives me a funny look when I tell him. I don’t tell him that he’s about to get a call for an old lady who suffered a stroke in some place called Middlebury. That kind of trivial information is lost on most people. Kind of like I know my mom and dad are going to cry and hug each other and worry about Roger until they find out he’s dead. After that, Dad will get more distant because he secretly blames me (it’s not a secret, Dad, I know) and Mom will hug me a little tighter each night at bedtime. I see it, but they don't need to know I do.

I hope Roger is in a better place, but Paschar tells me he’s not. [Paschar is always right](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/akrjsd/my_name_is_lily_madwhip_and_i_dont_need_a/).You know the type of story:  Somebody gets a new apartment or a new job, and finds a list of weird "rules" to follow.  "If someone knocks at 3:11 A.M., meow like a cat but don't answer."  "If the copier starts when nobody's in the copy room, go to the break room for ten minutes."  They break the rules, and awful things happen.

One afternoon in my room, Bryan and I were showing each other our favorites on Reddit.  He started making up rules for our dorm, Millard Hall.

"If you see someone picking their nose," he said, "chant, 'Snot, Snot, Thanks a lot!' or you'll get their booger in your nose tomorrow."

I laughed and tried one.  "If you penny the door of room 307"&mdash;my room&mdash;"only use pennies dated 2002."

"Or what?"

"Umm&hellip;  You'll fall asleep in your next test!"

The fun of "lists of rules" stories is the weird consequences of breaking the rules.  We started trying to think of scarier outcomes, and from there to scarier-sounding rules.  Pretty soon Bryan started writing them down.

He intended to post them in the lobby as a joke.  It was me who suggested slipping them under the doors of freshmen.  We were both Resident Assistants:  He was RA for second floor north, I was RA for third floor south.  So we had an excuse to roam the halls any time of night, and we had lists of which residents were freshmen.

Double-plus-uncool behavior for RAs, obviously.  But I only intended it as a joke.
****
Over the next couple of days, I kept having to stifle giggles in class, as new rules popped into my head.  After class Bryan and I compared notes, culling out the duds.

Sometimes we didn't agree.  He really wanted a classic "If someone knocks..." rule, and I flatly refused, bored with them.

We hammered out a final list:  rules only, consequences left to the imagination.  This is part of it, the ones that became important:

>**Diet Pepsi** At the Pepsi machine in the lobby, NEVER get a Diet Pepsi right after a Diet Mountain Dew.  If you're not sure what the last can bought was, buy a Mug root beer first -- That's always safe.
>
>**Howler** If somebody starts howling in the courtyard at about 2-3 a.m. on a Friday night (Saturday morning) don't turn on any lights.  You can look out the window, but don't even turn on your phone or a flashlight.  They're watching for lights -- They find your room by counting windows.
>
>**Oven Pizza** Don't use the oven to reheat *anything* from Patsy's Pizza, not even sandwiches.  Use the microwave -- Even if it makes the crust soggy.
>
>**Water Fountain** Don't drink from the lobby water fountain whilst there's sunlight on the thumb button -- This only happens near the winter solstice, early morning.
>
>**Dollar Bill** If you find a brand-new dollar bill tacked to your door, Series 2003A, serial number starting with J804, you can take it -- But spend it OFF-CAMPUS.  DON'T put it in the lobby bill-changer.  Dropping in a church collection plate might be lucky.
>
>**Movie Poster** Sometimes a poster appears on the lobby bulletin board, always on GREEN PAPER -- "Free movie in Chalfont Auditorium, Tuesday at 7:30."  Ignore them -- They go away by morning.  DON'T go to Chalfont Tuesday evening.
>
>**Pay Phone** The pay phone off the lobby hasn't been connected for years.  But it still rings occasionally -- Don't answer it.
>
>**Orange Rules** Sometimes rules like this appear, printed on HEAVY ORANGE PAPER.  If you get one of those, for the love of God DON'T follow the "Room 307" or "Blue Bathroom" rules.

I formatted them as a little tri-fold pamphlet and printed off about forty on plain white paper.  One night we slipped about twenty under the doors of freshman-only rooms on various floors.  The next day I kind of held my breath.  But nobody said anything, and we spread about fifteen more that night.
****
The second morning I saw a kid in the lobby with one of our pamphlets.  He stopped Stella Palecki, RA for 3 North, and showed it to her.  She read it through; I saw a couple of quickly-suppressed grins.  She looked up and said deadpan, "Yah?  So?"

"So are these for real?"

"Can't say.  They just show up.  But the last time somebody broke one, we never saw him again."

The kid left so wide-eyed he looked like a seventh-grader.  Stella walked the other way, grinning to herself.  I hadn't counted on another RA playing along, but it tickled me.

I printed off another twenty or so, and a couple of nights later we spread them to rooms where a freshman and an upper-classman shared.  People were talking a lot about them, and texting photos of them to each other.

At the lobby Pepsi machine I heard one girl shout at another, "Hey!  Buy a *Mug* first!"  People walked faster past the disconnected pay phone, and checked the sunlight before drinking at the fountain.

A Post-It appeared on the Pepsi machine that said, STICK ME ON THE LAST BUTTON PRESSED.  Twice I saw somebody shift it to the Diet Mountain Dew button, just to be a dick.  Bryan said somebody'd given him free root beer, not once but twice, because they didn't want to take a chance.

Shawn Brown, RA for 2 South, caught me in the hall one day.  "Beth, have you seen these?"

I looked at the pamphlet he handed me.  Obviously much handled, with penciled notes here and there; "I've heard of 'em, haven't seen one yet.  Hey, that's my room number!"  I pointed at "Orange Rules".  "What an asshole."

"Yeah.  Well, Mom Franks"&mdash;Millard's dorm mother&mdash;"said to keep an eye out for whoever's passing these out.  There's a couple of people pretty upset about them."

I felt a twinge of guilt (I remember how stressful freshman year was) and more than a twinge of nerves.  This really wasn't good behavior for an RA, maybe even enough to get me or Bryan kicked out.

A few people, skeptics and attention-seekers, were deliberately flaunting the rules.  Bob Wester hung a Patsy's Pizza box on the oven door, and when a freshman ran in the kitchen all frantic about the rules, Bob's roommate slammed a textbook on a table right behind him.  The freshman nearly peed himself.

Rosie Crowell, RA for 1 North, made a point of waiting until somebody bought a Diet Dew before she'd buy her Diet Pepsi.  Just plain annoyed at how many people took the rules seriously, she was trying to debunk them.

And the next two Friday nights, well after midnight, some joker in the courtyard howled, "Aahh-*wooooo!*" loud enough to wake people.  Having a courtyard window myself, I began to wish we'd skipped that particular rule.
****
As nervous as I'd gotten, though, I wasn't done.  I printed a poster for a 20th-anniversary showing of *The Matrix*, on green paper left from a high-school art project (I had about fifteen sheets of orange paper, too).  When I snuck it onto the lobby bulletin board, freshmen who'd been settling down freaked all over again.

I prepared a second version of the rules:  different font, altered formatting, and two new rules:

>**Blue Bathroom** - If your suite bathroom suddenly has blue walls one day, prick your finger and spread a drop of blood around the rim of the sink - The bathroom will change back overnight.  If you don't, either you or a suite mate will die within a month.
>
>**Room 307** - If you penny the door of room 307 with pennies dated 2002, you will come into money within a week - at least $125.

I finished off my orange paper printing these, but I didn't slip them under doors.  Instead I kind of dropped them here and there:  lying on the stairs, in the kitchen microwave, tucked between lobby couch cushions.  Soon people were arguing about them.

I got a big kick out of threatening doom to whoever put my room number in the rules.  I did more random hall prowls at odd hours, "looking" for the perpetrators.  It was perfect camouflage for my guilty secret.

Even better:  Someone really did penny my door!  If you've never lived in a dorm, know that the room doors open inward.  Take two pennies (or three, depending on the door's fit), slide them up to the gap between the door and the metal frame right above the knob, then hammer them into the gap.  Pressure on the door latch makes it nearly impossible to turn the knob or, if the door's locked, to draw the deadbolt.

In the middle of the night I heard two hard *whams* on my door; pretty common when people get rowdy.  But in the morning I couldn't open my door.  I called Bryan, who came across to check.  "Yeah, it's pennies.  And they're hammered right in there, not gonna be prying them out."

Well, for some students, especially women, that might have been a problem.  But I keep a small tool kit, so it only took me a couple of minutes to knock the hinge pins out.  Bryan shoved the entire door into my room a few inches.  I heard the dull *tink* of pennies falling, and murmuring from women who'd gathered.

"Yeah, they're 2002," Bryan said.  "2002-D."  I heard gasps of fear.

Bryan helped me wrestle the heavy door back onto its hinges.  "So we just watch for whoever gets a chunk of cash all of a sudden," I said, "and they can pay the school fine."  I glared at the gathered women.  "This's a safety violation, not just a prank.  What if there'd been a fire and I couldn't get my door open?"  Not really a big concern, the walls and floors are all concrete, but I wanted to keep up my annoyed facade.

"But that's an orange rule!" a red-haired freshman protested.  "You aren't supposed to follow them!"

"Something bad's gonna happen to them!" another girl said.

"Serves 'em right," I grumped, winking at Bryan.
****
I had one more escalation waiting.  The "Dollar Bill" description wasn't random:  I had about twenty like that, left from forty my dad had given me as a kid, to buy snacks while at church camp.  I'd loved the crisp new bills so well I'd avoided spending them.

Now I dedicated four to the cause, tacking them to the doors of people who'd been skeptical, like Rosie Crowell and a freshman named Celia.  By the next afternoon, everybody in the dorm had seen one.  Celia, a plump pretty Hispanic girl, was amused, but Rosie was distinctly rattled.  "You can't just run to the ATM and get brand-new sixteen-year-old bills," she pointed out.  She said she'd take hers to church.

But Rosie continued to call the rules a prank.  So when her Diet Pepsi tried to kill her, it scared the shit out of me.

She'd made a point, again, of waiting until somebody bought a Diet Dew before getting her DP, and she'd nearly made herself late for class.  So she popped the can, chugged it down, and tossed it in the recycle bin before heading out the door.

From my seat in the lobby I heard screaming.  Running to the door, I saw Rosie bent over.  She'd dropped her pack and sat down cradling her hands, which looked swollen and red.  By the time I got down the steps, her fingernails were spurting blood.

She was scraping her Nikes on the sidewalk.  I bent and unfastened them.  I could barely pull the shoes off, her feet were so swollen; her half socks were already sodden red.

People were dialing 911.  Rosie passed out before the ambulance arrived.  Later we heard she got transfusions and drugs to lower her blood pressure.

Stella Palecki called Bryan, because I was hysterical.  Bryan found me sitting on the blood-spattered sidewalk, one Nike still beside me.  I kept crying, "They're not real!  They're all fake!"

Fortunately, I didn't say, "We made them up," or some such; I came across as disbelieving, not guilty.  Bryan hustled me up to my room, and I told him what had happened.

He took it a lot better than I did, even though at this point we still didn't know but what Rosie bled out in the ambulance.  "What'd I do?" I kept asking him.  "What'd I do?"

"You didn't do nothing," he said.  "Hush up.  It's not your fault."  I let myself be soothed, that time.  *It's not your fault.*
****
But it was hard to convince myself of that when Celia Flores lost three fingers feeding one of my dollar bills to the snack machine.  She wanted a cinnamon roll, so she fed in two dollars.  Four people nearby said when the second bill sucked in, the machine attacked her.

They all told it differently, but it came to this:  The panel with the coin slot and push buttons opened up and grabbed her right arm.  She tried to pull loose, and it closed on her fingers, chopping off all but her index finger and thumb.  Three of them said the machine *growled.*  Two said they heard weird music from it.  Two said the room lights dimmed and turned blue.

That afternoon I wrapped the rest of my 2003 dollar bills in the rest of my green paper, stuck them in an envelope, and mailed them home.  I deleted all the rules files off my laptop, then ran an app to scrub deleted files.

I didn't get Bryan's reaction.  He was shocked at Celia's injury, but at the same time he seemed excited.  We'd dated for over a year, but I began to wonder about him.

Friday night I was in Bryan's room working on Psychology when a freshman, all upset, knocked at the open door.  *Oh, shit,* I thought; *what now?*

But he was asking if Bryan could help his roommate with a scholarship problem.  "There's a whole office for that in Admin," Bryan said.

"But they're gonna kick him out&mdash;he's gotta find three thousand dollars this week!"

"Huh? Slow down, what's wrong?"

The roommate, Mark, had lost a state scholarship, from misreporting something on his application.  But the money was already paid to the school for this semester.  Now the state wanted their money back, and the dumb kid was about to get kicked out.

Bryan asked an obvious question.  "Why are *you* coming to me?"

"Mark's too freaked out.  He broke a rule!"

I froze, but Bryan burst out laughing.  "*Mark* pennied room 307!  Didn't he?"

The kid looked guiltily at me, obviously knowing who I was.  "Yeah," he admitted.  "And a week later he gets a letter from the state."  He was almost sniffling.  "I *told* him it was an orange rule!"

Bryan wasn't just excited, now; he was absolutely hilarious.  He chased off the freshman and took one of our original pamphlets off his desk (nothing incriminating; as RAs we'd both collected them).  He went down the list, checking some rules, crossing out others, putting a question marks on a couple.  "Nah, that's bullshit," he muttered; "that one; maybe that one?"

I jerked the list away.  "What's wrong with you?  People are getting *hurt!*  Rosie lost her fingernails; Celia lost *fingers!*  Don't you care?"

"Yeah, I care, but it's not your fault, so don't get flaky."

I couldn't stand him in that mood.  I went back to my room to sleep alone.
****
I woke to the most blood-chilling sound I've ever heard.  It was a howl, but way more than that.  It went up and down like a yowling cat; it growled and screamed and hooted and wailed.  It echoed in the courtyard like the ambulance that had carried off Celia, but I could tell it was a single voice.

It wasn't human, but at the same time no one animal should have made all those noises.  I knew I should go to the window, try to see who it was&mdash;the courtyard's brightly lit&mdash;but that horrible howl froze me to my bed.  I pulled a blanket over my head and shivered.

Then bounced right in the air when somebody pounded on my door.  "Beth! Beth!  Wake up!"  I kicked off the covers and grabbed my phone:  3:07 Saturday.  *Oh, shit.*  The girl at the door was a freshman named Carla, half frantic, in T-shirt and panties.  "Rayma turned on the light!  I told her not to, but she opened the window and called whatever it was an asshole!"

I tried to reassure her, but I was too damn scared to be convincing.  "Can I stay in your room?  I can't stay there!"  So I let her sleep on my spare bed, wrapped in my giant bath towel.

After the sun came up we went to her room.  Rayma, a junior, was gone.  I said, "She probably went to breakfast early," but Carla said Rayma always slept late on weekends.  She didn't show up that day, or the next; she hasn't been seen since.  I should have made Carla bring Rayma to my room, too.
****
Bryan and I weren't speaking any more.  If I'd thought there was anything anybody could do, I'd have confessed to Mom Franks.  But there was no explanation for what was happening.  We'd made up *completely bogus rules*, and now people were disappearing and being hurt.  But Bryan still acted like it was all a joke.

I'd thoughtlessly carried off the list of rules he'd marked up, the one I'd snatched from him.  He'd checked or put a question mark on several; they're the ones I listed at the beginning.  By now, I'd seen or heard of most of them affecting somebody.

Then the rules came after me.  The Tuesday morning after Rayma disappeared, I shuffled into the bathroom for my shower.

Millard Hall used to be men-only, with big communal bathrooms, then was remodeled into suites, each with two double bedrooms and a shared bath.  But the RA rooms, next to the stairs, have just one bedroom and a tiny bathroom.

I turned on the shower, grabbed my hairbrush, and started yanking my hair around, waiting for the water to warm up.  Looking in the mirror, I realized the wall beside me was blue.

The walls in Millard are all a dirty white, the kind that never looks clean.  The shower and the cabinets still were.  But the concrete-block walls were a pale, powdery blue.

I shot out of the bathroom like a spitwad from a straw.  The pocket of my robe caught on the doorknob and ripped open.  I stood shaking in the middle of my room, trying to remember if I'd seen the walls last night, if anybody could have been in my room.

Well, Mom Franks could have been; she had a master key.  But the RAs don't get them; if there's a bad problem we have to get her.

I sniffed the air.  Paint smell lasts for *days,* and my room smelled just like always.

Oh, god, were blue walls an orange rule or not?  I couldn't remember.  I pulled out the pamphlets I'd collected.  "Blue Bathroom": an *orange* rule.  The white rules said to ignore the orange rules, but "Blue Bathroom" said if I didn't do the right thing, "either you or a suite mate will die within a month."  As an RA, I didn't *have* any suite mates.

If it hadn't been for Mark and his lost scholarship, I might have broken down and bloodied my sink.  *Bless you, Mark, you poor dumbass.*

I shuddered at a sudden recollection:  Just *after* I printed the orange rules, I imagined it would be hilarious if an orange rule said, "Don't obey the white-paper rules **Oven Pizza** or **Water Fountain**."  If I'd actually included that, I wouldn't know *which* rules to trust, Mark or no Mark.
****
Wednesday morning my bathroom was dirty white again, and I cried with relief.  But Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday were rough in Millard Hall.  Everybody, freshman to seniors, had shared copies of the rules on their phones, and everybody checked them frequently.

When the disconnected pay phone rang Wednesday evening, a girl in the hall screamed and a guy in the lobby fainted.  Thursday somebody visiting from Gartner Hall made the mistake of answering the pay phone; whatever he heard made him beat his ear to a bloody pulp with the handset, until he knocked himself out.

Some jerk got caught shuffling the Post-It on the Pepsi machine, and a girl knocked him right out with a Calculus textbook.  A dozen people saw her do it, but nobody "recognized" who it was.

Somebody clogged the spout of the water fountain with superglue.  Bob Wester's roommate rewarmed a Patsy's cheese pizza in the kitchen oven, took one bite, then started throwing up blood and *huge* earthworms.

And Friday afternoon somebody else got a bad Diet Pepsi, and was taken away, blood gushing from his hands and feet.
****
Just after midnight on Friday I was startled awake by knocking.  "Shit!"  I did *not* want to hear what was wrong now.  I jerked open the door, and there stood Bryan, my ex-boyfriend.

"What are you doing here?"  Though the dorms are coed, we aren't supposed to have opposite-sex visitors in our rooms overnight.  I mostly turn a blind eye to discreet overnights, but for RAs the rule is especially important, since we get called out at any hour.

He pushed his way in like I'd invited him.  "Somebody's gonna talk to you soon," he said.  "You've got to say the right thing."

"Oh, shit, did Admin find out about us?"  I pulled on jeans and a flannel shirt, not wanting to talk to him in panties and tee.

"Nobody in the school has a damn clue.  I'm talking about the Circle.  They're witches, a gang of witches."

I laughed out loud.  "Witches!"

"You're not from around here.  You wouldn't laugh if you were."

It's true; a lot of the local kids believe in all sorts of weird shit.  They say in the '70s a kid was killed right outside Millard Hall, taken right off the street by a monster from the bird sanctuary.

"So, what, some Wiccans did all this shit with our rules?"

"Wicca is bullshit for kids.  These are real witches, hill magic that really works.  And I'm trying to join them."

"You?  You're gonna be a warlock?"

"Warlock's an *insult.*  I'll be&mdash;I *am* a witch.  And this is, like, kind of an audition for the Circle.  I mean, at first it was a joke, but then I decided I could use them."

I just looked confused.  "I did it," Bryan said.  "I made a spell, that made our rules work, to show the Circle I could."  He pointed a finger at me.  "Somebody from the Circle's gonna find you in the next few days.  You can tell them&mdash;"

Live in dorms long enough, you learn to scream in a whisper.  "*You shithead!  Do you know how many people you've hurt?*"

"That's part of it.  Witches can't be bound by human rules."

I raved at him, keeping my voice low to not wake my neighbors.  He just laughed off my fury and insisted I tell the Circle how he and I made up the rules between us.

I raved some more; even without raising my voice I was getting hoarse.  Then my fear of waking people came to squat, because some drunk bitch came upstairs yelling and slamming doors.

Bryan wouldn't leave after that, afraid he'd get caught, but I made him use the spare bed.  "You're not ever touching me again," I said.  I didn't even undress to sleep.

I spent a long time lying awake, angry and scared and wondering if Bryan was just nuts.  Witchcraft couldn't be real, but how else could joke rules make people lose fingers and barf worms and disappear in the night?

I finally dozed; that godawful hooting wailing howl in the courtyard woke me up.  "No lights!" I heard Bryan hiss.

"I *know!*" I hissed back.  "It's *my floor* that lost somebody, dipshit!"

I went to the window and looked out, trusting the rules that it was safe.  I couldn't see anybody, but I couldn't see the whole courtyard, and who knew but what the Howler was invisible?

I didn't let Bryan see the phone in my hand.  Quickly, before I changed my mind, I pressed it flat against the glass and hit the power button, and held it there until the screen went back off.

Grabbing my keys and my Crocs, I told Bryan, "I'm going downstairs.  Don't fuck with my stuff."  I left the door unlocked on my way out; I don't really know if that mattered to the Howler or not.
****
That was three days ago.  Nobody's seen Bryan since.  I thought if the Howler got Bryan, the spell or curse or whatever he put on the dorm would go away.  But today the old pay phone rang again, and I barely stopped a kid from answering.

So now I'm hoping somebody from the Circle, whoever they are, really will come talk to me.  Maybe they can remove the curse.

Does anybody on here know how to undo a curse like this?  I haven't been able to get into Bryan's room, to see if he left any instructions or formulas or anything; maybe I can convince Mom Franks I left some personal stuff in there.

Maybe from now on we'll have to give everyone in Millard a *real* list of rules.

Update: [I've met somebody from the Circle.](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/e0oqv2/)

[DTS](https://www.reddit.com/user/DrunkenTree/comments/dvgbbi/)I work at a rest-stop diner in a town people pass through as quick as they can on their way to something, or someone, better. It’s called Lucky’s, which is a little ironic because if you’ve ended up here you’re anything but. If you stay too long the dust settles. Working at Lucky’s you never see the same licence plates twice, or faces for that matter. I’ve lost count of the amount of times the answer to my “Where you heading?” has been “Anywhere but back.” The lights flicker more often than not, and the jukebox sometimes spits out songs that aren't on the index cards, but the coffee’s hot, and most people who try them say the pancakes are the best they’ll ever have, and I’m inclined to agree. 

The embroidered name tag on my uniform reads Isabella, but that ain’t even close to my real name. It was my mom's. Lucky’s has been here a long time. I wear it because I like hearing her name said by other people. It’s like she’s still here, still coming up in conversation. Like she might walk through the door any second and isn’t buried in the cemetery just past the strip club. 

Lucky’s is also always open. Always. Working long shifts serving drifters and truckers and runaways, those who have become impermanent out on the highways, you get to know how to read people pretty quick. When you move around that much, always on the road, you leave parts of yourself behind sometimes, lost between the miles. Sometimes, people are just driving because there’s nothing else left to do. Working at Lucky’s I’ve seen all sorts of lost things. 

I once saw a man hit a deer with his truck and pull over to bury it in the red dirt, digging as the sun went down, tears a steady flow down his face as he fought the ground to cover up what he had done. I once had a man I recognised from the news leave me a blood stained $20 as a tip, sad-eyed in a denim jacket that barely hid the gun taped to his ribs. I once saw a one-armed girl no more than sixteen stand up on the roof of her car and sing, until a coyote came and sat in front of the hood, howling along. I once saw two women fistfight in the parking lot in the night outside, until one was spitting blood and teeth and then they kissed in the blue lights of the police car that happened to pass them by, faces lit up red and shining. 

I’ve seen the highway on fire, lines of flames between tires as the asphalt set itself alight in the heat. I’ve seen roadside baptisms, preacher pulled up with a van and a kiddie pool. I’ve seen things walking out in the desert just beyond reach of the neon sign for the motel that don’t look quite like people, shifting out in the blue night. I met a woman who showed me a photograph of the place she was buried. I often meet people who you talk with a while until their faces start to flicker, can’t quite hold up the pretence that long. I’ve met people who have to be invited inside, before they can cross the threshold. I’ve met some lovely members of a sacrificial cult who tipped well and were oh so polite, even when they asked me if I’d consider letting them harvest me. 

But this is a story about - well, you read the title. 

It was a Friday and I was working a night shift. I prefer nights, because when I drive home I can pretend for a while that I’m going to follow the taillights of the car in front until I leave everything in my rearview mirror, until it gets light and the desert changes to ocean, like if I rolled my windows all the way down I’d taste salt on the air. That, and I’m one of the only waitresses, shall we say, qualified, to deal with the night customers. Besides, tips are always better when the moon is out. We only have three true regulars in Lucky’s, and only two had showed so far. 

Rose-Marie, our first and most frequent regular, was sat by the window in her brown fur coat, always drawn about her shoulders come rain or shine. Not that it ever rained here. Her hair was long and white down her back, like the moon through a glass. She waved over to me, gracing me with a wink that made her crows feet deepen, all the more beautiful for it. Rose-Marie liked whiskey in her tea. Sometimes, she fed cake crumbs to the voodoo dolls she carried in her pockets. She was also a chronic insomniac and liked the company of Lucky’s when sleep was hiding from her. 

She continued to shuffle through the deck of cards she had already set up on the table top. I watched her thumbs flipping over two jokers. Rose-Marie liked to divine the future, when she had the time. She used a frayed pack of hotel playing cards, and if she was in a good mood she’d read your coffee grounds. I didn’t ask her too much, because those coffee grounds had a startling way of coming true. 

Table 6 was empty, and spotless as usual. It was the only table without a salt shaker, and the only one I never placed cutlery on. Only one person ever sat there.

Our second regular, Jones, was sat in his usual booth, dregs of his black coffee held tight between his hands, badge resting on the table. He had his eyes closed, head bent down like he was repenting, steam curling off the lip of the mug and wrapping round his fingers. Jones was my favourite of our customers, not that I’d ever tell him. I walked past the booth and slid a bowl of sugar packets along the tabletop until it hit the mug with a soft clink. He jumped, reaching for his holster out of habit, until his eyes focused and he saw me.

He smiled, embarrassed, and it changed his face, dragging him back to life. When he smiled it was like a storm in a drought, made you want to stand and watch, and maybe stay out in it just a while longer. I wanted to put my hands over his where they had resumed their place on the mug, to feel the second hand heat through his palms. 

Sometimes I can sense the sad in people just by the feel of their skin. They carry it around with them, bone deep, trying to hide it from the world. But sometimes you can lift it from them for a minute or two, if you have enough kindness spare. It doesn’t take much, most times. Jones was too young to be that sad. And yet. 

“Tired today?” I gestured with the coffee pot to his half empty cup. Everyone knew about the little girl he’d pulled from the dumpsters outside the swimming pool last week. She was the fifth one missing in three months. I could tell from the shadows like purple thumb prints beneath his eyes he’d been dreaming about her. She’d been found without her shoes on. He’d carried her to the ambulance in her socks, pink with little daisies on ‘em, small in his arms like she was asleep.  

Lou the fry cook had cried when I’d told him that the other day. I really liked Lou. He was almost too big to fit through the service door, and had a tattoo of his dog just below the one of the angel of death on his shoulder. Lou sheds a tear for most things. The dead racoons we’re always finding by the backdoor with their hands missing. Whenever there’s a new missing poster plastered over the cracked glass of the phone booth in the parking lot. Every time he hears I Will Forever Hate Roses when it decides to pop up on the jukebox. Big guy, bigger heart. 

“Always tired,” Jones said as I poured. Another girl had gone missing yesterday. As I poured, I made sure to brush his thumb where it rested on the cup handle with the inside of my wrist, lifting out that sadness as far as I could. He smiled up at me, shy, and I smiled back before I could stop myself. 

I walked on to the next booth, two truckers with faces that had seen too much sun. One was showing the other the photos of his new baby in his wallet. He had tobacco stained teeth, a scab on his cheek and wind-chapped lips - and his smile was the most beautiful damn thing as he talked about his kid, lit up like christmas morning. He showed me too as I refilled his coffee, and I stayed and talked to them a while. 

The other trucker, with gold back teeth, told me how he’d used to drive pigs, but couldn't handle the guilt when he handed them over to the slaughterhouse. Said he’d look right into their pink faces through the slats and their eyes looked right back, bright and pleading like they knew what he’d done. Said he still dreamt about them. Now he drove freezers of seafood, specialty deliveries for fancy hotels. He’d never seen the ocean. 

Lou slammed the bell from the depths of the kitchen and I got back to work, taking orders from a woman with a Labrador who ordered hot dogs for them both, and three teenage boys in their blood-stained varsity jackets in the corner, who had ten dollars between them and asked for as many waffles as they could get. 

They often came in on full moons, leaving their bikes chained up in the parking lot. They were always hunting something, with their baseball bats, backpacks filled with bullets and their daddies’ guns, but they were nice kids so I always gave them extra scoops of ice-cream. Besides, I knew they needed the energy, because when they were hunting they had to run fast. Real fast. There used to be four of them. 

I cleared the table from the two women at the next booth on my way back. They looked to be twins, both dressed in long silk skirts and hiking boots, red hair piled up messy on top of their heads. 

Neither acknowledged me, not out of rudeness but because they were too preoccupied, packing up their bags, overspilling with maps and notebooks. I spied a roll of duct tape and a bottle of vodka in there too, along with some stakes and crucifixes. They were deep in conversation, waving their hands and I caught a little of it as I stacked their empty glasses, lipsticked round the rims. 

“I know where I buried him Sylvia-,”
“You don’t know jackshit! We dug for hours, and-”

My mom always taught me eavesdropping was rude, so I left them to it and headed into the kitchen. But I got the sense that wherever they had left, whoever he was, he certainly wasn’t there no more. I felt like telling them, but like my mom said, it’s not polite to listen to other people’s conversations. You never know what you’ll wish you hadn’t heard. 

Lou was dancing to the radio, swaying his hips to Sugar Hill as Dolly sang down the wires. He waved at me with the spatula he was using as a microphone. 

Carlos handed me a plate of pancakes. 

Carlos had worked here so long he’d known my Mom, and was the only one who new my real name. He sometimes came with me on the weekends to change the flowers on her grave. He always brought her desert flowers, growing from the same earth she was. Carlos was also the only one who knew the recipe for the Lucky’s pancakes, and the only one that could cook them right. On days when he wasn’t working, we had no pancakes. Simple as. That was just the way it went. I’d learnt that the hard way, but that’s another story. 

Along with the pancakes, came a warning. 

“He’s back.” He gestured through the doors. “Table 6.” 

Our final regular had showed. It had been a while since he’d been around. I hadn’t even seen him come in, but that wasn’t unusual. He moved in mysterious ways. I raised an eyebrow. Shit. Carlos raised one back. Oh shit. He tossed me the salt with a grimace, and I filled the pockets of my apron. Lou banged around in one of the staff lockers for a moment, until he emerged triumphant, waving a bible that had definitely seen better days. He placed in on the counter next to the syrup jugs and flipped to a random page. 

We leant over his huge shoulders to read what it said. “Keep far from a false charge, and do not kill the innocent and righteous, for I will not acquit the wicked.” Lou shrugged and patted me on the shoulder.

I don’t get paid enough for this shit. 

I took the pancakes to table 6, which had been empty the last time I’d looked. It was now very much occupied. The man sat at table 6 was smiling as I walked over. If you could call it a smile. It was more like rictus, lips straining deep red at the corners of his face. His eyes kept darting from side to side, too fast to count, like his pupils couldn't make up their mind where they should be. His hands shook as I got closer, hovering like flies on a carcass.  

I tried to lean as far away from him as I could as I placed the plate on the tabletop, but as I pulled my hands away he darted his neck out fast, whipping his head up and tilting his face towards me. He sniffed in, hard, eyelids fluttering. He giggled, shrill like it was stuck on the roof of his mouth. I recoiled, trying to hide the urge I had to run back to the kitchen. There’s something about hearing a grown man giggle that makes the skin crawl. 

“Can I get you anything?” I asked, faking bright. 

“I’d take your name.” He gripped one of the pancakes in his fist, turning it to mush. 

I tapped the name tag on my uniform. He shook his head, grinning, shoulders almost vibrating with this strange fluid roll as his smile slipped for a second, front teeth jutting suddenly, tongue sharply poking out. Filth was caked under his nails, red like the dirt on the sides of the road. Then he was smiling again, swaying slowly from side to side, feral, in his hunting jacket. His hair hung in greasy strings around his ears, like blonde rattails, and they swung with him, back and forth. 

“Isabella, Isabella, Isabella. It don’t suit.” He suddenly slammed his hand up to his face, shovelling the crushed pancake into the gaping hole of his wide mouth. I jerked back, the movement was so sudden. I shoved my hands into my apron, reaching for the salt, and his eyes narrowed. 

“There’s no need for that,” came a voice from behind me. It rolled across my shoulders, deep, to the bone. Mr Prince. 

I turned to face our third regular, relief mixing with fear in a swirling pit in my chest. Kinda like that feeling you get at a fairground in midsummer, when you’ve been on a carousel too long, and part of you knows you need to get off, but the other part doesn’t want to leave because you know as soon as you stand still you’re gonna be sick. Mr. Prince had that effect on people. 

Mr. Prince was dressed, as always, in his black pinstripe. His stetson was darker than the night outside, and his boots shone like they were wet. If you didn’t notice the upside down crucifixes embroidered daintily onto his custom lapels, you’d think he was just a man with money, maybe mixed up in something a little shady, like oil, or pharmaceuticals. He was handsome by the way of his jaw, with his bone white smile, but his black sunglasses were balanced on the bridge of his nose, silver rimmed and gleaming, hiding his eyes as usual. When he spoke it was a drawl, dragged up from the depths of the South. 

“I’m sorry for my… acquaintance. He’s a little…” Mr Prince glanced at the man sat at table 6 as he panted with his tongue hung out, like a dog. “…over excited.” Mr Prince sat down and the lights above the booth flickered. He tilted his hat back on his head and the jukebox coughed and skipped, and suddenly Robert Johnson was on and singing about that damn crossroad again. Mr Prince popped a Marlboro Red between his teeth, and pushed the window open a sliver with the knuckles of his left hand. The silver pentagram ring on his wedding finger clacked against the glass.  

Mr. Prince smiled, the way snakes do when they’re watching you from the grass on their bellies. The cigarette was now smoking between his teeth, although he hadn’t moved. 

“Besides, Leroy ain’t the type for salt. He’s just a man.” He looked him up and down and his top lip curled. “Barely.” He turned to Leroy. “I see you started on my pancakes. But what’s the point of good food if it ain’t for sharing.” Leroy giggled that strange high sound that made me want to run, and shook a little. Everything about Leroy made me nervous, fight or flight getting ready to flood my system. 

Mr Prince handed Leroy a menu. “Order whatever you want.” He leant forward and the lights flickered.

Leroy ordered four cheeseburgers, and glass of milk. “Well, if that’s all!” I managed. I could feel Leroy’s eyes clinging to my back as I left. Rose-Marie waved me over before I could get back to the safety of the kitchen. 

“I wouldn’t worry about him, darlin’.” She crossed herself, and tapped the card on top of the pile. The Jack of Spades. It had its eyes scratched out. But not by Rose-Marie. It looked like it had been printed that way for years. “We won’t be seeing him again.” She wasn’t talking about Mr. Prince. She cupped my cheek and I leant into it, her hand rough with age, but warm. I could tell she thought I looked tired. She paid for her tea and toast, and walked out into the warm night waiting outside the doors.  

I finally made it back into the kitchen and was immediately attacked. Cold water doused me in the face and I threw up my arms on instinct, trying to protect my hair. Lou aggressively squirted me in the face with the spray bottle we also kept in the staff locker, the kind you use for tending house plants. Ours was filled with holy water. 

“Lou! Jesus fuckin’ Christ, get off I’m-“ I sputtered, and he sprayed me again. I spat holy water out, dripping down the front of my dress and wiped it from my eyes, makeup running a little. I grabbed the bottle from his hands. “I think I’m good.” I wasn’t really mad though, better safe than sorry, especially when it comes to possession. 

“Sorry! Just checkin’.” Lou sheepishly handed me a dish towel. “Already did me ’n’ Carlos.” He looked down at his shoes, awkward. He was a foot taller than me and a decade older, and I hid my smile because he was twisting the toe of his boot back and forth like a little kid been kept after class.

Carlos kept his eyes firmly fixed on his hands as he started flipping patties, but I could sense him holding back a laugh, desperately clenching his teeth. I narrowed my eyes and aimed the spray bottle at him. “Maybe you need some more,” I threatened. Lou snorted and then Carlos was laughing and I was too, and that heavy feeling that had hovered over us since Mr. Prince had walked in lifted. 

Sometimes when things get too dark, all you can do is laugh. Mom always said that when shit gets rough, you can either choose to laugh or cry. I never saw my mother cry.

It was coming up on 3 in the morning as I took the burgers back to table 6. Leroy visibly drooled and clapped his hands as I walked over. I put the plate in front of him as quick as I could but as I pulled back, his head darted forward and he licked the inside of my wrist. His tongue was long and wet against my pulse. I recoiled like I’d been bitten and he laughed, shrill and manic. 

“You taste better than they will,” he said, grinning and gesturing to the burgers. Mr. Prince watched this unfold, calm and unreadable like the sky before summer lighting burns down a tree. I frantically wiped my arm on my apron, but I could still feel that tongue on my skin as if I’d left my hand in his mouth. I fought off the tears that suddenly burned at the corners of my eyes, because something told me Leroy would enjoy them just a little too much. I shuddered, and cleared Mr. Prince’s plate.

“Tell Carlos the pancakes were… good as hell,” he said, from behind his sunglasses. Then he chuckled, low and raspy, as if something he’d said was funny. He popped another Marlbro between his teeth and it started to glow, as Leroy shovelled meat down his throat. I tried not to gag as I watched it clog beneath his long nails.

I walked by Jones on my way back. He waved me over, eyes creased with worry. He ran a hand over his face, as if he was trying to wipe all the bad things away.

“Is he botherin’ you?” He gestured over to Leroy who was rocking back and forth drinking his milk. Jones suddenly looked so tired, uniform creased as his face, looking fifty instead of his twenty two.
“Nothing I can’t handle,” I shook my head and thought about Rose-Marie. “We won’t be seeing him again.” 

It felt like hours waiting for Leroy to finish. I took the order of a man with a butterfly tattooed on his neck, and some truckers pouring Jim Beam into their coffee. They asked me for an extra cup which they placed at the empty seat on their table, for absent friends, they said. I cleaned down the counter top, restocked the sugar packets, and took out the trash, ignoring the man in the rabbit mask that often waits out by the dumpsters. As long as you don’t look at him, he doesn’t bother you. I refilled coffee cups, and took the orders of the large group of biker girls that came in, leather clad and road weary. 

At 3:03am, Mr. Prince stood. Leroy had licked his plate clean and was sitting still, staring up at him with his teeth bared in a smile, hands gripping the table top so hard his knuckles were going white as milk. Mr. Prince handed me a roll of bills wrapped in black plastic that I knew better than to count. He tipped his hat. 

“See Leroy. We all gotta pay eventually,” he said. He leaned in and spoke softly. “For I will not acquit the wicked,” he smiled. He held out his hand to Leroy, palm flat, waiting. Leroy’s hands shook as he reached into his hunting jacket and pulled out a pair of shoes. A child’s shoes, small enough that both could fit in one hand. Little pink sneakers, dirty, with brown stains on the toes that I knew could only be one thing. Mr Prince considered them a moment, under the lights, and shook his head. 

He seemed like he was sorry, before he handed them to me. “For your man over there. Tell him to dig deeper where they looked last.”  He nodded to Jones, who was watching us, his badge gripped in his hand. But Jones knew better than to come over. 

Mr. Prince turned to Leroy and grinned around his cigarette. “We’ve got a ways to go, the road we’re takin’. They say it’s paved with good intentions.” He chuckled, and I felt sick to my stomach. He took Leroy’s hand, like a child, and they walked out into the night, warm and waiting. The doors swung shut behind them, even though nobody had touched them. The jukebox sputtered, and Chris Rea was on, singing about that road again. 

I placed the shoes on the table by Jone’s empty coffee cup, and passed on the message. He sat still for a long time after, just watching them on the table top, trying not to cry or scream or punch a hole in the plaster. All I could do was refill his coffee, because when someone is trying to hold themselves together like that, there’s nothing left to say. 

My shift ended, and I drove myself home, following the taillights in front of me. I knew when I woke up it would be dark, and it would be time for my next shift, but for now, I just drove, dreaming about the ocean and watching the sun come up, like it always does, despite everything.[Part I](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/nmax25/when_we_turn_18_we_get_the_name_of_our_soulmate/) || [Part II](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/nqtu23/when_we_turn_18_we_get_the_name_of_our_soulmate/) || [Final](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/nvzhya/when_we_turn_18_we_get_the_name_of_our_soulmate/)

I was young when I realized that the place I lived was special.

I didn’t realize it at first, since I had lived there my whole life. I thought it was normal for a city to not allow pets. I grew up never hearing the sounds of barking dogs, or hissing cats. No one that lived inside the city border was allowed to have them.

I thought it was normal for cities to have mandatory blood testing every week, with no explanation or seemingly any reason.

I thought it was normal for cities to not have any jails.

I thought it was normal for cities to give their citizens soulmates.

I never really understood how it worked. All that we were told was that there were the Matchmakers, who were responsible for making the matches, and sending out the tiny slips of paper that determined each citizen’s love life, and future. No one ever saw the Matchmakers. No one knew how they were recruited, no one knew how they worked. All anyone knew was that it worked.

Where I lived, there has never been a filing for divorce. The Matchmakers are never wrong.

Each citizen received their paper on their 18th birthday. Inside the piece of paper, there was nothing except a name. The name of your supposed soulmate. There was no telling how you would come across this person, no when or how. All anyone knew was that it would eventually happen. We were allowed to tell other people, allowed to ask around, try and seek out people that had the same name as the one on the paper, but it didn’t matter. It couldn’t be forced.

Of course, literal eternal love and happiness does not come without rules. Every citizen had to follow the Rules. They weren’t too strange, and seemed like a small price to pay for what you were getting in return. Most of the rules were simple. To name a few, there was no going outside, under any circumstances, after 2am. No pets, blood tests, etc. There were also rules that we weren’t allowed to know until we were older.

We got the new rules on our 18th birthday, the same day we got our Matchmaker paper. We called them Slips.

As I got older, I realized that our city was special, and that other cities didn’t have what we had, but I didn't care. Life was good, life seemed simple. Our city was like a little paradise. It was happy. It was without issue.

||

It was the night before my 18th birthday, and I couldn’t sleep. This was to be expected, since knowing that the next morning, you would know the name of your literal *soulmate* was enough to keep anyone up late.

Usually, I wouldn’t have believed in such things like soulmates, especially as I got older, but it was hard to argue with evidence. My parents had gotten married in their late 20s, and have stayed happily married ever since, both of their names matching what was on their Slips. My older sister Katlin got her Slip last year, and though she’s been through her fair share of failed relationships, she’s currently in a happy one with some guy named Roger. I don’t think I need to tell you the name that was on her Slip.

I wished Katlin still lived with us. We used to share a room, but ever since she moved out, it feels empty with just me in it. By some miracle, I eventually fell asleep, my brain finally exhausted after hours of wondering what tomorrow was going to bring.

I woke up the next morning, my arm groping for my alarm to turn it off, just like any other day. It wasn’t until I sleepily sat up that I realised that today wasn’t like any other day.

I swung my legs out of bed, my heart pounding in my chest as I tried to compose myself. I wanted to pull on a shirt and shorts as fast as possible, rush to the kitchen to get the envelope I knew would be addressed to me, but I didn’t. I didn’t want to be one of those people who’s entire lives suddenly revolved around trying to find their soulmate. I needed to be calm.

Taking a few even breaths, I slowly put on a shirt and some basketball shorts, before opening my door. Chatter, and the smell of waffles hit my senses instantly as I stepped out of my room. Turning the corner, I stopped, grinning.

“Katlin!” I said, unable to contain my excitement at seeing her. Reaching her in a few short steps, I wrapped my arms around her in a hug, to which she enthusiastically returned. “What are you doing here?” I said, pulling myself away to look at her.

“Aw, you seriously thought I would miss your birthday? Get real.” She said, matching my grin as she looked at me. “*Damn* you got tall.” She said, looking at me. “He got it from his old man.” My dad chimed in, and Katlin rolled her eyes. Besides my height, I got a lot from my dad. I got his warm brown eyes, and I got his wavy, dirty blonde hair that I had always kept medium-length. I looked so much like my dad that my mom always chimed in saying how I got her nose and smile.

“Happy birthday hon.” My mom said from the counter, giving me a soft smile. “These are almost done, and we’ll go out for your birthday dinner later tonight.” She said, gesturing at the waffles, and I smiled. “Birthday waffles for the birthday boy.” My dad chimed in, putting an arm around my mom, and the simple movement made me remember something I forgot in the midst of the excitement. “Is it- is it here?” I asked them, trying to keep my voice even.

My sister nodded, understanding what I was talking about. “On the front table.” My legs felt like rubber as I walked the few steps into the hallway, instantly seeing the stark white envelope on the table. I picked it up.

*| Deliver to: Theodore Shillings |*

I walked back to the kitchen, all eyes on me as I turned the envelope over, trying to act calm, act normal.

I opened the envelope, pulling out two pieces of paper. One of them, I knew would be the new rules. The other one, was my Slip. I looked at the bigger paper first.

*To people(s) registered as 18 years as older, the following rules will come into effect.*

1. *Under no circumstances is anyone 18 years or older permitted in city waters. This includes all local rivers within city limits.*
2. *Under no circumstances will anyone 18 years or older be allowed to watch the television on the 14th of every month.*
3. *Under no circumstances is anyone 18 years or older permitted to use faucets after 12am. This includes sinks, bathtubs, and showers.*
4. *Under no circumstances is anyone 18 years or older permitted to use any kind of elevator after 9pm.*
5. *Under no circumstances is anyone 18 years or older permitted to share their rules with people(s) under the age of 18.*

And that was it. I honestly expected more, but was relieved there wasn’t too many that I would have to memorize. They were weird, sure, but nothing that I wouldn’t be able to do. After re- reading the new Rules, I put the paper down, heart hammering as I took my slip. Wanting to get it over with, I opened it, to which a single name was printed.

*Avery*

I read, and re-read the name several times. Avery. Avery. *Avery.*

I racked my brain for people I knew named Avery. There was a girl in my history class, and maybe one who I had pre calc with a few years ago? Before I could wonder further, Katlin’s voice cut me off. “What’s the name?” She said, to which I handed it to her. It passed from her, to my mother, then my father. “Avery. Nice name.” My dad said, handing my Slip back to me. Chatter resumed between my parents and Katlin, while my mind was whirring.

Some things made more sense now, like why I never saw adults kayaking in the river like I saw them do in other cities. I had told myself for a long time that once I got my Slip, that I wouldn’t focus too much on it, but my mind kept coming back to the name that was burned into my mind. *Avery*.

I still had to go to school, and got ready while Katlin went out to reconnect with some high school friends. I ignored my texts asking what the name on my Slip was, preferring to have that conversation in person.

My friends were waiting for me at the bus stop eagerly. There was Jennifer, who was usually pretty quiet, and who I’d known since preschool. There was Joseph, who was a bit of a daredevil and a jock who I’d met during my freshman year. Lastly, there was Charles and Sophia, twins who were never separated, and who I’d bonded with sophomore year over our love for horror movies. Looking at us as a group looked weird, but we worked, and had fun with each other.

I was bombarded with the same question as I got close to them.

“Who’s name did you get?”

“Avery.” I said, the first time I had actually said the name. It sounded nice, coming out of my mouth, It sounded right. My friends nodded, followed by a moment of silence that meant that they were all trying to think of Avery’s that we knew.

“Isn’t there a chick in your history class named Avery?” Joseph offered, and I nodded. “Yeah. I’m trying not to think about it too much, I don’t wanna become one of those people who become obsessed with it.” I said, although the name was really all I could think about.

My friends dropped it after that, all except Joseph. He would chime in every few minutes, rattling off girls that he knew, all with the name Avery. He was still talking about it as the bus came, and as we walked up to the school. He really didn’t have an “off” button, which meant that I was left to try and tune him out, nodding my head in agreement every few minutes.

As the school day went on, I couldn’t help but wonder if each Avery I came across was my soulmate. Somehow though, none of the girls I came across felt right.

Everything else aside, the school day went pretty smoothly. People wished me happy birthday in the halls, occasionally asking who I got on my Slip.

After school, I still had time before I had to head home and start working on homework, so as usual, I met outside the school with my friends. The day had gotten progressively hotter as it went on, and by the time school was let out, it had reached the point of uncomfort. Most of my friends were already waiting for me, and as I got closer they were already in conversation.

“-balls hot man, we should go claim a spot by the river before it gets too crowded.” Joseph was saying, to which my other friends nodded in agreement. The river he was referring to was the biggest in the city, almost cutting it in half. It was a popular hangout spot, and my friends and I had been going there for ages. But now,  my throat felt tight. None of my friends had turned 18 yet, since I had an extra year of preschool when I was a kid. They didn’t know the new rules.

One of the rules said I wasn’t allowed to tell them. Did that mean I also couldn’t hint at it?

“Er, I’m not sure if I’m feeling the river today.” I said, trying to sound as nonchalant as possible.

“Are you crazy? It’s like, 90 degrees out here.” Jennifer said, raising her eyebrows. Not wanting to act suspicious, I decided that I would go, but I wouldn't go in. Under any circumstances.

“Alright let’s go, but I can’t stay long, I have my birthday dinner with Katlin and my parents.” I said, to which Joseph pumped his fist.

Relieved that none of them seemed to suspect anything, we set off towards the river.

There were a couple other families there, with kids playing in the shallow water and the parents sitting safely on the edge.

I took a few, even breaths to remind myself that I was fine, and that I would stay on the shore. Jennifer and Joseph were the first to the river, instantly pulling up their jeans and taking off their socks and shoes as they dipped them into the river, sighing with the relief that the cool water provided from the hot weather.

I desperately wanted to be there with them, swimming in the river and enjoying the nice weather, but the rules were very clear. I sighed, sitting down a few feet away from the water, my legs out in front of me, watching as my friends splashed each other with the water. I just had to hold out until they had their birthdays, and then I wouldn’t have to make excuses. I could handle a few more months. “Oi! Come on birthday boy, get in the water!” Charles yelled, splashing water in my direction as he was ankle deep in it, a few feet away from where it dropped off into deeper waters. I smiled, shaking my head as I adjusted my legs to make myself more comfortable. “Nah, I’ll be the one to drive you guys to the hospital when you get hypothermia.” I yelled back, to which I could see his eyes roll from here.

“Aw, we can’t have that!” Joseph called, wading back to where I was. “I command the birthday boy to get hypothermia with the rest of us!” Joseph said, smirking as he approached me. I felt a trickle of unease as he approached me. I stood up to move away, but just then he swooped down and picked me up over his shoulder. Joseph played for the football team, and I always admired his strength, but this was the first time I was afraid of it. “Joseph, stop! Put me down!” I yelled, panic rising in my voice, struggling to escape his arms as he was carrying me to the water.

My heart pounded wildly in my chest, as a rising fear crept up my throat. He outmatched me in size and strength, and my struggles were fruitless. “I’m serious Joseph, put me the fuck down!” I yelled, to which he gave a little laugh. “You’re always so serious Theo, loosen up! Live a little!” He replied, and I could see he was in the water now, wading further in. I looked at my friends, wide eyed, but they were giggling like it was a joke.

They had no idea.

As he got closer to the drop off, I struggled harder, hitting him on the shoulders. I wasn't weak by any standards, but Joseph was built like an ox, almost all muscle. Fear closed my throat so tightly, I couldn't breathe. “ Come on, everyone in the water!" He said, motioning with his head to my friends, who obliged, standing on the edge of the drop. "Alright on three, we’ll all jump in together.” He put his hands on my waist, and I knew what was coming. “One…. two…..” He started, rocking back and forth. “Joseph, stop! STOP!” I yelled, punching him harder, but it didn’t make any difference.

“Three!”

I heard the splashes of my friends jumping in, just as I was launched a few feet into the air.

I didn't know what to expect.

I shut my eyes tightly as images rapidly flashed through my mind. I saw myself at my ninth birthday party, saw myself applauding at Kaitlin's graduation. Rapid images throughout my life flashed before me.

Was my life flashing before my eyes?

It felt like an eternity before I hit the water.

Nothing could have prepared me for what happened next.

I hit the water hard, the cold water stinging every part of my body. The wind knocked out of me, but since nothing else happened immediately, I thought, fleetingly, that I was fine.

I was wrong.

It felt like a giant vacuum was at the bottom of the river, sucking me towards it. I thrashed in the water, desperately trying anything to prevent myself from getting sucked deeper. I had been swimming in the deep part of the river before, and one summer my friends and I actually measured how deep it was, and I knew well enough that I was being pulled far beyond that. I was running out of air, and my panicked state wasn't helping the situation.

Whatever was down there started to pull me faster, as if whatever it was could sense my desperation. My chest felt tight, as I could no longer hold my breath. My body started to go limp when suddenly- I was falling.

I was no longer in water, and I took a gasp of breath, sputtering out the water that had managed to get in my mouth from my surprise. I was so relieved to be breathing again, that it took me a minute to realize I was falling rapidly through the air. Darkness surrounded me, and through my confused, dazed state I couldn't make out what was around me. A few seconds later, for the second time during the day, my body hit water again, hard.

Once again, I had the wind knocked out of me, and I could feel myself sinking. I couldn't move, I couldn't breathe.

I didn't have the energy to panic. My eyes closed. I didn't know what I was supposed to think about. I didn't want my last thoughts before death to be wasted.

It was during these last thoughts that suddenly, something pulled me away from them.

Literally.

I could feel something grabbing the back of my shirt, pulling me upwards, towards the surface. Confusion swept me as a moment later, I felt myself being heaved out of the water, and being roughly set down, on something hard, something solid. I gasped, coughing and sputtering as water dripped off of me.

I shakily pushed myself onto my hands and knees, trying to get my breathing under control, my thoughts moving at the speed of light. I felt oddly light-headed, my body drained and exhausted. I wanted to look around for my savior, but I couldn't. My vision had started to go black, as my exhausted body finally collapsed.

||

Someone was shaking me awake. My first, fleeting thought that it was my mom, telling me I was going to be late for school. Then I remembered. It was just a dream. I told myself. Just a dream. You'll open your eyes and mom is going to wish you a happy birthday, tell you you're going to be late for school-

Someone shook me harder. I opened my eyes. It was not my mom.

It was a boy, who looked around my age with dark, messy hair and who was looking at me with two dark blue concerned eyes, who looked relieved as I opened my eyes. "Good. You're awake. Come on, we need to move." He said quickly, looking behind him. Confusion clouded my mind. "Who- who are you? And where am I?" I said, trying to keep the fear out of my voice. The boy looked back at me. "My name is Avery. I can explain everything later, but we really have to go."

My breath caught in my throat. Avery. Avery. Avery.

Oh, shit.[Part 1 - you are here](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/7ptkdg/i_ran_into_my_high_school_sweetheart_tonight_at/?ref=share&ref_source=link)

[Part 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/7q6bgt/i_ran_into_my_high_school_sweetheart_tonight_at/?ref=share&ref_source=link)

[Part 3](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/7qouus/i_ran_into_my_high_school_sweetheart_tonight_at/?ref=share&ref_source=link)

[Part 4]
(https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/7r66yp/i_ran_into_my_high_school_sweetheart_tonight_at/?ref=share&ref_source=link)


---





*Names are made up for anonymity


I met Stacy (my wife) when I was in the 6th grade. We started officially dating in 8th grade, and we dated all through high school. Then just after graduation, she broke my heart. She wanted to go to college to find herself. I knew what that meant. I was taken completely by surprise, but she made it clear there was nothing I could do or say to change her mind. And believe me, I tried. More than I’d like to admit. So just like that, it was over.


I went to a college close to our home town, and she went to a college that was across the country in California. Selfishly, I told her we couldn’t be friends when we broke up – as I knew that would help me to move on faster. Remaining friends would have kept the sense of hope alive, stringing me along.


Over the next 2 years, I didn’t hear from her *at all*. At one point, I did hear that hear mother passed away (her father passed when she was young), but I never really found a good way to reach out.  I went about my life, coasting through college, with a couple of short-term relationships here and there but nothing serious. I assumed she did the same.
Then, one night I went to a local bar with a few of my friends and there she was. I was too embarrassed to admit it, but I didn’t actually recognize her at first. It had only been two years, but her hair was now short, and I already had a few drinks in me at that point. It was only after she made her way across the bar to hug me that I fully comprehended who she was. 


My friends and I would always joke that this bar was like a high school reunion every time we went there (it was the only decent bar in the area so everyone went there). This time was no exception.


It struck me as odd that she was back in town mid-semester, as this seemed like a strange time to fly across the country to visit home. But, we got to talking, and after a few drinks I thought nothing of it.


We really hit it off that night – it was like she had never been gone. The feeling I had when I was with her. I joked about how she left me behind when she went off to college – hoping to ease any concern about whether I was upset – but she completely brushed it off. A little later I brought up a story about a time when we were in the 9th grade, and my mother dropped us off at a movie theater for a date. I could see the confusion on her face. She quickly explained that she had been in an accident her first year of college, and that she lost bits and pieces of her memory. The way she described it was that she basically couldn’t remember some of the specific memories from her childhood, but she could remember faces and who people were. It sounded terrible and I didn’t want to prod too much, so I dropped it. 


After that night, we hung out again soon after. And then again. We picked up right where we had left off in high school. A few weeks passed, and she eventually told me she wasn’t going back to school in California. She wanted to stay here, which was great! Things progressed, and we eventually got married after I graduated.


Things were so great. Years rolled by, we had 2 kids. She was a stay at home mom, and was so good with the kids. There were some ups and downs over the years, but things were generally pretty good. And then I got an invitation to our 10-year high school reunion about a month ago. I thought about not going, but after some convincing from my friends at work, I decided to go. Stacy had also planned to come, but we ended up getting into a ridiculous argument tonight beforehand so she stayed behind.


I don’t quite know how to explain what happened tonight at the reunion, I’m still processing it. It seemed like it was going to be a pretty tame night. There were only about 40 of us that went. But then, somebody tapped me on the shoulder. I turned around, and I immediately felt what I can only describe as dread in the pit of my stomach. I couldn’t quite comprehend what I was seeing. She looked so familiar. I knew exactly who she was – but my mind was having a hard time processing it. It was Stacy. The Stacy I dated in high school. The Stacy that dumped me after we graduated. She looked exactly as I’d expect, just grown up. But she didn’t look like *my* Stacy. This wasn’t the Stacy I married. This wasn't the Stacy that was back at home.


**Stacy:** “OMG Steve! I can’t believe it’s been 10 years!!! How are you? Tell me about your life. You just kind of fell off the map, what happened?”


**Me:** (still feeling confused) “I’m great – I’m married now, with two kids. How about yourself?”


**Stacy:** “I’m doing well! I fell in love with California during school and decided it was where I was meant to live! This is actually the first time I’ve been back since my mom passed 9 years ago. There really hasn’t been any reason for me to come back since, until now.”


**I ended the conversation there, and immediately left.**


I’m now sitting outside my home in my car. The lights are off. I don’t know who it is that I married. Who I had kids with. But it is not Stacy, because that was *definitely* Stacy at the reunion. What is happening?


I’m trying to piece this all together but it is just too much. I don’t think I can go in there.  


---


[Part 1 - you are here](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/7ptkdg/i_ran_into_my_high_school_sweetheart_tonight_at/?ref=share&ref_source=link)

[Part 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/7q6bgt/i_ran_into_my_high_school_sweetheart_tonight_at/?ref=share&ref_source=link)

[Part 3](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/7qouus/i_ran_into_my_high_school_sweetheart_tonight_at/?ref=share&ref_source=link)

[Part 4]
(https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/7r66yp/i_ran_into_my_high_school_sweetheart_tonight_at/?ref=share&ref_source=link)
I’ve lived in Arizona for the past fifteen years of my life, but I had a very different life before that. I used to live in a small town, in the middle of nowhere. I couldn’t even tell you what side of the country it’s on, or if it even is in the United States. 

&#x200B;

It was a small forest town with dense trees in all directions, but where exactly this particular forest is, well, your guess is as good as mine. The only thing I know for certain in the name of the town; Point Pine. I lived in Point Pine for the first ten years of my life, before we moved the summer after my tenth birthday. Once we left, my parents never spoke of it again. In fact, they acted as if it never even existed, and to them, I guess it didn’t. 

&#x200B;

I don’t really blame them either. I caught on pretty quickly and realized that they were trying their hardest to forget the memory of Point Pine. Whenever kids at school asked me where I was from, I simply told them I was from a small town that they had never heard of. 

&#x200B;

I also learned early on that any questions about Point Pine would be met with punishments. A few months after we moved to Arizona, my older sister Felicity had a school project about family history. She did it on our life in Point Pine and wrote about some of the things she remembered from there. 

&#x200B;

Our mom found her project the day before she turned it in and burned it in the backyard. When Felicity came home that afternoon, my parents took her up to her bedroom, where I heard Felicity crying out every few minutes in what I assume was pain. 

&#x200B;

I said nothing, and from that moment on, neither one of us mentioned Point Pine again. 

&#x200B;

Except for me, right now. I’ve decided to tell all of you about it. I don’t know what is causing me to remember all these things that I had locked up in the deepest parts of my brain. Maybe it’s the fact that my father died about a week ago. Since he died, my mom has remained silent; hasn’t said a word to anyone. She hasn’t even cried. 

&#x200B;

In fact, she ended up sending my father's remains off to god knows where (my money in on Point Pine, although I’d be crazy to ask). I’ve started recalling random little things about the town that, at the time, seemed like normal everyday things that we as residents were all used to. Now, as I look back, I realize that they’re not as normal as I thought back then. 

&#x200B;

One peculiar thing about Point Pine had to do with the Point Pine Bakery. Whenever you went in there, the owner, Mr. Terrance, always knew what you were about to order. I remember the kids having some sort of rumor about Mr. Terrance being a magician who could read minds. Also, whenever you paid for your baked goods, you had to tip Mr. Terrance with an old item of clothing that you had grown out of. There was a giant box up by the register that everyone tossed old baby clothing and shoes into. 

&#x200B;

That was one of the odd things; although you’ll come to realize that it won’t seem that weird in comparison to some of the other things about Point Pine. 

&#x200B;

Every year on your birthday, you had to get bloodwork done. I don’t think anyone really knew what the point of this was, or if they were actually looking for something. We just all knew that our birthdays would start off with a trip to the Point Pine Labs. 

&#x200B;

Everyone had to be up at 8:13 am. There was a system of speakers placed around the town like an amusement park or something, and at 8:13 am, without fail, the wailing alarm sound would ricochet through the neighborhoods, waking everybody up. This was followed by parents running to wake up their children and get them out of bed as quickly as possible like the house was on fire or something. Sometimes I expected it to be.

&#x200B;

All the Point Pine schools were placed in different areas of the town. Point Pine Elementary was towards the east side, Point Pine Middle School was in the West, Point Pine High was in the dead center of town, and Point Pine University was up on a small hill towards the south. 

&#x200B;

If you hadn’t noticed by now, every place in town was named “Point Pine \_\_\_\_”. The Point Pine Cafe, Point Pine Mall, Point Pine Grocery, etc, etc. 

&#x200B;

Certainly, one of the weirdest things by far that took place in Point Pine, was the Point Pine Monthly Parade. 

&#x200B;

It happened every month; without fail. It was never on the same date, and each month, a student from Point Pine High was chosen to be in it. The weird thing about this parade was that we weren’t allowed to watch it go by. Not out on the streets, not from the windows, and not even on television. That was one of the most enforced rules; you must never, under any circumstance, look at the parade. In fact, for the most part, we weren’t even allowed outside when the parade passed through. 

&#x200B;

We always knew when the parade was about to start because it always happened the same way. You would hear a chorus of voices, like a church choir, singing a melody. It wasn’t a familiar one that I knew (I was only familiar with it in the sense that I heard it once a month). It sounded like it could be from a nursery rhyme or something similar. 

&#x200B;

The voices seemed to come from everywhere and nowhere all at once. It was like they were coming from the sky, the ground, the trees, the buildings; like everything in Point Pine was singing. 

&#x200B;

Once you heard the first note, you had five minutes to get inside a house or a building that had locks on the doors. This might come as a surprise, but in Point Pine, not many buildings contained locks. So, if you happened to be out and about on the street when the singing started, you had about three options on the places you could go; one of the schools, the staff break room in the Point Pine bar, or the fridge in the Point Pine Pizza Shop. 

&#x200B;

One year in the month of August, my friend Lee and I decided that we were going to break the rules and not go inside when the parade passed. Now that I think about it, I’m surprised that kids didn’t do this more often, considering that well, when you tell kids that they must absolutely never do something...they often do that exact thing. 

&#x200B;

Since we didn’t know when the parade was coming, where it started, or the exact path that it took around town, we decided the smartest thing to do would be to wait in the forest near the Point Pine Library until the parade eventually came down that street. So, we basically decided to spend about half of the month of August hanging out near or around the library. 

&#x200B;

Around the third week of the month, while we were sitting on the steps of the library talking about some random things that aren’t important, we heard the music start. 

&#x200B;

Lee and I looked at each other and then took off running into the trees, while everyone else raced to the nearest school. We went far enough into the forest that someone on the street wouldn’t see us, but stayed close enough so that we were still able to see a part of the road. 

&#x200B;

We waited for a while, whispering to each other and then shushing one another as we waited for the infamous parade to pass. This year, my sister’s friend Reid was chosen to work on the parade. She was a few years older than my sister, but they were friends because Reid used to live next door to us when we were younger. 

&#x200B;

We were crouching in the bushes and leaves when we heard the chorus of voiced getting louder and therefore closer. 

&#x200B;

“Dude, I totally see it!” Lee hissed. 

&#x200B;

I straightened my back a little bit in my crouched position to try to see what Lee was seeing. I was always a short kid, even now I’m shorter than most guys my age- or any age really- so Lee always pretty much towered over me. 

&#x200B;

“I can’t see anything!” I hissed, shifting my position. 

&#x200B;

“Shh! They might hear us!” Lee hissed. 

&#x200B;

I stopped moving and instead waited for them to get closer, where they were bound to pass right in front of my line of sight. 

&#x200B;

“Oh no. Oh crap!” Suddenly, Lee dove to the ground, landing in the fetal position, with his head cradled in his hands. 

&#x200B;

“What?” I asked, looking from him to the street. 

&#x200B;

“I saw her! I saw that girl!” He exclaimed.

&#x200B;

“Reid?” I asked, looking over to try to spot her. 

&#x200B;

Lee grabbed me and slammed me down to the ground. 

&#x200B;

“Ow!” I exclaimed. 

&#x200B;

“What was that for?” I asked. 

&#x200B;

“You don’t want to look at it.” Lee replied.

&#x200B;

I noticed that for the first time in all of the years that I had known him, Lee looked absolutely terrified. 

&#x200B;

I turned my back on the parade and sat down to look at Lee instead. 

&#x200B;

“What did you see?” I whispered. 

&#x200B;

“Those things, they did something to her. They’re eating her, Cody. But she doesn’t even care.”

&#x200B;

I looked at Lee, who still had his head in his hands, and he was crying now. 

&#x200B;

I sat with my back to the parade, no longer wanting to see. I heard the singing get louder, 

&#x200B;

“Cody…” I heard the voices calling. 

&#x200B;

“Don’t look.” Lee whispered. 

&#x200B;

“Cody...Cody…” Now the voice sounded like Reid. 

&#x200B;

“Look at us, Cody…” 

&#x200B;

I shut my eyes. The voices went on for a few minutes longer, and at one point, Lee started wailing. I kept my eyes shut the entire time.

&#x200B;

After that, it moved along and continued its way through town. 

&#x200B;

Once we began to hear everyone come out of their hiding places, I stood up and leaned down to help Lee get up. 

&#x200B;

Once he stood up, he kept his head down. 

&#x200B;

“Lee, what’s wrong?” I asked. 

&#x200B;

I could hear him sniffling.

&#x200B;

“Lee?”

&#x200B;

He finally responded as he lifted his head. 

&#x200B;

“It took my eyes.” 

&#x200B;

I will never forget the dark, bleeding holes in Lee’s face and the cuts around his skin. I threw up in the forest for a good three minutes, before I was able to help lead Lee out of the forest. A few adults saw us and got our parents, who came and got us right away. 

&#x200B;

The day after that, my family moved out of Point Pine. 

&#x200B;

I never knew what became of Lee after that day. Minutes after we left, my parents acted like Point Pine never existed. It was never discussed, and I never had the nerve to ask about Lee again. As far as I know, Lee was the only person who ever saw the parade, and he was never able to see anything else after that. 

&#x200B;

I don’t know if Point Pine still exists, I’d like to go check it out again, but even if I knew where it was or how to get there, I don’t think I’d ever go back. I have a feeling that I wouldn’t exactly get a warm welcome. Although, I can't shake the thought that my parents were somehow still connected to the town, even after all those years.I’ve only been babysitting for about six months now. It was an easy way to make money and it didn’t require me to have any real, applicable skills. It was slow going at first but a couple of months ago I hit the jack pot after a young couple from the rich part of my town asked me to look after their two kids one Friday night. They paid me two hundred freaking dollars to look after their extremely well behaved children for three hours in a house five times the size of mine. It was awesome.

The young couple must have also thought that I had done a good job because word spread quickly around the rich neighborhood about the nice, young lady who was willing to look over your children so you could go out for a night of drinking and fun. And when I say that this neighborhood is one of the richest in our state I am not exaggerating. Most of the people living there are young couples who have come from a long line of wealthy families.

Sometimes I’ll babysit for a few of hours and make a couple hundred bucks. Other times the parents want me to stay the night while they go off and get a hotel room so that they could be away from their kids for a change. That is where I make the big bucks.

A couple of days ago a husband and wife had texted me asking if I could stay the night at their mansion and watch their seven year old little girl for them. I happily agreed…

If only I knew what I was in for.

When the day finally came I drove my beat up jeep wrangler to the edge of the rich neighborhood and made my way up this private driveway that I had never noticed before because the entrance was hidden back amongst the trees that surround the entire north side of town. I drove up this steep, winding driveway for what seemed like ten minutes before I finally saw the house come into view.

Out of all the houses I’ve babysat at this was hands down the most gorgeous one I’ve ever seen. It was a huge Victorian style mansion that was covered in dark brown bricks making it blend perfectly into the woods surrounding it.

I got out of my car and made my way up to the front porch where I knocked on this gigantic, wooden door. A few seconds later a beautiful woman in her mid-thirties answered and introduced herself as Mrs. Collins. She called her husband down and shortly after an extremely handsome man also in his thirties came walking down the grand stairway holding an adorable little girl in his arms.

The couple seemed very anxious to leave and even though they were both gorgeous people I could tell that underneath all of their beauty they were both extremely tired and haggard from having to keep up with their seven year old. They were obviously very excited about having an entire night to themselves and couldn’t wait to get out of there as fast as they could.

Before Mr. and Mrs. Collins left, however, Mrs. Collins hand me several pieces of paper and told me that she had written down a couple of instructions for me to follow throughout the night. She stressed to me how important it was to follow her instructions and I assured her that I’d give them a look. I waved to the pretty young couple as they made their way down the driveway in their expensive Mercedes and then closed the door behind me.

I gave the instructions a quick once over before folding the papers and stuffing them into my back pocket. “I’ll look at them later,” I told myself. How stupid I was to do that.

Mr. and Mrs. Collins’ daughter, Samantha, was a very nice, young girl who warmed up to me almost immediately, and we had spent the next few hours playing games and watching TV. After we finished our fifth episode of *Teen Titans Go* I noticed that it was getting late and asked Samantha what her bed time was. She shrugged not really giving me an answer which is when I remembered Mrs. Collins’ instructions.

I pulled out the folded pieces of paper and scanned through them very quickly when I saw the words “Samantha needs to be in bed….before 8:00 p.m.” I checked the time to find that it was almost 7:45.

“Well it looks like your bedtime is right now.” I said lift Samantha up off the couch so I could get her ready. She brushed her teeth and I tucked her into her California king sized mattress. I told her good night and was leaving her room when she said something that stopped me in my tracks.

“Don’t forget to lock my door before you leave,” she said.

I stopped walking and turned back around toward her confused.

“What do you mean don’t forget to lock you door?” I asked, “Why would I need to lock your door? What if you have to go to the bathroom in the middle of the night?”

She looked at me innocently and shrugged her shoulders again. “I don’t know, but Mommy always locks my door before I go to sleep. She says she does it to protect me and herself. I don’t remember what happens after I fall asleep, but Mommy says that I always try to leave my room at night which is bad thing.”

I looked at her dumbfounded. I didn’t know what to say.

“Mommy told me that she would leave instructions for you to follow and locking my door is one of them,” she said

“O—okay Samantha I’ll lock your door. Good—goodnight sweetheart.” I stammered. She gave me a big smile and rolled over in her bed. I closed her door and noticed that there was a latch drilled into the door frame that would allow someone to lock it from the outside. I closed the latch and then walked back downstairs so I could read the rest of Mrs. Collins’ “instructions.”

When I had first seen the pieces of paper I was under the impression that they were just instructions that told me what shows Samantha is not allowed to watch, or how to operate the surround sound. After I started reading them though I realized that I was wrong. I was completely and utterly wrong.

Hello Annie,

I’m so glad that you agreed to stay the night and babysit Samantha for us. She is such an angel, and I am sure that the both of you will get along very well. I know that our house might seem old and scary but don’t worry because nothing bad will happen to you as long as you follow some simple instructions.

1. Firstly, Samantha needs to be in bed in her room with the door locked before 8:00 p.m. Do not open up her bedroom door after 8:00 p.m. I repeat, DO NOT open Samantha’s bedroom door after 8:00 p.m. She will try to convince you to open the door in many different ways. She will cry, scream, and threaten you until you give in, but DO NOT listen to her. She can’t hurt you as long as the door is closed.

2. Between 8:30 and 9:30 p.m. make sure you remain in the living room with the lights turned on. Around this time of night you may hear scratching and growling coming from Samantha’s room, or from other parts of the house. These noises are nothing to worry about as long as you stay in the living room. Watch some TV to pass the time, we have a lot of movies to choose from ;)

3. After 9:30 do not venture into any dark areas of the house. I would recommend that you turn on as many lights as you can before 9:30 so that you don’t accidentally trap yourself. You might begin to see things hiding in the dark areas of the house from time to time, and sometimes they will even try to talk to you. Just ignore them and they’ll eventually ignore you as well. You might also happen to see a pair of yellow cat eyes looking at you through the darkness ever once in a while. DO NOT stare at them for more than thirty seconds.

4. At around 10:00 p.m. it might begin to sound like there are several people walking around in the basement downstairs. Do not worry because as long as you stay out of the basement they cannot get to you. I know it sounds unlikely, but around this time you will begin to feel an overwhelming urge to walk down into the basement. If this happens go into the kitchen and drink a cold glass of milk, this usually helps. The urge will most likely pass after about ten minutes, but if the urge is still there after ten minutes and you don’t think that you will be able to stop yourself from walking into the basement then call either me or Mr. Collins and we’ll tell you what to do.

5. When 10:30 comes around you will begin to hear something running back and forth in the hallway upstairs. Stay on the first floor of the house during this time. Don’t worry about Samantha, as long as you locked her door beforehand he won’t be able to get to her. If you start to hear him making his way down the stairs then lock yourself in the first floor bathroom with the lights on. He will knock on the bathroom door repeatedly and will try impersonating someone close to you like your mom or your dad in order to trick you into opening the bathroom door for him (he is really good at it). No matter what he says to you and no matter who he sounds like DO NOT open the door. He should go away after five minutes. Check under the door to make sure that he is no longer there before you open it.

4. Now this next part is very important. You will be sleeping in our guest room upstairs for the night. Before you go to bed make sure that you leave a plate outside your bedroom door with a piece of raw steak on it (you can find the raw steak in our refrigerator), and leave a glass of milk next to the plate as well. On a piece of paper write the words “parcant mihi” in red ink and leave it on the plate with the raw meat. (Also, at some point during the night you might wake up and notice that there is something standing in the corner of your room, please refrain from looking at the figure as much as you can. I’d recommend wearing ear buds so that you won’t hear it muttering to itself).

And that’s about it. There are also a few other general rules that you should follow throughout the night just to make sure that nothing bad happens.

Rule 1: If the house phone rings at any point during the night don’t answer it no matter how long or how loud it might ring. Mr. Collins and I will call your cell phone if we need to talk with you.

Rule 2: If you feel something tap you on the shoulder at any point during the night don’t turn around, and wait at least thirty seconds before moving again.

Rule 3: Don’t eat meat after 8:00. They might see it as a threat and will most likely attack you.

Thanks again Annie, if you have any trouble or questions feel free to call me or my husband at any point during the night. If you do call us and a man with a very deep voice answers the phone hang up immediately and try calling us again.

P.S. Throughout the night you might hear a dog whimpering from somewhere off inside the house. We don’t have a dog so don’t go looking for it.

I hadn’t realize what I had gotten myself into. It is currently 8:31 p.m. as I am writing this, and the growling noises just started. It sounds like they’re coming from every room in the fucking house. I thought that Samantha’s screams from a couple minutes ago were going to be the worst part, but now I can hear her muffled growls from upstairs and I can assure you that this is worse. This is so much worseAnthony Willis is sitting in my chair today - a young man who is somehow skinny and fat at the same time and has greasy, unwashed hair. It crosses my mind that maybe I should have the chair cleaned when he leaves. This is his first time and he is still young, fresh, and stupid. Hopefully when he leaves my chair he will be knowledgeable and maybe, just maybe, have gained a little understanding. 

“So how old is your child?” 

“Oh, umm,  two months.” Interesting. Most new parents count the age of a newborn through weeks and days. Makes sense when every week is a new milestone. And most of them don’t need a second to think about how long the child has been in their lives when they’ve only been there for such a short time. 

“Do you have a wife?”

“Yes. She’s 21.” Wow. That’s the most defining thing he can think of about her? Her age? Not how long they’ve been married or even her name? Now that I think about it, he didn’t mention his kid’s name either. Or even if they’re a boy or a girl. Of course I already know it’s a girl because I read his file before he came in.

“How are they?” Now he’s fidgeting in his chair. Interesting.

“Um, good. They’re pretty good.” *Pretty good?* So descriptive. And he actually broke eye contact with me to say that. This guy is a horrible liar. Thank God. He’ll be so easy to break.

“Yes, but we’re not here to talk about them are we?” He brings his eyes back to me and sits up when he realizes that the small talk is over and it’s time to get down to business. “We’re here to talk about you. So how are they in relation to you?” 

“Uhh…” I must have caught him off guard. He’s uncomfortable. He’s actually stretching his arms out and placing his hands behind his head in a subconscious attempt to take up more space. Typically in a human male this means they are either intimidated or trying to impress someone they are attracted to. Something tells me it’s not the latter. After a few seconds of painful silence I decide to help him out. 

“Let’s just start with your wife. Would you say you have a good relationship with her?” I’m leaning forward, eyebrows furrowed, hands together on the table. It seems like the more attention I pay to him the more awkward he becomes. It’s delicious. 

“Yeah, well… it’s okay.” God, this guy doesn’t want to talk. That’s fine because I’ve dealt with a lot worse. I have a lot of baddies come through this room and sit in my chair. So far I’ve broken them all.  

“Do you ever have arguments? Or disagreements?” Now I’ve got him. People who are on the brink of divorce or murder will more times than not tell me that their marriage is “okay”. I think that people have a very hard time revealing things like that to strangers. We’ve been conditioned, after all, to slap a bandaid on a bullet hole and a smile on our face during hardship. Especially marital strife. 

“Well, yeah, we do. We do argue.”

“What do you argue about?”

“Um..” He’s looking away from me again. I think this time he’s trying to hide the emotion in his eyes. Lord forbid a man were to show any emotion. He gives a tiny chuckle that looks like it took a lot of effort to get out. “Everything, really.”

“Everything? That doesn’t sound okay. That sounds miserable.”

“Yeah, miserable. It can be actually. Ever since she got pregnant.” He’s still not looking at me. In fact he is trying so hard to avoid eye contact he has his face pointed almost completely away from me. That painting of a plant on the wall must be extremely compelling because many of the people who have sat in that chair have spent quite a bit of time staring at it. Funny, because I always thought it was just a dumb painting of a plant.

“How have things changed between you two since she got pregnant?”

“More fighting. A lot more fighting.” Now he has gotten to the point where instead of spreading out he is starting to take up less space. He’s gripping his thighs and sitting upright. 

“What do you fight about? Try to be specific.” He’s moving his hands up and down his thighs now - God he just can’t stop fidgeting, can he?

“Just stuff, like, I don’t even know. It’s always something. Every time I walk in the door there’s something wrong, like, *I’ve* done something wrong. I just can’t do anything right.” 

“Do you help with the baby?”

“Man, I try to,” So now he’s calling me *man*? Looks like I’m already breaking down walls. “But it’s like what am I supposed to do? I’m not gonna be able to make it stop crying,” Oh interesting, very interesting. So now the baby’s an *it*? “And she’s breastfeeding so it’s not like I can help with that. And she never wants to just let it cry. She thinks it’s our job to just jump up every time that it makes a sound and find out what’s wrong. And I’m just, like, won’t she get spoiled like that?” The more upset that he gets the more fragmented and confusing his sentences are. But, we’ve had one advancement. He referred to his baby daughter as *she* instead of *it*. 

“So, would you say you have different parenting ideals than your wife does?”

“Oh, yeah.” He’s looking me in the eyes now and nodding furiously. “Sometimes I’ll get mad and I’ll be like, ‘so what? Let the damn kid cry for a bit!’ and then she’ll just lose it!”

“Lose it?”

“Oh, yeah,” Now he’s mimicking my behavior by leaning forward and using hand motions. Suddenly I’m his best friend. “Tells me I’m a bad dad. Tells me she hates me. I hate it when she says that.”

“Because you love her?”

“Because it fuckin’ pisses me off!” His reaction is almost explosive, but I’ve dealt with worse so I don’t react.  
 “Because you love her?” 

“Yeah, I guess.” He mumbles. 

“What about your daughter? Do you love her?”

“Of course I do! I mean, she drives me bat shit. But, she’s still my kid. I just don’t think she should be treated like the queen of England, ya’ know?” Oh yeah I know. I know all about you, Anthony Willis, and I know exactly how you feel about your wife and daughter.

“Does your wife call you names or put you down when you fight?” 

“Yeah. Lazy bastard. Fat ass. Dumb ass. Dead beat. Like she thinks it’s *my* fault I can’t get a job in this shithole economy. I’m not *applying myself*.” 

“How long has it been since you held a job, Anthony?” I already know the answer but I ask anyways, just because I want to see him squirm. 

“It’s been, like, awhile. Maybe a few months?” Suddenly he’s not looking at me anymore and he’s leaning back in his seat like he thinks if he gets far enough away the question won’t hit him. Or maybe that I won’t hear him. But I don’t have to hear him because I know why he’s really sitting in my chair.

“So, does your wife work?”

“No, of course not. She *can’t* work ‘cause of the baby, right? She quit her job, like, a couple months before the baby was born. Isn’t that a load of shit? She just gets to prop her feet up all day while everyone rushes around her like she just gave birth to baby Jesus and then they all scream at me to get a job. Like it’s just that easy.”

“If neither of you work then how do you support yourselves?” Of course I know the answer to this as well. But it’s very important that he says these things out loud. It’s the only way I’m going to lead him to the truth.

“Her parents, ya’ know? They’ve got a little money, I guess. We sleep in the spare bedroom. Sometimes. Sometimes I just sleep on the couch ‘cause I don’t feel like fucking dealing with it. Sometimes I just want to get a full night of sleep without that kid waking me up, ya’ know?” Yes, Anthony, I know. I know all too well. “She *insists* on having the baby sleep in the bed. I don’t see why she can’t just put the crib in the bathroom or the living room and then just let the baby cry for a little bit. Even for just a few hours if it means we’ll get some sleep, ya’ know? But, *no*. No, no, no, no, *no*. I need a full night of sleep sometimes, ya’ know?”

“What about your wife? Does she ever get a full night of sleep?”

“What does she need it for? What does she do all day? She’s always either sleeping, watching TV, or just completely glued to that baby. But then she complains at me that I should be doing dishes and making dinner. Even though I literally spend *hours* every day on the internet searching for jobs. But as soon as I try to take a break you can guarantee she’s gonna come in and start screaming at me.” I think it’s funny that a few moments ago he wasn’t even speaking in full sentences to me and now he’s spewing paragraphs. He’s not uncomfortable anymore. He’s still fidgeting, though. He keeps his eyes on me but his hand are traveling all over his body like he’s covered in ants. Guilty conscience, Anthony?

“Living with your in-laws must be stressful for you as well.” I’m trying to hit all the pressure points. How worked up can I get him? And what can I get him to confess?

“Man, you don’t even *know*.” I know, Anthony, I know all about it, but I want you to tell me anyways. “Her dad? The dude fuckin’ *hates me.* Like, hates my guts. He is *constantly* telling her to leave me and he really wants to kick me out. Or kill me, probably. And then her mom is just a bitch. Just a straight up bitch. She doesn’t like cussing. Doesn’t like drinking. Or smoking. Or anything *except* for her grandbaby. She treats that baby like it came from God. But *me*? The man who *made* the baby? She treats like shit. Go figure.”

“Do you fight with her parents?”

“Yes and no. Like, they won’t say anything to my face. They just say it to her. And then we end up fighting because of it.”

“Do you get angry?” My voice is so low now it’s almost a whisper. I’m leaning forward, preparing for the pounce.

“Who wouldn’t?”

“*How angry?”* 

“Well sometimes,” His voice is getting lower as well. “I just, like, I just… I hear that baby. That damn baby screaming. And, I swear to God, I want to kill her.” He’s holding his hands in front of himself now with his fingers clenched. The tendons in his hands are sticking out and I can see veins under his transparently pale skin clearly. 

“So what do you do when you’re angry?” I’ve already got him. He’ll answer any question I ask him but I still want to lead him into his own realization. Also, I’m not done toying with him yet. 

“I - I throw things. Break things. Her mom doesn’t like for me to get drunk so sometimes I just throw empty bottles and break them when they’re not home. I slam the doors, I punch the walls, kick the walls. I punched a hole in our bedroom door one time. I can’t help it. It’s really hard, ya’ know? Being a man but being treated like a lil’ kid. I just want a little fuckin’ freedom.”

“How does your wife react? When you go into a rage?”

“Oh, ya’ know, all scared and shit. Like she actually thinks I’m gonna hurt her. She gets all freaked out. One time she told me that if I laid a hand on her then her dad would shoot me. Dude, at this point? That fat, old man can go ahead and do it! It would be a fuckin’ blessing right now.”

“And what about the baby? Have you ever hurt her?”

“God, no, of course not! I’ve screamed at her before. Told her to shut up. But all parents get frustrated. It’s actually supposed to be normal to get frustrated sometimes. But I get treated like I’m a monster or something. Sometimes when she’s crying *so fucking loud*  it’s like I just can’t take it anymore and I have to punch something.”

“Like the wall? Or the door?”

“Yeah, like that! Ya’ know?”

“Or what about the lamp? Do you sometimes smash the lamps?”

“Sometimes, yeah. It’s like I just want some fuckin’ sleep. And sex. This is really hard to admit, especially for a man. But, ya’ know, we haven’t fucked since *before* she gave birth? She doesn’t understand because for her it’s not as big a deal. She doesn’t even take one, single second to think about how that affects me! Especially since I can’t really jerk it more than maybe once a day since we have absolutely no privacy. I have to hide in the bathroom like I’m a kid again. It’s humiliating.” By this point I’m feeling borderline rage. But I’ve learned how to hide it very well. My face remains practically expressionless although underneath I’m tensing up for the kill.

“Think about the last time you argued with your wife. What was it about?”

“At first it was because I wanted her to actually show me that she loved me, ya’ know? Like put the baby down for two *goddamn* seconds and pay attention to me, for once. Oh, she didn’t like that. *Of course* she didn’t like that. How dare I imply that I’m a human being with needs, right?”

“By needs do you mean sex?” 

“Not exactly. I’m just a physical person, ya’ know? Love languages and shit? Well I’m physical. I like to be touched. Ya’ know, initiate a kiss or something every now and then? If it leads to sex it does, but it doesn’t *have to*. But, at the very least she could at least try. She would always complain that if she tried it would hurt but, like, how the fuck is she going to know if it will hurt this time if she won’t at least *try*?” Once you get this guy talking he could go on forever. I could get him to spill his entire life story to me right now if I wanted to. But, I don’t. I just want one thing and I’m getting closer and closer.

“What happened next?”

“I don’t remember too well, to be honest.” Now he’s acting like I’m his good buddy. He leans back in the chair and stretches. Talking shit about his wife seems to be making him more confident. Men like him love to talk shit. And when they actually meet someone who will sit there and listen to it without kicking their ass they eat it up. The hardest part of my job is pretending like I’m not disgusted by men like him. 

“You left the house, didn’t you? You were quite angry?”

“Man, angry doesn’t even cut it. I was *pissed*. I think I did leave. Maybe I went to a bar or something? I must have gotten real shit faced because I can’t remember anything.”

“Can’t or won’t?” I have to speak slowly and enunciate each syllable to keep from screaming. 

“What does that mean?”

“Let me help you out. You didn’t go to a bar. You went to a gas station. You bought a lot of beer. You drank a lot of beer. All by yourself in a gas station parking lot. Then what happened?”

“Uhh, I went home?” His poor, stupid brain is going into overdrive now. I think for the first time he’s actually starting to question where he is. And maybe who the hell I am. But there’s no time for that and he wouldn’t understand yet anyways. I have to keep him on track. We’re nearing the breaking point.

“Yes, you went home, now focus on remembering.” I’m leaning so far over the desk now I’m practically laying on it. My eyes are stuck on his so hard he doesn’t dare look away. I have to keep him focused. 

“Her parents were still gone. I was really happy about that. I couldn’t stop thinking about how lucky I was. But then I was really mad.”

“Why were you mad?”

“Um, because the fuckin’ door was locked and I didn’t have a key. And I was pounding on the door and yelling and she wouldn’t come and open it. She was purposefully not letting me into my own house.” It’s not your house, Anthony, but that’s not important right now. He’s making progress.

“So how did you get in?”

“Oh, easy.” He looks down at his bloodied right hand. “I broke the window on the door and just reached through and unlocked it. It was really simple. And I was so drunk that it didn’t even really hurt.”

“And your wife - she was inside?”

“Yeah, I think so…” He was still looking at his hand like he just couldn’t comprehend. I can’t let him finish the puzzle yet. He needs to put the pieces together in order.

“Anthony! Your wife - what was she doing? What did she do when she saw you?”

“She started fuckin’ screaming. Loud. Telling me to stay the fuck away from her. Oh yeah, then she tells me, guess what? Her parents are at the police station! They’re trying to get me put in jail! Over a tiny punch, like, not even half force!”

“And what did you say?”

“I told her that if I was going to jail she was going to the hospital. So she fuckin’ runs like a little bitch into her parents’ room and locks the door. I can hear the dumb bitch through the door. She’s on the phone saying ‘oh god he’s gonna kill me help me oh god’. I’m mad so I start kicking the door. I’m really only trying to scare her, but then the door breaks. And next thing I know there’s a gun pointed at my face. *She’s* pointing a gun at *me* but she has the nerve to call the cops on *me*? I wasn’t even afraid, though. I mean, I knew she wouldn’t do it, ya’ know? There’s no way she has that much courage. So I just start walking forward. And she’s walking backwards. And crying. And saying ‘don’t make me shoot you’. So ya’ know what I did? I walked right up to her, I took the gun, and I held it to my chest. And I just said, ‘if you’re gonna do it, fuckin’ do it’. And ya’ know what she did? *She threw the fuckin’ thing on the ground*. And then she’s just crying and saying ‘please don’t hurt me’. That bitch was gonna *shoot* me! Can you believe it?” He’s no longer on the line between crying and laughing, he’s playing hopscotch with it. 

“But she didn't shoot you. She couldn’t do it.” The game is over. Anthony Willis will be leaving my chair and taking his filthy, greasy hair with him. He won’t be leaving a better man - it’s simply too late for him. But maybe I can rid the world of his stench once and for all. Maybe I can properly finish the job he left half done. 

“No, she couldn’t. She was too sweet. Too kind. Too babying. Too scared. Hell, I don’t know. But she made a fucking mistake. I saw some bright lights. Yep, she had called the fucking cops on me. She had denied me sex like I was fucking unworthy, locked me out of my own house, pulled a gun on me, and then called the cops. And, of course, who are the cops gonna believe? Not me, for sure. They always take the chick’s side. Always. Probably because they think she’s gonna bone ‘em, ya’ know?” No, Anthony, I don’t fucking know. “A shoulder to cry on becomes a dick to ride on as they say.”

“What did you do to your wife, Anthony?” 

“Well, I thought, ya’ know what? Maybe I should show her what it’s like to have a gun shoved in her face. So I grabbed it off the floor and pointed it at her. And then… I don’t know, I was so drunk.”

“Yes you do remember. You remember exactly what you did.”  
 “I remember she screamed or something, the cops were banging on the door. It scared me.”

“Say what you did! Say it!” I realize that I’m no longer sitting and I can’t calm myself down enough to sit back down. I’m going to break him. He looks at me with tear filled eyes - a pathetic and ugly look for him.

“I was just *so scared.*”

“No, Anthony, *she* was scared.”

“I think there was some kind of accident, like, she fell…” His veiny, bloody hands are on his face now. They weigh down his skin and make his eyes look saggy and inhuman.

“No accident. What did you do?”

“I think I -- I think I…” He’s rocking now. The truth is fighting him hard. It’s fighting to come out and be free and I think that very soon he will be defeated by it. “I think I shot her…” 

“Shot who? Who was she?” I’m walking across the floor now and then standing over him. I want to hit him but I know it would be pointless. So I fight him the only way I know how.

“My - my wife… her…”

“No, Anthony, her *name. What was her name?”* 

“Oh, God, what’s happening? Where am I? Who are these people?” He tries to rise from my chair only to find that he is bound, but not by chains. “Why can’t I leave? Why can’t I stand up?” 

“This is my last question, Anthony. Just answer it and I will answer your questions. I’ll tell you everything. *What was her name?”*  He curls up his knees and hides his face in them like a tired child. 

“I can’t say it.”

“You *have* to say it or you won’t ever leave this room. You won’t ever leave this chair.”

“Please don’t make me… please…” He’s openly sobbing now and I can’t help but remember how he felt towards his sobbing, pleading wife. 

“You can not leave unless you say it. There’s no other way.” This is the toughest stretch but I know that I’ve already won. All I have to do is keep pushing, he’s so close to breaking. His wailing stops and he is calm for a few seconds. He breathes deeply a few times and I allow him this reprieve. When he looks up at me with bloodshot eyes I know there’s no need to prod him more. The truth is bubbling it’s way up to the top. The silence is thick and heavy and suffocating which I know will make it all the more relieving when it is broken. 

“Priscilla. My wife’s name is Priscilla.” The words come out flat and emotionless. I wonder if this is the same way he looked when he pulled the trigger.

“Her name *was* Priscilla.” I correct him. Standing up I walk away and sit back down in my chair across the table from him. It’s time to answer some questions.

“Your name is Anthony Willis. You died when you were 23. This is the house that you killed Priscilla and yourself in 10 years ago. These are the people that live here now. You can see them but they can’t see you. Or hear you. They have a message for you.” 

The young couple sitting on the other side of the room are watching with wide eyes. I know that they can’t see or hear him. But the goosebumps on their arms and panic in their faces tell me that they can sense him. One of them is gripping the other’s arm so hard I can see pale fingerprints in their arm. Anthony is sitting in the chair and finally looks like what he is: dead. His eyes are flat and detached, his mouth hanging slightly open. 

“They want you to know that this is their house now and you are not welcome here. You never were welcome here. It’s time for you to stop breaking their lamps, kicking holes in their walls, and terrorizing their children. That’s why I’m here. To give you this message and to enforce it.” He doesn’t respond for a few seconds but I am willing to wait. I have learned that death is a very hard thing to accept - even for those who deserved it. I’m not surprised when he finally starts to fight against his invisible bonds. He is trying so hard just to stand but I know that his chains are unbreakable. Much stronger people than him have fought them and lost. The chains are made powerful by personal items of his. His obituary, a picture of him and his dead wife at their high school prom, and a picture of his dead wife and their baby daughter. The couple who now own the house are becoming more frightened as he struggles. His presence must be stronger now with all the energy he is exerting. If he keeps this up they may be able to see his physical presence. 

“No! This is my house! You’re not going to take that away from me! You can’t make me leave!” He is fighting full force now which is actually stronger than I would have thought when I first met him. 

“No, Anthony, you are going to leave.” I pull a lighter out of my pocket, click it, and produce a small flame. Anthony seems to go even paler when he sees it. “When I burn these items you will be released from this world, to go wherever it is you will go.”

“Wait!” His voice is high pitched and panicky,“Where will I go?”

“That’s for you to find out, Anthony. I’m still alive so I don’t know.” I bring the flame towards the pictures in front of me but he cries out again and I allow him his last words.

“Am I going to hell?” He asks quietly and looks pleadingly at me.

“I don’t know, Anthony, why don’t you send me a postcard?” I light the pictures. I know the couple in the room with me can hear the screaming because they both jump and grow a shade paler. One of them actually screams out loud and acts like they are going to bolt for the door. To my surprise they find enough courage to stay. I know that I was terrified as well the first time that I heard the wailing death screams of an unwilling spirit being forcefully ripped from this world. But, now I find a small amount of pleasure. The world could always use less Anthony Willises. Of course it’s the most horrible people who seem to cling to life the hardest. It might be because they are so terrified of what awaits them on the other side, or maybe it’s because they just want to inflict as much pain as possible. Either way it’s not my job to know. It’s just my job to get rid of them. Not a job I chose, but the job that was chosen for me. 

The last remnants of Anthony Willis are fading out of this world in long tendrils of smoke that continue to spark in an unworldly manner. The young couple are holding each other and hiding their faces from the gruesome sight that I have grown so desensitized to. Eventually the smoke starts to clear but a musky sulfurous smell is still lingering in the hazy room. Yes, I’ll definitely be having that chair cleaned.

The next few moments are silent except for the haunting echoes of Anthony’s passing. The couple finally look towards me. One’s face is tear streaked and they are trembling, the other steps forward and addresses me while never letting go of the other’s hand. 

“Is - is it gone?” They ask in a whisper that is barely more than a breath. 

“Yes, he’s gone. He won’t be back, either. Of course if I were you I would still keep my eye out for any other occurrences. While uncommon, this was a traumatic death involving more than one person, so I would keep an eye out for the wife just in case.”

“The wife? The one he killed?” Their question reminds me that they could only actually hear my side of the conversation. 

“Yes, it’s unlikely that she is still here, and even if she is I don’t think she would actually cause you any problems. But if there are problems don’t hesitate to reach me again.” 

“Okay, thank you. And the, umm, the payment?” They ask tentatively. I never ask for payment up front because in my experience any medium who asks for payment up front is a fraud. 

“My assistant will get with you about that. Is there anywhere you can stay for the night? Possibly tomorrow night as well?” 

“My mother’s house, that’s where the children are right now. Why? Is it not… safe yet?” They seem so awkward talking about this. They always do. I find that many people when actually confronted with the supernatural would rather brush it under the rug and erase it from their minds. I can’t blame them, honestly. It’s not the kind of thing you can just bring up at a company picnic in casual conversation. And retelling the story around a campfire at night just seems to make light of the situation. 

“His presence is gone but there is a remaining mist and bad odor that will likely persist until at least tomorrow evening. Possibly the next morning even. Some people have found this smell to be overbearing and some have even had negative side effects due to it. Nothing too serious; headaches, nausea, light headedness, moodiness. Finding another place to sleep for the next two nights would be safer.” 

“I think that’s a great idea. I’ll call your mother, now.” The one who has been crying seems eager to leave this place and return when the memories are less fresh and easier to reconstruct into something tangible. They leave the room quickly and as soon as the door is opened the pressure in the dark and musty room is lightened.

“I don’t know what to say. I don’t understand this at all. But thank God for people like you. What would have happened if we hadn’t called you? I mean, could it have gotten worse?” 

“Well if you had waited too long I wouldn’t have even been able to help. I’m sorry for your family’s misfortune and I hope you are able to move past this quickly. The children may take a little time of course. The younger they are the better they seem to be able to remember it for some reason.”

“Even the baby?”

“Especially the baby. She will probably remember this years and years from now even after you have long forgotten. I’m sorry, I don’t want to be rude, but I have a flight to catch so I can’t stay for much longer.”

“No, no of course. Go ahead. Thanks again.” I am led to the door and I feel the familiar rush of fresh air and sunshine and life in general. Hi Guys,

Sorry it’s taken a while to get this posted up. I’ve been busy chasing leads with US missing persons.

I won’t waste more of your time. Log is below. If you have any information then please send it my way.

Thanks for your help guys, it means a lot.

[Part 1](https://redd.it/7asz8x)

[Part 2](https://redd.it/7bkk41)

[Part 3](https://redd.it/7cf4h8)

[Part 4](https://redd.it/7dmuvp)

[Part 5](https://redd.it/7fdu9c)

[Part 7](https://redd.it/7jabqd)

[Part 8](https://redd.it/7loh1l)

[Part 9](https://redd.it/7q3x6e)

[Part 10](https://redd.it/7uyiss)

*****

The Left/Right Game [DRAFT 1] 12/02/2017

Silence used to be an absolute. 

That’s something I definitely miss.

Back in the real world, it would stand as self-evident that a group of people saying absolutely nothing, by definition, could not be saying any less. Maybe things are different on the road, maybe I’d just never encountered it before, but it’s clear to me now there are degrees beyond silence. A pervasive realm of deafening quiet which, following the loss of Eve and Apollo, our group has unreservedly embraced. Constructed out of our collective trauma, cemented with a cruel mixture of grief, guilt, and harrowing self-doubt, it quickly becomes apparent that this silence is stronger than all of us. The challenge of breaking it remains unmet for the rest of the journey.

We spend the next few hours burrowing through a featureless corridor of maize. The stalks rise far above the Wrangler, leaving only a thin strip of clear sky visible like the painted ceiling of a renaissance church. I find myself glancing intermittently at the CB radio, half expecting, half hoping, for Apollo’s voice to crackle through the speaker, bringing words of comfort, or a much needed attempt at levity.

After I catch myself staring at the radio for the fifth time, I decide it might be best to get on with my work. I plug my headphones into my notebook, bring up the audio files I’ve recorded thus far, and set about creating a very rough cut of our first day on the road.

**APOLLO (VO)** Everybody knows Rob, Rob's the god! Ahaha

I listen through Apollo’s first interview, making notes for the closing paragraph I’ll now be forced to write about him. When I have everything I need, I listen to the interview again, and then once more. It’s not lost on me that I just want to hear his voice, to lose myself in a pleasant digital echo, far removed from the frantic screams that followed him into the asphalt.

I listen to Eve’s interview next. She bristles with excitement as she talks about her upcoming visit to Roswell, steadfastly attempting to recruit me to the effort. She had no idea what she was heading into when she stepped out onto Rob’s front lawn. Then again none of us did.

The thin strip of sky is turning deep orange as I reach our encounter with the hitchhiker. It’s chilling to hear his voice after the fact, to revisit the conniving, veiled pleasantries he employed against us. I cringe as I hear Rob’s hand grasp my arm, ashamed that I let myself fall for the hitcher’s trickery.

**ROB (VO):** You did good, I’m sorry for grabbin’ you. I just didn’t want you to do something you’d regret.

**AS (VO):** No it’s fine. I was going to. Do you know what happens if you talk to him?

**ROB (VO):** Not sure. Came close myself once, a few years back. The way he looks at you when he thinks he’s got you? I don’t think I wanna know.

**AS (VO):** Rob, I-

I pause the audio file, clicking back ten seconds before pressing play again.

**AS (VO):** No it’s fine. I was going to. Do you know what happens if you talk to him?

**ROB (VO):** Not sure. Came close myself once, a few years back. The way he looks at you when he thinks he’s-

I certainly didn’t notice that at the time. I’d been so shaken by my run in with the hitcher, and so curious about the abandoned car that I’d been completely blind to anything else that had come my way. Maybe Rob misspoke, maybe he meant to say weeks or months. But if it wasn’t a mistake, if it was a truth carelessly uttered, then Rob has some explaining to do.

The Left/Right Game was posted online in June 2016, less than a year ago.

I glance sideways at him, a wall of corn rushing past us as we approach the rest stop. Throughout this trip, every emotion Rob’s displayed has seemed genuine. The sadness, the anger, the concern. They tell a story of a man who cares deeply about the welfare of those around him. Yet at the same time, it’s strikingly clear that there’s something he isn’t telling me.

With every new piece of the puzzle, the car, the text message, the faceless creature with the ringing phone, I’m left with the dilemma of when to confront Rob Guthard with what I know. I feel I’ve gathered enough to bring before him, enough to demand an explanation, but there’s no way I’d be able to truly verify his answer. I have a collection of strange and perplexing notions, lacking in the common thread that could bring me to any workable conclusion. If I am going to confront Rob, I need to uncover that thread. Much like the greatest journalists of our time, I should know the answer before I ask the question.

The jeep pulls up onto a large green space. Staring straight ahead, I find myself puzzled by the way the ground seems to stop, as if the horizon lies only twenty metres away from the car. As soon as the engine cuts out, I unbuckle my seatbelt, climb out and walk towards the grassy verge. The rest of the convoy pulls up behind me as I go.

I stop a few steps short of the edge, realising we’ve found our way to the top of a sheer cliff. A sudden swaying vertigo takes over, forcing me to take a few steps back. It doesn’t feel like we’ve been heading uphill, the road has been level since Jubilation, yet somehow I’m standing at the edge of a 400 ft. rock face, descending straight downwards, the distant earth shrouded by stalks of corn.

That’s the truly strange thing about this monolithic precipice. On either side of me, the maize runs to the very edge of the cliff and, at its base, the endless harvest continues until it stretches beyond the darkening horizon in every direction. It feels like I’m standing on the cliffs of Dover, staring over a golden ocean, its waves governed by the evening breeze. I wonder for a moment where it ends, then, taking consideration of the world I now occupy, I start to wonder if it ever does.

A belligerent scream rips me from the view. The source of the noise is blocked by the Wrangler and the first thing I see as I circle around are the shocked, wide eyed faces of Bonnie & Clyde. Once I make my way past the Wrangler’s hood, my expression mimics theirs.

Lilith has pinned Bluejay up to the side of the Jeep, a locked forearm pressing her chest against the door. Her other arm has been grasped in Bluejay’s hands, desperately stopped before it can strike her across the face. The two of them yell through gritted teeth as Lilith struggles furiously against her, vying to cause her any conceivable harm.

**BLUEJAY** Get the fuck off me you bitch! Get off!

I take a few quick steps over to Lilith as Bluejay attempts to kick her away.

**AS:** Lilith, we can’t do this… Jen…

Lilith doesn’t even register my presence as she continues her assault, deafened by the bubbling vitriol in every growling breath.

**AS:** Jen! We are not doing this now. Not after-

Before I can comprehend what’s happening, I’m staring at the sky, my head knocked back by the force of Lilith’s flailing elbow. A hot, raw ache radiates across my lower lip as I stagger back, raising my hand over my mouth.

Before Lilith can continue her assault, Rob swings open his door and takes two short strides over to her. He puts one arm around the girl’s waist and picks her up, carrying her safely, but firmly, over to Bonnie & Clyde’s Ford, and planting her back on the ground.

I seem to always forget how strong he is.

**ROB:** Damnit this is not the time.

**LILITH:** Take it back!

Bluejay has lost her usual snide demeanour, yet her aura still radiates an unbridled scorn. In response to Lilith’s demand, Bluejay walks back to her car and sits on the hood. She takes the Marlboros out of her pocket along with her lighter, and ignites a cigarette. I imagine the burning embers are the only company she’s comfortable to accept right now.

By the time I look back to the rest of the group, Lilith has stormed away.

**AS:** What did she say?

**BONNIE:** I didn’t hear it all.

**AS:** What did she say Bonnie?

**BONNIE:** I heard something about… she said Lilith was… that we were complicit.

**ROB:** Ah goddamnit… Bristol can you…

I watch Lilith, as she sits on the grass and looks over the cliffside. She begins to cry, yet I get a strong notion that it’s not something I should interrupt. It feels like something between her and Eve, a final act of reactionary mourning reserved for them, and them alone. 

**AS:** Yeah… don’t worry. I’ll handle it.

**ROB:** Ok. I’ll cook us somethin’ up.

An hour passes. Lilith grows slowly calmer, drifting from cathartic release into a cold, wordless melancholy. Finishing up my dinner, I make my way over to her.

**AS:** It’s a strange view.

Lilith looks up at me. Her face falls.

**LILITH:** I cut you… I’m so sorry.

**AS:** It’s fine. You should see the other girl.

**LILITH:** Hah, yeah, I bet she looks like shit right about now.

I help myself down onto the cool ground, staring alongside Lilith into the ocean below.

**LILITH:** Bluejay thinks I’m complicit… in what happened to Eve.

**AS:** I heard.

**LILITH:** She used to think we were morons, now she thinks we’re all in on it… doesn’t make sense.

**AS:** I think she he has to believe this place is a lie. She needs it to make sense, and the harder it gets for her to rationalise the more she... Anyway, she shouldn’t have said what she said. She’s just... I guess the word is "troubled".

**LILITH:** She’s a fucking thundercunt.

**AS:** Umm… uh… ok.

**LILITH:** She’s right though... I killed her... and I killed Apollo too.

I look to Lilith, concerned, not quite sure what she means. Her eyes remain locked on the impossible horizon.

**LILITH:** Sarah… she wasn’t cut out for this, and she knew it. She wanted us to turn back this morning… but I didn’t want to.

**AS:** That wasn’t just your decision Lilith.

**LILITH:** Yes it was. She uh… she followed my lead. Always. Through everything. And I knew why she was doing it. I knew. But I let it continue, because it was convenient, because it was easy…. because deep down I liked having someone around who… who’d jump through fucking hoops for me… god it’s so fucked.

Lilith rests her head in her hands.

**LILITH:** She was weak. She was anxious and shy and… but that should be ok, right? You’re allowed to be weak that’s… but I made her come here. I dragged someone who couldn’t swim into the fucking deep end. And the last thing I did was lie to her and she fucking knew it.

Lilith takes a few deep, frayed breaths.

**AS:** What do you mean?

**LILITH:** I’m not uh… I didn’t, I… I loved her, you know as a… as a friend. It was always this fucking one-way street and… I don’t think she minded but. Then suddenly she’s vanishing right in-fucking-front of me and she said what she said… I mean how else was I supposed to respond to that? I had to say it back right?

Lilith maintains her composure as a steady stream of tears roll down her cheek.

**AS:** I don’t know what I’d do in that situation.

**LILITH:** I could see it in her eyes that she didn’t believe me. Fuck… I wonder how many people have died while being told like… comforting lies. How many of them fucking knew?

**AS:** I think you did the best you could Jen. I think you did better than most.

**LILITH:** You don’t need to tell me that just… are you tired? Do you need to go to bed soon?

**AS:** No, I don’t need to.

**LILITH:** There are some beers in uh… in Apollo’s bag. Is that like… looting? Or is that ok?

**AS:** I think he’d want us to have them, as long as he got a toast.

Lilith laughs briefly and finally smiles. She walks over to Bonnie and Clyde’s car, returning a moment later with a four pack.

We spend the next hour and a half slowly drinking them. Lilith can’t muster the right words for a toast so we just say thank you to Apollo, raising out cans to the open air. We talk about his tireless humour, his attempts to keep us all up during our first night on the road, how caringly he spoke to everyone, even at the edge of death. 

We talk about Eve as well, about the pair’s misadventures, awkward college parties and the future of Paranormicon. Lilith smiles, and tells me there’s always a place for me once radio dies out.

After everything that’s happened on the road, the night can’t help but feel bittersweet. But for once, on a solitary cliff side in the middle of nowhere, it’s more sweet than it is bitter. That may not be much, but at the end of an awful day it’s more than either of us could have hoped for.

*****

The next morning goes quickly. It’s amazing how efficient a group of people can be when none of them feel like talking. Not only that, but breakfast has become a noticeably brief affair. I manage to get through half a bag of trail mix before I find myself uncomfortably full. Rob’s words about the road’s sustaining properties ring in my ears as I look around the group. Everyone leaves their bowls half empty. Lilith hasn’t eaten a bite.

By this point, the launch protocol has been drilled into us. Despite our preoccupations, and the fractious rifts developing between us, the cars line up like clockwork as they merge onto the road. In fact, the mood of the group seems strangely procedural. All radio contact starts with the stating of a call sign, followed by that of the recipient. The cars maintain an even, careful distance between one another. We’ve seen all too clearly what happens when the rules are neglected, and no one wants to take chances any more.

**AS:** How far away are we?

**ROB:** From where?

**AS:** You haven’t got to the end of this road right? I mean… you’re still charting it?

**ROB:** That’s right.

**AS:** Well, how long until we get to… you know to… uncharted territory?

**ROB:** To be honest, not too long.

**AS:** What’s going to happen once we reach that point?

**ROB:** We’re gonna keep drivin’.

**AS:** Until we get to the end?

**ROB:** That’s the plan. You know I won’t judge you if you wanna turn around. I’m sure you can talk someone into it.

**AS:** Could I talk you into it?

Rob smiles.

**ROB:** ‘Fraid not. This trip ain’t like the others. Road’s kickin’ back like never before. I think it knows I’m comin’ all the way this time.

**AS:** … What is this place Rob?

Rob sighs as he slowly takes the next left on a quiet, rural T-junction.

**ROB:** I think it’s a stray thread… runnin’ off the spool.

The radio crackles.

**BONNIE:** Rob you just took the wrong turn.

An instant drum of fresh panic hammers in my chest. I stare at Rob, and he stares right back. I know he’s feeling the same thing I am, though he’s doing a much better job of keeping it off his face.

He thinks carefully for a moment.

**ROB:** No… no. I been down this road before. We took a right last time.

**AS:** Uhhh… yeah. Yes. The turn before this one was a right, I remember.

**ROB:** Ferryman to all cars. Thanks Bonnie for giving us the fright of our lives. We’re on the righ… we’re on the correct road.

**BONNIE:** No no that can’t be its… that’s wrong… Martin tell them…

**CLYDE:** Our mistake Rob, let’s keep going.

**LILITH:** Bristol…

There’s concern in Lilith’s voice. I lean over to my wing mirror, attempting to gauge the atmosphere in the car behind me. There’s clearly some commotion between Bonnie and Clyde, with the latter attempting to gently remove the walkie talkie from his sister’s hands.

There’s something else however. Past Bonnie & Clyde. Past Bluejay. An old, dilapidated road sign made of weathered timber stands by the side of the road behind us. I can’t read all of it as the peeling letters grow ever smaller, but I can piece together what it probably once said.

“Wintery Bay – 5 Miles”

**BONNIE:** We’re going to turn around right?

**AS:** Uhh one second Bonnie, I’ll… check the map.

I promptly switch off the radio.

**AS:** Are we not passing through Wintery Bay?

Rob turns to me, a puzzled look in his eyes.

**ROB:** Through where?

In the wake of those two, innocently inquiring words, my mind reels back to the morning of our third day on the road. Watching Bonnie and Clyde wander over to Rob to confess their transgressions with the hitchhiker, the quiet conversation that passed between them, Rob’s seemingly comforting response. I’d felt wretched in those moments. A few minutes prior I had tricked and deceived Clyde… yet I’d never once considered he might have done the same to me.

**AS:** Is it safe to pull over?

**ROB:** What? Why?

**AS:** Is it safe Rob?

**ROB:** Uh, yeah should be.

**AS:** Then pull over.

I switch the radio back on and grab the receiver. As I make a connection to Bonnie and Clyde’s car, it’s clear that an argument is brewing. Lilith is asking for me, a helpless passenger, caught in the middle of something she doesn’t understand.

**AS:** Bristol to all cars. We’re stopping up ahead.

Rob seems acutely aware that I’m not messing around. As soon as we roll to a halt, I throw my door open and jump onto the dusty roadside, striding over to the rest of the convoy, who are just starting to get out of their own cars. I’m conscious of a driving anger behind each step I take.

**AS:** You didn’t tell him.

**CLYDE:** Bristol, I…

**ROB:** What’s goin’ on Bristol?

Rob’s marches up behind me, more than a little restless to get a grip on my motives.

**AS:** Clyde?

Clyde looks around a circle of expectant eyes. When he delivers his answer, he’s unable to meet any of them.

**CLYDE:** Bonnie… Bonnie talked to the hitchhiker.

Rob’s expression shifts, his confusion degrading into a solemn understanding.

**ROB:** God… ahh Goddamnit. You knew about this Bristol?

**AS:** I told them to tell you the morning of the third day. I saw them go over to you I… I thought they did.

**CLYDE:** Bonnie… thought you’d… turn us around.

**ROB:** Well she’s was damn right. You seen what happens when the rules get broken. You shoulda told me as soon as you saw me and headed right back home.

**CLYDE:** That was before Ace… before everything. I didn’t know this place was-

**ROB:** The rules are the rules Clyde! Is anything even wrong with Bonnie? You said she gets confused... was that a lie?

Clyde doesn’t answer, avoiding Rob’s glare. As I process what Rob’s just said, I have to say I’m surprised by the deviousness of the two siblings.

When I thought they were telling Rob about the hitchhiker, it appears they’d instead told him that Bonnie was, to some degree, senile. It was a simple lie, but one that would adequately explain her odd behaviour, draw sympathy from Rob and, most ingeniously, prevent him from telling me about their conversation. A truth buried beneath an unpleasant lie, its subject matter just uncomfortable enough to head off any chance of discussion.

Still, it leaves a bad taste in my mouth.

**CLYDE:** We can head home if you want.

**BONNIE:** No.

The group turns to Bonnie. She speaks in a tone more decisive than I thought her capable.

**BONNIE:** He... the hitchhiker... he was talking about a… about the village we just passed. I was looking forward to seeing it, that’s all. I’m ok really.

**AS:** You’ve been talking about it a lot Bonnie.

**BONNIE:** It just sounded like a lovely place, I was sad that we passed it by. I’m sorry for worrying everyone. Please don’t make us turn around Rob.

Rob stares at them both. His position has been made crystal clear.

**ROB:** We’re stopping a little early today. Come the rest of the way with us, rest up… then tomorrow you both go home. You should count yourselves lucky you get the chance to turn around.

Rob marches back to the Wrangler, signalling that the discussion is over.

**ROB:** Lilith, you’re with us.

Lilith doesn't even try to hide her relief as she shuffles away from Bonnie & Clyde and climbs into the back of the Jeep. It’s a little heart warming that Rob still has the awareness to look out for her, angry as he may be.

As well as his surprising strength, I also tend to forget how perceptive he can be.

Bonnie, Clyde and Bluejay climb back into their respective vehicles. I catch Bonnie’s eye, the moment before she returns to the Ford. She appears truly disappointed, but otherwise resigned to keep going, satisfied to let Wintery Bay fade into the distance. It’s comforting to hear that she’s ready to put the place behind her.

It’s just a pity I don’t believe a word of it.

*****

**LILITH:** It was fucking weird Bristol.

Lilith seems happy to be in the Wrangler, enjoying the sense of security the modded behemoth affords, and also greatly relieved to be away from Bonnie & Clyde. She’s spent the last five minutes detailing the thirty second argument that unfolded between them, charting its disturbing nuances as well as it’s eerie conclusion.

**LILITH:** ... but I swear she was basically like crying like… she didn’t understand how we could be going the wrong way. But then like, as soon as you pulled us over and she just stopped. Like I mean… stopped.

**AS:** That must have been disconcerting.

**LILITH:** You have no idea... So Rob, when are these cornfields gonna fucking end?

**ROB:** Soon. We’re gonna rest up for the night in a few turns. Then tomorrow it won’t be long until we’re on a track through the woods.

**LILITH:** The fucking woods? Are you kidding? Are we talking like… Sleepy Hollow bleeding trees or what?

**ROB:** Hah, wish I could tell ya.

**LILITH:** Wait, what do you mean?

**ROB:** I ain’t been that far yet. It’s new territory.

**LILITH:** Oh… great. Maybe the cornfields aren’t so…

Lilith goes quiet, transfixed by something in the rear view mirror, before quickly turning around to get a better look out of the back window.

The car behind us is out of control.

Bonnie is fighting to wrest the steering wheel from her brother. The Ford swerves erratically behind us, driven mad by the dynamic power struggle taking place inside it. Rob sharply accelerates out of the way as the car behind lurches drunkenly to and fro before skidding to a shuddering halt. Rob hits the brake hard, and by the time I’ve turned in his direction, he’s already slammed the door of the Wrangler, storming across the tarmac to Bonnie and Clyde. 

**ROB:** Cut the engine!

The Ford’s engine goes silent and in the absence of its rumbling growl, new sounds emerge. The sounds of a struggle, and of wild desperate screaming.

Stepping out of the car for the second time today, I jump onto the road and cover the distance between us.

Rob is attempting to pull a screeching Bonnie from the car. Even with his impressive strength it seems to be a challenge. Bonnie claws at the walls, trying with all her might to regain her grasp on the steering wheel.

**BONNIE:** Please! PLEASE! Let me go! Let me go! 

Rob extracts Bonnie from the car and attempts to subdue her amidst a flurry of flailing hands and elbows. She writhes and kicks as he pins her arms to her sides.

**AS:** Bonnie! Bonnie. Calm down ok? Let’s talk this through.

**BONNIE:** He told me it was on our way! He said we’d pass through!

**ROB:** He lied Bonnie.

**BONNIE:** No… no we’re going the wrong way. We’re going the wrong way!

Bonnie lashes out again, striking at Rob’s legs with her own. Rob holds her firmly, hit teeth gritted through every impact.

It’s clear that Bonnie isn’t going to let up. I run back to the Wrangler and open up the trunk. After a few moments of rummaging through my bag, I find the first aid kit and pull out an unopened pack of white zip ties.

**AS:** Clyde, open the back door.

Rob sees me standing with the zip ties. Even in the midst of Bonnie’s incessant struggle, he looks at me with an almost questioning air, as if he’s wondering how we ever arrived at this point. As if he’s asking whether we can really do what I’m wordlessly suggesting.

Bonnie answers the last question for him. In the slim few seconds of distraction, she slams her head back into his nose, eliciting a disgustingly loud thud and a pained growl from Rob. Dazed and confused, his nose immediately fountaining blood, Rob manages to keep his arms wrapped around her. But it’s clear this isn’t going to be sustainable, and that she isn’t anywhere close to calming down.

Clyde has opened the door, stepping back and looking on like a frightened child as we carry Bonnie over to the back seat of the Ford. I lean in before him, adjusting the headrest until it’s pressed against the ceiling, ensuring that it can’t be removed from the bracket. I then loop a zip tie around each bracket and fasten them.

**BLUEJAY:** What the fuck is going on?

Bluejay has stepped out of her car, making her way towards us. I realise that, to someone who is fighting to not believe in any of this, the following scene would appear at best as a melodramatic farce, and at worst, as the attempted detention of an innocent and distressed woman.

Sadly, I don’t have time to field her questions. I climb into the car. Bonnie working constantly against us as Rob eases her in after me, his hand on her head to prevent it bumping against the top of the doorframe.

Once she’s inside, I loop a second zip tie around the one I’ve already fastened on the right bracket, forcing her right hand inside it. I pull the plastic tab over the sleeve of her jumper.

I hope it’s not too tight, but at the very least it’s secure enough to keep her in place. Bonnie continues to pull against the zip ties, but it’s clear her strength has been sapped from her spirited battle with Rob.

Not quite able to look her in the eye, I push a pile of luggage out of the way and climb out the other side of the Ford. Rob and I are both getting our breath back, the former pinching his nose and adjusting stoically to the fresh pain.

**BLUEJAY:** Hey what the fuck are… you’re not going to leave her like that are you?

**AS:** Get back in your car Bluejay.

I walk back to the Wrangler, tuning out Denise’s coarse protests. Rob reaches into the Jeep’s still open trunk, and pulls out a pile of blankets and pillows. In the rear view mirror, I can see him placing them on Bonnie’s lap, giving her a place to rest her elbows.

She leans her forehead against the back of the headrest. Even with her face blocked from view, I can tell that she’s crying.

We arrive at the rest stop some twenty minutes later, the vague outline of a deep green forest blooming on the horizon. It’s earlier in the day than we would usually stop. Rob tells us he wants the entirety of tomorrow to chart the woods, as well as good time to turn back before night fall should the need arise. I’m not complaining, I’m glad of the chance to rest up following today’s events.

For the rest of the day, we take it in turns to keep an eye on Bonnie, making sure she has everything she needs. When the Ford pulled up alongside us, Lilith, Rob, and I expected to see a quivering wreck, tugging ceaselessly against her bonds. We were all surprised, and more than a little disturbed, to find her smiling. By the time my turn comes around, the sun is already dipping in the sky. Rob has prepared a small pot of miso soup in case anyone can bring themselves to eat. I finish my bowl, all too aware of how unnecessary each meal now feels, and pour out a helping for Bonnie.

I find her in good spirits.

**BONNIE:** How are you doing Alice?

**AS:** I’m fine. How are you doing Linda?

**BONNIE:** I’m ok. Sorry for giving you all such a fright earlier. I feel terrible.

**AS:** It’s fine honestly. I’m sorry about… about all this.

I gesture to the zip tied restraints. Rob has reapplied them, fastening bandages underneath the straps to afford Bonnie a modicum of comfort. Still the scene rings with a sinister barbarity which no kind consideration can make up for. 

**BONNIE:** It’s ok. I wasn’t myself.

**AS:** I brought you soup. I know you might not be hungry.

**BONNIE:** No no I’d love some, thank you. Everyone’s being so lovely.

**AS:** Well, we just want to make sure you’re alright.

I submerge the spoon, drench up a measure of warm broth, and begin to raise it towards her.

**BONNIE:** Oh no you don’t have to… I can feed myself…

She gestures to her bound hands, the clear implication hanging in the air.

**AS:** No I… I don’t mind. I think it’s-

Bonnie throws her weight sideways, her elbow jabbing outwards and hitting the bowl out of my hands. Soup spills over my fleece, just a little cooler than scolding hot, and soaks immediately into the fabric. I back away reflexively, and watch Bonnie’s expression flicker like a faulty lightbulb from kind tranquility to utter, burning contempt. It’s gone as quickly as it appears, just in time for the rest of the group to look our way.

**BLUEJAY:** What are you doing with her?!

Bluejay storms across from her car, angrily drawing from a Marlboro and forcing the smoke draconically back into the air.

**AS:** Nothing. Just an accident.

**BONNIE:** It’s ok Bluejay, it was my mistake.

**BLUEJAY:** Did she get any on you?

Bluejay leans in placing her hand comfortingly on Bonnie’s, before turning to fix me with a murderous stare. It’s almost impressive how, even when caring for someone, Bluejay still manages to be simultaneously venomous to those around her.

**BONNIE:** No no it’s ok it was my fault. It’s fine. I’m sorry for causing trouble.

Bluejay laughs at Bonnie’s submissive apology, unable to believe what she's thinking. Her eyes remain fixed on me.

**BLUEJAY:** You’re a fucking coward. Look what he’s making you do. Look!

My eyes follow where she gestures. I have to admit the helpless figure of Bonnie, restrained in the back seat of the Ford, rings with an innate inhumanity, and being forced to stare my actions in the face makes me feel utterly ghoulish.

The choices I’ve made must seem insane to Bluejay, but that doesn’t mean hers are not. Despite her pretensions of rationality, I can’t help but feel that Bluejay’s actions are simply being governed by a different insanity. An insanity borne out of the desperate need to explain the unexplainable, which has morphed into an ugly cocktail of paranoia, self-grandeur, and fervent antagonism.

Bluejay notes my silent expression, most likely taking it as a personal victory. Without another word she returns to her car and shuts herself inside, festering silently and alone.

**BONNIE:** Do you want to know what’s wonderful Alice?

Bonnie leans towards me, lowering her voice so no one else can hear.

**BONNIE:** He told me there’s a house… waiting for me. My home by the sea.

**AS:** I’m sorry Bonnie. I don’t think there is.

**BONNIE:** It’s going to be a such a beautiful place. Such a beautiful place.

Bonnie flashes me a broad grin. 

**BONNIE:** It’s been lovely knowing you Alice.

Bonnie turns away from me, placing her forehead back on the headrest. The grin doesn’t fade as I turn away. I walk back to the Wrangler, faced with the choice of changing into new clothes or my thermal pyjamas.

After removing my fleece and lying down for a just a moment, I end up sleeping in the clothes I’m wearing.

*****

When I wake up, the Wrangler is moving. 

The air mattress reverberates and my body rocks as we make a sharp U-turn. I sit bolt upright, Lilith waking up next to me, similarly bleary eyed and confused.

Rob is behind the wheel. The gear stick shakes as he transports us down the road at incredible speed.

**AS:** Rob what’s happening?

**ROB:** Bonnie got herself free. She’s headed for the turn.

I pull myself into the passenger seat, suddenly wide awake.

**LILITH:** What? How did she get free?

**AS:** Is she with Clyde?

**ROB:** She hit him over the head, dragged him outta the car. I couldn’t wait for him, but he’s catchin’ up.

Lilith and I turn around. Bluejay’s car is gaining on us, a distant pair of high beams steadily drowning the rear window in light.

**LILITH:** Why’s Bluejay helping him?

**AS:** She probably wants to keep an eye on us. Rob, do you think we’ll catch up with Bonnie?

**ROB:** I’m workin’ on it.

The Wrangler continues to rocket through the darkness. We keep our eyes fixed forward, scanning the very edge of the horizon for any sign of Bonnie’s Ford.

When Bluejay pulls alongside us, I get a look at the pair. Bluejay is nought but steely determination, dedicated to reaching Bonnie before we do. Clyde looks mortified, rocked by his sister’s actions, a small contusion on his head to mark her vicious betrayal.

Rob screeches to a halt once we arrive at the junction. Bluejay’s headlights are already illuminating the road to Wintery Bay, and Rob’s lighting rig coats the entire area in an artificial twilight. In the middle of it all, we see Bonnie, standing next to her car, smiling.

She’s already beyond the threshold of the turn.

**CLYDE:** Linda! Linda, please… come on back now, ok?

**BONNIE:** You can all come with me. There’s a place for all of us. He told me. There’s a place for everyone.

**CLYDE:** Please Linda. You have to come back.

A strange trail of black dust is streaming off Bonnie’s skin, rising into the air and dancing in the breeze. After a moment, it becomes clear that the edges of Bonnie are slowly degrading, converting quietly into dark ash and drifting into the atmosphere.

**BONNIE:** I love you very much Martin. You’re always welcome.

**CLYDE:** No please… please.

Bonnie turns around and climbs into the car. Without looking back, she pulls away down the road to Wintery Bay. The trail of black particles rise from the Ford as she goes, with greater and greater volume as the entire car starts to wither away before our eyes. Less than a minute later the Ford, with Bonnie inside it, gradually dissolves into dust and scatters to the winds.

Clyde doesn't speak. His entire being is quiet. Lilith immediately runs back to the Wrangler. Rob waits a while, staring at he dancing cloud of dust, before putting his arm around Clyde and gently escorting him to the Jeep. 

As I turn away from the road to Wintery Bay, I take note of Bluejay’s reaction. She looks absolutely petrified, more so than I’ve ever seen her. She impulsively removes the pack of Marlboros from her pocket and holds them in her hands, before quickly returning them, unsmoked.

The night passes slowly after we return to the rest stop. All of us are exhausted, and more than willing to surrender to the escapism of sleep. Rob rests in the driver’s seat, giving up his space on the air mattress to Clyde. Everyone drops quickly enough into a quiet slumber, leaving me awake with only my thoughts for company. I find myself thinking of Bluejay, of how she could possibly hope to rationalise the disintegration of Bonnie and her car. 

I wonder how I’d feel if the Left/Right Game were exposed as some unparalleled magic trick. Would I feel foolish? No I don’t think so. Impressed, maybe. Relieved? Most definitely. In fact, the more I think about it, the more I miss the innocent days when I believed the game was a hoax. I suppose I see why Bluejay is so adamant about dismissing this place; trickery however elaborate is almost always a preferable alternative to genuine horror.

The Jeep’s door opens and shuts 

Part of me tries to ignore it, to wash my hands of any other developments in this harrowing night. However, exiled as I am from the kingdom of sleep, I slowly find myself sitting up, quietly putting on my boots, and letting myself out.

I step out into the cool night, observing the figure before me.

**AS:** Where are you going Clyde?

Clyde turns to face me, I initially interpret the look he gives me as one of resignation, but the word doesn’t quite fit. Resignation is a defeat, the world exacting compliance from you against your own wishes. But the man before me is as calm as the night air around him. His wishes are clearly his own. There’s no defeat in his eyes, but something else entirely… peace, maybe.

**CLYDE:** You know where I’m going Alice.

Clyde speaks softly, a quiet conviction behind every word he says. I briefly glance towards the Wrangler, wondering if I’m really equipped to handle this on my own.

**CLYDE:** Don’t call Rob. I made a mistake coming back to the rest stop. I shouldn’t have done... please. Just let me go.

**AS:** Clyde, just wait for tomorrow ok? He’ll understand. He’ll turn us around and take you home.

**CLYDE:** It won't be home anymore.

Clyde’s gentle stare renders me silent.

**CLYDE:** Linda had a husband once. He was a good man. Died young. She could never bring herself to go looking again and I… I never found who I was looking for. We’ve been by each other’s side for sixty years. Sixty years. I gotta be honest, even after all we’ve been through, everything you and I have seen, I never felt like I was in a new world until now.

**AS:** I don’t think I can’t let you do this Clyde.

**CLYDE:** I’m sorry Alice, but it’s not up to you.

Clyde breathes in the cool night air, exhaling through his nose.

**CLYDE:** I yelled at her to come back, when she ran off to rob that ice cream parlour. I kept calling out and calling out. I spent so much energy trying to get her to come back to me. After a while I realised she wasn’t coming back… that I’d have to follow her. I should’ve realised it earlier. That’s all I can do.... follow where she goes.

Clyde looks at me, almost apologetically.

**CLYDE:** Goodbye Alice.

He turns away from the convoy and wanders back down the road.

**AS:** Clyde.

He turns around one last time.

**AS:** Do you want company?

It takes roughly an hour for us to walk back to the junction. In the time we have, I’m treated to the story of Bonnie and Clyde. The warmest fragments of their life together, the moments that built them, the waves that rocked them and the places they once called home. I don’t think I’ll ever agree with what Clyde is doing, but the more he talks, the more I understand.

His stories span more than half a century, supported by a transient cast of acquaintances and friends, but at the core of each tale is a pair of siblings who meant the world to one another. The pair existed as two relative souls, quantifiable only in relation to each other. In the absence of one, the remnant was indefinable. A drifting point, unanchored in space.

The story ends just as we reach the junction

**AS:** I hope she's out there.

**CLYDE:** I hope so too. Thank you for coming with me, I know it’s late.

**AS:** No… it’s never a bad time to see a friend off.

Clyde smiles at me one last time before turning to face the road. He steps over the threshold, past the old wooden sign. In the silence of the night, I hear nothing but his soft footsteps and the quiet breeze, which after a few minutes carries the last of him into an open sky.

It’s a long walk back to the convoy. My mind is numb to fear as I make my way through the dark, the corn rustling in the wind beside me.

It’s been four days since I arrived at Rob Guthard’s house, sat down at his table, and listened to him speak about the new world he’d discovered. In that time, I’ve seen things I can’t hope to comprehend, sights that exist beyond the spectrum of our reality. Things I wouldn't have deemed possible.

For all I know there is a Wintery Bay, and Bonnie has already arrived at her house by the sea, standing at the door, waiting with quiet confidence for her brother’s arrival.

I may never know. But I do hope they find each other, wherever they may be.I've seen a lot of really disturbing stuff throughout my life. But nothing from my past experiences could've stopped my hands from shaking so hard right now. I don't know what the *hell* is going on at this school, in that godforsaken room.

&#x200B;

I was never the type of guy who got excited for assignments. Whether it be hostages, bomb threats, shooters, the adrenaline rush only lasts for so long. The fear kicks in quickly after. Only got one life, after all.

&#x200B;

The worst cases are the ones with kids involved. I have a niece who’s innocent and carefree beyond comprehension. My skin crawls thinking about her being exposed to those kinds of situations. Safe to say, I wasn't looking forward to whatever task laid ahead of us when we were called in.

&#x200B;

When we arrived, there were already six or seven police vehicles parked outside, with a massive crowd of evacuated students standing outside. A lot of them looked a combination of utterly shocked and terrified, like they'd just been chased through a cemetery by a machete-wielding demon.

&#x200B;

As we entered the building, we were getting caught up to date by the one of the Police Officers. But he was hardly any help.

&#x200B;

"...Uh...we don't know what to do... they're in room 203, but...we can't go in there."

&#x200B;

"Can't go in there? What'd you mean?" Dex - our unit leader, asked him.

&#x200B;

He stumbled out a mostly incoherent response, skin pale and eyes wide as he did so. From his expression, you'd assume that he'd been to hell, or something of a comparable nature. Obviously, we weren't taking this lightly. We tried getting more information out of him, but he was adamant that he didn’t know anything beyond the fact that we couldn’t go into the room under any circumstances.

&#x200B;

“We’ll figure it out.” Dex ended up saying to him, realizing that trying to converse with the guy was getting nowhere. The officer simply nodded his head in response. Not confidently, though.

&#x200B;

We traversed into the school, and up to the second floor, all alert as hell. In the utter silence, the place was rather eerie. Not that I ever liked school regardless. Once we ascended the stairwell, room 203 was just to our right.

&#x200B;

It wasn't really what we expected. No blood. No signs of a struggle. Just a room. However... it wasn't silent in there. We approached the door cautiously, listening intently to what was going on inside. It sounded like a teacher giving a standard lecture. But obviously, that wouldn’t have warranted a school-wide evacuation and subsequent police backup.

&#x200B;

Jensen – another Officer, tapped me on my shoulder, pointing to the crack underneath the door. I didn’t see it at first, but a small stream of blood had begun oozing out from underneath.

&#x200B;

*Ah, shit*, I thought to myself. Even though I was expecting something like this sooner or later, it was still jarring to see.

&#x200B;

I wanted to bust down the door right then and there, unleashing a flurry of lead into the perpetrators skull, but that was obviously impulsive. He might’ve had hostages, or wired the door to explode upon opening or *something* of that nature.

&#x200B;

The Police Officer’s words also stuck to my brain. Sure, he seemed like a maniac, but people don’t just become that way through arbitrary means. He’d definitely seen something *bad* lurking behind the door, and I wasn’t eager to find out what.

&#x200B;

Still, we had to figure out a plan. I tried listening closer, in an attempt to discern what the person was saying. Now, I wasn’t sure if they were speaking too quietly or if they were using another language entirely, but I couldn’t make out anything explicit.

&#x200B;

But the more I listened, the more obscure their tone and speech patterns appeared to be. It wasn’t like somebody giving a lecture at all. It was more akin to somebody monotonously reciting a series of separate and unrelated passages in succession.

&#x200B;

Eventually, Dex stepped up, banging on the door.

&#x200B;

“What’s your purpose here? You got any demands? At the moment, we’re willing to co-operate. But we can’t do that if you don’t communicate with us.”

&#x200B;

No response. We tried negotiating for 10 more minutes, but the speaker paid no attention to us, simply continuing their obscure diatribe to the audience of presumably captive and horrified students.

&#x200B;

“Fuck it,” Dex said, frustrated. “Hate dealing with crazy fucks.” He pulled out a radio and began talking to another unit. Soon enough, two more teams were on their way, one to monitor the windows from outside, and one to take a position in the room directly under 203. We were trying to consider every possible angle here.

&#x200B;

About fifteen minutes later, the outside team showed up. Of course, there was nothing much to report on, given the fact that the windows were boarded up from the inside. Still, they had multiple snipers take vantage points. They were more or less there in case things went absolutely belly up.

&#x200B;

“This is some bullshit,” Axwell – another Officer, said. “If they end up never telling us anything, are we just gonna wait here forever? The kids might die of natural causes instead.”

&#x200B;

I wasn’t going to be the one to say it, but I sure was thinking it. There were no easy solutions for situations like these. Another five minutes elapsed before the ground team showed up, announcing to us over the radio that they were making their way over to the room underneath.

&#x200B;

The radio crackled once again. “Hey Dex…”

&#x200B;

Dex picked it up. “Yeah. Something wrong?”

&#x200B;

“I… I don’t think we should go inside.”

&#x200B;

“What? What the fuck are you talking ab-“

&#x200B;

He was cut short by something rather jarring. Not a noise. More so the absence of noise. Whoever was inside the room had stopped talking. Dex put the radio down, ready to negotiate once again.

&#x200B;

“You finished? Can we talk now?” He asked.

&#x200B;

Suddenly and wholly unexpectedly, the door opened just a crack. Thankfully, I was on the side closest to the doorknob, which meant I wasn’t able to see anything inside. But as for the three Officers who did (including Dex)… well I’m not quite sure what happened to them.

&#x200B;

I remember feeling a gust of boiling air seeping out and seeing some kind of deep purple glow emanating from within. At a point, I thought I could see Dex’s eyes beginning to leak blood, but that may just have been my imagination. All I know is that I blinked a few times from the heat, and a few seconds later, two of the Officers were gone and the door was closed, leaving Jensen by himself, kneeling on the ground while covering both of his eyes with his hands.

&#x200B;

We tried getting him to talk, but he wouldn’t budge. In fact, he wouldn’t move an inch from his bizarre position. At that point, I was beginning to panic hard. This evidently wasn’t a normal situation at all.  Lee was also frustrated, banging on the door and barking out orders as if whatever fucked-up entity lurking in the room cared at all about his grievances. And then he made a drastic mistake. He took his rifle and began breaking the door down with it.

&#x200B;

He managed to get about halfway through before succumbing to whatever fate Jensen had just before him. I turned around, seeing him also covering his eyes, frozen in the position on the ground. I tried not to look at the purple light flowing out from the holes in the door as I made eye contact with Axwell.

&#x200B;

We were both ready to get the fuck out of there. I took the lead, rushing towards the stairwell. But after about two seconds of running, I heard a scream from behind me. Some kind of large insect-like appendage shrouded in a dark violet smoke had burst through one of the holes, grabbing him by the waist. I reckon that if I were a single second later, it would’ve done the same to me as well.

I tried shooting at the thing, but my bullets simply bounced off. It pulled Axwell in shortly after, demolishing the door with it. The room was completely open now, but I wasn’t planning on investigating.

&#x200B;

Just like that, I was the last man standing. I bolted down the stairwell, and through the first-floor hall, only to find the path to the nearest exit blanketed in the same smoke that was coming off of the appendage. There was no way in hell I was going to try traversing through it. I picked up my radio, attempting to contact the floor unit instead.

&#x200B;

“Where are you guys? What’s going on?”

&#x200B;

A shaky voice answered on the other end.

&#x200B;

“You… you better hide.”

&#x200B;

“Hide?” I questioned. “Why don’t we get our asses out of here instead?”

&#x200B;

“I’m… I’m looking outside the window right now… something's... happening out there.”

&#x200B;

Given all the commotion, my mind had automatically filtered out the noise. I concentrated, hearing suppressed screams and sporadic gunshots emanating from beyond the walls of the school.

&#x200B;

“Oh, c’mon...” I muttered.

&#x200B;

I did as I was told, stumbling into a stray classroom and barricading the door behind me. The room I’m in now doesn’t have any windows, so I can’t tell what’s going on outside. I’ve been checking for news updates on my phone, but nothing. I’m also averse to using my radio to call for help, because it might give my position away. I don’t know what the hell’s lurking out there in the hallways, but I can certainly hear *something* moving around. Not sure how far it is, though.

&#x200B;

I guess… I’ll just have to wait here until somebody comes for me.

Update: https://redd.it/c0fwhkHi Guys,

It’s been a long week, but I’ve finally got to my computer to post the next log. I’ve been working overtime to afford both London rent and Christmas presents. Hasn’t been fun. Anyway I can’t say much more since this log’s one of the longer ones. I’ll try and get the next one up a little sooner.

Thanks for all your help.

[Part 1](https://redd.it/7asz8x)

[Part 2](https://redd.it/7bkk41)

[Part 3](https://redd.it/7cf4h8)

[Part 4](https://redd.it/7dmuvp)

[Part 6](https://redd.it/7h9jzb)

[Part 7](https://redd.it/7jabqd)

[Part 8](https://redd.it/7loh1l)

[Part 9](https://redd.it/7q3x6e)

[Part 10](https://redd.it/7uyiss)

*****

The Left/Right Game [DRAFT 1] 11/02/2017

The next morning, everything’s the same.

It’s strange. We’re usually so blind to the quiet consistency in our everyday lives, only really taking notice once something changes. Yet, as I stir a spiral of honey into my oatmeal and glance around the group, it’s the notable *lack* of change that truly stands out.

Since the previous evening, the atmosphere surrounding the convoy, and the demeanour of each member, doesn’t seem to have altered in the slightest. The night has fallen short in its role as a grand meridian, failing to partition the past and future, and bringing with it neither perspective nor closure. It’s as if yesterday has spilled, like a toppled brush pot, into the next morning, colouring everything with the same temperaments, fears and divisions.

Lilith and Eve sit facing each other, their legs crossed on a plastic groundsheet. Neither are saying very much, albeit for vastly different reasons. Lilith is still preoccupied by her own smouldering indignation, whereas Eve looks overcome with a subtle but pervasive dread. Neither have taken food from Rob’s stove, a decision I suspect Lilith made for the both of them.

Apollo, Bonnie and Clyde are across from me. Apollo is making conversation, attempting to revive his usual good humour. Bonnie and Clyde help him out, laughing at his jokes, and smiling along with his stories.

Bluejay hasn’t stepped out of her car all morning, eating her own rations and maintaining a welcome distance from the rest of the group. Her eyes meet mine as I look her way, and I’m treated to a sharp, sardonic dismissal.

And Rob? Rob is attending to the practicalities of the road; serving breakfast, then topping up the Wrangler from one of the hulking jerry cans. It’s clear the routine is comforting to him. I can easily imagine this is how he deals with a great many problems. Compartmentalising. Recasting himself as a blunt instrument engaged in a set of necessary processes. He’s made himself too busy for grief, and will likely remain so until the feeling fades.

As coping mechanisms go, it isn’t remotely healthy. I should know. I’m doing pretty much the exact same thing. 

**AS:** Clyde, could I get a few words?

Clyde looks up from his food, a little surprised. 

**CLYDE:** You want me?

**AS:** Hah, yeah… if that’s not too much trouble.

**CLYDE:** Oh no no, no trouble at all. You want to do it now? I’m not too hungry.

**AS:** No me neither. That would be great thank you. Would you mind if we moved away from the stove?

Clyde nods keenly. Putting my bowl to one side, I take Clyde to the edge of the apple grove. Nobody looks after us.

**CLYDE:** How are you holding up Bristol?

**AS:** Getting there. How about you?

**CLYDE:** I’m uhh… yeah I’m getting by.

**AS:** So can I ask… why did you choose Bonnie and Clyde as your call signs?

**CLYDE:** Hah well it came pretty easy. We used to play outlaws when we were kids, one time Bonnie stuck up a bank.

**AS:** Really?

**CLYDE:** Well, no it was an ice cream parlour. But Bonnie was pretending it was a bank and then she ran in, holding her hand like a gun. Told Mrs Gilford it was a stick-up.

**AS:** Wow, that doesn’t seem like her.

**CLYDE:** Oh no she was a wild child. Always living in a story. Anyway, we got free sundaes and a new nickname in town after that. When Rob told us about the call signs it was the first thing we thought of.

**AS:** It’s a good choice.

I pause, letting the previous subject fade before launching into the next one. All things considered, this may be the last time me and Clyde are on such casual speaking terms.

**AS:** Bonnie told me she talked to the hitchhiker.

Clyde’s disposition shifts. There’s sudden alertness that wasn’t there before, rushing to the fore in immediate response to my words. In the following silence, at the centre of his wide eyed stare, an educated guess suddenly becomes much more.

**CLYDE:** Wh.. when did she tell you?

**AS:** I’m sorry Clyde… she didn’t. You just did.

I can almost see the stone fall in Clyde’s throat. The deep, burning embarrassment and hurt that comes from being deceived, from a close secret you held getting out into the world. I don’t feel exceptional either. Lying to Clyde, bringing him away from Bonnie under the guise of an interview… beyond the personal abhorrence, it also flies in the face of everything I’ve tried to be as a journalist. 

Clyde can’t bring himself to talk, so I press forward.

**AS:** I think it might be best if you call Bonnie over here.

Nodding vaguely, Clyde wordlessly shuffles back to Bonnie, whispering in her ear. She puts a hand on his shoulder and helps herself up. Whatever he’s told her, she doesn’t seem angry as she joins us beneath the shade of the apple trees.

**BONNIE:** I didn’t want to cause any trouble, a… and Clyde’s been looking forward to this trip for so long I didn’t want us to turn back. I’m sorry.

**AS:** What happened Bonnie?

**BONNIE:** I just said two words. I wasn’t talking to him; I was doing what Rob said but then he… I just said “Bless you.” That’s all it was.

**AS:** That’s it?

**BONNIE:** Well I… he thanked me and then he was just… so easy to talk to and I thought, “Well I’ve already talked to him, what will a few more words do?”

**CLYDE:** She hardly said anything else.

**AS:** What about him? Did he say anything?

Bonnie starts to smile, the same way she did last night. A dreamy, enthused expression glowing with reminiscent joy.

**BONNIE:** He told me about this wonderful place. Wasn’t it wonderful Martin?

**CLYDE:** Bonnie-

**BONNIE:** Just a few houses by the sea, but he made it sound so nice. 

**CLYDE:** Bonnie, please…

**BONNIE:** What’s wrong? I can talk about it right?

When I look back to Clyde, his lips are firmly pressed together, his facial muscles tight. He’s holding something back, but what slips through betrays a poignant dismay.

**CLYDE:** It’s all you talk about Bonnie. You… you mentioned it a few times after… and since Jubilation you ain’t stopped.

**AS:** Are you guys talking about Wintery Bay?

Clyde grimaces, and Bonnie grins, when they hear the name.

**AS:** Bonnie are we heading there?

**BONNIE:** The hitchhiker said it’s on our way. I’m so looking forward to seeing it.

I can’t say I feel the same, and it’s safe to say Clyde agrees with me. Before now, I’d only heard Bonnie mention Wintery Bay on two occasions, but it sounds like she’s talked about it a whole lot more. I sympathise with Clyde for what he’s had to deal with. However, the gross irresponsibility of his actions aren’t lost on me either.

**AS:** Does Rob know?

**CLYDE:** I didn’t want to-

**AS:** You didn’t want to trouble him? Or did you just not want him to turn you around?

**BONNIE:** I’m alright, really.

**AS:** Well either way, you need to tell Rob before we hit the road. 

Clyde shuffles uncomfortably.

**AS:** I’m not going to do it for you. But too much has happened on this trip already. Ace is… this place is dangerous ok? There’s no place for lies any more.

I hope that Clyde doesn’t see the irony, given that I’ve roundly deceived him in the past five minutes. He nods, takes Bonnie’s hand, and walks slowly towards the Wrangler. Rob is loading the last of the fold up chairs into the back of the car. The conversation doesn’t last long, but by the end of it, Rob rests his hand on Bonnie’s shoulder and sends them on their way. He doesn’t look mad. Perhaps he just has other things on his mind.

That’s the second thing I’ve done today that’s inherently non-journalistic. I was supposed to be a fly on the wall for this story, a passenger, recording events with objective detachment without my own influence seeping into proceedings. In many ways I wish I still was. But the stakes are higher now, and though secrets make for good editorial, they’re also potentially damaging to the safety of the group. Following the incident with Ace, I’m slightly less concerned with an unbiased story than I am with getting home to tell it.

Rob looks like he’s about to make his morning address. The group wanders over, some more reluctantly than others, and gathers around the Wrangler. 

**ROB:** First things first, I want to say that… well… tempers got a little heated last night, and that I’m sorry for my part in all that. I wanna thank you for coming with me this far, and if you wanna turn back, well that’s just fine.

The group stays quiet.

**ROB:** If you are headin’ back. I’d say if you travel one by one, be sure to stay on the radios, retrace the route and follow all the rules that applied when you were gettin’ here. Now can I get a show of hands, who’s wantin’ to *keep goin’* on the road?

I observe my compatriots closely. The definites will be Bonnie & Clyde, who have already implied that they want to continue, and also Bluejay, who feels she has nothing to worry about from the road. Apollo is in the wind, and Lilith & Eve are probably a split vote. All in all, this could be the moment our convoy splits in half.

Bluejay throws her hand up lazily. Bonnie and Clyde, predictably, raise theirs. Apollo raises his a few moments later.

**APOLLO:** Hey, I’ve come this far.

That leaves Lilith and Eve. After sharing a brief glance with her friend, Lilith raises her hand and Eve follows suit, albeit with an air of trepidation.

I’m surprised that no one’s turning back, after everything that happened yesterday, but it’s clear everyone has their own reasons. I’m just glad I don’t have to say goodbye to anyone. I set about trying to divine everyone’s motives for continuing on the road, but I quickly stop when I realise everyone’s looking at me.

**AS:** Oh sorry. Yeah I’m in... I’m going… that way.

I gesture to the road ahead and raise my hand redundantly. 

**ROB:** Well ok. I guess that’s everyone then. We got a fair way to travel today but there ain’t much to see. Just follow the rules and take things as they come I guess.

As we pull out, I start to feel a little restless. The sedentary nature of travel is beginning to take its toll, and I’m starting to feel overfamiliar with the Wrangler’s passenger seat. I’m glad that I got a chance to stretch my legs last night. 

Rolling, Elysian corn fields span the roadside for the next five hours. Turns are few and far between, but Rob’s attention never wavers. I only manage to grasp his attention briefly.

**AS:** Aren’t Jeeps supposed to have poor fuel economy?

**ROB:** They ain’t the best. That’s why I always bring gas along.

**AS:** It’s just… the fuel gauge has hardly moved since we left this morning.

**ROB:** Haha. You noticed that huh? I was wonderin’ if you were gunna.

**AS:** Why, what have you done to it?

**ROB:** Nuthin’. It’s the road. Makes fuel burn slower. 

**AS:** Seriously?

**ROB:** Ain’t just that either. You finish your food this mornin’?

**AS:** No… why?

**ROB:** Hardly anyone did, ‘cept Apollo. More you go, less you need to keep goin’.

**AS:** Ok… wait you said the road pushes against you.

**ROB:** Yep.

**AS:** But now you’re making it sound like it’s helping us along.

**ROB:** Yep.

**AS:** So it’s hostile whilst also incentivising us? That sounds odd to me.

**ROB:** Sounds like life to me. Reasons to stop, reasons to keep goin’.

I suppose that makes sense. Despite his well-documented obsession with the secrets of the road, Rob seems to have a strangely laissez faire attitude to its internal logic. It’s like the road doesn’t need to make perfect sense to him, or at least he doesn’t expect it to yet.

As the fresh rural air drifts in through the windows, I lose myself in the hypnotic endlessness of the passing fields. I wonder how many eyes have seen these vistas. I wonder where we are, not geographically, but in a grander sense. Are we still in the world as I know it? Are we beyond it? Below it? Or have we just slipped through the cracks, into some intermediate domain?

Rob slows the car down to a crawl, a precaution he takes before most corners. My eyes wander gently back into the Wrangler, finally resting on the rear view. 

There’s something behind us. A humanoid figure, shrouded in the soft focus of considerable distance. It staggers quickly toward the convoy, unsure on its own feet.

**AS:** Rob what is that?

Rob follows my gaze to the rear view mirror. His brow furrows.

**ROB:** Somethin’ new.

Rob grabs the receiver. Before he can make an announcement, the speaker splutters with static, followed by Eve’s frantic voice.

**EVE:** Guys there’s something behind us... guys? Something’s coming after us. Bluejay can you see it?

Bluejay doesn’t answer. I doubt she considers it worth her time. A squealing panic rings out over the radio as Eve calls again.

**EVE:** Is it from Jubilation? Guys? Guys?!

**ROB:** Stay calm everyone. Let’s pick up the pace a little.

Rob lets his foot rest heavier on the gas. The Wrangler gently accelerates, with the rest of the convoy eagerly matching our speed. 

**APOLLO:** Who is that Rob?

**ROB:** I ain’t so sure, but we got a turn coming up. Let’s just get ourselves off the road, see if he follows. 

The figure continues to stumble towards us. Its arms hang crookedly in the air and, as it comes into sharper focus, I can just make out that there’s something wrong with its face.

**EVE:** Guys speed up, please. Please.

**LILITH:** Calm down.

**EVE:** It’s coming for us!

I can sympathise with Eve’s panic. I’ve had the luxury of travelling at the head of the convoy. I was the first across when that godforsaken pine was dropped across the road. Eve is now second to last, relying on three other cars to make their escape before she can follow. Ace had to wait for the rest of us, and it cost him everything. Now Eve & Lilith are one car closer to being where he was.

**EVE:** It’s face. Oh my god! Oh my god. Guys please!

**BLUEJAY:** Jesus, shut up!

**APOLLO:** Hey that is NOT helping. Rob it’s movin’ pretty fast we-

**ROB:** We stay the course. It ain’t caught up yet just-

**EVE:** Oh god. Oh god, oh GOD!

Rob’s warnings are cut short by the screeching of tires. Eve swerves out of the convoy’s neat, single file line, and onto the empty stretch of road beside us. The car accelerates past Bonnie & Clyde. Past Apollo.

I get a brief glimpse of Eve & Lilith as our windows align.

Lilith is yelling at Eve, trying to get her to calm down. Eve is screaming into the air, the puppet of her own frenetic terror. The car shoots past us and down the long road ahead. Rob swears and picks up the radio. 

The figure continues to lurch towards us.

**ROB:** Ferryman to Eve & Lilith. Stop the car right now.

**LILITH:** Eve slow down!

**ROB:** Eve goddamnit you’re gonna-

I stare through the windshield as their car stops. Not a slow, grinding deceleration, but an unequivocal, immediate halt. Their bodies are thrown forwards against the safety glass as the car becomes utterly motionless.

**AS:** Rob what’s happening?

**ROB:** I told’em to be careful!

**AS:** Why what’s-

I no longer need an answer. I realise that it’s written right in front of me, etched into the side of the road. A brief gap in the endless rows of golden corn, only a little wider than the Wrangler itself. A dirt track the leads off to the left, about ten metres ahead of us, about fifteen metres behind Lilith & Eve. I now understand why Rob was being so careful, and why Eve should have been as well.

They’ve missed the next turn.

**ROB:** Ferryman to all cars. I’ve found the turn, let’s make it quick. Eve and Lilith you stay in the car. I’m coming back to get you both.

Rob flicks on his turn signal, preparing the group for the sharp left corner, and slams his foot on the accelerator. Lilith and Eve disappear behind a wall of corn as we pull down the dirt track. Rob keeps driving, until enough space is left for the rest of the group. 

Once they’re all safely pulled in, Rob climbs into the back of the car, grabs his rifle and jumps out onto the path. I quickly climb out and follow behind him.

When we arrive on the main road, the figure has covered a considerable distance, finally drawing near enough for me to see what’s wrong with its face. At a certain point, midway across the crown of the head, running in a straight line down past the cheeks and under the jaw, the head simply stops. It’s like the foremost section of his skull has been sliced cleanly off, and has bent inwards, his entire face concave and shrouded completely in a deep shadow. A ghastly, organic hood, that seems deeper than physics should allow.

That isn’t all that’s wrong with the picture however. The man’s outstretched arms are bent in several places. Dark purple contusions blossom at every unnatural joint as if his arms had been broken multiple times. His leg is also bent to one side, the reason for the irregular walk that still carries him towards us. 

Rob looks shaken as he raises the rifle to his shoulder, bidding the figure turn around.

The man ignores Rob’s demand, continuing its march. Even when a bullet hits it square in the chest, the figure hardly slows down. We’re forced to jump out of the way as it continues down the road, Eve and Lilith cowering in their locked car as it approaches. 

Fear shifts into confusion as the creature passes them by, and continues down the road. It’s as if it doesn’t even know we’re here.

Rob breathes a sigh of relief, lowers the gun, and runs back to the rest of the convoy. The moment he leaves, my mind notes something peculiar. It’s an utterly bizarre observation, especially considering the many otherworldly facets of the retreating creature, there’s something familiar about it. Specifically, its fashion sense. 

The shirt, the dirt covered jeans. They aren’t dissimilar to the ones I found in the brown leather duffel bag, resting atop the block of C4. 

Reaching into my pocket, pulling out my phone, I scroll through my list of contacts. As the man heaves himself down the road, I call the second number I discovered last night. The one in the Nokia’s received calls list. The number that likely belonged to whoever created the bomb, and whoever was driving the car that day.

After a few moments, a ringtone disrupts the creature’s silent walk. I end the call, realising how reckless I’ve been and praying that the strange figure doesn’t see my action as an excuse to turn around. 

I’m lucky, this time at least. The dial tone cuts out, and the figure continues to stumble its way toward the horizon.

The next thing I hear is a scream.

Scanning for its source, I see Eve, her door open and with one foot out of the car. She’s frantically pulling at her leg, seemingly unable to lift it from the tarmac.

**AS:** Eve what’s going on?

With shaking fingers, Eve clumsily unties her shoelace, and lifts her leg back into the car. Her boot stays in place, and it’s possible to make out a slight elasticity to the road below it, a depression in the tarmac around its base. Slowly, and steadily, the sole of the boot disappears into the road. Eve watches as the dark tarmac slowly sucks the boot down, enveloping the heel and dragging it beneath the surface. 

The thought comes to Eve the same moment it does to me. We both fix our eyes on the back of the car, where same, soft indent is gradually developing around the tyres. 

Eve’s terrified scream is drowned out by the blare of revving engines. I jump out of the way as the rest of the convoy reverse out of the corner and back onto the main road. Bluejay, Bonnie & Clyde, Apollo and finally Rob, park themselves chaotically around me. Rob jumps out and approaches.

**ROB:** They ain’t pulled back yet?

As soon as he asks the question, he sees the sight before him. Only the neck of Eve’s boot remains above the ground, sinking ever further into the tarmac. The road gradually but voraciously churns at the car tyres, consuming the rubber, and swallowing the lowest edge of the wheel cover.

In the midst of such an impossible sight, all I can say to Rob is:

**AS:** They’re trying.

Lilith & Eve hit the gas hard. The engine growls at the road as it furiously attempts to reverse, the undercarriage creaking and groaning from the sheer mechanical strain. The wheels themselves, however, don’t rotate an inch. The tyres belong to the road now, taken by the unknowable forces that continue to drag them into the earth.

The engine chokes, defeated, and I can see Eve screaming into her fists as the roadway calmly continues its work.

**ROB:** Goddamn it we can’t reach’em. Tell’em to get on top of the car.

**APOLLO:** What the… What’s happening Rob?

**ROB:** Bristol! Tell’em to get on the roof!

Rob marches off to the Wrangler. The rest of the convoy gather on the road, just in line with the left turn, where we assume it’s safe to stand. Everyone, saving for Bluejay, looks on in anxious silence.

**AS:** Eve! Lilith! I need you to get on top of the car ok? Guys?

**EVE:** We’re sinking! Oh fuck… oh fuck we’re-

**AS:** Eve! I’m trying to help you. Rob’s working on something, but you need to climb onto the roof of the car. Don’t think about anything else. Open the door, wind down your window and use it as a foothold.

Eve is still deaf with worry. Lilith doesn’t hesitate. She places one hand on the upper rim of her open door, one foot on the base of the open window, and her free hand palm down on the car’s roof. The door rocks on its hinges as she puts her weight on it. In one strong motion, she pushes herself backwards until she’s sitting atop the car. 

The tarmac has swallowed its way to the car’s lower chassis. Eve stares, transfixed by the road as it pulls her ever closer towards it.  

**LILITH:** Sarah look at me!

Lilith is crouching on the car’s roof, her hand reaching down to Eve. Her friends voice seems to be the only thing that can break Eve’s fearful commune with the waiting abyss. She turns around, Lilith’s hand a few inches from her face. 

**LILITH:** Get up here.

Her eyes brimming with tears, fought back by rapid, shallow breaths, Eve grabs Lilith’s hand. Lilith gets a solid handhold around the lip of her own doorway and heaves Eve up and onto the roof of the car. Eve shrieks a little as the door swings, putting all her trust into Lilith’s grip.

She joins her friend on the roof just as the road consumes the lower edge of the door, spilling inside the car’s cabin like magma.

**ROB:** Damnit they’re too far away.

Rob has returned from the Wrangler, rapidly uncoiling a braid of long, light blue climber’s rope. I’d seen it resting in the back of the car during the trip, never once thinking that I’d see it used. 

Rob threads one end of the rope through a carabiner and secures it in place with a tight knot. He holds it to his side as he shouts to Lilith & Eve.

**ROB:** Ok listen, we only got one shot at this. I’m gonna throw you the hook and you’re gonna catch it and yank it taut ok? Then you can hook it onto somethin’ and climb your way over. Don’t let it fall. Ok?

Lilith looks pale. She nods before clambering to her feet, and stepping to the back of the car. Eve watches on, her hands wrapped around her legs.

**ROB:** Well, here goes nothin’.

Rob begins to swing the rope over his head, a large undulating circle that quickly levels out as the weight of the carabiner eases the rope onto a flat plane. I instinctively shrug down as the rope passes over my head, swinging faster and faster. Gritting his teeth, his face reddening with the towering pressure of this single throw, Rob lets the rope fly. It arcs in the air, like a cast fishing line, towards Lilith’s outstretched hands. 

I watch it pass in front of her, the metal of the carabiner glinting in the sun as it falls.

She catches it, grasping the rope in her shaking hands.

Despite her victory, I see her face contort with sudden and striking panic. She holds the rope high over her head, staring wildly down at the road between us. Following her eyes, my heart falls. She caught the rope, but she didn’t pull it taut fast enough. 

Even with Rob continuing to hold his end above his head, the rope had too much slack when it landed in Lilith’s hands. It’s fallen in a sloping arc, the lowest point of which has scraped against the tarmac. It only rests a few precious seconds before Lilith finds herself unable to pull it free. It sinks into the ground. The rope starts to brush gently against Rob’s fingers before he throws it to the ground.

 **ROB:** Goddamnit! Ok… if I just got somethin’ else. Somethin’ we can put down.

**AS:** The empty jerry cans? They could step on-

**ROB:** Too unstable, and we’d have to throw them perfect. Ok… ok.

The road has claimed almost half the car now, eating up the licence plate as the vehicle sinks lower and lower. Lilith looks helplessly on as we deliberate, Eve crying her eyes out behind her.

**CLYDE:** We could get a ground sheet.

**ROB:** We ain’t got one that’ll stretch.

**AS:**  Well what about-

**APOLLO:** I’m going out there.

Apollo’s blank statement catches us all by surprise. Turning in his direction, I note a direct and powerful confidence in his manner. 

**APOLLO:** They aren’t gonna last much longer. It takes a second for the road to get you, that’s how they got so far ahead before they stopped. I drive out, they jump onto my car, then we climb back.

**ROB:** I ain’t got more rope.

**APOLLO:** You got the winch right? If I drive out with it bunched up on my lap I can make sure it never goes slack. Then I hook it up to my roof bars and we get the hell outta dodge.

**ROB:** You got the best car for it. But I should drive out there.

**APOLLO:** You need to work the winch. Bonnie & Clyde can’t climb back. 

He skips over his rationale for not choosing Bluejay, not wanting to waste time on a foregone conclusion.

**AS:** What about me? I’m lighter, the climb back would be easier. 

**APOLLO:** But you can’t help them when they’re jumping over. We’re wasting time, you know it’s a good idea.

Rob takes a moment to consider it, his mind fighting for a better solution. 

**ROB:** You’d better get back here Apollo.

**APOLLO:** Don’t plan on hanging around there Rob.

Apollo grins before sprinting to his Rover. Rob, wasting no time, runs to the winch, switches it to manual, and unspools the heavy duty rope. His hands cross over as he drops each new length onto the ground.

I turn back to Lilith.

**AS:** Did you hear that Lilith?!

Lilith is huddled next to Eve, attempting to comfort her as the car’s headlights disappear into the depths of the road. Her head snaps round when I call.

**LILITH:** What’s… what’s happening?

**AS:** Apollo’s coming out to you. You have to jump onto his car and climb back over ok?

**LILITH:** … Ok!

She hurries back to Eve, grasping her friend’s shoulders as she relays the plan.

**ROB:** Ok that’ll hold. 

Rob’s climbing down from the hood of the Wrangler. He’s fed the winch cable around and through the lighting rig, ensuring a good level of clearance on the way out and, more importantly, for the climb back. The rope has already been fed through Apollo’s driver’s side window.

Bonnie and Clyde are helping to throw Apollos’ baggage out of the trunk and onto the rode behind him. The less he has to lose on this trip the better.

**ROB:** All set up over here.

**APOLLO:** Ok. See you on the other side Rob.

Apollo slams his foot onto the accelerator. The Range Rover bolts forwards, and powers toward the threshold. The engine roars as he rockets past the left turn and keeps on going, into the territory beyond. In the few precious seconds he has, he crosses the distance towards the two terrified girls. The winch rope streams through the window, and then suddenly, pulls tight.

Apollo is thrown forwards as the car comes to an uncompromising stop, roughly a metre’s distance from Lilith & Eve. The impact looks brutal, but Apollo somehow manages to keep a hold on the rope and, inexplicably, his sense of humour.

**APOLLO:** I don’t think I got the insurance for this.

Clumsily, still feeling the aftereffects of the sudden stop, Apollo throws open his door and starts to climb out.

**APOLLO:** Take in the slack Rob!

My attention fixed on Apollo, I hear the mechanical whir as the winch kicks into life. As Apollo climbs out of his car and up onto the roof, he affixes the hook at the end of the winch to one of his roof bars, securing it in place. A few moments later, the rope is pulled straight.

Apollo steps down onto the hood of his car, his arms outstretched to the girls. It’s a short jump, but they’ll have to make it from a lower elevation, the trunk of the car already sinking to ground level.

**APOLLO:** Ok come on I got you, we’ve got to move fast now.

Lilith stands up, helping Eve to her feet before stepping down onto the rapidly disappearing trunk.

**LILITH:**  Ok… ok…

Lilith yelps as she throws herself towards Apollo. Her front foot plants itself on the hood of the car, her other leg flailing in the air behind her. Apollo grabs her by the arms and yanks her onto the car, holding her close to him as she gets her bearing on the smooth metal of the hood. When she’s stable, he lets her crawl up onto the roof, where she immediately looks back to Eve.

**APOLLO:** See Eve, nothin’ to it. Come on now.

Eve paces back, her hands shaking as she contemplates the jump. Fighting against her screaming instincts, Eve squeals as she steps across the trunk and makes the leap across. The toe of her shoe lifting off the car mere seconds before it descends into the murky, black pitch of the road.

Eve lands short of her destination. One desperate, grasping arm makes contact with Apollo’s as her legs bang and scrape against the Rover’s grill, scrambling for any conceivable purchase. Apollo is wrenched sideways by the force of Eve’s landing, thrown off balance by the unexpected application of her whole weight. In the gut churning moments that follow, Apollo tugs Eve up to his chest and wraps an arm around her, his centre of gravity passing over the edge of the car.

The fall takes a lifetime. Wrapped in each other’s arms, Eve and Apollo tumble forward towards the patient, ravenous ground. In the split second before he leaves the hood of the car, Apollo uses his last inch of footing to push himself into a slow turn. The twist continues as they fall, until Eve is looking to the road, Apollo to the pale blue sky. In one final action, Apollo pushes Eve’s waist, holding her at arms length.

Apollo’s back thuds into the asphalt, his head smacking audibly against it. Dazed and concussed, he manages to hold Eve aloft, keeping everything but her feet from joining him on the hard ground.

**APOLLO:** Get back up… quickly get back up.

Her face shredded by fear and guilt and sorrow, Eve stares into Apollo’s eyes and whimpers. Collecting herself, she pushes herself off him, ripping out her laces, and leaving a shoe and a sock behind as she clambers back on to the Range Rover. With every movement she whispers a quivering apology.

**APOLLO:** It’s ok. It’s ok. Go on. It’s ok.

He repeats those two words over and over, until I’m not even sure who he’s talking to. The road elasticates around him, dragging him down into its depths. Eve looks back to him, her face cringing in misery. 

Bonnie buries her face in Clyde’s chest, unable to watch the next few moments unfold.

**EVE:** I’m so sorry. I’m so sorry.

**APOLLO:** It’s… it’s alright. Just get going ok? It doesn’t hurt… it doesn’t hurt, really.

Apollo’s ears sink beneath the road. Entering a new world of perfect silence, Apollo sees the end nearing.

**APOLLO:** Oh god. Rob! ROB!!

I won’t play his final moments, for your benefit and, ultimately, for his. Before he sinks into the road, Apollo asks for Rob to talk to his family. He wants Rob to tell them that he loves them. Rob nods, knowing that Apollo won’t be able to hear his response.

After a few cries of panicked despair, Apollo’s eyes and mouth are enveloped by the road. His screams are drowned by the thick, churning asphalt.

Eve watches the rest of his body sink, while Lilith tugs at her sleeve, pulling her towards the roof.

**LILITH:** Come on we’ve got to go. Sarah we’ve got to go!

**EVE:** I’m sorry.

Whispering one last heartfelt apology to the air itself, Eve steps up with Lilith and stares at the cable. 

**AS:** Ok guys just let yourself down until you’re hanging from the rope and work your way across.

**LILITH:** I got it! You ready?

Eve looks to her friend.

**EVE:** I… I don’t…

**LILITH:** Just watch me ok? Follow right behind me.

The Range Rover’s wheels have now disappeared. With every passing second, the cable’s clearance diminishes, and the angle between the roof bar and the Wrangler’s lighting rig becomes steeper. They need to start moving now or not at all.

Eve looks across the length of the rope. I can feel her mind kicking back at the prospect.

**EVE:** I can’t.

**LILITH:** Sarah… we fucking have to ok? Follow behind me.

Lilith wraps her arms around Eve, hugging her stiff, shivering frame, before letting go and crouching down to the rope, slowly working her way under it. Her hands clenching the cable, her legs wrapped securely around it, Lilith starts to pull herself along the rope, shifting her feet up every few seconds behind her. She fixes her eyes on me as she drags herself to the halfway mark.

**LILITH:** Is she following?!

The asphalt swallows the Range Rover’s lower chassis. Eve hasn’t moved a muscle. The stretch of black tarmac might as well be a bottomless ravine, the Grand Canyon. The idea of hanging herself over it mortifies her.

**AS:** Sarah! Sarah it’s not as bad as it looks, please! Please come on.

Lilith crosses the threshold. Her knuckles are white as she continues to cling to the rope. Rob marches up to her and helps her down into his arms, coaxing her hands free by telling her that she’s safe.

As soon as her feet hit the ground again, they give way beneath her, and Lilith sinks to the ground crying out.

**LILITH:**  Sarah! Come on please!!

**EVE:** I can’t! I can’t… I…

**LILITH:**  Please Sarah… I need you here.

Her shallow breaths quaking with anxiety, Eve slowly crouches down and grips the rope. Slowly but surely, as the asphalt consumes the car’s licence plate less than a metre below her, Eve lowers herself down and, with clumsy desperation, drags herself along the rope.

She’s left it late. Her back hangs mere inches from the hungry ground as she shuffles unevenly towards us, lifting her feet and scraping them up the rope, her arms straining to stay locked.

**EVE:** I’m not going to make it!

**LILITH:** You are! Keep going! 

The Range Rover’s window is now disappearing, inside the dashboard has been submerged. With every yard that Eve manages to climb, the lowering rope ensures she stays close to the ground, even over the final few feet.

My heart breaks the moment her foot slips.

It happens almost too quickly to register. As Eve erratically shuffles her feet along the rope, her bare left foot gives way, swinging underneath her and kicking down onto the ground. Eve tries to raise it in time before discovering that she can’t.

**LILITH:** No… no no no please.

Thrown entirely off balance, Eve tries to pull herself up. However, with her lower leg seeping into the dark tar, her position can’t be maintained. She falls, her body twisting, as she falls onto the road. 

Lilith releases a terrible shrieking cry. Eve whimpers as the side of her head rests against the tarmac, her cheek already subsumed.

**EVE:** I’m sorry. I’m sorry.

**LILITH:** No.  No. Please don’t be sorry. 

**EVE:** I.. love you. I love y… you Jen.

**LILITH:** I love you too… I’m sorry I didn’t… I’m so sorry.

Eve tries to reply, but half of her mouth is sealed shut, encased in the creeping asphalt. Her short breaths finally melt into one long inhalation, as her nose and mouth are sunk entirely.

One remaining eye takes a final, fleeting look at Lilith, before vanishing.

I look away from what is still to sink. The important things are already gone.

Lilith collapses on her knees, a screaming of torrent of grief expelled from her burning lungs. Rob is completely immobile, likely searching for something practical in which to bury himself. Bonnie & Clyde simply look lost, as they turn their backs on the sinking Range Rover.

Bluejay’s reaction surprises me. She stares into the tarmac, the smirk ripped from her face, replaced by a familiar look of shellshock. She repeatedly mutters something under her breath, something that sounds like:

“It’s not real… It’s not real.”

We stand in silence for what seems like an age, accompanied by the breeze and Lilith’s gradually waning laments. After she’s exorcised the immediate torment, her screaming descends into a deathly stillness.

Rob makes the first step to approach her.

**ROB:** I… I can take you back home if you want to-

**LILITH:** No... No.

Lilith wipes her eyes, as tears continue to fall freely down her cheeks. When she turns around, she looks enraged.

**LILITH:** No. I’m still going. I’m going to get to the end.

**ROB:** You know I can’t tell you when that’ll be.

Lilith stands up and glares at Rob, then looks over to Bonnie & Clyde.

**LILITH:** Are you guys still going? Do you have a seat free?

The siblings look to one another. Bonnie nods.

**CLYDE:** You got a place with us if you want it.

**LILITH:** Is the door unlocked?

**CLYDE:** Uhh yeah.

**LILITH:** Then what the fuck are we waiting around for?

Lilith marches to Clyde’s Ford and climbs into the back seat. She waits for us impatiently to finish up.

**ROB:** Anyone else want to turn around?

Rob looks to me and Bluejay. Bluejay sends a look of deep scorn his way before marching off to her own car. 

**ROB:** Bristol?

The Range Rover has finally sunk. The road has settled back into a hard, permanent surface. It isn’t like Rob to offer me a ride home, and I feel overwhelmingly like I should take him up on it. But there are too many questions unanswered, too many unchallenged mysteries weaved into the fabric of this journey. Going back now wouldn’t be a return, it would be a retreat.

**AS:** I’m still going.

A few minutes later, the three remaining cars roll down the dirt track. Leaving another incomprehensible atrocity behind us. There’s a part of me that can’t believe I’m still continuing down this road, a greater part of me is astonished that no one took the opportunity to turn back.

As Rob carries me on to the next turn, and the one after that, I realise we all have our reasons. I’d become obsessed with chasing the truth, as had Bluejay in her way. Bonnie had her own, unsettling motives for carrying on, and Clyde wasn’t about to abandon her. Lilith had directed her smouldering anger and grief toward the road itself, seeking deliverance at its end. And Rob? As far as he’s concerned, there’s only one direction to go.

Still, when I think of the sorrows that have already befallen us, and the potential for unspeakable ruin that lies ahead, I realise that no one in their right mind would continue down this road.

I suppose no one is.It started at 4:43am. The noise jolted me awake. It sounded like there was a giant truck revving its engine right there in our bedroom. Exhaust fumes wafted in through the open window. It was a bad way to start the day.

“What is that?” moaned my wife. We’d both slept poorly, because our daughter had crawled into our bed at 1am and kept kicking us in the face until we were both half-hanging off the bed while she snored away.

“Start of the apocalypse,” I groaned. “Go back to sleep.”

“No way can I sleep through that racket,” said Vanessa. She rolled out of bed and shut the window. That helped a little, but it still sounded like war out there. She pulled the curtains back and looked through the window. “It’s the fucking neighbor. Mowing his lawn. Before the sun is up. We need to have a heart-to-heart with him. Let him know that’s not okay.”

Keagan, our daughter, woke up crying.

“Guess that’s that,” I muttered, getting out of bed myself. “I’ll go talk to him after some coffee.”

“Bring me some too,” said Vanessa.

“Papa, bring me some Smarties,” said Keagan.

“No. No Smarties for breakfast. Banana. Or toast. But not Smarties.”

“Fine,” huffed Keagan. “Toast. Cut into shapes.”

I sighed. This was really the last thing I wanted to be doing at 4:45 on a Saturday morning. Making coffee and cutting toast into animal shapes instead of drooling in my sleep and dreaming of a gentler world.

I went into the kitchen and started the coffee and toast, and then looked out the living room window. Sure enough, there was Mr. Limsky, mowing his damn lawn, in his damn bathrobe no less. That was another thing that I had no desire to do: get into it with him about this, or really talk to him about anything ever beyond a friendly wave and a “Howdy, neighbor.”

By the time I was awake enough to form a coherent thought, it was almost 6:00, and I had consumed four cups of coffee. Mr. Limsky was still at it, which was strange, because his yard isn’t very big at all. It shouldn’t take more than a 40 minute mow job. But here it was, an hour and fifteen minutes later, and he was still at it.

I got semi-dressed and stumbled outside. I walked across my own yard, which, I noted, needed mowing itself. *Maybe I’ll tell him that if he mows my lawn and promises to never start so early again, I’ll let it go.* But I knew that I wouldn’t do that. I was a coward.

As I got closer, I observed with some confusion that his lawn was *already* mowed. He was going over it a second time now. I walked up to our property line, denoted by the contrast between mowed and unmowed grass, and started waving my hands in the air, waiting for Mr. Limsky to notice me.

He never did. He just stared straight ahead and kept pushing the mower.

“HEY!” I shouted. But it was no good. I could barely hear myself, and so I knew that he wouldn’t be able to hear me from across the lawn, right behind the lawnmower.

*Goddammit*.

I walked across his yard until I was right behind him. “HEY!” Nothing. I tapped on his shoulder. Nothing. He just kept pushing the lawnmower onward over the already mowed lawn. I didn’t know what to do.

*I’ll catch him after he finishes, I guess. He’s in the Zone.*

I shrugged and was getting ready to turn back to my house when I saw a trickle of what was presumably urine run down his bare leg.

*Jesus.*

I went back to my house and opened the door. Vanessa was reading a book to Keagan. She stopped when I came in and looked up. “Well?”

“I, uh… he couldn’t hear me. I’ll go over there once he stops. He’s got to stop some time, right? And, uh… well, I’m a little worried about him honestly. I saw him, you know, wet himself.”

“Mr. Limsky peed his pants?!” asked Keagan. She started laughing.

“Well, that sometimes happens, kiddo,” I said. “You used to do that. We do that a lot when we’re kids and then we don’t do it for a while and then when we get older we sometimes do it again.”

That gave her something to think about anyway.

“Huh,” said Vanessa.

“There’s more,” I said. “He’s already done with the lawn. He’s just going over it a second time.”

“Maybe he missed a few spots?”

“Nope. It’s perfect. Not a blade of grass higher than any other blade of grass.”

“Hmm,” said Vanessa. “That *is* strange. Do you think he’s okay? Should we call somebody?”

I shrugged. “Who are we going to call? The police? Tell them that our retired neighbor is mowing his lawn twice while pis… while peeing himself? What will they say to that?”

\*

By 8:00, I was done cooking the bacon and Mr. Limsky was still at it, mowing his lawn for what must have been the fifth time. I tried not to think about it, but it was hard.

“After breakfast, we should go somewhere,” I said. “It’s a beautiful day. No sense staying cooped up all day.”

“Why does Mr. Limsky keep mowing his lawn?” asked Keagan.

“I don’t know, kiddo,” I muttered. “I don’t know. You want to go to the playground or something?”

“Yay!”

“I’m going to stay here and try to go back to sleep if that’s okay,” said Vanessa.

“Of course,” I said. I felt like going back to sleep myself, even after all that coffee, but the desire to get far away from the sound of the lawnmower outweighed my tiredness.

We ate, then Keagan and I headed to the playground.

At 9:00, I got a text from Vanessa: “Can’t sleep. He’s still mowing.”

9:30: “I’m really starting to get worried. This isn’t normal.”

10:00: “I went over there and tried to talk to him, but it’s like he’s in a trance. Please come home.”

I sighed, but complied. I rounded up the kid and drove home. I felt a deep sense of unease, that grew more intense the closer I got to home.

*You’re afraid of an old man mowing the lawn?* I chided myself. It didn’t work, because my instinctive answer was: *Yes*.

I turned onto my street and prayed that Mr. Limsky would be done mowing the lawn by now. He’d tell us it was just a practical joke and we’d all have a good laugh over it. But soon enough, I saw that wasn’t going to happen. As I pulled into my driveway, I saw that he was still out there. I thought I saw a streak of brown running down his leg, but it was hard to tell for sure because he was going around under the shade of his ancient apple tree.

I walked inside and Vanessa was at the kitchen table with bags under her eyes and a glass of wine in front of her. “Please make it stop,” she said.

“I don’t know how to do that,” I said, suddenly feeling very tired and in need of a drink myself.

“Call the police,” she said.

“Why don’t you?” I asked.

“Fine,” she said. “It’s just that I do everything else around here so I thought maybe you could help this *one* time.”

I held my tongue. I did plenty around there, but I knew that now wasn’t the time to point that out. “Okay,” I said. “I’ll call the police. How has he not run out of gas by now, anyway?”

“I’ve been watching him,” said Vanessa. “He’s got a can of gas in his driveway. Sometimes he grabs it when he passes by and gasses up *while still pushing the mower*. It’s crazy. Please call the police.”

“Alright, alright,” I said. I looked up the number and proceeded to have one of the most awkward phone conversations of my life. It was ten minutes with the receptionist, and then another ten minutes with an officer. Finally, they agreed to come over and check it out.

\*

Fifteen minutes later, I watched out the window as the cop car pulled into Mr. Limsky’s driveway. A single cop got out and walked over to Mr. Limsky.

The cop was waving his hands and shouting, but it was no good. Then the cop grabbed Mr. Limsky’s shoulder and spun him around forcefully. This caused Mr. Limsky to finally let go of the throttle, and for the first time all day, the lawnmower stopped moving. It was still running though, because he had taped its safety shut-off down.

I held my breath as I waited to see what would happen next.

Mr. Limsky opened his mouth, and something emerged from it. It looked like a long, thin tentacle. The tentacle wrapped itself around the cop’s neck, and lifted him up into the air. Then a second tentacle emerged from Mr. Limsky’s mouth, and made its way down the cop’s throat.

I slammed the curtains shut and noticed that I too, like Mr. Limsky earlier, had wet myself.

“What’s going on out there?” asked Vanessa from the kitchen. “Did the police arrive?”

I didn’t have a good answer, so I didn’t say anything.

“Honey?” said Vanessa, walking over. “Are you okay?”

From outside, we heard the whine of a new machine join in with the lawnmower. Vanessa opened the curtain, and I turned slowly to look out.

The cop was out there going around the old apple tree with a weed whacker while Mr. Limsky was back pushing the lawnmower around again.

\*

It’s 5pm. Besides Mr. Limsky, there are now four cops in his yard doing various tasks. One is still at it with the weed whacker. Another has been going at the shrubs with a pair of clippers for hours now. But the one who concerns me the most is the one who is going around spraying the ground from a bottle full of neon blue liquid that Mr. Limsky at one point puked out of his mouth.

I personally am petitioning the family to pack up the car and start driving to Florida where Vanessa’s mother lives. I have no idea what is going on, but it doesn’t look good.

&#x200B;

[Part 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/cfdnpp/my_neighbor_was_mowing_his_lawn_for_13_straight/)You would probably be surprised at the number of bodies one can find out in the desert.

You would probably be even more surprised at how often people play with the bodies. But I don’t know. Since most of us are tweakers or disadvantaged youth doomed to repeat the mistakes of our alcoholic mothers and abusive fathers, maybe you wouldn’t be surprised at all.

My best friend, Kameron, found last winter’s corpse du jour: an old man in a dilapidated trailer. A white beard matted with corpse juice hung past his bony knees, so Kameron bought him a Santa hat from the Dollar Tree and christened him “Satan Claus.” Satan Claus was a popular attraction among the high desert’s underbelly until Gidget Gagnon blabbed to her brother, who was a deputy sheriff.

This pissed Kameron off. He didn’t grow up here, so he didn’t understand the rules: there’s always a snitch, there’s always a whiner, there’s always a freak, and there’s always someone who fantasizes about killing you.

Even if he understood, he’d never have believed that I was both the freak and the person who fantasized about killing him.

I’d known Kameron since we were teenage patients at a county psychiatric facility. It was the first time in our lives either of us ever had security or structure. I miss it, honestly.

We moved in together the second we could. For the record, we weren’t lovers. We never even experimented; I couldn’t separate sex from trauma and didn’t particularly want to try, so I was voluntarily celibate.

This enchanted Kameron because he has a Madonna/Whore complex the size of Babylon. I was his pure, unsullied princess. This is why he paid half my bills, supported me emotionally, and asked nothing in return.

That’s not to say *he* didn’t have sex. Kameron was a bona fide man-whore. That’s the only reason he went to raves and parties: the girls.

We were at just such a party the night I met Daddy.

The party was in a bashed-up warehouse that smelled like roadkill and alcohol. Kameron stayed glued to my side for a while, I guess to make sure no one else swooped in to fuck his Madonna off her pedestal. But it didn’t last. It never does. A girl I recognized vaguely - waist-length black hair and makeup you could scrape off with a putty knife - was eyeing him ostentatiously.

I thought it was disrespectful; to the untrained eye, Kameron and I were a couple, after all.

Now, Kameron was drunk by this point. He gets handsy when he’s drunk, even with me. So I cuddled up and wrapped myself around him. He was enjoying it; cuddling doesn’t break the Madonna pedestal. It just makes him feel special. 

But I messed up.

We were sitting in the corner, starting to play around. He was looking at me in a way no one else ever does: bright and warm and hopeful, like I’m the most important person in the world. I could feel myself teetering on the edge of the pedestal. Then he leaned in to kiss me.

I panicked. Before I knew it, I was running.

I pretended I was flying, that I’d dash outside and leap into the air, taking flight among the mad whirl of constellations. I could almost see it: the warehouse shrinking as I gained altitude, the night wind cooling the sick heat inside me. For a mad moment felt the feathers sprouting from my skin, itchy and hard and growing fast.

I made it outside and halted. No feathers, no flight, no night wind scraping the brokenness away. 

By the time Kameron found me, the night’s chill had settled into my bones and I was shivering.

Only when he tapped my shoulder did I realize I’d been crying. I wiped my eyes hastily and turned.

The black-haired girl lingered several feet away. She had a small smile, halfway between anxious and satisfied.

“Hey.” Kameron slurred slightly. “Demetria and I are leaving. Will you get home okay?”

“Her name’s not *Demetria,* I said in as bored a tone as I could muster. “It’s Britni.”

All at once he looked a lot less drunk. “You know her name doesn’t matter, don’t you?”

We stared at one another for what felt a terribly long time. He was waiting for something, and I knew it. But I couldn’t give it. Even if I could, I’d stop mattering the second he got it.

“Don’t keep her waiting, Kameron.”

His face somehow drew upward, then fell into a flat smile. He gave me a half-assed wave and left with Demetria.

I counted to one thousand, then went back inside.

A humid rush of sweat, piss, and beer burps crashed over me like a wave. The crowd writhed and squirmed like maggots. Music blared. Bargain bin lights spun over everything. It all seemed so pointless. Nothing would be accomplished here tonight. Nothing would ever be accomplished here on any night.

I looked down at the floor. Amid the chewing gum, spilled drinks, gouges, and stains, I saw three words written in black Sharpie:

*Come to Daddy*

An arrow underneath pointed east.

I looked up at the pointless party and I thought of Kameron, of the way he looked at me. He’d be giving that look to Demetria just now.

I followed the arrow.

Halfway across the warehouse was another message and another arrow:

*Keep Coming*

I followed it to the back wall, to another Sharpie message:

*Hurry, Daddy’s Waiting For You*

This arrow was absurdly long, and pointed to a bland door I wouldn’t have noticed otherwise.

I opened the door. Cold, foul air swept over me. I gulped a deep breath; it was preferable to the sweat-heavy humidity behind me.

Before me was a set of rickety metal stairs. I descended and found myself rewarded with another message:

*Daddy’s Coming Through The Back*

I turned into a low concrete corridor lit by flickering fluorescent lights. Something came into view at the other end: bony, huddled, and terribly small.

A body.

Its head lay tilted against the wall, open jaw yawing up at the ceiling. Overhead, painted in streaky letters, was a single word:

*DADDY*

An oil drum sat next to Daddy. I withdrew, gagging, when I saw the half-rotten sludge of dead vermin at the bottom. A nightstand sat on his other side, bearing a plastic container filled with Hershey kisses. A hand-lettered sign read:

*Give Daddy a Kiss*

This crazy bullshit was enough to salvage the night. Smirking slightly, I unwrapped a kiss and popped it into Daddy’s gaping mouth.

A second later, he shuddered and began to chew. His head lolled weakly. With a heavy grunt, he flopped forward so that his eye sockets were trained on me. Something glinted within, dark and iridescent like dirty oil. He swallowed the kiss, and spoke.

“What do you want from me?”

Terror and mirth whirled together in a mad tornado. “What?”

He lurched forward, desiccated body hitting the concrete with a clatter. “I can give you one thing. Any one thing. What shall it be?”

I thought about it. I really did. If wish-granting, Hershey-loving corpses exist, might as well take advantage of the wish.

Except I didn’t know what to wish for.

I didn’t want to be normal. People like Demetria are normal.

I didn’t want another life. Why bother, when I barely want to live?

I couldn’t have Kameron; he’d have to turn into something he’s not before that would ever be a possibility.

I didn’t want money. I didn’t want a house. I didn’t want a better job. All of these are changes. At some point, every change causes pain. I’ve had enough pain for a lifetime.

“I don’t know,” I said.

Daddy’s dark eyes flared. “That does complicate things.” He smiled; papery skin cracked and split like porcelain varnish. “But it makes them interesting. Give me a rat.” He pointed to the vermin barrel. “I need protein.”

It didn’t occur to me to resist. This was the first time in memory that I actually felt alive. I snatched a mushy tail from the morass. Only half a rat emerged, melting into translucent rot before my eyes.

I tossed it at Daddy, who lunged like a spaniel and caught it in his mouth. He swallowed it whole, then said: “I can tell you the deepest desire of your heart and give it to you.”

“Why?”

“Because I can.”

This was the only justification I recognized, the only one I believed, the only one that made sense. “Then do it.”

“Not that simple. I need energy.”

“More rats?”

“Well…of a kind,” he chuckled. “But not exactly.” He watched me expectantly. Those sockets glinted madly, reflecting every color under the sun and several I couldn’t describe. Music thumped from upstairs, loosing trickles of dust and reverberating through Daddy’s lair.

“I don’t get it.”

“People. I need people. Or rather, parts of people. Skin, eyes, hair, livers -”

I eyed him suspiciously, wondering just how fast this Monkey’s Paw motherfucker could run. “You could get all of those from me.”

“You’re my client. Clients pay the provider’s price. You pay this provider’s price in bodies. I need two eyes, two lungs, one stomach, one liver, one skin…” He continued, rattling off seeming every organ in the human body. Then he finished: “And each must come from a different person.”
 
I contemplated this briefly. “You’ll show me what I want -” *Something,* I added silently, *that will make me happy* - “*and* you’ll give it to me?”

“I swear on my name.”

“Which is…?”

He wagged a finger. “Sorry, darling. Names are power here. But an oath upon my name - spoken or otherwise - is unbreakable.”

I watched him. He smiled widely; the thin remains of his mummified skin split and flaked off like snow. Under the lights, he looked like a cross between a Halloween decoration and a bad photoshop project. Except for his eyes: those dark, writhing masses of nearly hidden color.

I turned around and went back up to the party.

Almost immediately, I spied a long, shimmering curtain of black hair across the floor. For a triumphant moment I thought it was Demetria, but no. She resembled Demetria, though, and that was enough for me. She wandered around nervously, a tragically overgrown little girl lost.

I pretended I was her ride home, and led her downstairs. Daddy warped and shuddered and grew into something that blotted the lights, something I couldn’t look at without panicking, and swallowed her whole.

I kept my eyes closed until Daddy cleared his throat.

He’d grown skin: thick and fleshy, lipless, it reminded me absurdly of a squashily upholstered sofa. Dull, cracked teeth glinted in the recessed mouth. “Will I have more tonight?” 

I got Daddy a stomach, two eyes, and a liver before the night was done. I chose dirty, dusty men, the kind that looked as if they’d been sucked dry. Homeless tweakers, people who, for all intents and purposes, have already disappeared.

I know how sick it is, but please try to understand. The only things I ever feel are fear and panic, and that only happens when someone touches me unexpectedly. Can you imagine what it’s like? To be dull and empty like a reptile, except when you’re accidentally triggered into reliving the worst moments of your awful life? I’d have given anything to change that. Anything to have something that would make me happy.

So I fed Daddy people that no one would miss. It’s easy to find them if you know what to look for. Men with sucked-in faces who ride children’s bicycles, women with nice bodies and ancient, haunted faces, dust-caked teenagers and old men sleeping under tarps in the desert.

It took a month.

In that month, Kameron began to date Demetria. She spent more time in my apartment than I did. After I walked in on her blowing him after a long shift, I went to my room started to pack.

I don’t have much, so it didn’t take long. Kameron caught me as I dropped the last bag in the trunk. His eyes were wet. 

“She doesn’t mean anything,” he said.

I slammed the trunk shut. “Then that makes you a shitbag, Kameron.”

“Tell me to dump her. I’ll do it.”

“I’m not your mommy.”

He ran his hands through his hair. His lip started to tremble. Loathing exploded through me. “You’re the most important person in my life.”

“Only because I can’t be.”

I climbed into my car and drove off.

After a couple of brutally cold nights under the stars, I moved into the warehouse with Daddy.

He sang lullabies and fed me Hershey kisses from that dirty plastic bowl. No matter how many I ate, the bowl never emptied. Daddy didn’t expect conversation, affection, or any attention at all.

All said and done, it was a relief.

I still went to work, of course. Kameron came in every night. I felt a cruel surge of triumph whenever he wandered in. He still looked at me as he always had: like I was the only person that mattered.

Then Demetria followed him. The fight was a truly spectacular example of a white trash beatdown. He and Demetria were banned, and I got written up.

It didn’t really bother me.

That night I found a raggedy fat man in foul-smelling clothes out behind the restaurant. I told him he could stay at my house if he wanted. He was slow, childlike, and took me at my word.

Daddy ate him quickly and spit the bones into the rat barrel. Then he burped, enormous fleshy cheeks beating like sails in the wind, and sat down. “We’re almost done,” he said. “Only one body left.”

I did a quick calculation. “Two. A heart and a brain.”

He chuckled indulgently. “I’ve had a brain all this time. All I need is a heart.”

By this time, Daddy looked like a cross between Nosferatu, Frankenstein’s monster, and a Picasso painting: pale, fleshy, and muscular, with ridiculous Fabio hair and a thick, indecently red mouth that didn’t quite fit his skin. He had one green eye and one brown eye. In place of whites, that murky, oily rainbow continued to swirl.

“I’ll find it tonight,” I told him.

He hesitated theatrically. “There’s a special rule for the heart.”

My skin tightened.

“I need *your* heart.”

My pulse beat slow and heavy in my throat. “That’s against the rules.”

He laughed. “You misunderstand. I don’t need this -” he tapped my chest - “tired little muscle. I need your *heart*. Only…it’s inside someone else.”

“What,” I asked levelly, “are you talking about?”

“A heart that is yours is a heart that loves you.”

“You mean Kameron.”

He smiled and nodded.

I almost left.

But why? Kameron didn’t really love me. He loved his illusion. His pure little princess. Someone he couldn’t touch. Someone who was too good to be touched.

It was a paradox. The moment he got what he wanted would be the moment he lost it.

But he could help me get what *I* wanted. If he really loved me, that would make him happy.

Wouldn’t it?

I drove to my old apartment and knocked. Kameron answered the door, smelling like dirty clothes and whiskey. His eyes went wide when he saw me. Then he started to cry.

“She’s gone,” he said. “I’m so sorry.”

“You’ve got nothing to be sorry for.” I came inside held him. He got handsy. I let him.

Maybe because I was expecting it this time, or maybe because there was finally a light at the end of the tunnel, it was okay. Not enjoyable; my heart raced and I felt sick and he was too intoxicated to do a whole lot. But he was gentle and careful.

He got what he wanted.

Before he could realize that he’d knocked his angel off her pedestal - before he could take my heart away - I talked him into a drive. 

The drive to the warehouse was the happiest I’d ever seen him. 

I led him through the warehouse, pausing every minute or two for a hug or a kiss. That was fine. It was good to make him happy. Quid pro quo.

Only when he saw Daddy, hulking and grinning under the fluorescent lights, did Kameron realize that something was wrong.

Daddy stood up. He looked awful: nine feet tall and completely wrong, a hybrid of every childhood nightmare.

“Get back,” Kameron told me. 

Daddy charged. Kameron shoved me toward the stairs. I felt his hand on my back, felt his pulse beating through his wrist, for a fraction of a second.

Then Daddy grew, blotting the lights, bones creaking and cracking as he exploded into something I couldn’t comprehend.

And then, like all the others before him, Kameron was gone.

My heart began to pound - from grief or excitement, I couldn’t tell. “We’re done,” I said. “So where is it?”

“Where is what?” Daddy stretched luxuriously.

“What I want.” I could feel my blood pressure rising. “The thing I want.”

“You mean the deepest desire of your heart?”

“Yes!”

He grinned and dropped to his haunches, posing like a runner about to take off. “Here it is.” He took a deep breath.

The stillness was excruciating, poised overhead like a crushing weight.

Then Daddy opened his mouth and threw up. Bloody and foul, full of shattered bones and flesh, it flooded toward me like a tide. 

And floating within it, a pale crown jewel, was Kameron’s head.

Daddy gurked up a final outpouring of viscera and settled back. “There it is.”

My skin prickled and stung. I thought of feathers, small and hard and piercing the skin as they forced their way up.

I turned and ran. 

I did not fly through the air, but I flew across the sand. Stars lit my way, a million eyes glazing the desert in silvery darkness.

Sometime around dawn, just as gold and red bloomed across the horizon, I tripped and fell. I remember watching the sunrise.

Then everything went dark,

*

Kameron found me.

When we got home, he helped me into the shower. I sat blankly as dust and dried blood skirled down the drain.

After twenty minutes, he helped me out and put me to bed.

I fell asleep quickly.

I woke around midafternoon. Sun streamed through the window. Kameron slept beside me. His shirt was hiked up halfway over his back, revealing what looked like a tattoo.

I lifted his shirt, half-expecting to see Demetria’s embellished name, and froze.

Not a name. Not even a tattoo.

Just seven words written in black Sharpie:

*Give Daddy a little more credit, honey.*
I'll assume you all know about the deep web. Well, what you've heard is true, it's not a great place. While some people are there to score weed or firearms, or even out of sheer curiosity, others... well they're obviously not up to anything good. But I'm not here to talk about those sickos. I'm here to talk about what lies beyond that point. The more cryptic and unexplainable part of the internet. The part that nobody’s really supposed to see. 

There was an info-graphic that cropped up a while ago. Not sure when. "The 8 levels of the internet". Maybe you've seen it. As interesting as it was, it's complete bunk. I'm sorry, but "Polymeric Falcigohl Derivation" means nothing. And the "Primarch system"? I guess somebody's a fan of Warhammer. No, there's no quantum mechanics involved here. However, that doesn't mean it was an easy place to find. 

Now, I'm not going to begin to tell you how to get here. It's unlikely that'd you be able to, even if I did. I'm not tooting my own horn here, I just didn't have a life outside of this. I was warned, of course. Everybody told me I wasn’t going to like what I saw. That I wouldn’t even understand it. Now I’m passing off that warning to you. Don’t try to look for this. 

There's no official name for this place, or at least I haven't seen one. There were rumors, however. These ranged from an illuminati chat room to a virtual holding cell for an experimental AI gone rogue. In reality, it’s a lot worse. After a long and painful process of breaking down firewalls, encryptions, solving bizarre philosophical riddles, and following hidden links, I was finally directed to a blank page with one line of text and a text-box underneath. "Quid quaeris?” Latin for "What do you seek?” I remember feeling surprised. But in retrospect, I didn’t know what I was expecting. I'll admit, I was a bit stumped here. Partly because I didn't know the answer to that question. I had no objective, I just wanted to see if I could do it. I tried some generic answers at first. I typed in "the truth" and "enlightenment". You know, matrix shit. Nothing happened. I tried a bunch of answers, but none of them worked. I was getting frustrated at this point. Maybe this was a gag page. Maybe I really hadn’t figured anything out. If only. 

I tried something off the wall. Not sure how this came to me or why I thought it would work, but I typed in “what also seeks me”. Now that I think about it, this thing might have been an AI. To my surprise, the page went blank. Like fully blank. I waited. After about five minutes, I was directed to what looked like a forum. No, not even that. It was more basic. Just a list of links over a brownish-yellow background. The links themselves were indecipherable. Just seemingly random sequences of characters, symbols and letters. A lot of them I had never seen before. It almost looked like an alien language. Obviously, just a code I didn’t understand. At this point, expectations were off the wall. Each link was a shot in the dark. I clicked on the first one. It loaded up a live-feed of what seemed to be the Paris catacombs. I watched for a while, but it was ultimately uneventful. 

I moved on to the next link. It was a shaky video in a dark setting. But I could make out men in tactical gear. They were in a house, opening doors and sweeping each room. Eventually, they kicked one down to reveal a creature. Tall and humanoid, with scaly skin. It was gnawing on a dismembered arm. They tried shooting at it, but it escaped out the window. The video stopped there. Well, I was floored. What the hell was this? It looked too real to be unreleased film footage. I was officially intrigued. Maybe this was worth the months of headaches and bloodshot eyes after all. I couldn’t stop now. I started working down the list of links. With each click, everything got more and more bizarre. More disturbing. I stumbled upon a document called “The Paragon project”, detailing trials of human experimentation that would lead to superhuman levels of strength and durability. It was an apparent success. Looked official too. 

There were essays on space-time anomalies, glitches in reality, and apparent pictures of alternate dimensions. There were detailed explanations regarding Area 51, the Bermuda triangle, assassinations, disappearances, and the true nature of the Holy Grail. One of the more upsetting ones was a document referring to a “world-ending bomb”. A nuke that’s 720,000 times stronger than the one dropped on Hiroshima.  I don’t want to know why we would need that.  I found contingency plans for different kinds of Apocalypses - nuclear winter, biological weapons, viral outbreak. Some more peculiar ones were called “The Marianas Trench abnormality”, the bluntly labeled “Strange man on the fifteenth floor”, and one simply referred to as “Blackout”. Recovered logs of skin-walker hunting expeditions, 911 transcripts from residents of a town in Texas that went missing in 1977 and even the journals that belonged to the people involved in the Dyatlov pass incident. They didn’t go insane because of the snow. 

I spent hours on there, looking through pages and pages of things I felt like I wasn’t supposed to see. I came across a trailer to a silent film made back in 1910. One that apparently made people claw their eyes out after watching that nearly derailed the whole industry. There was a live stream of a hooded man sitting in front of a camera, head crouched down. He eventually lifted his head. Even though he had no mouth, a deep, guttural, “Hello” came through my speakers. Somehow, I knew it came from him. I didn’t stick around for that. There were obscure sets of step-by-step guides that involved things like cutting off your own limbs and sewing on a corpse's, performing religious incantations in the middle of the Siberian forest and going to coordinates that apparently housed captive fallen angels. It was unclear what any of these were supposed to achieve. There was also a 20 second long clip titled “The futility of the living”. I didn’t watch it. That’s when I realized there was no way even the highest form of organized government had full control of this. One of the scariest things about this whole experience was that I didn’t find an end to the list. No matter far I scrolled down. 

I think I had a meltdown and passed out eventually, because I woke up on my floor in the middle of the night. I looked at my computer screen to see looped helicopter footage of a massive, crab-like creature tearing apart a coastal island. I clicked off of it. I just sat there for the longest time. I couldn’t comprehend what I was seeing, and I don’t think I really wanted to. Now, I’m not really sure why I kept going. My brain was screaming for me to take my computer out to the lawn and smash it into pieces. But I didn’t. I noticed something I hadn’t before. A small message at the bottom left hand corner of the screen. I don’t know if it was always there or not. It was hard to read so I had to squint. More Latin. Translated into “Are you satisfied?” There were two options underneath it, yes and no. 

Now, I knew the answer to this question. Hell no I wasn’t satisfied. I was horrified, scarred for life. But I should have clicked on yes. If I just clicked on yes it would have taken me out of that godforsaken place. Back to comfort and sanity. Even right now, I can’t tell you why I clicked on no. But once I did, the page seemed to refresh. It was still the same basic setup, except there were only four links. This time, there were no recognizable numbers or characters. Hell, it didn’t look like anything that could have come from this world. Just a collection of extremely crude symbols that didn’t give off any sense of pattern or direction. I clicked on the first link. 

After about 20 seconds, I slammed my computer shut. I can’t describe to you what I saw. All I know is that I wasn’t supposed to see it. NOBODY should ever see something like this. It’s not only that it didn’t make any sense, I can’t tell you why it didn’t. I couldn’t begin to grasp the images I was seeing. It wasn’t graphic or anything, not like that. I just couldn’t recognize anything. I could make out things moving, but not in a way any creature on earth has ever moved before. Colors that I’d never seen before. Just thinking about it gives me a splitting headache. This is my best attempt at visualizing it. We have 3 dimensions here on earth. We can move forwards, backwards, left, right, 72.4 degrees southwest etc. These things weren’t restricted to that. I can’t explain it any further. All I know is that I didn’t want to watch one more second. I don’t think I would have been able to. 

I left my room. For the first time in a while, I was planning to leave my house. I needed fresh air. To take a walk or something. Hell, I was thinking about running a marathon in the middle of the night just to get my mind off of that shit for a few hours. I was putting on my jacket when I heard a knock at the door. I stopped dead in my tracks. Obviously, I wasn’t opening up. About a minute and five more sets of knocks came before somebody spoke up. “Open up. We know what you did, but we’re not here to hurt you. We just want to talk”. The tone wasn’t threatening. Eventually, I obliged. I opened up my door to two tall, slim men in suits. They smiled at me. “Can we come in?” I still don't know how they found me. I thought for sure that I was off the grid.

We sat down on the couch. I guess I was just waiting for answers at this point. One of them looked at me and said “What were you looking for?” “I don’t know. But I’m not going back”, I responded. He smiled again. Like this is what he wanted to hear. The other one piped up: “Who do you work for?” His tone was a bit more aggressive. I just shook my head. “Look, I didn’t know what I was getting into. I wasn’t looking for anything.” They just stared at me for a while. “I’m not gonna tell anybody. Trust me”. They finally responded: “We’re not worried about that. Doubt anybody’d believe you.” Another smile. Somehow it felt genuine. “We just wanted to know what your priorities were.” In retrospect, that was a very strange question. “Just do us favor and we’ll leave”. I perked up. “Give us the device you used to access it”. I didn’t ask any questions. I ran upstairs and basically tossed them my laptop. They both smirked at me one last time before heading for the door. Just as they were about to leave, one of them turned back. “I don’t think you need to be told, but don’t try this again. And don’t show anybody else how to get there either. We’ll know.” I didn’t ask who they were. I’m not sure I would have wanted to know. 

It’s been a week now. I don’t go on the internet so much anymore. After this, I’m going to try and forget. To try and not to think about it anymore. I’ve started having horrific nightmares. Been seeing a therapist for that, but I don’t think it’s helping. Anyways, I’m not going to let this consume the rest of my life. The thing is, I’m afraid this might not be possible. There are some things we aren’t supposed to know about. Probably for our own safety and sanity. Don’t try and seek them out. It’s better that way. However... it might be a bit too late for me. 

Part 2 here: https://redd.it/7ah7udHave you ever seen a photo reCAPTCHA?

Instead of a checkbox, [it’s a low-quality photo split into 16 square sections.](https://i.stack.imgur.com/gGF0T.png) It’ll say something like: “SELECT ALL SQUARES WITH STREET SIGNS,” and you have to click every square that contains a street sign.

At 11 PM on Sunday night, I got one while downloading free stock images. It was a photo of a path through the forest.

SELECT ALL SQUARES WITH PEOPLE.

Okay. That was easy enough. In the center, there was a jogging woman in pink shorts. She took up a few of the middle squares, and I clicked them all.

I pressed VERIFY.

It didn’t work.

SELECT ALL SQUARES WITH PEOPLE, the message said again. I took off my glasses, placed them on the table, and squinted at the image.

*No.* She wasn’t the only person.

Several feet off the trail, at the very edge of the image, I could see it. The edge of an arm clad in a black sweatshirt, with a pink thumb poking out.

I triumphantly clicked the two squares containing it. VERIFY.

The image blinked as it refreshed. Then the same text popped up, as if to taunt me: SELECT ALL SQUARES WITH PEOPLE.

I rubbed my eyes and stared at the image.

The trees cast low-resolution, blocky shadows across the path. The woman’s ponytail swung to the left, mid-motion. Patches of yellow sunlight dappled the surrounding forest. I studied some of the darker shadows, far from the path; but none of them matched the silhouette of a person.

I glanced to the edge of the image.

*No.*

The image had changed. The arm at the edge of the photo was now further in the frame, taking up three squares instead of two. Bulky shoulders and dark jeans followed it.

And the jogger was just slightly further down the path – as if she’d just taken a step.

The touchpad was slick under my fingers. My heart pounded in my chest. Slowly, I dragged the cursor over the three squares and clicked them all.

VERIFY.

The image blinked.

SELECT ALL SQUARES WITH PEOPLE.

I leapt back from the computer.

The image was different again. The man was further in the frame, taking up five squares. His hand was stretched out towards the jogger, just inches from her shoulder.

And the jogger…

She was turned towards him, eyes wide. Mouth open in a silent scream.

*Click, click, click.* I furiously clicked all the squares. VERIFY.

*Loading…*

SELECT ALL SQUARES WITH PEOPLE.

The man’s face was finally in frame.

The hood of his sweatshirt was pulled tightly over his head. A translucent Halloween mask poked out from underneath, pressed against his features.

His hand was latched onto her arm.

She was screaming.

*Click, click, click.*

VERIFY.

The image disappeared.

I’d passed the reCAPTCHA.

\*\*\*

I reported what I’d seen to the police. At first they thought I was crazy, but as I gave a detailed description of the images, they frantically took notes and asked me questions.

The woman matched the description of a local woman, Kaylee Johnson. She went missing a week ago, during an afternoon jog on the wooded Lakewood Trail.

She was never [found.](http://www.blair-daniels.com)

[BD](http://www.reddit.com/r/blairdaniels)I was fresh out of college and desperately looking to start a career that didn’t involve serving burgers, wiping down storefront shelves, or bringing stuffy old businessmen their coffee. On average, I was applying to six jobs a week and going to maybe half as many interviews. I knew my major in English wasn’t likely to be met with high demand, but I honestly thought my options would prove more promising. Still, I remained optimistic, persevered, and only applied to comfortable office jobs with benefits. It wasn’t good for my bank account, but it nourished what little pride I had left.

About three weeks ago, I had a phone interview with an internet security company. Proficient Technologies had offices all over the country and were looking for a new customer support specialist for their international department. Requirements were a pleasant voice, good spoken and written grammar, some tech-knowledge, and the ability to work day and night shifts. The office was only two subway stations from my apartment, and they offered health insurance. I applied despite having very vague notions about computer sciences. The phone interview went well and after two more meetings with HR and management, they sent me a very generous offer (considering I was entirely inexperienced).

During my first week, I had to work the regular 9-5 shift so I could be online at the same time as my manager, who was working from a different city. Afterward, I would work on the regular support schedule - a four-day cycle of one day shift, one night shift, two days off (9 am - 9 pm and 9 pm - 9 am respectively). On my first day, I dressed smartly in a loose sweater and long skirt. Perceptively aware that IT departments are mostly male, I didn’t want to draw unnecessary attention by dressing provocatively or inappropriately. The guy at the front desk seemed regular enough. He introduced himself as Tom before helping me fill out some paperwork and guiding me to a desk in the large open-plan workspace. I stared at the countless desks as we walked, finding it difficult to meet the eyes of the men that sat behind them. I saw no other girls in the workspace, which was unusual and somewhat unsettling. Tom’s relaxed demeanor could not make up for the immediate hostility aimed at my presence. The air seemed to seep out of the room as I felt my new coworkers chant ‘*you don’t belong here*’ in silent unison. It surprised me when Tom stopped at a desk that was extensively decorated with printed memes, bright pink floral stickers, and a small tattered teddy keychain that lay behind the monitor. Apart from these artifacts, there was a thick layer of dust coating the keyboard, monitor, and desk space.

‘Oh, what the actual...’, Tom muttered angrily. ‘I’m so sorry,’ he said, chancing a quick glance down at my papers. ‘...Gemma. This desk was supposed to have been cleared ages ago. I’ll have to have a word with the custodian.’

‘Oh, that’s all right,’ I answered. ‘I could just wipe it down myself, no problem.’

Tom was skeptical, but a sweeping glance around the room confirmed that there were no other free desks for me to occupy. The rest of the day went by in a haze. I learned about my tasks, which were to answer support related phone calls and create new tickets in the system. I had to monitor all incoming chats and written tickets and sort them by level of urgency and type. I wouldn’t be required to offer any technical advice, but I had to become well acquainted with the product software. Since I wasn’t answering any calls yet, I immersed myself in the manual. I didn’t understand a lot of it and spent most of my time googling networks, black and white box testing, database security, and other things. My manager checked in just before lunch and seemed slightly disappointed by my overall grasp of the material. Feeling like a failure, I took a break to clean the desk. I got up to find Tom and ask him for a cloth for my countertop.

I instantly regretted my decision. Every eye in the room was upon me the moment I rose. I couldn’t stare back to confirm, but there was a surreal hush as I made my way back down the workspace. The familiar clatter of keyboards had noticeably diminished, as my face grew warm and self-conscious. I noticed myself hunching forward slightly as I walked, a weak attempt at becoming less visible. Before turning off to the passage that led to the front desk area, I dared to meet the eyes of one of the shameless gawkers. I don’t know what I was expecting, but the sight of a sneering hooded programmer sent a chill down my spine. He was around my age but didn’t seem the least bit ashamed or uncomfortable by my confrontation. There was a cruel smile playing on his thin lips as he eyed my exposed ankles before turning his attention back to the screens in front of him. I wondered how he would feel if I eyed his long, pimpled neck in the same manner. It was the same as I walked back to my chair with a box of computer wipes.

There was some good to come of that day. While I was cleaning the desk drawers, I found a half-used notebook from the previous occupant. She never wrote her first name, only an initial followed by a last name: *S. Brooks*. However, based on the desk decor, I was sure she was a girl like me. Her discarded belongings provided some comfort, but it was her notebook which proved to be a true treasure. In it, my predecessor had summarized and simplified the entire manual, using easy-to-understand terms and explanations for the daunting terminology and complicated instructions in the manual. With her help, I was able to surprise my manager with my product knowledge at the end of the shift.

After a good day’s work, I braved the workspace once more to explore the kitchen before heading home. Tom had advertised a top-notch coffee machine and snacks, and I was starving after such an emotionally and intellectually taxing day. Besides, all my credit cards were in the red, and I wanted to fill up on cookies. As I approached, I heard eager chatter coming from the kitchen area and even some laughter. Foolishly, I hoped that my kitchen-dwelling coworkers would be warmer, more welcoming, or, at the very least civil. Instead, the small kitchen space fell perfectly silent upon my entrance. There were five men of different ages and sizes seated around a cheap-looking cafeteria table, and they were all looking directly at me.

‘Rough first day?’ inquired a sardonic, medium-pitched voice. I lifted my gaze from the floor tiles and scanned the crowd for my addresser. It wasn’t difficult to recognize the self-assured hooded figure that had stared me down earlier. ‘You must be very experienced,’ he continued snarkily, waving a strand of greasy black hair from his eyes. ‘To get such a comfortable job. You must be quite the whiz.’

‘What is this, high school?’ I blurted out. Now, I’m not usually a confrontational person, but this was honestly too much. Hostility is one thing, social awkwardness another, but this was beginning to feel like a cheesy 80s high school drama with thirty-year-old actors playing teenagers.

‘I’m just here to grab some coffee and if you doubt my candidacy for this job, you can take your concerns to HR directly.’ I continued, enjoying the shocked and somewhat nervous faces of my offender’s gang. Good, I wanted them to feel a fraction of the discomfort I had been dealing with all day. Opting to enjoy my snack far away from my coworkers, I walked back to my desk with my head held high and a mug of coffee. Right as I was about to sit and enjoy my frothy treat, I saw I had a text message from a withheld number:

*You have quite an attitude, don’t you?*

I froze, hovering over my desk with the mug in one hand and my phone in the other. As I was attempting to process this grave breach of boundaries, I received two more messages within the same chat window. One was a naked photograph that I had sent my first serious college boyfriend. The second read:

W*hy don’t you take that photo to HR?*

Obviously, I was deeply unsettled by this invasion of my privacy. The shame crept in, and I felt angry about drawing so much unwanted attention to myself. This was all my fault. I had come to work in an office full of *ethical* hackers with a very common dog name as a password. No doubt the photograph had made the rounds thanks to my gross coworker, and I was now the silent laughingstock of the office. Leaving my coffee untouched, I signed off and headed home, holding off the waterworks until I reached the safety of the subway.

I couldn’t stop crying for most of that night, turning the day's events over in my mind, feeling sick every time I imagined my coworkers leering at my naked body. At around 3 am, however, I realized that there was no sense in continuing the pity party. I had to come up with a plan of action if I was going to survive this workplace. Quitting was not an option because the pay they were offering me was far too good to pass up. Besides, I was literally living off scarcely more than a slice of pizza a day. My second option was going to HR, but there was no way I was going to open that can of worms. I couldn’t prove who had sent me those messages. Last option? Stick with it, keep my head down, do the job they hired me for, and ignore all further harassment attempts.

So that’s what I did. Throughout my week of training, I came in to work on time, never leaving my desk except to go to the bathroom. I avoided contact with everyone and kept my eyes drawn to inanimate objects only. Thanks to *S. Brooks,* I kept on top of my training. For every new task from my manager, there was a corresponding entry in her notebook. There were no more horrible texts or face-to-face confrontations, but there was something else that stirred my anxieties afresh. Last Friday was my final day of training, which brought me to the last entry in the notebook.

***Night Shift Survival Guide***

*- sleep during the day before shift and don’t fall asleep*

*- don’t let anyone in*

*- keep pepper spray near*

*- check every aisle, meeting room. don’t forget to check under desks, balcony, kitchen tables, behind cooler*

*- have skype open with credit for emergencies in case of disabled mobile service*

*- check-in with friend/family/lover every hour*

The list made little sense. Firstly, HR made it clear that I was allowed to sleep between 2-5 am, provided I kept the office smartphone nearby. They even had a pullout couch in one of the conference rooms for this purpose. Secondly, the entire job was answering calls, so there would always be a way to call from the office phone, right? Lastly, the measures outlined in the ‘guide’ seemed excessive and paranoid. Perhaps the list was satirical? Maybe this Brooks girl felt just as awkward as I did with all the silent, leering male coworkers? Though my brain worked hard to rationalize this list of precautions, a nagging feeling in my gut told me I was missing something crucial. It came to me as I was leaving work on Friday, my last day of training.

‘Tom,’ I approached him timidly. ‘Could I ask you a question?’

‘Sure thing,’ he responded, smiling warmly; his pleasant features a far cry from those of the sullen men in the main room.

‘I was just wondering why I haven’t seen any of the other customer support agents. I mean, there should be at least another three people to cover the four-day rotation cycle?’

‘You have to ask your manager about that. Most likely they’re scattered across the country. Pretty normal for that to be the case,’ he replied, already dismissing me as he went back to his final tasks of the week.

‘Was there an agent who worked here before me?’ I continued, eager to learn more about the girl that filled the notebook I’d been using all week.

‘Yes, another girl held your position for a short while,’ Tom said, still looking at his screen, though I noticed he had stopped typing or moving his mouse. He was staring pointedly at a single spot behind his monitor.

‘Tom,’ I narrowed my eyes. ‘Who is the guy who works at the desk that’s just at the turnoff into the main working space? Pale complexion, skinny, dark curly hair,’ I said, waving a finger at my temple, poorly imitating curly locks.

‘Ah, that’s Sam,’ Tom replied, noticeably attentive to my line of inquiry. ‘Any reason you’re asking? Has he been bothering you?’

‘No,’ I said, rather more dismissively than I felt. ‘Have a good weekend, Tom.’

‘See ya,’ he said, watching me questioningly as I left.

All weekend I mulled over the events of my first week at work. It felt as though Tom wasn’t telling me something important. There was no reason for him to grow so tense at the mention of the girl who had worked there before me. Could someone have complained about Sam before? Could it have been *S. Brooks*? Was Sam the reason for the survival guide in the notebook? Why did she quit? A million theories disturbed my weekend lounging. Before I knew it, it was time to go back to work.

This is where we’ve almost caught up to present events. Yesterday was Monday, the first regular day shift. It passed in a blur, as I frantically answered the phone, recording, sorting, and assigning dozens of customer complaints in our system. It took getting used to, and by the end of the day, I was absolutely exhausted. Just as I was signing off, I received another ominous text from an unknown number.

*You’re such a hard worker. Can’t wait to see you take on night shift.*

Now, this was the first text to fill me with true fear. I quickly looked around to see if Sam was still at work so I could confront him for sending the message, but he had already left for the day. After calming myself down, I headed home and tried to find *S. Brooks* online. My best bet was LinkedIn, and I looked through all the women that had Proficient Technologies listed on their profiles (they were suspiciously few). Finding nothing, I looked through Tom’s list of friends and finally found what I was looking for. There was a girl by the name of Sierra Brooks listed as unemployed. I sent a friend request with a message introducing myself and asking her if she had ever been harassed by one of her previous coworkers. Finally, feeling like I was getting somewhere, I went to bed and braced myself for the next day’s events.

I decided there were some upsides to the irregular work schedule when I got to sleep in on Tuesday. I checked my LinkedIn soon after waking up at around 1 pm. There were no signs of activity from Sierra, so I went about getting ready for my first night shift at the office. I was a little nervous, but mostly excited to get to know my place of work more intimately. Without the day crowd, I was free to walk around the space, binge on cookies, spit in Sam’s mug, whatever!

There were still a few late workers when I arrived for my shift, but I didn’t pay much attention to them as I had a lot of calls and chats to deal with. Two hours in, however, the stream of calls, chats, and incoming tickets began to wind down, until they stopped altogether at around 11 pm. I leaned back in my chair and surveyed the workspace. There was no one left at the office as far as I could see. All the lights were on, but as I took off my headphones, I heard a low jingling melody playing from somewhere. It sounded like a Christmas carol, but it was hard to tell where it was coming from. There was no reason for this to scare me, but I felt the hairs on my arms prick up in alarm. As I got up from my chair, the melody ceased.

Now, I’ve freaked out over less in the past. I once thought a man was following me at night until he walked right past me to the corner store ahead. Although I lived alone, I’d always double and triple check my locks before bed. I had to admit that my fears were probably unwarranted. Someone had left their headphones connected to their computer with the music turned up. Or maybe there was an office party for a different company downstairs. Hearing music is only scary in strategically written horror flicks, right? Right?

Rationalizing aside, I checked the office to make sure I was actually alone. Walking through the aisles of connected desks, I realized how lucky I was to have my secluded corner spot. I might not have been able to handle such close quarters with any of my unpleasant coworkers. Checking all the rows, I went back to the front desk area, lingering over Tom’s desk, inspecting his belongings in search of clues. Finding nothing of interest, I went back through the main room to the kitchen. My nerves were already easing up, and I found myself spending more time taste-testing cookies rather than looking for potential fiends behind curtains. I had to stop indulging mid-cookie, however, because the sound of the melody came back while I was in the kitchen, louder this time. At the same time, my work smartphone (which we had to carry around us if we left our post) buzzed with a text message from a random number.

*Finally got to the cookies, huh?*

My entire body stiffened as I processed the implications. It was probable that Sam had not left the office and was now screwing with me. I pricked up my ears and listened carefully. There was no one in the kitchen as far as I could see or hear. Also, if Sam was in the main workspace, it wouldn’t be difficult to guess that I was eating cookies. Breathing out slowly, I ignored the melody to see if I could hear anything else. Nothing. Slowly, I walked to the kitchen drawers and found a large knife. Did I know how to use a knife? No. Would my wild jabs ward off an unarmed opponent? Definitely.

I was about to head into the workspace when a call came in on the work phone. I positioned myself safely against a kitchen wall, knife in hand, before answering with the standard customer support greeting. There was static on the other end, some clanking noises, followed by complete silence. Glancing at the phone, I saw that it had switched off. I tried to start it up again, but it wouldn’t turn on. Great, now I had to make it back to my computer in case any more calls came in. I remembered Sierra’s guide as I was slipping the dead device back in my pocket.

*- have skype open with credit for emergencies in case of disabled mobile service*

Had this happened to her as well? The instructions in the notebook made a lot more sense, and I cursed myself out loud for being so ill-prepared. As soon as the words escaped my mouth, there was another ominous bing from the phone. I pulled it out and tried to unlock it, but the regular home screen didn’t come up. All that came up was a white screen with a short bit of text on it.

*Tut tut. Ladies really shouldn’t use that sort of language.*

As soon as I read it, the screen cleared and more text appeared.

*Why don’t you come out and play?Don’t bother taking that knife with you.It won’t do much against my gun.*

I threw the phone across the room and dashed to my computer. The melody grew louder as I approached my desk, finding a pink stuffed pig toy. There was a fabric button on its left hoof with a music note on it. This was the source of the music and proved without a shadow of a doubt that there was someone else in the office. What’s more, they were watching my every move and actively trying to scare me with children's toys.

Panic coursed through my body, gearing up for fight or flight. I took a deep breath, attempting to lull my nervous system. So far I had heard no signs of anyone moving around the office. There were some background city noises coming from outside and the rhythmic hum of computers that someone forgot to shut off. If my stalker was moving around, I would need to pinpoint their location to plan my escape. Also, I had to get help. Fast. Moving the toy aside, I sat down in my chair and pulled up the Skype for Business application. I quickly dialed 911, putting the stationary phone on speaker. The dial tone was brief, and there was a live operator on the other end within moments. I was about to give a very hasty account of events when someone grabbed my ankle from underneath the desk.

I screamed hellfire, jerking my leg away and running as fast as my legs could take me. I heard some commotion close behind me, followed by a loud bang, which I interpreted as my assailant giving chase after me. Before I knew it, I was descending the three flights of stairs and rushing out the doors past the startled night guard. The freezing air prickled my skin through my thin sweater as I approached a nearby pedestrian for help. They called 911, and the police were at the office space within the hour. As I awaited with the guard for their arrival, I kept thinking of Sierra’s written warnings, and how stupid I had been to dismiss them.

\- *check every aisle, meeting room. don’t forget to* ***check under desks***, *balcony, kitchen tables, behind cooler*

The police quickly took down my account of events and, leaving me in the care of a young officer, went upstairs to inspect the office. There had been no one coming or going from the building since I ran out, so it was possible that the culprit was still hiding out somewhere inside. The thought made me nauseous, and I shifted closer to my armed companion. Not long after the cops left us, the young officer’s radio crackled and several voices spoke one over the other, asking for backup and naming codes I couldn’t understand. Things escalated quickly from there. Instead of going home, I was taken to a police station and held in an interrogation room for hours before someone finally came to speak to me. I was tired, miserable, and confused at the way the events of the night were unfolding. I wanted to go home but spent several more hours recounting my story to two detectives.

‘So, you had the knife with you when running from the kitchen to your desk? Are you sure?’ asked the older detective, who had introduced himself as Senior Investigator Barnshaw.

‘I... Yes,’ I stammered nervously. ‘I believe I did. I was panicking, so it’s hard to say. Then there was the pig toy,’ I said, losing my train of thought.

‘And you believe the person who was harassing you was Samuel Guilford?’ said the other detective, whose name I couldn’t remember. He wore no badge.

‘I don’t know his full name, but I can’t imagine anyone else is responsible.’

‘And one more time, just for the record, what happened when you dialed 911?’ asked Barnshaw for the third time that night.

‘Someone grabbed my leg. My ankle, actually. This happened before I had the chance to explain the situation to the operator. I screamed and ran until I found a stranger outside who let me call for help,’ I responded, growing weary of the cyclical questioning.

‘Samuel Guilford was found lying dead not far from your desk when our officers came on the scene. Did you see his body when you were running out of the office?’ asked the other detective, feigning an air of innocence while dropping this bombshell.

My jaw fell open, and I stared at the interrogators in naked shock and terror.

‘No,’ I croaked, ‘I don’t understand.’

‘He was stabbed to death with a large kitchen knife. His body was covered in twenty-three stab wounds,’ Barnshaw explained. ‘And we found the knife wedged in his mouth, pinning him to the floor through his throat.’

‘We have reason to suspect it was the knife you’ve described to us in your statement,’ added the second detective.

I eyed both detectives mutely, straining to focus when my mind seemed to have lost all clarity.

‘Your story checks out for the most part. We found his phone riddled with amateur hacking apps,’ continued the senior detective. ‘We found several naked photographs of you and all the texts you’ve mentioned. He had a gun in his hand and we found the bullet he fired as you fled.’

‘What we don’t understand is how he died,’ added the second detective, keenly gauging my reaction. ‘It’s okay if you killed him in self-defense, Gemma. The guy was a creep.’

‘I didn’t,’ I stammered. ‘I swear, I had no idea... Oh, oh God,’ I cried out helplessly.

‘I mean, just a month ago a report was filed against him by another coworker,’ said Barnshaw.

‘Sierra,’ I murmured.

‘You knew Miss. Brooks?’ asked the second detective, suspicion flaring in his eyes.

‘No,’ I insisted. ‘I got her desk and her notebook. I should have mentioned it before. What did the report say?’

Barnshaw scrutinized my face before meeting his partner’s eye. Some sort of unspoken exchange took place before they decided to disclose the terrible things that had happened to Sierra. Things that had so nearly happened to me. Sierra Brooks had come straight to a nearby hospital from her first night shift three months ago. She was badly beaten and bruised, wanting to register an anonymous rape kit. The damage to her reproductive organs was severe, and she had to get stitches. She filed a police report two months later when she failed her probationary period at Proficient Technologies, losing her job (her only way to pay off her medical debt). It was her word against Sam Guilford’s, who had expensive legal counsel as well as countless coworkers to vouch for his respectable character.

‘It was just yesterday that Miss. Brooks came by to drop all charges against Samuel,’ said the younger detective. ‘We are currently attempting to track her down and bring her in for questioning. I’m sure you can see how your knowledge of her name gives us cause for concern.’

The police kept up their line of questioning until someone brought Barnshaw a note. Forensics had drawn up a report on the fingerprints found on the knife, as well as the blood-spatter patterns. I was asked to submit some DNA samples to aid the investigation and finally released to go home.

At home, exhausted as I was, I couldn’t sleep. I had none of my belongings back. My handbag, phone, and even coat were all submitted as evidence. So I turned to my old trusty laptop, hoping that some aimless browsing could help soothe my nerves. My browser was still on LinkedIn from the day before, and I refreshed the page out of habit. A small red icon showed that I had a new message. Sierra had replied to me.

*Don’t worry, sis. I took care of it* [<3](https://www.reddit.com/r/peculi_Dar/comments/kndyhx/story_master_list/)“Alright, let’s get this started. Incision time, 9:45,” a manly voice said loudly, jolting me awake. 


I felt groggy, and my eyes were kept shut by tape covering my eyelids. I tried to call out for help, but quickly realised I couldn’t form any words, nor move a single muscle. 


Was I paralysed, had I been in an accident? My mind was too shattered, unable to recall even the simplest information. 


“Prepare the device, part 108, we don’t have much time to get it in place,” another voice said.


A sharp pain shot through the back of my head, immediately followed by warm liquid trickling down my neck. I wanted so desperately to cry out in pain, but I could do nothing but listen to what happened as something dug deeper into my skull. 


“Apply pressure right there, will you. Don’t you see the bleed?” the first voice said.


“It’s not working.” the second responded after a moment.


“Fine, then cauterise it, the skin flap is already made.”


The smell of burned flesh filled the air, making me feel sick. Luckily I could feel my stomach had already been completely emptied. I knew I hadn’t eaten in quite some time.


Then it dawned on me. 


Surgery, I was in surgery! But, I hadn’t fallen asleep, and I couldn’t move.  


The surgeon continued to burn my bleeding flesh, and as the pain intensified, I struggled to think back. All I had was a vague memory of a disease, some sort of cancer growing inside my abdomen. If that was the case, what where they doing inside my head?


“How’s he holding up?” One of them asked. 


“His BP and heart rate are a bit high, but he’s under for sure. Don’t worry,” another responded. 


While could hear and feel everything they did, I had no means of communication. 


“Perforator drill.”


They started the drill up, shaking my body as they put it against my skull. The vibrations didn’t hurt, but the cracking sound produced as they dug through is one I’ll never forget.


“Shit, did you go too deep?”


“Nah, he’s fine.”


Once the bone was cut through, the pain slowly disappeared. With the brain having no pain receptors itself, I could do nothing but listen to the sickly squishes as they rummaged around inside my head. 

“Is the device charged yet?” the surgeon asked. 


“Charged and ready, doctor.”


I felt a vague sense of pressure as something was pushed deep inside my head. 


Desperate, and terrified, I tried to think about the moments before surgery. I’d gone in for a tumour on my pancreas, and while I’m no anatomy genius, that shouldn’t be anywhere near my head. 


“Put the electrodes around the device entry, set it to 650 milliamps.”


A high pitched tone was produced as they powered up the device, followed by a violent jolt, and then…


…darkness.


When I finally regained consciousness, I was lying in a hospital bed. A smiling woman stood in front of me. I recognised her as one of the prep nurses, thought I hadn’t caught her name yet. 


“Everything went great, Mr Jones, we got it all!” she said, ecstatic. 


“Wha-what?” I responded.


“It’s alright, the drugs might make you a bit woozy, but you’ll be good in another hour or so.”


A doctor I hadn’t seen before entered the room, holding a chart and a syringe containing a crimson, but transparent liquid. 


“Good afternoon Mr. Jones, my name is Ethan, I’m just here to check up on you and finish the treatment.”


I peaked down at my abdomen, it stung, and was covered in a large bandaid.


“Does it hurt?” he asked. 


“Y-yeah, quite a bit actually.”


“We’ll up the dosage of your pain medication in a moment. But first, let me give you the final part of your treatment. Now, this stuff burns a bit,” he said, waving around the syringe. 


“But, even with most of the tumour gone, we’ve still got to kill off the stragglers, don’t want them to fester.”


As he prepared to inject me with the contents of the syringe, my mind started to clear. The memory of my surgery returned with a blast, and I violently retracted in bed, ripping the IV-line out with me. 


“You drilled into my head!” I shouted. 


“What are you talking about?” Ethan said, visibly confused. 


“I woke up during surgery, I heard everything the surgeons said, they put something inside my head.”


Ethan nodded his head in understanding. “Mr. Jones, it’s fairly normal to experience vivid dreams while under, some even feel like they’re floating around in the room watching the surgery, some just have weird dreams. It’s perfectly understandable to mix up fantasy and reality.”


“No, it wasn’t a dream, I even felt it,” I argued as I reached for the back of my head. 


There was no wound, hair still intact and no sign of any sutures.


“As I said, perfectly normal.”


I calmed down a bit due to his explanation, and let him reset the IV and finish the injection. It burned as the liquid entered my veins, searing up my arm and neck. I felt lightheaded. 


“All done!” Ethan said, smiling, “you should rest now, you’ll be here for observation for a few days. You’ll be allowed visitors by tomorrow.”


It had seemed all too real, yet my supposedly incurable cancer had been eradicated, only weeks after categorically being told I would die within six months. 


Even the setup before surgery had been suspicious. Starting from a nothing more than a phone call from a Mr. Burke, representing a newly founded Artifex Pharmaceuticals. They were working on a new treatment for terminal cancer patients, he had said. 


He told me I’d fit the criteria for the treatment, free of charge, seeing as it wasn’t FDA approved yet. We set up a quick meet and he explained the procedure, which would combine surgery and their new chemotherapeutic drug. 


At the time, my choices were either to die slowly, and painfully from cancer, or to die quickly on the operating table. Naturally, being in the last stages of life, I took the gamble, and that’s how I ended up miraculously cured, against all odds. 


The next week came and went. I was discharged with a bottle of pain medication to keep me going while I healed. Yet, I just couldn’t shake that horrific nightmare from the day of the surgery. 


Out of curiosity I looked through the papers I had been given by the company, surprised to find that nowhere in the fifty page long document did they ever mention the name ‘Artifex Pharmaceuticals,’ nor the name of any employee. 


I tried to call the number they’d given me, but it continuously returned a busy signal. Confused, and haunted by the nightmare, I could do nothing but rest, and hope they’d call me back in for a checkup.


I needed answers… 

***


Time went on, and after a month in recovery, which I spent mostly catching up on my favourite TV-shows, I was ready to return to work. 


First order of business was a meeting with my boss, Daniel Harrison. He had always been good to me, and allowed me all the time off I needed while going through with the treatment. While it wasn’t an amazingly well paid job, I was happy to be there.


“Benjamin, great to have you back!” he basically shouted as I entered the office, embracing me in a rough hug. 


We then returned to more professional means of greeting each other, and shook hands as went on to talk about my future in the company. I sat myself down in front of the desk, when I started hearing a bizarre sound, feedback-like static. Though, I couldn’t for the life of me figure out it’s origin. 


It was just vague, barely audible at first. I tried to ignore it, but Harrison immediately noticed something was off.


“Are you alright? You look a bit pale,” he said.


“Yeah, I’m fine. Do you hear that?” I responded as the sound kept increasing in volume. 


“Hear what?” 


“Uh, never mind, my head just hurts a bit,” I said, playing off my increasing anxiety. 


He gave an odd look while pondering what to say next, then he sighed. 


“Look, Benjamin, I know it’s not easy to recover from such an ordeal. It’s a burden, both mentally and physically. In fact, I once went through a similar situation, many years ago, and it left a scar on my self esteem, like I’m wasn’t strong enough to survive without help.”


“I’m sorry, I never knew,” I said, the sound reaching unbearable levels. 


“That’s alright, I never really talk about it, was almost fifteen years ago anyway.”


He paused for a moment, his wide smile turning to a confused look. 


“It was odd though, thinking back. I was supposed to a terminal case, told me I’d be a gonner within a year. Then, out of the blue, some guy showed up at my doorstep, proposing a miracle cure.”


His story hit too close to home for comfort.


“I can’t even remember their name, everything following the surgery feels somewhat vague, distant. What was the company called again?” he asked himself. 


My boss chuckled, “Heh, it’s all gone, I think something beginning with ‘A,’ hmm ‘art-‘ something.”


“Artifex Pharmaceuticals?”


“Yes, that’s the one!” He yelled, barely audible over the static sound filling my head. “How’d you know?”


“That’s the same one that fixed me up, they said they were new.”


“That’s odd,” he simply responded. 


I excused myself from the office, claiming the headache was worse than I thought, and Harrison said I should take as much time off as needed. No, he ordered me to take time off.


No sooner had I left the office, before the sound stopped. I let out a sigh of relief, and hurried back home to once more go over the documents. 


After a fruitless search, I tried the internet, more phone calls and looked through my email filled with thousands of junk messages.


Nothing… 


If they had truly cured Harrison fifteen years in the past, their drug had to be well past the experimental stage, and I demanded answers. The sound breaking my eardrums from within my own head, my awakening during surgery, and the fact that no one I knew had ever heard about Artifex Pharmaceuticals outside my treatment, it was all too much to handle. 


I decided that in the morning, I’d return to the hospital and find one of the doctors working on my case, but my head was shattered. I needed to rest. 


That night, I spent lying awake, unable to find any comfort in the fact that I was cancer free. Around midnight, my phone rang; One of my old coworkers, whom I hadn’t spoken to since my treatment. 


“Benjamin?” he said in a somber tone. 


“Alex, I didn’t really expect to hear from you, why are you calling this late, is everything alright?”


“It’s Harrison, he- he’s dead.”


“Dead, when, how?”


Apparently Harrison had suffered a brain haemorrhage from an undiagnosed brain aneurysm, not long after I left the day before. Just like that, he was gone. 


Morning rolled around, and without a lick of sleep, I headed for the hospital.



I asked the receptionist to speak to any representative of Artifex Pharmaceuticals. She claimed she’d never heard of such a company. When I then asked for one the doctors, I realised I couldn’t exactly remember their full names. So, I asked if anyone in the surgical department was named Ethan. 
After doing a quick search on the computer, she simply shook her head. 


Defeated, I left without answers. I continued the fruitless internet search for a couple of weeks, but work quickly occupied most of my time. It was a dreadful place in the wake of Harrison’s death. New management took over, and I had to start moving on with life. 


After half a year, I started to settle down in my life. Free from disease, but with an additional few pounds gained from the recovery. In a futile attempt at combating the weight gain, I returned to the gym, spending most time running aimlessly on the treadmill. 


I was just reaching my first mile, a huge achievement for someone like myself, when the god-awful feedback sound returned, almost knocking me clear off the treadmill. 


I glanced to my side, noticing a man in his mid forties who’d just started running next to me. Unlike myself, he was in an ungodly well kept shape, wearing an oversized tank top. It revealed a massive surgical scar on the side of his chest, nicely decorated with a tattoo of a tree, reading ‘Arborvitae,’ beneath it.


He noticed my pained expression and stare. 


“You alright, mate?” he asked as he walked towards me.
The sound intensifying as he got closer, making me clutch my ears in agony. 


As suddenly as it had begun, the sound just stopped. The man in front of me fell over to the ground, briefly seizing before lying there, lifeless. 


He’d suffered a brain haemorrhage. At least that was as much information as I could get from the gym staff, but I knew it was more than that. The man had died just like Harrison, that horrific sound proceeding his sudden demise. 

***


Following the gym event, I visited three separate doctors, begging them to have a look at my head, CT, MRI, whatever they could offer, I’d take it. I even told them about my cancer treatment, but no record of my hospitalisation even existed. 


The first doctor recommended a shrink, the second was clueless, and only the third agreed to give me a scan to check for anything abnormal.


“Well, Mr. Jones. Luckily we settled for the CT, because the MRI would have torn your brain to shreds. You really should have told me you had some kind of implant. Outside of that, the starburst basically made your scan unreadable.”


“Excuse me?” I said, confused, but not entirely surprised that something in there didn’t belong.  


“I’m sorry, a starburst is what happens when we put metal in a CT-scanner, but that’s far better than putting you inside a giant magnet, you’d-“ 


“No, I mean, what implant?” I interrupted. 


The doctor showed me a section of the CT, a large flare looking artefact covered most of the picture, but in its center was a diamond shaped metal object. 


“I have to ask, have you had any brain surgery at all? I can’t for the life of me figure out what this thing is, but it’s clearly not a physiological formation.” the doctor said, pointing to the thing inside my head. 


“I-I don’t know.”


“Well, have you been in any accidents, maybe a car crash or other type. Sometimes debris stuck inside you can travel through your blood vessels, regardless of where the original injury was.”


“I had pancreatic cancer, stage three, they did surgery and gave some experimental treatment, but…”


“What exactly did they give you?” he asked, sounding more curious than concerned. 


“It was just an injection, I think, and it was only once following the surgery.”


“Look, Mr. Jones, I’m not an oncologist, but as far as I know, there aren’t any single injections on the market that can cure cancer. What you’d need would be months of chemo spanning over several sessions. Whatever they gave you, it wasn’t for the cancer.”


He looked over my head, and to my surprise, he actually found a scar that I myself hadn’t noticed, though only a minuscule one. 


“Well, you have a scar for sure, but it’s amazingly well hidden, never seen anything so small from brain surgery.”


I tried to explain my experience during the surgery to the best of my limited memory, but he couldn’t help. He told me he’d look into some different pharmacological trials to see if anything fit my explanation, but he didn’t seem very hopeful. He couldn’t even remove the damn thing, claiming it sat too close to my brainstem, or something.


So, here I am, living life as good as I can, still waiting for answers. Every now and then the sound will return, and when it does I just stop dead in my steps, and run the other way. I can’t let anyone else die simply by getting to close. 


Whatever they did to me, I’m not alone, there are others out there with the same implants, and I fear we’ll just have to wait to see what their purpose are. 


If anyone ever gets contacted by Artifex Pharmaceuticals, don’t agree to any of their miracle cures. 


[They’re not trying to help us.](https://www.facebook.com/richard.saxon.author)https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/j3r593/what_if_the_greatest_trick_the_devil_ever_pulled/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share (part 2) The Son

The clock on my dash reads 4:30 am. The darkness outside of my headlights is so thick that I can’t see anything to the left or right of me. There isn’t a star in the sky and the moon is eerily absent. The phone call I received last night assured me though, that the church in Havens Creek is nice and the congregation was wonderful. I wanted to get there early, get the lay of the land, and put my own little flair to the place. I’d been driving for some time when I finally came up on my turn for the church. I pulled into the parking lot and what my high beams fell on took my breath away. A large, beautiful white church with long columns, a bright red double door, and beautifully stained glass windows with depictions of our lord and savior.


I stepped out of the car, turning off the headlights and the night was heavy again. Outside of the interior lights of the church and the solar powered lights lining the path to the door, I could see nothing. Ill admit I felt a bit unsettled, but my mentor, Father Reynard had me come here as a guest pastor, and I was not going to let him down. I made my way up the stairs and into the church. 
The inside was even more glorious than outside. 50 yards of pews lined down both sides and a gold lined red carpet from the door to the pulpit. Getting the full view of the stained glass I see our lord and savior, the cross, our Virgin Mary, cherubs with wings, and the angels up above. Just being inside this place filled my heart with love. I made my way down the gold lined carpet and to the first pew. I took a seat to relax and just take it all in. Directly next to me was a book I’d come to know very well over my 40 years of life, the Bible. I picked up the very pristine book, and sat it in my lap with my hands folded, resting on top of it and took a deep breath. At this point I was just trying to take it all in, when I heard the front door open. 


The persons feet sounded hard off of the floor with each step, which was strange seeing as the way up was thickly carpeted. Each step drew nearer and nearer to me until finally a man came into view. He was extremely handsome and well dressed. A black suit jacket and pants, with a red vest, and black tie with red lacey inlays. The man had long blonde hair pulled back out of his face and an air of authority about him that I just couldn’t place. The man walked  past me and removed a chair from the rack and walked back toward me. He sat the chair directly in front of me, sat down, and crossed one leg over the other. 


We both stared at each other in silence for a short time and just as I was about to speak up he said, "forgive me father, for I have sinned." His voice rolled out like honey, sweet yet sinister. I stared back at him. This isn’t how we usually do things at my church, I thought to myself. But I am a guest in this house, so I won’t push.

 "What is your name, my child?" I asked the man sitting in front of me.

 He cocked his head to the side and smiled. "You can call me Sam, fatherrr…." he held out the word so I knew it was a question. 

"Ah, I replied. Salazar, father Marcelo Salazar." He gave a slight smile and his bright blue eyes shone vibrantly. 

"It is very nice to meet you Father Salazar, as I said before my name is Sam, and It would be greatly appreciated if you could assist me. I have sinned and I fear I may wind up in hell."


 I shook my head softly. "Oh my child, do not worry. Our father is a forgiving God. Please tell me of your burdens so I may absolve you of your sins." 

Sam adjusted in his seat then un crossed his legs and crossed them the other way. "I drink to excess and then judge others in church when they admit to doing the same." 

I nodded. "Well my child, I said-"  Sam quickly cut me off and continued. 

"When I was married I would have my wife stay at her mothers when she was on her period."

 I looked at him, as I tried to assure him that the Bible speaks of it being a time of uncleanness, Sam quickly cut me off again. 

"I sent my son off to a conversion camp when he came out as homosexual." I didn’t respond this time and he continued. "I raised my hand to my wife if she tried to leave the house in anything other than modest clothing. I wanted my wife to be modest but I also received…less than modest photographs from my 19 year old babysitter, Brittany."


My eyes widened and I stood up from the pew I was sitting in. I stepped around the side and began to back away down the aisle towards the door. His soft look hardened in an instant. His bright blue eyes went from soft to dangerous. "What’s wrong father? He spat at me, You look awful." This man was speaking my life back to me….

"Who are you, and what do you want?" My hands and voice were both shaking. I was backing up steadily and Sam was just staring at me. We were far enough apart that if I turn for the door I should be right there. I turned to look over my shoulder at the door and when I turned back I was in the front of the church again, face to face with Sam. My eyes widened, "what is this? What is going on?" I looked around and up at the ceiling. All of the stained glass depictions were staring at me and they looked angry. 

"What does it look like father?" Sam said. "You’re being judged."

I looked around franticly. "Judged?! Are you…..God?!" I immediately dropped to my knees and bowed my head.

 I heard Sam scoff, "God, he laughed. You believe a man who led a life such as yours would be judged by my father?" I raised my head and stared up at him….

"Your father?" I was confused, I ran through my knowledge of scripture as fast as I could and it came to me. I looked deep into his eyes and said the only thing I could think of…."Samael." The man smiled a big toothy grin. I stared in horror, "I’m dead….." Sam winked at me.

"I applaud you Marcelo. It takes most of you so much longer to come to that conclusion." 

"Wait, this can’t be." I stammered. "The devil himself…..Lucifer?! I may not have been the greatest man during life, but I followed the Bible as close as I could. I kept my wife in modest clothing, sent her away during her time of uncleanness, and tried to have my son reborn in the eyes of the lord. I did falter in my marriage a bit but how has that earned me an audience with the devil."


Sam let out a long and deep laugh. "You know, my dear priest" he said. "Some say that the greatest trick the devil ever pulled was convincing the world he didn’t exist. But I assure you, I have done no such thing. The greatest trick the devil ever pulled, dear priest, is convincing the world that the Bible is the word of god." 

I stared at him, mouth agape, and my mind running overtime. "What do you mean, Sam?" I felt on the verge of tears. 

"I mean, I wrote the book that you people flock to. You see, my dear priest….many, many, many years ago. My father created humanity. He loved you with all his heart and swore that humanity would be…perfect. I assured him that no creature with free will would ever be so, he assured me of the contrary, and for the first time in his long life the devil struck a deal with none other than God himself. I told him I would add but one thing to this world that would prove the downfall of humanity, and if they proved unfit, he would see me as his right hand. He assured me that it wasn’t possible, that humanity was pure and perfect..Now….that book has existed in many forms depending on who holds it, but I wrote them all. I never appeared to Adam and Eve as a snake, but a book bound in snake skin, did. I told them of the beauty that lay outside, the glory, the happiness. It spoke of just eating that fruit and experiencing it all. Then, as the first bite was taken, I had won. My father was furious, my brother was bloodthirsty, so began a war in heaven and my fall from grace."

I stared at this man, this being, as he turned everything I thought I knew upside down. Sam began again, "Did you not stop and think as to why your loving malevolent God would have bears turned on children? Why he’d destroy cities full of people in holy fire, or flood the world committing genocide?"

 I stared at him, "because" I said, "gods wrath is terrible, but his love is infinite. It was for the greater good so humanity could be reborn."

 Sam spoke up, "ah, no not quite. Just a little smoke and mirrors on my end to 'put the fear of god' in humanity you know?" Sam tilted his head back and laughed again. "You people use this book to mask your bigotry and hate, not knowing that one day, your undying soul will land right here on my doorstep. Since humanities initial birth I haven’t persuaded a single soul to do anything, I haven’t had to. That whole, the devil made me do it….pure shit. The things I wrote made it normal for people to hear voices about murdering their children. Oh, its just God’s will. Nope, hi, sorry again, that’s mental illness."


Sam looked at me serious and spoke again, "do you believe God makes mistakes?"

 I stood and faced him, headstrong in my conviction. "No I do not." I said. My voice no longer shaking. 

He stepped forward almost nose to nose. "Then why is it, my dear priest, that you tried to change one of God’s creations because it did not fit your narrative?" I took an involuntary step back as he continued. "I wrote that book with the idea in mind that hypocrisy would surge. Its laden with enough truth and love to lead the stupid astray. My father loves all life, all things, no matter color or gender. The part about stoning those that lay with the same sex, all me. You hypocrites line my doorstep like lambs to slaughter. That love you feel well up inside when you tell someone they will burn in hell for who they love, or for living their life not according to your broken vision of an almighty God. It is not love at all, but your souls acceptance of your truly wicked nature"

I clutched the Bible to my chest and just shook my head. "No, you are the father of lies, none of this is true."

 Sam smiled again. "Is that what you believe, my dear priest? If so, have a look at the book you have so coveted all your life."

 I pulled the Bible away from my chest and looked down at it. A snake skin cover with a 6 winged angel emblazoned on the cover. Sam seemed to stare into my soul. "This, my dear priest, is the book that Eve held in her hands when she decided to take that first bite." I opened the book to a language id never seen before. Sam looked at me quizzically and turned his head to the side. "Ah, he said, my apologies. You can’t read Enochian." He waved his hand and the book glowed white hot. I dropped it immediately and took another step back. I couldn’t understand this, if what he was saying was true, my entire life had been a lie.


"But wait, hold on..…what about before the birth of Jesus Christ, before Christianity." I stammered.

"Ah, you will find my handiwork in the hieroglyphics, in the halls of ancient Rome, or the diary of Julius Caesar."

 I had heard enough, I couldn’t take anymore, tears openly fell down my cheeks. "Now for my questions, my dear priest. How does it feel knowing that I robbed you of all earthly desire only to have your soul remain in hell for eternity?" 

I couldn’t answer him, I couldn’t even form clear sentences in my head. 

"How does it feel knowing that the wife you detested so much, took your son, denounced your wicked ways, and will both thrive for eternity in my fathers kingdom?"

 I felt his hand touch my shoulder and it burned like nothing I’ve ever felt before, I screamed out in agony.

"As for my final question, this one won’t be directed at you my dear priest. But for our little eavesdropper here. So tell me, my dear reader. When was the last time you went to church?"As a kid I lived with neglectful parents at best. At worst dad would turn his screams and fists on me but I learned quickly how to dodge the worst of it. Mom wasn’t much help, she’d just smoke in the kitchen and bitch at him for staying out so late.

At the time we lived basically in the middle of nowhere, our nearest neighbors were a long walk away for a six year old and we had trees between us. No one to run to for help. But I was pretty small for a kid my age. I learned I could fit pretty much anywhere. The closet. Dryer. I think even once I tucked myself under my futon in such a way I could still get some air but no one could see me.

I was a master at hiding. But it wasn’t for a good reason.

One night though, one night I chose to do something different.

I could hear it in dad’s yells, he was pissed and was about to get violent. Mom wasn’t helping either, just piling fuel onto an inferno of a flame. So I knew I had to find a good hiding spot. I’d gotten the idea a few days before, when I realized the lattice covering the bottom half of the back porch had a hole in it. Not big enough to fit a full grown man, most likely, but it could fit a skinny six year old no problem.

So wrapping myself up in my blanket and grabbing my hippo stuffie, I snuck out my window and ran into the backyard. In the middle of autumn. When it was forty degrees out and the temperature was steadily dropping.

I crawled under the porch, scraping my elbows and getting splinters in my palms but I fit inside. It was actually quite spacious compared to most my hiding spots, I couldn’t sit up all the way but I had plenty of room to spread out my limbs.

Of course I was also getting covered in dirt. It’d rained a few days ago so the mud was still a little wet. I wrapped myself in my blankie the best I could and settled in for the night.

But soon, even with my blankie and my hippo, my teeth were chattering so hard I could barely breathe. I didn’t want to go back inside though, knowing if my dad caught me I’d be in for the whipping of my life. So I had to tough it out.

“Honey, are you cold?”

That voice was not the voice of my mother, scratchy from all the smoking and screeching she did. It was sweet, like honey. I turned over to see the dim outline of a woman, lying on her stomach next to me. She had a pretty butterfly necklace and was just as dirty as I was.

I nodded, not wondering how she’d been down there without me noticing.

The woman belly crawled forward and wrapped her arms around me and suddenly I became warm. Like I was sitting next to a campfire. I snuggled into her arms, not minding the mud, after all we were both dirty.

“You’ve gotten so big,” the woman said, examining my face. “How old are you now, Alex?”

“Six.” How did I know this woman again? I didn’t think I did.

“Six!” The woman gasped. “You’re all grown up then. I’m so happy.” She sighed pleasantly and stroked my hair. I’d never felt so cozy in my life.

“What’s your name?” I asked.

She smiled, I could hear it in her voice. “I’m Lily. What’s your favorite thing to do?”

I had to think for a second. “I like board games. And coloring.”

Lily chuckled. “Just like me then. Could never get enough of Scrabble. But I guess you’re still too young to play that, huh?”

I nodded. “Lotsa words. I wanna play it though. I like the tiles. Would you play with me?”

I heard Lily sharply inhale. “I… I don’t think I can. Your daddy put me under here, and I can’t leave… but…” She thought for a second. “Alex, could you do me a favor?”

“Of course!” This lady was oh so nice. Why wouldn’t I do her a favor?

“When you wake up in the morning, go to the police station. Ask for an officer by the name of Lowell Joyce. Tell him where to find Lily, okay? Under your back porch. He’ll come and he’ll get me, okay? And… and then maybe we can play Scrabble.”

Yippee! I was too excited about the possibility of playing Scrabble to notice how Lily’s voice caught at the end. I nodded vigorously. “I’ll do it! We can be on the same team, right?”

Lily softly laughed.

“I’ll help you understand the rules. Goodnight, Alex.”

When I woke up the next morning, I heard Lily’s voice.

“Go now. Your dad’s gone to work. I’ll tell you how to get to the station.”

Rubbing my eyes, I crawled out from under the porch and went into the house to grab my shoes and a coat. I shivered in the frosty cold. But I thought Lily was right behind me.

After my shoes and coat were on I started walking. It was long enough to get to the neighbor’s house. I really can’t remember how long it took to get to the police station, although I have no idea why no one pulled over to see what the hell a six year old in dirty pajamas was doing walking alongside the road. Lily kept guiding me onward.

“Wait. Okay, cross the street now.”

“Turn right here.”

“Keep going! You’ve almost made it!”

I nearly collapsed with exhaustion by the time I walked into the station. The guys out front chatting and having a good time didn’t see me until I almost made it to the front desk.

“Whoa! Kid! You okay?” One of the officers knelt down to my level, eyes wide.

I nodded. “I’m okay. Can I speak to Lowell Joyce?” I asked.

One of the other officers picked me up. “Sure kid, sure, let’s just get you someplace warm, holy shit your lips are blue…”

I remembered quietly scolding the man about watching his language. ‘Shit’ was a bad word.

I was given some warm cocoa and wrapped up in a blanket by the time an old man with a graying mustache sat by me.

“Hey kid. I’m Sheriff Joyce. What’s your name?” He asked.

“Alex.” I set down my cup and looked him straight in the eye. “I was told to tell you that Lily is under the back porch.  You need to go let her out so we can play Scrabble.”

I had never seen a grown man turn pale before.

Lots of things blurred together at this point. I remember being taken back to my house and there were a lot of police cars and people around. The back porch was surrounded by yellow tape, and someone was taking a black bag away while my dad was in handcuffs.

After that, I lived with my grandparents. Sheriff Joyce and his wife.

I tried to ask about what happened and who was Lily but I always got shut down. I was too young to know.

But life got better. A lot better.

Grandpa was the best man I could’ve hoped for in my life. We went out on weekends to the movies where he let me have the giant soda even though I’d have to pee in the middle of the movie. When I asked if I could drink when I was thirteen he let me try a beer. I spat it out and didn’t touch it again. He never judged me for my love of art, letting me paint my own bedroom multiple times over the years. I felt safe around him. He never laid a hand on me. My grandmother was amazing too, over the week she’d homeschool me along with teaching me things that you wouldn’t learn in a school, such as how to respect others but not take their crap. And cooking. Lots of cooking. I could make my own birthday cake by the time I was twelve. But I usually just made them for my friends. I got a lot of those, after I was free from my dad.

When I turned sixteen, Grandpa took me back to my dad’s house.

The whole thing had been bulldozed over. But I could still see the yellow tape wound around a few trees, faded and torn.

We sat together on the back of his truck. He opened a beer and drank half of it before setting it down and grabbing me an orange soda.

After I’d drank it he told me.

“Lily was your mother.”

Good thing he didn’t tell me as I was swallowing, I likely would’ve had it coming out of my nose. “My mom?” I questioned, confused.

“Your actual mom. The woman who lived with your dad was not your mother.” My granddad grabbed another beer. “Lily was my daughter. I loved her so much… but when you were around six months old, she vanished.”

My stomach dropped. “My dad just imprisoned her under the porch?” I asked, starting to feel sick.

Grandpa took a deep breath before setting his unopened beer down. “That’s…. something I’ve never been able to understand. Lily told you to find me? And that she loved Scrabble?”

“Yeah. She kept me warm that night. I probably would’ve frozen to death if she hadn’t been there.” I was a stupid kid, even I knew that.

Grandpa went dead quiet before he opened that beer and slammed the whole thing. “… Alex, Lily had been dead the whole time she was gone. When we dug her up she was bones. Experts confirmed it, and your dad confessed to what happened. They’d gotten into a fight and he threw her down the stairs. She… broke her neck.” He clenched his fists. “I knew he had something to do with her disappearance, but I never had proof until you walk into my station, covered in dirt and telling me she was under the porch.”

I was floored. I couldn’t breathe. All I could do was shake my head.

“But- I saw her! She was alive! She had this butterfly necklace…” I trailed off when Grandpa pulled an evidence baggie from his pocket.

There was that butterfly necklace all right. Rusty, and parts of the paint had chipped off, but I remembered it as clearly as I remembered Lily’s voice.

Grandpa took a shaky breath as he pressed the bag into my hands. “… Lily loved you so much. ‘ts why she stuck around that bastard. You were her whole world. She was constantly taking pictures and sendin’ them to us in the mail. Sometimes a mother’s love can accomplish things that no human can do.”

My eyes overflowed with tears as I clutched the necklace to my chest. Choking on sobs, I leaned against Grandpa. He held me tight and I swear I felt a few of his tears land on the top of my head.

And for just a brief moment, I swear I felt that warm love I felt that night under the porch.*What the hell?* I sat behind the security desk at my university library holding an envelope that I assumed was meant for me. "To the New Guy" was scrawled on the front in jagged script, and I supposed I was the recipient because it didn't get any more new than I was last night. I was scheduled to work my first night time shift (12-4am) at my university library. The hours didn't deter me at all, I'm a serial insomniac and my class schedule was structured so I could stay up late and sleep in the next day. This luxury had the unfortunate side effect of limiting my employment options, and in order to stay somewhat afloat in the sea of student debt I was floundering in, I couldn't afford to remain unemployed.

&#x200B;

When I heard about the night shift at the library from my friend Valerie who I attended high school with, it seemed like a perfect match. I can't reveal the specific school that I work for, but suffice to say it's a large university in the southern portion of the United States. Anyway, Val worked the early morning shift (6-10) and she mentioned that the guy who worked the late night shift, some guy named Flanders, had quit a few days prior. When she told me the hours and confirmed that the pay was at least north of minimum wage, I jumped at the opportunity. After spending a week slogging through the three departments you have to send paperwork to in order to become an official university employee, my bank account was in desperate need of that first pay day.

&#x200B;

So anyway, last night was my inaugural shift, and it being a friday night, the library was expectedly dead at midnight when I relieved my new colleague Tory from her post. The employment manuals I was required to read had prepared me extensively for what was by all indications going to be a mundane four hours. I started at the security base, a big wooden desk the size of a tank underneath a huge glass window embossed with our university sigil in the library atrium. Here I would stay for the first thirty minutes of my shift and perform some clerical tasks like checking the book detectors and ensuring the patron counter worked correctly. After those first thirty minutes I was supposed to make my rounds about the library, an inconceivably large building, that (according to the employment manual) required about 2 miles of walking to complete a perimeter sweep on all four floors. When I settled into my chair behind the behemoth desk, I was exasperated to find the letter. *Oh great* I thought. *More bullshit protocols to read*. I tore open the envelope to find a sheet of yellow legal paper with numbered lines following a paragraph of writing in the same style as the print on the outside of the envelope.

*Dear new guy,*

*DO NOT throw away this list under ANY circumstances. This is your bible, your map and your survival guide all in one fucking succinct document. I didn't have to leave this shit for you, but my hope is that by leaving this behind, I'll help to curtail your learning curve a bit. Lord knows it can be a steep one. Anyway, the rules listed in this document are not optional. They aren't suggestions and they aren't advice. They are a code that you must adhere to or some terrible shit can happen. You wouldn't understand without experiencing it for yourself which is exactly what this letter is meant to avoid, so listen up. If you get through this first night, I'll leave more rules for you tomorrow.*

*Rule #1:* ***Never*** *look at the hallway safety mirrors in the basement corridor. Keep your eyes low and walk swiftly.*

*Rule #2: You will encounter an unfathomably tall man in a gray suit. Do not look at his face. Answer any question he asks you with "no sir" and he will go away.*

*Rule #3: Stay out of the atrium from 2:15-2:16 every night. It's better if you don't see it.*

*Rule #4: You will hear some horrible fucking sounds from study room 219J on occasion. Don't ever open the door.*

Rule #5: Always walk **beside** the book shelves in the west portion of the fourth floor, never between them.

*Rule #6: If you hear tapping coming from the glass window behind you at the security desk, DO NOT turn around.*

*Rule #7: At 12:15 you'll see a heavy man in a tweed suit hurry past you clutching his briefcase. When you see him walk past you, tell him "today is not the day, friend." He'll look relieved, nod and walk out of the library. If he gets up the stairs, you're already too late.*

I was so caught up in reading the letter that I had forgotten to check the student ID of the person who had just rushed by the security desk. I remembered the protocol with a jolt and looked up to call out to the offending student just in time to watch a man, clad in a tweed suit, clear the stairs and slip out of sight onto the library floor.

&#x200B;

[Part 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/dbmkyk/i_just_started_working_the_night_shift_at_my/)First post: https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/3iex1h/im_a_search_and_rescue_officer_for_the_us_forest/

So I logged back on tonight and was blown away by the staggering amount of interest this seems to have generated. First off, I'll address a few things that you guys have brought up:

* There's been an overwhelming amount of people mentioning the similarity between some of my stories and those of David Paulides. I assure you I'm not trying to rip him off in any way, I've got nothing but respect for the guy. He's actually what inspired me to write this, because I can verify a lot of the things he talks about. We do have a lot of these strange missing persons cases, and most of the time they aren't solved. Either that, or we find them in places they have no business being. I personally haven't been on many calls like that, but I'll share a few that I've seen, and a story my friend told me that relates to this.

* There was a lot of feedback about the stairs, so I'll touch on that briefly here, and I'll also include a story. 
They come in a variety of shapes, sizes, styles, and conditions. Some are pretty dilapidated, just ruins, but others are brand new. I saw one set that looked like they came from a lighthouse: they were metal and spiral, almost old-fashioned. 
The stairs don't go up infinitely, or farther than I can see, but some sets are taller than others. Like I said before, just imagine the stairs in your house, as if someone cut-and-pasted them in the middle of nowhere. I don't have any pictures, it's never really occurred to me to try again after the first time, and I don't really feel like risking my job over it. I'll try again in the future, but I can't really promise anything.

* A few people expressed confusion about the guy who ran into the man with no face. Just to clarify, when the climber ascended and reached the top of this peak, he saw another man in a parka and ski pants. This was the man with no face. Sorry about the confusing wording of that story, I'll try to avoid that in the future.

Alright, on to the new stories:

* As far as missing persons go, I'd say about half the calls I get are related to that. The others are rescue calls; people who fall down cliffs and hurt themselves, get injured by fire (you wouldn't believe how often this happens, mostly drunk kids), get bitten or stung by animals or insects. We're a tight team, and we have veterans who are excellent at finding signs of lost people. That's what makes these cases where we never find any trace of them so frustrating. One in particular was upsetting for all of us, because we *did* find a trace of them, but it just led to more questions than answers.
An older man had been hiking alone on a well-established trail, but his wife called to say that he hadn't come home when he should have. Apparently he had a history of seizures, and she was worried that he hadn't taken his medication and had suffered one out on the trail. Before you ask, I have no idea why he thought it was okay to go out alone, or why she didn't go with him. I don't ask about that kind of thing because past a certain point, it really doesn't matter. Someone is missing, and it's my job to find them. We went out in a standard search formation, and it wasn't long before one of our vets found signs that the guy had gone off the trail. We grouped up and followed him, spreading out in a fan to make sure we were covering as much ground as possible. Suddenly, a call comes over the radio telling us to all head back to the vets location, and we come right away, because this usually means the missing person is injured, and we need a full team to help get them out safely. 
We meet back up, and the vet is just standing at the base of a tree with his hands on the sides of his head. I ask my buddy what's going on, and he points up into the branches of this tree. I almost couldn't believe what I was seeing, but there's a walking stick dangling from a branch at least thirty feet off the ground. The little strap thing on the handle has been looped around the branch, and it's just hanging there. There's no way the guy could have tossed it up that far, and we don't see any other signs that he's still in the area. We call up into the tree, but it's obvious no one's in it. We're all just sort of left scratching our heads. We keep searching for the guy, but we never find him. We even bring our canines out, but they lose his scent long before this tree. Eventually, the search is called off, because there are other calls we have to attend to, and past a certain point there's not much we can do. The guy's wife called us every day for *months*, asking if we'd found her husband, and it was heartbreaking to hear her get more and more hopeless each time.
I'm not sure why this call in particular was so upsetting, but I think it was just the sheer improbability of it. That and the questions that were raised. How the hell had this guy's cane ended up there? Did someone kill him and toss that up there as some weird trophy? We did our best to find him, but it was almost like a taunt. We still talk about that one from time to time.

* Missing kids are the most heart-breaking. Doesn't matter what circumstances they go missing under, it's never easy, and we always, *always* dread the ones we find deceased. It's not common, but it does happen. David Paulides talks a lot about kids SAR teams find in places they shouldn't be, or couldn't be. I can honestly say I've heard about this kind of thing happening more than I've seen it, but I'll share one of the ones that I think about a lot that I witnessed personally.
A mother and her three kids were out for a picnic in an area of the park that has a small lake. One is six, one is five, and the other is about three. She's watching them all really closely, and according to her, she never lets them out of her sight at any time. She never saw anyone else in the area either, which is important.
She packs their stuff up and they start to head back to the parking area. Now, this lake is only about two miles into the woods, and it's on a *very* clearly established trail. It's almost impossible to get lost getting from the parking area to it, unless you're deliberately going off the path like an imbecile. Her kids are walking in front of her, when she hears what sounds like someone coming up the path behind her. She turns around, and in the four or so seconds she's not looking, her five-year-old son vanishes. She figures he's stepped off the trail to pee or something, and she asks her other two where he went. They both tell her that 'a big man with a scary face' came out of the woods next to them, took the kid's hand, and led him into the trees. The two remaining kids don't seem upset, in fact she says later that it seems like they've been drugged. They're sort of spacey and fuzzy. So of course, she freaks out, starts looking frantically in the area for her kid. She's screaming his name, and she says at one point she thinks she heard him answer her. Now obviously she can't go blindly running into the woods, she's got the other two kids, so she calls the police and they send us out immediately. We respond, and we start the search for him.Over the course of this search, which spans *miles*, we never find a single trace of the kid. Canines can't pick up any scent, we don't find any clothing or broken bushes or literally anything that would signify a child being there. Of course there's suspicion about the mother for a while, but it's pretty clear that she's completely destroyed by the whole thing. We looked for this kid for weeks, with a lot of volunteer help.  But eventually, the search peters out, and we have to move on. 
The volunteers keep searching, though, and one day we get a call on the radio letting us know that a body has been found and needs to be recovered. They tell us the location, and none of us can believe it. We figure it has to be a different kid. But we go out there, about 15 miles from the site where he vanished, and sure enough, we find the body of the kid we've been looking for. 
I have been trying to figure out how this kid got where he did ever since we found him, and I've never come up with an answer. A volunteer just happened to be in the area, because he figured he might as well look in places no one else would think to on the off chance the body had been dumped. He comes to the base of a tall, rocky slope, and half-way up, he sees something. He looks through his binoculars and sure enough, it's the body of a little boy, stuffed in a little opening in the rock. He recognizes the color of the kid's shirt, so he knows right away that it's the missing boy. That's when he calls it in, and we're dispatched.
It took us almost an hour to get his body down, and none of us could believe what we were seeing. Not only was this kid 15 miles from where he'd started, there was no possible way he could have gotten up there on his own. This slope is treacherous, and it's hard even for us with our climbing gear. A five-year-old boy had no way of getting up there, of that I'm certain.
Not only that, but the kid doesn't have a scratch on him. His shoes are gone, but his feet aren't damaged or dirty. So it wasn't as if an animal dragged him up there. And from what we can tell, he hasn't been dead that long. He'd been out there over a month by that point, and it looked like he'd only been dead for, at most, a day or two. The whole thing was unbelievably strange, and was one of the most disconcerting calls I've ever been on. 
We found out later that the coroner determined the kid had died from exposure. He'd frozen to death, probably late at night two days before we found him. There were no suspects, and no answers. To date, it's one of the weirdest things I've ever seen.

* One of my first jobs as a trainee was a search op for a four-year-old kid that had gotten separated from his mom. This was one of those cases where we knew we were gonna find him because the dogs were on a strong scent trail, and we saw clear signs that he was in the area. We ended up finding him in a berry patch about half a mile from where he'd been last seen. Kid wasn't even aware that he'd wandered that far. One of the vets brought him back, which I was glad for because I'm really not good with kids, and I find it hard to talk to them and keep them company. 
As my trainer and I are headed back, she decides to take me on a detour to show me one of the hot spots where we tend to find missing people. It's a natural dip in the land near a popular trail, and people will usually move downhill because it's easier. We hike out there, it's a few miles away, and we get there in about an hour or so. As we're walking around the area and she's pointing out places she's found people in the past, I see something in the distance. Now, this area we're in is about eight miles from the main parking area, though there's back roads you can take to get closer if you don't want to hike that far. But we're on state-protected land, which means there can't be any kind of commercial or residential development out here. The most you'll ever see is a fire tower or makeshift shelter that homeless people think they can get away with building. But I can see from here that whatever this thing is has straight edges, and if there's one thing you learn quickly, it's that nature rarely makes straight lines. I point it out, but she doesn't say anything. She just hangs back and lets me wander over and check it out. I get within about twenty feet of it, and all the hair on the back of my neck stands up.
It's a staircase. In the middle of the fucking woods. In the proper context, it would literally be the most benign thing ever. It's just a normal staircase, with beige carpet, and about ten steps tall. But instead of being in a house, where it obviously should be, it's out here in the middle of the woods. The sides aren't carpeted, obviously, and I can see the wood it's made of. It's almost like a video game glitch, where the house has failed to load completely and the stairs are the only thing visible. 
I stand there, and it's like my brain is working overtime to try and make sense of what I'm seeing. My trainer comes and stands next to me, and she just stands there casually, looking at it as if it's the least interesting thing in the world. I ask her what the fuck this thing is doing here, and she just chuckles.
'Get used to it, rookie. You're gonna see a lot of them.' I start to move closer, but she grabs my arm. Hard.
'I wouldn't do that.' She says. Her voice is casual, but her grip is tight, and I just stand there looking at her. 'You're gonna see them all the time, but don't go near them. Don't touch them, don't go up them. Just ignore them.' I start to ask her about it, but something in the way she's looking at me tells me that it's best if I don't. We end up moving on, and the subject doesn't come up again for the rest of my training.
She was right, though. I'd say about every fifth call I go on, I end up running across a set of stairs. Sometimes they're relatively close to the path, maybe within two or three miles. Sometimes they're twenty, thirty miles out, literally in the middle of nowhere, and I only find them during the broadest searches or training weekends. They're usually in good condition, but sometimes it looks like they've been out there for miles. All different kinds, all different sizes. The biggest I ever saw looked like they came out of a turn-of-the-century mansion, and were at least ten feet wide, with steps leading up at least fifteen or twenty feet.
I've tried talking about it with people, but they just give me the same response my trainer did. 'It's normal. Don't worry about it, they're not a big deal, but don't go close to them or up them.' When trainees ask me about it now, I give them the same response. I don't really know what else to tell them. I'm really hoping someday I get a better answer, but it hasn't happened yet.

* This is another one that was less spooky and more sad. A young man went missing late in winter, when realistically no one should be going that far out onto the trails. We close a lot of them, but some remain open year round, unless there's a shit-load of snow. We did an op for him, but we had about six feet of snow on the ground (it was an unusually heavy snow year), and we knew it wasn't likely that we'd find him until spring when the thaw came. Sure enough, when the first big thaw came, a hiker reported a body a little ways off the main trail. We found him at the base of a tree, in a pile of melted snow. I knew right away what had happened, and it scared the living shit out of me. Most of you who ski or snowboard, or spend any amount of time on a mountain, will probably have guessed too. When snow falls, it doesn't collect as thick in the areas beneath the branches. It happens most with fir trees, because they have a sort of closed umbrella shape. So what you end up with is a space around the base of a tree that's filled with a mixture of loose, powdery snow, air, and branches. They're called tree wells, and they're not immediately obvious if you don't know what you're looking for. We put up signs in the welcome center, big ones, letting people know how dangerous they are, but every year that we get an unusual amount of snow, at least one person doesn't read them, or doesn't take the warning seriously, and we find out about it in spring. 
My best guess is that this young man was hiking and got tired, or maybe a cramp from walking in the deep snow. He went to go sit at the base of the tree, not knowing that there was a tree well, and fell in. He got stuck with his feet up, and the surrounding snow caved in around him. Unable to free himself, he suffocated. It's called snow immersion suffocation, and it doesn't usually happen except in really deep snow. But if you get stuck in a weird position, like this guy did, even six feet of snow can be lethal.
What scared me the most was imagining how he must have struggled. Upside down, in the freezing cold, he didn't die quickly. The snow would have formed a dense, heavy pile on top of him, and it would have been literally impossible to get out. As it got harder to breathe, he would have known what was happening. I can't even imagine what he was thinking in his last moments.

* A lot of my less outdoorsy friends want to know if I've ever seen the Goatman while I've been out on calls. Unfortunately, or I guess fortunately, I've never had anything quite like that happen. I guess the closest was the whole 'black-eyed man' thing, but I didn't see anything. However, there was one call where I had something kind of similar happen, but I'm not sure I'm willing to chalk it up to the Goatman.
We'd gotten a report that an older woman had fainted along one of the trails, and needed assistance getting back down to the main area.
We hike up to where she's at, and her husband is just beside himself. He runs, well, I guess more jogs, to us, and tells us that he was a little ways off the trail looking at something when his wife starts screaming behind him. He runs back to her and she's passed out on the trail. We get her on a backboard, and as we're getting her down to the welcome center, she comes to and starts screaming again. I calm her down and ask her what happened. I can't remember verbatim what she said, but essentially, what happened was this:
She'd been waiting for her husband when she started hearing this really strange sound. She said it sounded sort of like a cat, but it was off somehow, and she couldn't quite figure out why. She went a little ahead to try and hear it better, and it sounded like it was coming closer. She said the closer it got, the more uneasy she was, until she finally figured out what was wrong. I do remember this next part, because it was so weird that I don't think I could forget it if I tried.
"It wasn't a cat. It was a man, saying the word 'meow' over and over. Just 'meow, meow, meow'. But it wasn't a man, it couldn't have been, because I've never heard a man make his voice buzz like that. I thought my hearing aid was going out, but it wasn't, I adjusted it and it still sounded all buzzy. It was awful. He was coming closer, but I couldn't see him. And the closer he got the more scared I was, and the last thing I remember was a shape coming out of the trees. I guess that's when I fainted." 
Now, obviously I'm a little perplexed as to why a guy would be out in the fucking woods chanting 'meow, meow' at people. So once we get down the mountain, I tell my superior that I'm gonna go search the area to see if I can find anything. He gives me the go ahead, and I grab a radio and hike back to where she fainted. I don't see anyone, so I keep going about a mile more, and I when I head back I go off the trail, to see if I can figure out where she saw him coming from. It's almost sunset by this point, and I don't have any desire to be out at night alone, so I just sort of write it off and make a mental note to check it out again tomorrow. But as I'm headed back, I start to hear something in the distance. I stop, and I call out for anyone in the immediate area to identify themselves. The sound didn't come closer or get louder, but it sounded exactly like a man saying 'meow, meow' in this really odd monotone. As comical as it makes it sound, it was almost like that guy on South Park with the electrolarynx, Ned. I go off the trail in the direction I think it's coming from, but I never seem to get closer. It's almost like it's coming from all directions. Eventually, it just sort of fades out, and I ended up going back to the welcome center. 
I didn't get any further reports like that, and even though I went back to that area, I never heard that exact sound again. I suppose it could have been some stupid kid out there fucking with people, but even I have to admit it was weird. 

So this kind of turned into a massive wall of text, and for that I apologize. I wanted to get to the stories my friend told me, and he does have some good ones, so I'll post those tomorrow evening. I also have a few more of my own I think you guys will like. I'm sorry to keep you all in suspense again, hopefully the stories here make up for it and help you get through the next 24 hours until I can post again!

EDIT: Since it seems like all of you would like to hear more, tomorrow I'll write up as many stories as I can and do a massive post. I'll include my friend's stories, and I'll see if I can't get ahold of a few more people who might have interesting things to talk about. I just wasn't sure how people felt about big huge walls of text, but if you're all okay with it, I'll post lots of stories!

**EDIT: Part 3 is up: https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/3iocju/im_a_search_and_rescue_officer_for_the_us_forest/**“I wasn’t smart when I was born.  In fact I was a cripple and a simpleton.  I couldn’t walk, so I dragged myself around the forest floor, never straying from my mother’s presence.  I felt at the time she never cared much for my siblings and I, mostly letting us fend for ourselves, but I realize now she kept a careful eye on us.  She was cold, distant, and dumb like me, but she knew how to watch for large animals and other potential threats as my brothers, sisters, and I slowly figured out how to feed ourselves.  It seems cruel in retrospect and many of my siblings died young.

Life was hard crawling in the dirt of the forest floor, treating anything remotely edible as a banquet to be cherished.  As I slowly grew, she eventually disappeared, leaving me and two of my remaining brothers alone at a very young age.  They both perished shortly after.

But somehow I managed to survive against all odds.  Crawling in the mud and struggling against my disability, finding food and shelter anywhere I could.  I slowly learned how to use my disabilities to my advantage, setting ambushes and traps for small game.  But I was still fundamentally an idiot and no matter how clever I thought I was back then, failure was common and life continued to be difficult.

Surviving in the jungle while mentally disabled and handicapped was mostly a factor of sheer luck, though at the time I thought myself to be quite adept.  I never stayed in one place for long and I moved very slowly but carefully.  My diet consisted of anything I could find laying around which was edible, mostly small animals I could catch, but I could go hungry for very long periods of time.

Eventually, I stumbled on a small stream with an even smaller cave nearby.  I made it my home for a while.  It wasn’t much but it was hidden well and provided some sense of security.  I would drag myself out to the stream and bask in the warm tropical sun at times, take naps under trees, and eat as often as I could manage.  Those were my simple pleasures in life back then.

Predators were always a threat, and being crippled, running was not an option.  So I learned to hide.  I learned to read my environment.  I learned when to be loud and when to be quiet.  And against all odds, I somehow survived.  Once again, in retrospect, I mistook luck for cleverness.

And that would have been my entire life, up until I starved or finally ran out of luck.  But that is where my story really begins: where it should have ended.

I was crawling along the forest floor searching for something, anything to eat.  It had been many days and I had a furious hunger.  All I knew how to do was hobble around, crawling and dragging myself through the jungle, looking for scraps or small animals I could ambush on the ground.  I had just pulled myself through a small bush when I saw it.

The jaguar was low to the ground, in a pouncing position.  On any other day I might have become its meal then and there, but it was focused on something else.  I remained absolutely still, barely even breathing, hoping to not draw it’s attention.  It crouched down even further, clearly preparing to strike, it’s eyes focused like only a hunter’s can be.  I dared a quick glance at it’s target.

And what I saw was the most unusual bird, giant and dangerous in its own right.  Bright and colorful, and nearly the size of the jaguar itself, it was a rainbow of feathers with a crown of plumage on its head.  Of course at the time, I didn’t realize how unusual this creature was, all I knew was that this jaguar was going to try and take down the giant avian at any moment.

And it did.  Try to at least.  The bird took flight the moment the jaguar lept and it soared into the canopy, the cat pursuing.  I remained still for some time to see if it would return, but eventually eased out into the small clearing.  There wasn’t much of interest so I wiggled up the small hill the bird had been resting on, only to find when I reached the top that it was in fact a giant bird’s nest.  And to my delight, resting inside were three very large eggs of unusual color.

Of course I ate them all right then and there and then dragged myself back to my usual resting spot.  Sleeping with a full belly was always it’s own reward.

But that was when things started to change.  Over the next few days I started to notice things I hadn’t been aware of before.  Small things at first: observations about my surroundings that I hadn’t noticed before.  The world looked a bit more colorful than it did, shapes a little more defined.  I was able to pay attention to more things at once.

As days turned to weeks I started realizing I could make plans that were more sophisticated than just waiting silently for something to run by so I could grab it, or looking for scraps laying around.  I started to devise clever traps, using rocks and other features of my environment to help me catch my food.  Choosing my resting locations in places where bushes and leaves would ensure I could hear predators on the ground.  I was still a cripple, but I was growing smarter.

I also began to grow bigger.  Alot bigger.  I had been an underfed runt most of my life but in the span of several months I had become a veritable giant.  Well nourished now and nearly six feet, all muscle.  I still had to crawl around but I could do so with a speed and vigor I had never known.  I felt optimistic and elated, yet I had no idea what was still to come.

As months turned to years I was able to walk for the first time in my life.  Few predators could stand before me now, as I stood nearly twelve feet tall, a titan of the forest, with a strength to match.  I strolled carelessly through the trees, eating what I wished, when I wished, where I wished.  I built my first house out of stone and fallen trees.  I was the king of the jungle.

And I climbed my first tree.  I will never forget it: hundreds of feet up in the forest canopy, I finally reached the sunlight atop the tallest tree I could find and looked out upon my domain.  Endless green as far as the eye could see in every direction.  A playground which had once threatened to consume me, but which was now mine to explore freely.  And so I did.

I began to travel more.  I discovered rivers, waterfalls, groves, huge cave systems, and giant sinkholes and lakes.  And so many new types of plants and animals I had never seen.  Frogs and birds, cats and spiders, animals which ate plants and plants which ate animals.  Over time, I took a special love of watching the tree monkeys, as they were the only other animals which seemed to express an intelligence like my own.

Which is why when I found a small one which had been injured, I carefully collected it and took it with me.

I nursed it back to health, fed it, earned it’s trust, and it became my little companion.  There were no names back then, but none were needed.  For the first time in my life, I felt genuine love for this one specific creature.  My first friend.

I had to take great care, as my growing never seemed to cease.  By my memory and estimates, I may have been nearly 30 feet tall by then, and this little monkey was barely a fly by comparison.  But the joy he brought me as we traveled together, as he gathered tiny fruits for me, and as he slept peacefully next to me, made me realize how lonely I had been all those decades wandering the forests all by myself.  Always just watching, but never feeling like more than an observer anymore.

When he finally died peacefully of old age, I was of course heartbroken. I knew it was coming, I had seen how he slowly weakened and deteriorated.  While I seemed to defy the years and continue to grow, time shifted the world around me.  Landscapes slowly changed, rivers altered, animals came and went.  After he died, I retreated back to a more observational phase of my life again, mostly wandering the forest and indulging in the sights and sounds around me.

I don’t know how long I spent like that before they found me.  Other monkeys, but these ones were even more like me.  They were extremely clever.  They made noises at each other in rapid and consistent manners.  They used tools like me, maybe even more clever than the ones I had devised.  And of course they were terrified of me.

I was a giant, towering over them, looming nearly as tall as the trees.  I mostly left them alone but would sometimes go and watch over them.  They built strange houses out of sticks and leaves, not too dissimilar to the one I had built out of rocks before I no longer had the need for such a thing.  They even appeared to be able to wield fire, and lit up the night in ways that I had only seen from the thunder of an angry sky.

As time went on, more and more of them would come and visit me, and I slowly gained their trust, even if their caution and fear never fully passed.  I learned over time what their noises meant and after some effort on my part, we were able to communicate quite well.  They would often come to me and ask questions about the area.  Good hunting grounds, water sources, places to make a new village.  After all, I had been almost everywhere.

One day some of them started leaving strange carvings in stone around where I slept.  I asked one of them about the artifacts, a youngling who had come to ask for my help removing a mighty tree which threatened to fall on his hut.  He told me that they were left as offerings, so that I might bless them with good fortune.  He told me how their lives are hard and short and then told me that a god such as myself could surely make their lives better.

That was the first time I had encountered the concept of a god.  I had taken a liking to these little ones, so I had already been aiding them with my knowledge whenever they would ask for it.  But he was right, I could do more.  Much more.

I remember the look of terror on many of the little people’s faces as I towered over their village.  Perhaps they were expecting some wrath for a perceived slight, I can’t know, but I quickly made it clear I was there to help by removing the offending tree and setting it out of harm’s way.  Our relationship expanded quickly over the next few years and they devised great and clever projects which took advantage of my size and relative strength.  In those years, we accomplished in days what would have taken them decades on their own, were it even possible at all.  We even replaced the village huts with a more durable collective structure, stones stacked so tall that they dwarfed the trees around them.  The giant pile of boulders was carefully stacked to create living space to spare.  A crude pyramid of sorts, I would later come to realize.

Things went well for a while, and I took a very active role in the lives of my new friends.  It reminded me of my old monkey friend from so long ago, except this time there were many and I could speak to them and share my thoughts and feelings.  It was an exhilarating time for me, and we accomplished much.  We dug trenches to allow water to reach areas where they could cultivate crops.  We studied the stars together and speculated on the mysteries of the forest and the world.  I watched friends be born, age, die, only for new friends to appear.

After many many years though, the number of friends grew.  And grew.  And grew.  Eventually, there were so many that they began to fight each other over what seemed to be the infinite bounty of the forest.  Their noises changed and I could no longer understand all of them anymore, only the ones I remained near.  They began to ask me for help or blessings hunting other people, fighting other villages.  I always refused.

The tipping point came when the village I attended attempted to sacrifice a young girl in my name in order to gain my support in an upcoming raid.  I had tried to tolerate them and understand them, but their pettiness had boiled over and I was exacerbated.  There were too many people, too many villages, too many conflicts, too much sadness.  It felt like I was crawling through the mud again, a dumb cripple, unsure what to do or where to go, and with little means to accomplish anything.  I realized the moment they placed that little girl on the altar that I had forgotten what it meant to be helpless.

So I accepted their sacrifice.  I took the girl, and I left that village and never returned.  I went as far as I could away from that place and I did my best to take care of that little girl.  She was small and frightened at first, but grew to trust me over time.  We traveled south until we reached a great cliff with a waterfall, far away from the little people.  I built her a little house of stones at the top of the cliff right next to the waterfall, with a spectacular view of the forest below.

I didn’t even think to ask her name until she took the initiative to tell me, much later.  Names have no meaning in the forest, but I discovered it was Sacniete, an old and beautiful name I will never forget.

We were together for a long time.  She grew up, and once again more little people discovered us.  Once again they would come and ask for advice at first, and once again their requests would grow to be increasingly more and more demanding.  Untrusting of the little people now, I would often withdraw or refuse to speak to them.  Often I could not even understand their noises anymore.  But Sacniete would take over and represent me in my stead when the weight of it all became too much.  She even put feathers on her head like me in order to gain some trust and status from the visitors so they would eventually come to understand that I trusted her.  After a time, it almost became expected that she was the one you would speak to when you came to me.

Which I was fine with.  She never once misrepresented me, we were both children of a similar fortune.  Abandoned by fate but then entrusted with something special we could use to help others, and I knew she could be trustworthy.  I slowly came to understand that she was good at what she did.  I watched her mend divides, forge alliances, and eventually even end a war.  I was a simple person of the forest, but she was a politician and she knew how to use my name and power to change the little people.  To make them better.

I loved her, more than I even loved that little monkey.  She was kind, gentle, but intelligent and uncompromising.  She taught me things I had never heard of, things she learned of from our visitors.  We had no needs, so knowledge was paid for with knowledge.  Forms of what I would later find were arithmetic, astronomy, philosophy, and more slowly arrived bit by bit.  It gave me a new window into the world around me, one I had never given it’s due consideration despite being more ancient than many of the trees.  It always amazed me that these little people were so creative and intelligent, and it was her, she was the one who in the end inspired me to put my faith in them again.

I started to take a more active role once more, but being mostly stuck in one place, I studied and philosophized and tried to make myself useful to the little people in the ways I could.  I slurped up knowledge and I offered it back to any who asked.  I was too big to move so freely around the woods now without laying waste to it, but the little people seemed more than happy to come to me.  Sacniete even gave me a name, and while the little people had called me many things before, this was the first one I truly took to heart.

And in those years, my heart grew nearly as fast as I did.

When she died I was once again heartbroken.  It was a tragic accident.  Nearly 140 feet now, I was so massive it was hard to even move through the woods anymore without trampling everything in my path.  I tended to just remain in the same spot near the top of the waterfall as a result, and spent most of my time asleep or staring out over the vast and beautiful jungle, framed by the mountains hundreds of miles behind it.

I don’t know why she had come so close to me while I was sleeping that night, or what cruelty of fate caused me to roll over, but when I woke up I found I had accidentally crushed her to death.  I could barely even recognize her.  I had seen the little people cry before, but that was the first time I myself had ever truly wept.  I hadn’t even realized I was capable of it.

I retreated deeper into the forest after that, avoiding everything.  Everyone was so small, and I was so dangerously large.  I just wanted to go hide in a cave somewhere and never come out, but even finding such a large cavern now would seem nearly impossible.  As was so often the case in my life, I do not know how much time passed, probably ages, but eventually the little people found me again as they always did.

But this time it was different.  They remembered my name.  They brought me food and gifts.  They once again asked for my knowledge, and my help to save and improve their lives.  I enjoyed their company despite my distrust, apathy, and depression.  Eventually though, they asked me to come with them to their town, and after much deliberation I finally agreed.

What I found when I arrived there was a landscape drastically transformed.  The massive destruction of a forest replaced by farmland, and a great city made of stacked stone, much like the one I had made so long ago but much more refined and massive.  And the number of little people was uncountable.

The forest’s devastation was so great that I could not even see the trees on the other side of the city.  I just stood there, towering over everything, and felt horror ripple through me from my head to my toes.  I felt as though this was somehow all my fault.  I should have known this would happen.  I should never have helped the little people, for they were so smart that the forest itself had become their prey.  Or maybe I should have helped them more, taught them better to be stewards of the forest, not destroyers of it.

I immediately left without a word back the way I came.  They followed me yelling and crying my name for some while before eventually giving up and returning to their desolation of a home.

I went further south.  Far further south.  I dreamed about that bird from so long ago.  Was it the last of its kind?  What destruction had I myself wrought on it or it’s species when I ate its eggs?  I wasn’t intelligent enough to have such thoughts back then when I did it, but now it was always there in the back of my mind.  How easy it truly is to destroy something beautiful out of sheer ignorance.

I finally found a new cave, my cave, large enough for me to fit in snugly, and I went to sleep.  As always, I do not know for how long.  Ages most likely.   And once again I was awoken by the little people.

They hadn’t changed much by my perception, but their noises were new.  It took me some time to understand them again, but once I did, they told me of how things were.  An empire they said, greater than any before, and cities of stone which fed and housed vast numbers of little people.  I could only barely imagine how so many of them could survive on the fruits of the forest, but they told me they no longer needed the forest.  They claimed to have tamed the wilds.

I remember at one point asking one of their supposed wise men what had happened to the old little people who I had once seen doing the same thing.  He told me their cities had been abandoned long ago and they had retreated back into the forest.  This gave me some hope, and I believed that in time they too would return to the forest.  I did not tell him my thoughts though, I simply sent him away.

More and more of them flooded to me and before I knew it they were erecting monuments all around my cave, destroying trees and slaying animals in the process.  I tried to chase them off but they would always return eventually.  I fled them in a fit of anger one night after years of fitful and interrupted slumber.  I went further south.

Eventually I found another home.  One of many in my travels, but it was suitable.  Deep, dark, and hidden in the bowels of a sinkhole.  Nobody but I could get down this deep into the earth, so here I would finally be safe to rest.  No more little people.  No more sadness.

But this time it was a different kind of noise.  Grating, whirring, ripping noises.  Alien noises and the smell of fire and ash.  I don’t know how long had passed, but when I woke, deep in my hidden chamber, I knew something had changed.  These were not noises of the forest or even noises of little people.  I had to investigate.

When I peaked out of my cave, I stood up and looked over the trees to see smoke filling the air and huge swaths of forest completely burned to the ground.  I went to go see what was happening and observed the little people burning and chopping and tearing at the trees with strange tools I had never before seen.  Noisy tools.  Violent tools.

Some of them spotted me and it wasn’t long before they were screaming and fleeing in mass.  I couldn’t understand, there were no crops here, no city.  Why were they destroying the forest, burning it to the ground even?  Not even using the wood from the trees as they used to do.  I walked through the devastation and saw it stretched out seemingly forever.  In the distance I saw strange buildings, very different from the stone and thatch ones I was familiar with, and vast herds of unusual animals I had never encountered before.  The forest had turned to grassland at the hands of the little people.

I stood watch over the area for a few years, frightening off those who dared trespass.  I wandered around and patrolled, destroying the infrastructure the little people used to attack the forest wherever I found it.  I took care never to hurt any of them, and it wasn’t hard as they always fled in my presence.  I became cold hearted though, and felt the little people were a plague, a disease I had allowed to fester.  Once again, I believed this was my fault, that it was something I could have prevented.

Time continued to pass.  Many suns, many seasons, many years.  I remember one day I saw a strange bird fly overhead.  I now know it was an aeroplane, but at the time it reminded me of the bird from when I was just a young cripple.  Giant and majestic, beautiful.  I tried to follow it but it was far too fast and I watched it disappear over the mountains.  I remember wondering what new lands the bird would discover over there.  Maybe ones without little people.

No matter how much I tried though, I couldn’t stop the destruction.  Always small groups, simple tools, and a lot of fire.  I could not be everywhere at once.  I felt despair.

Time passed, but an old man found me one day and spoke to me in new and unusual noises.  At first I ignored him, but he persisted and slept nearby every night, refusing to leave.  He would come every day and make the same noises at me.  He seemed harmless and I felt lonely, so on a whim I decided to let him stay for a while so that he might teach me the new noises.  We were eventually able to speak more clearly.

He gave me his name, Fabio, and he was also born in the forest.  He told me many strange, wonderful, and terrible things.  He told me about how the land was now used for raising cattle.  He told me about how the silver bird was in fact a machine created by little people.  He told me what he knew about science, about history, about society.  That there were entire nations of little people all over the world.  That the little people had conquered it all.

I came to feel he was like me, for he seemed saddened by it.  He said there was nobody left who understood the old ways.  Living in the garden and only taking what you require.  He told me few people believed in me anymore, that I was just a scary story told to frighten frontiersmen’s children, or just a mythology told in schools.  That those who claimed to have seen me were met with disbelief.  And he said he had seen me as a child when I had run off his parents at the edge of the forest, and that he had spent his whole life searching for me since then.

The little people were always full of surprises.

I took him in and his welcome company and knowledge warmed me as I continued to hide in my cave.  He taught me to play chess, he told wonderful stories and even brought me books.  I had seen the scratchings in stone from long ago and their meanings, but these were far more sophisticated.  I learned to read and I lusted after the knowledge.  He would go out once every few months and bring back more books, photographs, and at one point even a motion picture for me, which I devoured greedily.  Years passed almost in an instant and I barely ever left the cave.

Eventually he told me I would need to face my fears and do something about the encroaching little people, who grew closer every day.  But I knew he could see my wounded spirit, and he was kind and let me rest, never pressing me.  He knew the little people had broken my heart.

But what is broken can break again, and when he finally passed away a few years later, I found myself alone once more.  Timeless, not like the tree, but like the very stone I dwelled in, I knew everything around me was ephemeral.  It was all going to change and die anyways, so what did it matter what I did.

And so I slept.  I don’t know how long.  It might have been ages.

Eventually I was awoken again by the little people’s noises.  Well, in this case, you specifically of course.  I remember thinking at the time that I was half tempted to snatch you all up and carry you to the edge of the forest and tell you never to return.

But  I observed you from a distance without intervening to see what you did.  My trust of the little people was low enough by now that I was prepared to even squash you if you stepped afoul, but to my surprise you all were nothing if not respectful of your surroundings.

After several weeks of observing you, I saw you rescue animals, study the plants, record information.  I saw you exploring and appreciating the wonder of the forest, just like the little people of old.  Just like I did.  I realized you were the scientists the old man had told me about.  That you were here to learn, not to destroy.

And that was when I decided to make myself known.  I knew you would be terrified, but I was used to that at this point.  And I still remember the look on your faces when I first presented, but when I managed to convince you I was harmless, your innate scientific curiosity took over I can only assume.  The same curiosity which drives me.  I believe you are like the other little people I once knew: kind, loving, and well intentioned.

And that is why I trust you with my story.  I hope you are able to share it and help me, for while I was once called a god, I am just as helpless as a baby snake crawling, crippled in the mud on the forest floor.”

*I turned off the recorder at that point and looked up at the towering feathered serpent, unfathomably large.  I told him that was the last thing I needed and that I would return to see him again as soon as I could.  He nodded in understanding, but watched with a sorrow in his eyes as we slowly made our way into the woods, leaving the cave we had been exploring for weeks behind.  My colleagues and I had expected to discover an immense undiscovered network with possibly uncatalogued species.  We had not expected to discover this particular uncatalogued species.*

*As I write this log of his recording, we are setting up camp less than a day from the airstrip where we will be picked up.  I don’t know if anyone will believe me, or if they will think I photoshopped our pictures, but the rest of the team agrees we need to tread lightly, lest we bring him unwanted attention.  But I have to do something.  I still remember the first words he spoke to me, after all those first days of terror and uncertainty, not knowing if we had discovered a monster, not knowing if we were going to die.  But the monster turned out to be anything but.*

*I will never forget what he said, the first time he spoke to us:*

“I have been watching you.  Do not fear. I have been here a long time.  The world is changing and I am crawling in the mud again.  I was once a little forest snake, but I was given the name Quetzalcoatl long ago by someone I loved very much.  Now once again, I am as helpless as a little snake.

I need you.  Every day my home gets smaller, and the little people grow.  Every year I must hide deeper and deeper to avoid their shiny birds and stinging smoke.

I may look big to you, but I am just a simple creature crawling in the mud.

Please help me save my home.”**1.**

It was a shock when our family cat, Nancy, passed away whilst giving birth to a litter of only one kitten.

And an even further shock when we noticed that this particular kitten, wrinkled and pink, had two heads. 

Pa said it was an omen.

“An omen of what?”

The kitten made a noise; half-way between a squeak and a cough.

Pa paused.

“I don’t know.”

We were silent for a bit whilst we thought on this. We didn’t know either, but no-one could doubt that it had to mean *something.* 

It made for a good name though: Omen. And so it stuck. The vet told us Omen didn’t have long for this world, said that animals with mutations like this rarely lasted more than a few weeks at best. He suggested we make a quick bit of cash and find a museum, or lab nearby to sell them to. 

Two heads, two sets of genitals, he said, Omen was a five-figure paycheck waiting to happen. 

We refused. Omen was ours.

In the end, Omen would end up outliving that vet, and part of me, although I know it can’t be true, believes that Omen always held a grudge against him for what he told us that morning. The vet made a joke in poor taste as we left.

“Might last a little longer. You never know, nine lives and all.”

I remember our whole family watching the way Pa looked to Omen’s two heads, and then back to the vet.

“Eighteen” he corrected.

“Eighteen lives.”

&#x200B;

**2.**

We spent the next few months hand-feeding Omen, both of their heads desperately hungry. Ma would often joke that it was like they had two stomachs, with the amount of milk they’d get through. We’d take turns to feed in the night, and even though I was much too young to be staying up that late they could see how much this cat meant to me, and they’d give me an hour or two after dark.

Omen had the most beautiful black coat, with sleek white socks, and a small cream spot, like a monk, on the top of their left head. The heads would sometimes chatter to each other, in meek little mews when they were alone, as if comparing notes on their new body. 

Omen always ate better if they could sit in your lap, nestling their body in the fold of your legs whilst both your hands would hold two small bottles for them to suckle from. Sometimes I’d sneak out of bed and sleep on the floor in Omen’s room, only to be found and scolded by my parents when the morning came.

But they didn’t mind, really. Omen was our favourite.

&#x200B;

**3.**

On the morning before his first birthday, Omen brought in a two-headed mouse, clamped in the right head’s jaws. The thing was limp, and made a soft *pat* when they dropped it onto the floor. I must have been 12 at the time, but I remember poking the mouse with a brush, turning it over to have a better look at each head.

I was so absorbed in the rodent’s strange biology I completely ignored the sound of my Ma and Pa coming to stand behind me, hands on hips, watching me watch it.

“I think it’s a message.” Pa said.

Ma made a noise; *he’s right*.

“I think they’re telling us they’re not alone.”

Both of Omen’s heads mewed in sync, as if to agree.

&#x200B;

**4.**

We went on holiday as a family, and as much as it pained us, were unable to bring Omen. Omen knew something was up when they saw us putting our clothes in bags, and when we all left at once, and they tried to sink their claws into our shoes to beg us not to go. 

But we had to, and, we did.

When we returned, sunburnt and at ease, we found that Omen had taken the time to smash every single clock in the house.

&#x200B;

**5.**

Omen would bring in all sorts of creatures; rodents, small birds, beetles it found interesting, frogs, toads, even fish every now and again.

One evening in particular, the family were gathered round the TV, watching I-can’t-remember-what, when Omen strolled in, sat straight in front of the screen (*attention please)* and dropped the bottom half of a squirrel at its feet. The organs and intestines were hanging out, putrid and red, and we could see the way Omen’s fur was matted around the mouth.

“He thinks we’re hungry. Trying to feed us.” Pa said.

“Disgusting.” 

“Doesn’t look half bad.” 

“If you’re so hungry, you can clean it up.”

Omen watched with disappointment as Pa dropped the offering into the bin. Though I didn’t miss the whisper that followed: *sorry, Omen.*

&#x200B;

**6.** 

We lived in a big house, and family and friends would often cycle through, staying in various rooms when they encountered problems of their own, or just needed a roof over their head for a while. Our Uncle came to stay with us during the last days of his life. There was no more modern medicine could do for him, and he told everyone he wanted to die with dignity.

We obliged him.

And so, for the last week of his life, Uncle lived as normal a life as he could, told stories until he grew too tired, never complained, and despite our protests slipped Omen meat and fish under the dinner table.

Around 24 hours before he died, Omen took up a vigil by his bedside. We’d been advised by the nurses that we should keep Omen away, that having a cat that close would only cause trouble, that you never knew where your pet had been. 

But that day, Omen wouldn’t budge. They hissed and bared their teeth whenever anybody made a motion to pick them up, and the whole thing quickly became more hassle than it was worth. It was clear Uncle was deteriorating, and we didn’t want to disturb what could be his final moments.

Omen lay on his stomach without moving for water, or food, all day. Both of their heads stood watch, making periodical sweeps of the room, examining the doorway. About an hour before he passed, Omen watched something, invisible to the rest of us, enter through the door and come to stand by Uncle’s bed. 

Omen mewed softly, pleadingly. The sound grew, and grew, until eventually, Omen was silent.

Five minutes later, whilst holding Ma’s hand, Uncle nodded, as if greeting an old friend, and took his last breath. 

&#x200B;

**7.**

Ma told us she was pregnant.

In response, Omen sneezed twice; one for each head.

&#x200B;

**8.**

Ma had twins.

And, God, Omen *loved* the twins. 

From the moment they came home Omen was all over them, transfixed by their angelic little faces, their impossibly thin wisps of hair, their laughs and their cries. I could almost hear Omen’s thought process as both heads stared up at the newcomers.

*Two of them!*

*Just like us!*

*Two of them!*

&#x200B;

**9.**

A local kid, who must have been roughly the same age as the twins at that point, say, around 4, fell from the top of their garden wall and broke their skull on the concrete below. 

Our neighbours told us that they found Omen at the scene, lapping at the pool of blood as if it was cream in a saucer.

The broken child was taken to intensive care, immediately.

Despite the doctor's best efforts, the child didn't make it.

Omen came home with blood matted in the fur around their mouths, and turned their noses up at the dinner we'd prepared. 

They were full.

&#x200B;

**10.**

An old woman with matted hair and yellow teeth came to the door. She said that she’d seen our cat, and she would pay *good money* to take them off our hands. 

She looked like a ghost dragged through a swamp. Her skin was so pale you could see the mass of veins underneath contracting like small worms, and when she spoke it made my skin hurt.

Cats like that are bad luck, she said. 

Touched by the devil, she said.

We told her that they were ours, that they were family. 

She snarled, and spat on our front door. 

I’ll see you soon, she said.

&#x200B;

**11.**

One night I heard a noise from the kitchen. Upon investigating, I found that someone was banging against the door. I recognised the voice. The woman from the week before. She was hammering the door now with her fist, frantically.

*Let me in, let me in, let me in.* She said, over and over and over again. 

I stood, paralysed by fear. There was something about her that I didn’t trust, that I *couldn’t* trust. I’d seen the way she’d looked at Omen, like she wanted them for something. 

Then the noise spread out over the house, and I was aware of the windows on three separate sides of the room, and that through each window, as I turned, I could make out the same dark figure, pounding against the glass, screeching. It was as if there were several of her, all silhouettes, all at once, begging and pleading to bet let in. And the voice cracked and changed, grew hoarser and harsher, and before long she didn’t sound much like a woman at all but something hungry and vicious-

Pa eventually came down, and found me hiding under the table. 

Omen was sat, facing the door, tail flicking from side to side. Pa said that in the following silence, he could hear their heads chattering away to one another. He said they sounded serious, concerned.

&#x200B;

**12.**

I was brushing my teeth the following week, just after my shower, when I heard some scratching at the door. I tried to ignore it. Sometimes Omen would do this, beg to be let in after you’d had a shower so they could drink the water around the drain, but Ma had said we had to stop Omen from their more unsavoury habits in case we had guests.

I kept the door firmly shut.

Omen grew more and more persistent, raking their claws down the wood, and mewing as if there was a fire.

I could have sworn the door was shut, but in my reflection, behind me I could make out the door start to open, slowly, fraction by fraction – and my hand stopped moving the brush, leaving it stuck in my mouth like a cocktail stick, when I saw a hand slowly emerge from the door in the reflection. A hand, and then a face I recognised, a gnarled and ancient face, all gums and loose skin, and I could see the woman slowly force her way into the room in the mirror, and, falling backwards, it was all I could do to try and grab the door, slipping on the handle.

The door flew open – in both real life and the reflection, and as I staggered back I could see the women now dead on, smiling, reaching out towards the surface, towards me – and my hand found something hard and heavy, and it was all I could do to throw it at the mirror.

There was a crash, the sound of falling glass, and the silence.

It took me a while to absorb my surroundings, for the adrenaline to wear off. 

I had thrown my alarm clock. A heavy, brass thing that was so loud it was impossible *not* to wake up. Omen was sat by the shattered clock, their two faces reflected endlessly in the dozens of mirror shards that covered the floor, blinking and preening themselves, before stepping closer and pushing their forehead against mine. 

Just for a moment, I felt as if I’d touched something old and dark and so *hot* and then Omen pulled away, 

and left me to clean up the mess.

&#x200B;

**13.** 

The twins were followed home by a strange man in a long coat, with thin blonde hair that he’d very carefully slicked back over his otherwise bald head.

He made lewd gestures at them, which they could repeat but not understand, and said words that made Ma blush.

Ma said she’d found the man by our gate, staring into Omen’s eyes, all four of them, without blinking. Said that she told the man she’d called the police, and that he should get off our property *this instant,* but the man stayed still. Wouldn’t take his eyes off Omen. Spoke strange words to himself under his breath. 

Prayed.

When the police came, some time later, the man was gone.

&#x200B;

**14.**

The strange man made local headlines, filling his pockets with rocks and throwing himself into the river. They said he’d finally lost it, that the weight of whatever he’d done had finally caught up to him.

But I knew something had happened that day. Omen had shown the man something in that moment, shown the man something so real and terrifying he’d had no choice but to drown himself.

And, as if to confirm my suspicions, Omen coughed up a wet, blonde hairball.

&#x200B;

**15.** 

Omen discovered catnip and spent three days in a daze, like some sort of feline junkie, until Ma caught them staring at their own reflection.

Embarrassed, Omen quit their newfound habit there and then. 

&#x200B;

**16.** 

Omen brought in the top half of a squirrel whilst we were watching TV.

The twins laughed.

Pa said: *looks familiar.*

Ma said she felt something a little like déjà vu.

Try as we might, we couldn’t place it.

&#x200B;

**17.**

Omen was sick in the night, and when we took them to the Vet she showed us her tattoo of a two-headed cat.

“It’s just like yours! I’ve never seen a *real* one.” She said, feigning surprise.

But the looks she shared with Omen made me think otherwise.

&#x200B;

**18.**

Omen spent their last five nights with each one of us.

First Pa, then Ma, then the twins for one night each, and last of all, me.

They slept by my side, purring like kindling whenever I’d tickle one of their chins. We both knew that their time was nearly up. They were growing old, and what had once been muscle and fat had quickly become skin and bone. 

Their eyes were not as sharp, and had developed a thin milky membrane. Sometimes one head would wake the other, and they’d spend a while bickering before they realised they were talking to themselves.

Before they passed they made one last, slow circuit of the house, checking behind each door and under each bed, as if to say, to us and to the twins, *see, you’re safe now.* 

&#x200B;

We buried Omen under their favourite tree, in a little wooden box we filled with shredded newspaper. Just above the box, to commemorate Omen, we planted a single orchid. We thought that every time we looked out and saw the flower we’d be reminded of our friend and protector. 

And it was a surprise to none of us, when, a month later, we saw two green buds rising from the soil.

[x](http://reddit.com/r/max_voynich)My neighbor brought over some baby shoes the other day. They were pink and had glitter on the toes and sequined flowers on the sides. We cooed over them for a few minutes and I told her how much I appreciated the gift. After she left, I threw them in my bedroom closet with all the other baby junk I've been given over the past six months.  

Six months ago, everyone in town started to ask about "my baby." I do not have a baby, I have never given birth or even been pregnant. I thought that I was being mistaken for someone else; I'm not particularly unique looking. Maybe some other short, dark haired and hazel-eyed girl gave birth recently. But I am shy by nature and southern by birth so I was too polite to say "you're wrong, you have the wrong person, I don't have a baby." I said things like "um, oh, ok?" Mostly because it must have been a case of mistaken identity.   

People brought over baby clothes, a crib, a swing that plugs into the wall and jiggles, toys and shoes and diapers. A very weird situation to be in, for sure. But then, to put it plainly, things got weirder. I was in the grocery store, and the manager, a friendly older man, came up to me and asked about "my sweet little girl." He asked if she liked the different formula he had suggested and if I wanted more. I just smiled. When I got home, I found formula in my grocery bags and an almost empty can in my cabinet. I don't even remember putting it in my cart. 

.. 

The thing is, everyone has been so nice to me, and the situation is just so odd that I started to go along with it. "How's the little darling today?" A neighbor would ask when I went to get the mail. "Oh, she's wonderful! Sleeping through the night," I'd answer.  

Then a young woman that got coffee at the same place as me asked about a play date with her 9 month old and my then "5 month old." I sort of blew it off. Next time I saw her though, she talked about setting up another play date and how much fun our two "darlings" had. She showed me a picture on her phone. "Aren't they just precious in this picture? Your little girl has the most beautiful blue eyes! Her dress really makes them pop. I'll text this to you." I looked at the picture and saw a chubby baby in a red shirt and blue shorts. It had dark hair and dark eyes. It was the only baby in the picture.  

I went home and opened my bedroom closet full of baby junk. I pulled out teddy bears and an unopened box with a changing table in it. I pulled out a shopping bag with new baby clothes. I dumped it out on my bed and looked through them. I found a light blue dress.  

.. 

A few weeks ago, I decided to call my mom.  

"Hello?" She answered. 

"Mom? It's me," I said. 

"Oh, Pearl, hi." 

"How are you?" I asked. We don't talk often. 

"I'm good, we're all good out here." She paused then asked "and how are you two doing?" 

"Us...two?" I asked hesitantly. 

"Now don't act like that, I know I haven't been in touch much but I do care about you and my grandbaby," she said sourly.  

"I know mom. Oh, she's crying, I gotta go," I lied. 

"Give Holly my love," she said and then hung up before I did. 

The funny thing is, Breakfast at Tiffany's has been my favorite book since I was kid. I'd always thought Holly would be a great name for a kid I would eventually have. 

I went into my room to put my phone down after my short conversation with my mom. The changing table and the crib were neatly set up by the window. I didn't do that. I'm sure I didn't. I walked over to the crib and looked inside. Nothing was there. I walked over to the changing table, then took a step back before I bumped my shin against one of the legs. Because I remembered that I had done that before. I looked down and saw a bruise on my shin. I know I hit it against the changing table, but I also know that they weren't in here before. I know it.  

.. 

"How's Holly today?" My neighbor across the street asked. We were both out grabbing our mail.  

"She's good, happy as ever," I said. 

"I heard her screaming up a storm when you came home last night, I'd be surprised if you were able to get her to bed at all!" 

"Once she lays down it usually doesn't take too long," I replied. 

I went inside and looked through my mail. A bunch of junk, a few red envelopes. I put everything down on the kitchen counter and opened a cabinet to get out a cup. I heard some noises coming from my room. I paused and listened. I didn't hear anything for a minute so I grabbed the cup and got some water from the sink. I heard something over the sound of the tap. Holly must be awake.  

I went into my room and looked down in the crib. Holly's stuffed elephant was in the crib. I reached down and picked it up. It was cute, no wonder someone got it for Holly. I put the elephant back down in the crib and brought the cup to my mouth to take a sip. I realized I was holding a baby bottle. Mom brain, I thought. Where did I put my cup down? But then I saw I was holding my cup. And I'm not a mom, what the fuck was I just thinking? I looked back over at the crib.  

Why do I still have this crap in my room? I kicked the crib. Then I kicked it again, then again until the wood began to splinter. I pushed the changing table over on its side. I opened my closet and shoved in the pieces of the crib and any other baby related item I could find. I slammed the door closed. I can't keep this charade up, I decided. I can't go along with this nonsense anymore.  

.. 

I went to get coffee this morning. I was so tired. I felt like I hadn't slept all night. The barista smiled at me. "Your kid keep you up?" She asked. 

"No." I said firmly. Her smile wavered.  

I sat down at a table to drink my coffee. Some woman walked up to me. She asked how I was doing, how my daughter was doing. 

"I'm fine," I answered, and left it at that. 

She sat down at the table and in a hushed and concerned voice, she asked me if I was experiencing any depression. She said that new mothers often feel like this.  

"I'm not a new mother," I said.  

A man came in and walked quickly up to the table. He bent down and whispered something in my ear. It didn't register at first. 

"What?" I asked. 

"You left your kid in her car seat in your car," he said again. 

I jumped up and ran outside. I unlocked my car and opened the back seat. How could I be so stupid? How fucked up am I to leave my kid in the car? But nothing was there. No kid, no car seat. I drove home.  

.. 

I sat on my bed and looked through the pictures on my phone. I looked at the picture of the chubby kid in the red shirt. I stared at it. Where is she? Where is Holly? There's only one kid in this picture but everyone else says that there are two. Chubs and my little Holly, bright blue eyes, blue dress. She does look so pretty in that blue dress. I do have a bit more to write, but Holly just started to cry. I need to go check on her.  I can't leave my bathroom.

About 30 minutes ago I got out of the shower and dried off, put on my pjs, opened the door and walked out, only to find myself back in my bathroom, staring at the closed door.

I stopped, and tried to rationalise what had just happened to me. I convinced myself that I had simply imagined that I had opened the door and stepped out, so I tried again. I pushed the door handle down, opened it, stepped out, and yet again found myself in my bathroom, standing in front of a closed door.

This has happened every single time I've tried to leave. I keep my phone in the bathroom with me when I'm showering- I live alone so I keep it with me just in case, for safety. The first thing I did was call my parents - my dad didn't pick up, but my mum did. I tried to explain the situation to her, but she couldn't seem to understand how I was trapped in my bathroom if the door could open. She seemed convinced that I must mean that my bathroom door's lock was broken and I was trapped inside. Regardless, she said that she would be over asap. She only lives a 15 minute drive away, so she should be here any moment.

I'm sat leaning against my bath tub, looking out the open bathroom door into my landing. I opened it this time, but didn't try to step out. Everything looks normal. My bedroom door is closed just as I left it, the airing cupboard door closed as well, the stairs leading down to the hallway and the front door, all normal.

The door's shut. I don't have any recollection of how it shut, when it shut- only that it must have happened in the last few seconds after I wrote that last paragraph. I've just reread and reread that paragraph, it's proof that I'm not going crazy and imagining this.

My mum just text me to ask if I'm in the house. I said yes, of course I am, I'm trapped in the bathroom, that's the whole reason that I called you here. This is what she has sent:

Mum: Why aren't you saying anything?

Me: What do you mean

Mum: Are you even in there?

Me: Yes I'm in here! Are you here?

Mum: I'm outside the bathroom door. I've been calling your name

I don't understand. I can't hear anything through the door. I'm going to open it.

I can see my landing, my stairs, my front door, but no mum. I tried to walk out, but it was fruitless. Back staring at the closed bathroom door.

My mum tried the handle of the door from her side, but it won't open. She brought tools to unscrew the lock. She says she's doing it now, but I can't hear anything, and I can't see the handle moving. 

Okay, mum text me to say the lock is taken out, but the door still won't open on her side. She looked through the circular hole in the door where the lock was, but just saw my bathroom. Empty.

There's no hole on my side of the door. The handle and lock are intact.

I have no idea what's happening, or how I can get out. After much convincing my mum that I am in fact in here, she said she is calling someone to possibly knock the door down. I'm worried that once they do that, they will find an empty bathroom, and yet I will still be here, trapped in my bathroom. There's no plug sockets in here, never mind my phone charger. My phone will die at some point, I'm already on 24%. When it runs out, I might lose my only point of contact with the rest of the world.

I don't know what to do.

Mum's left now to get help. I'm sat wondering what I can do. I tried to break the door down myself, I knew it wouldn't work, but I had to try. I remember reading once on Reddit that you shouldn't use your shoulder, you should try to kick the door by the lock because it's the weak point. It didn't work. I'm not sure any part of this door has a weak point now.

The window is small, and I'm not sure if I'd actually be able to fit out of it. 

Scratch that - the window won't open either. There are locks on the windows in my house, you can lock them with a little key, but I never received any when I moved in, so I've never been able to lock them.  It's locked now though.

It's got one of those white plastic cheap blinds covering it. I ended up ripping it down. It's pulled some plaster down with it, but now I can get at the window better. It's straight above the toilet, so I am kneeling on top of the toilet lid, yanking at the window handle. It won't 

Wait, it opened. I didn't notice how dark it was outside. It shouldn't be dark, it's midday.

I looked around, desperately trying to see anyone. No one's around. Everything looks kind of… muted. I can't describe it. Nor can I describe the deep seated feeling of dread and wrongness as I look out into my neighbourhood. My instincts are telling me not to, but I stick my head out to look down to where I could possibly drop to.

My window's closed. I never felt myself move, but my window's closed. Even the fucking plastic blind is back in place. 

I'm sat on the floor now, as far away from the window and door as I can get. I feel sick.

Mum came back, along with her work friend. He helped her unscrew the hinges and remove the door. I'm not in there. They can't see me. My mum sent a photo of her inside the bathroom, with no me. She thinks this has all been a joke, and is refusing to reply to my texts or answer my calls. I'm on 14% battery, I don't know if I will ever get to leave. This might be my only chance to say goodbye to my mum, but she won't answer her phone.

Edit: I've ripped down the shower curtain, and yet I'm staring at it right now, hung up, hanging over the side of my bath.

I looked out the window again. I think I heard a rumbling. Low, quiet rumbling. I haven't opened the window since.

My phone's on 1%. If I get out, I will update this post. If no edit comes, assume I'm still here. ___Part 1 - Current___  
[Part 2](https://old.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/c0ysyy/the_ocean_is_much_deeper_than_we_thought_part_2/)  
[Part 3 - Final](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/c3fnev/the_ocean_is_much_deeper_than_we_thought_final/)

***

“They told me you were experienced in harsh waters.” James said, as he pointed out the pearls of sweat that had formed on my forehead.


_“Yeah, I do.”_ I replied, moments before hurling the remnants of a less than appetising lunch, off the side of our ship.


_”It's just that you look a bit green around the gills.”_ He continued with a smirk. 


We’d just met a few hours ago. I’d been airlifted to USS Orion, a sealift handling abyssal transport capsules for a classified project conducted by the United States navy.


_“I guess they failed to mention that I’m much better underwater, in submarines.”_ I shot back. 


Considering the circumstances, his casual demeanour left an uncomfortable atmosphere among the workers. They all knew what my visit entailed, but just like myself, they were scant with information. 


All I knew, was that there might be a contagious infection at the bottom of the the ocean, and my job was to either to disprove it, or to confine the entire crew aboard the station.


As soon as we were positioned securely on top of the Tonga Trench, we were rushed into the transport capsule; A minuscule, vertical submarine, designed simply to take us to the base on the ocean floor, twenty thousand feet below us: Talos.


I entered the sub, feeling excited, while also dreading the return to the deep blue. It had been ten years since serving as a hospital corpsman, one of the few actually stationed aboard a submarine. Over the years I had clearly lost the natural sense I once had for the ocean, yet I longed desperately for it.


_“Whenever you’re ready, doc.”_ One of the crew members said, impatiently waiting to drop us into the abyss.


I raised my thumb. _“As ready as I’ll ever be, go ahead.”_


__10 feet: The Twilight Zone…__


The impact with the ocean lightly shook the capsule. As we submerged, my nausea quickly diminished, and a sense of peace washed over my mind.


I was back.


Outside the window a few curious fish accompanied our journey downwards, various sea life attracted by the cargo ship, following to see us off.


James piloted the miniature sub, having done the trip a thousand times before, it wasn’t anything new to him. Myself, I’d never been below two thousand feet, and never had I been able to look through the window and admire the mostly unexplored blue world.


__3,300 feet: The Midnight Zone…__


As we sank deeper towards the abyss, the last stray rays of sunshine vanished. We had left the realm of sunshine and mankind, all in favour for the domain of darkness.


_“First time in the abyss, right?”_ James asked after a long bout of silence.


_“Yeah, served aboard a submarine for a few years, but they never go very deep, this… this is something else.”_


He smiled at me. _“Well, you’re in for a treat then, we’re going all the way down, Talos sits right at the edge of the trench, ain’t nothing quite like it.”_


Any sea life once curious about our sub had long since retreated towards brighter areas. The rapidly increasing pressure had proven hostile to most, but some resilient little creatures had found a way to thrive in places once thought to be lifeless, the miracles of the ocean.


Within an hour we had reached a depth of ten thousand feet. Beyond the fifteen inch glass pane, separating us from certain death, lied nothing but everlasting darkness. For all we knew, the two of us could have been all that existed in that void, if not for the sound of the outer hull settling under the pressure, a constant reminder about the vastness of the ocean.


To distract myself from the unsettling, creaking sound, I asked James about the only thing I could think about.


_“Why don’t you tell me more about what happened down there?”_ 


James had acted casual that far, but my question quickly changed his nonchalant expression to a frown. _“They briefed you on the surface, didn’t they?”_


_“Of course, but-“_

_“Then that’ll have to do.”_ He said firmly.


__13,100 feet: The Abyssal Zone…__


The world outside hypnotised me, staring so far into nothing, knowing there could be a full world only a couple of feet before you was bizarre, I’d never experienced true darkness until that day, and to think a good portion of Earth’s life had existed within it for millions of years, terrified me.


When I served aboard USS Catacea, my captain explained why they don’t put windows on submarines. He told stories about shipmates going crazy after years at sea, that the isolation, or distance from the mainland never bothered any of them. He firmly believed that staring into the ocean and pondering its secrets was what truly drove men from their sanity, and to combat this, they never put windows on their vessels. Though it was clearly a tale he made up, seeing what truly lies beyond the surface brought back these memories, maybe he was right after all.


My sinister thoughts were interrupted by a dim light appearing in the distance. A red dot dancing blissfully up and down, getting close to our little sub; It was a jellyfish.


_“Would you look at that.”_ James said as he pointed at the little creature, so fragile, yet defying the deep sea pressure.


Another light joined in, then a few more, and before long a symphony of pulsating, crimson lights formed around our capsule, welcoming us with the warmth of thousands of stars, making up their own little galaxy thousands of feet below the surface. 


It was the most magnificent thing I’d ever seen, a bloom of jellyfish happily existing in such hostile conditions. I couldn’t help but feel impressed.


_“They’re called Atolla Jellyfish.”_ James stated. _“They don’t usually venture this far down, but there’s something about this place that seems to attract them. I usually see a few on my journeys down here, but never anything like this.”_


I just nodded in response, too mesmerised by the sight to notice what he said, but as quickly as they had appeared, they vanished, once more leaving us in absolute darkness.


_“Listen, Doc, I’m sorry about the outburst earlier.”_ James said. 


I turned towards him, turning my back to the darkness for the first time. It made me feel vulnerable.


_“You gotta understand, this ain’t something we usually deal with, and Mike, well, I’ve known him most of my life.”_


_“I know how much this sucks, believe me. I’m just trying to get as much info as possible, for all of our sakes.”_ I said.


_“Yeah, well, there’s nothing I could tell you anyway. The airlock has been on lockdown for the past two days, and we’ve been under strict orders not to open it until you deem it safe to do so.”_


I didn’t ask any further questions. I’d dealt with contagions ever since leaving the navy, and ninety percent of the time, they were simple overreactions. 


__19,700 feet: The Ocean Basin…__


For the first time since we left the ship, the radio came to life, emitting a static sound, one that slowly took the shape of a man’s voice.


_“James, can you hear me?”_ The voice asked.


_“Loud and clear, Captain. I’ve got our man from the CDC with me as well, we’re just about ready to dock.”_


_“Great, the crew is getting impatient, we-“_ The radio started breaking up. 


_“Ah, damn, the radio is- dock at section A, don’t-“_ It shut off completely.


_“Welcome to the Abyssal Zone.”_ James said. _“The radio has been acting strange lately, imagine giving us a state of the art station, but coms from last millennium.”_


Through the window we could see a massive dome lit up by hundreds of lights. Three paths stretched from its centre, each lit up by different colours, making sectors A, B, and C.
There was something else lit up by station’s light. At first just obscured figures leaving shadows in the sand, but as we got closer I realised they were fish. Hundreds, if not thousands of dead sea creatures littering the ocean bed, their corpses mangled from the intense pressure.


_“Christ, what the hell is up with the fish?”_ I asked, horrified.


_“Same as the Atolla, something attracts them down here, they swim until their bodies break under the pressure, then they sink.”_


_“What could possibly do that?”_


_“There are a few theories, but from what we can tell, it’s a sound that we periodically hear from the trench.”_


The docking process in itself took quite some time. The outer hull had changed ever so slightly due to the high pressure, just enough so that fitting into the station proved a challenge. 


As the doors finally opened I stumbled outside the capsule, greeted by three of the crew members aboard.


_“You’re the doctor, right?”_ The oldest of them asked.


_“That’s correct.”_ I said as he reached out his hand to introduce himself.


_“The name’s Robert Lewis, I’m the captain assigned to Talos.” He said as he shook my hand. “Thank you for coming this far, I know it’s not the most pleasant journey.”_


He seemed polite enough, though clearly sleep deprived, with bloodshot eyes and greasy hair.


_“This is Jennifer Burke, one of our biologists, and that’s Henry Gale, our technician.”_ He said.


They both shook my hand, neither making eye contact as they did.


_”Hey, Cap, where's Abby?”_ James asked. 


_”Still at section B, she's not doing too well as I’m sure you can understand.”_ He responded. 


James nodded.


_”Let's talk.”_ Robert said as he gestured for me to follow. 


The hallways were narrow, dimly lit up with lights that flickered, and constant creaking emitting from the walls. It looked disproportionate considering how large it had all seemed from the outside, and as a rather tall guy, I had to crouch down to keep my head from knocking into the ceiling.


_“I’m sorry about the grim mood.”_ Robert said. _“It’s the first time we’re dealing with something like this. I’m assuming they told you about the situation, on the surface?”_ He asked.


_“They did, but I have to admit, I’m a bit fuzzy on the details.”_


_“As are we. Mike put himself in lockdown as soon as he returned to the station, and we haven’t had clearance to open it yet.”_


_“He, Mike, didn’t give any good reasons?”_ I asked.


_“He never got the chance, he fell over dead the second he hit the button.”_


Robert lead us into the central dome, in contrast to the hallways, it was a pleasant surprise; A large living space filled with furniture and personal affects, had I not known better, I could have believed we were still on the surface.


_“Mike discovered some microorganisms down in the trench, a new type of parasite he said. He claimed they were able to withstand any amount of pressure, which isn’t a surprise down here, but he also explained that they were completely unaffected by rapid changes in environment.”_ Robert said as we headed inside an office.


_“Did he believe it was contagious?”_ I asked.


_“Seeing as he was our microbiologist, I can’t really come up with another fathomable conclusion. Needless to say we destroyed all the samples, but we still don’t know why he put himself into lockdown.”_ 


Robert sighed.


_“But that’s not the strangest thing.”_


I waited patiently for him to continue, while he tried to form words he clearly had trouble believing himself.


_“We lost him down in the trench for three entire days, the tracking system failed and the coms went down. We did whatever we could, but it was futile. Even if we had found him, he only had enough oxygen for ten hours, so we unfortunately, we presumed he had died. Then, out of nowhere, his tracker reappeared on our systems, showing that he was moving back up the Tonga Elevator, and though he never responded to any of our attempts at contacting him, he was clearly alive.”_


_“How?”_


_“It’s impossible, yet it happened. Once we let him into the station, he simply locked it down and fell over dead on the ground.”_


Before Robert could continue, the technician walked into the office.

_“When you examine him, be careful not to damage the EPM suit, it’s highly-“_


_“This is hardly the time, Henry.”_ Robert commanded, glaring at him.


_“I’m just saying, this is a billion dollar project.”_


_“Why don’t you go get the equipment for our doctor here?”_ Robert demanded, getting more agitated by the minute.


_“Look, Captain, If you would just let me go into the airlock, I could take all necessary precautions.”_


_“Absolutely not. Do you think headquarters would have sent the damn CDC if they thought we could handle it? For Christ’s sake, Henry, know your limits.”_


The technician left, and quickly returned with a modified hazmat suit and some surgical supplies, we moved on towards section B. 


Unlike the hallways we had traversed before, these were large, and well lit up. As we arrived at the airlock, we found Abby standing before the glass door, staring longingly at Mike’s lifeless body.


_“Abby.”_ Robert said.


_“I know, I know, it’s time.”_ She responded as she turned around. _“Oh, you’re the doctor?”_ She asked, her eyes red and voice trembling.


I nodded.


_“You’ll figure out what did this to him, won’t you? I just don’t understand.”_


_“Abby, why don’t you come with me while they work?”_ Robert said. _“You don’t need to see this.”_


As Robert led her back to the central dome, Henry started unpacking the cart of medical supplies, including isolation drapes and the hazmat suit. 


_”Alright, I'm going to guide you through this, no need to mess up a perfectly good EPM suit.”_ Henry said. 
_“What does EPM mean anyway?”_ I asked.


_“Exoskeletal Pressure Modulator.”_ Henry said as if it was the most obvious thing in the world.


James, and Jennifer helped me seal the hazmat suit, while Henry hung up the isolation drapes. 


I stepped through, while Jennifer entered a code behind me to open the airlock, my ears popped as they sealed the door shut behind me. Both the drapes and airlock were transparent, meaning they could observe everything I did, in addition to a mounted camera on my shoulder for closer view, displayed on a monitor on the other side. 


Just by the control panel, Mike lied dead, wearing a massive, black suit, looking more like an robotic piece of machinery,  than divers gear. 


There were several cables and hooks hanging from the ceiling, and just turning him over was a massive task, as he weighed about half a ton wearing the suit.


His face was pale as sheet, with thin streaks of blood pouring from every available orifice. The eyes were red from conjunctival bleeding, completely ridding them from any white.


_”I'm ready.”_ I said.

_“Alright, the first thing you’ll need to do, is to simply inspect the suit. Look for any breaches in the integrity. It shouldn’t be possible, but in the unlikely event that something broke through, a self healing mesh should have formed, it looks kind of gray.”_


I looked over every inch of his suit, from top to bottom. 


_“There, his feet!”_ Henry yelled. 


Sure enough, there was a patch of gray that stood out from the matt black metal covering the rest of him.


_“Something actually perforated his suit.”_ Henry said, surprised.


I got closer, giving them a better view on the monitor.


_“Clearly the puncture wasn’t what killed him though.”_ He added


I had to agree with that assessment, any breach not sealed off within a nanosecond would immediately crush him, but it seemed that the mesh had replaced whatever penetrated the suit at the same time as it was removed.

_“Next, attach the cables to his shoulder, they are colour coded, so it should be easy enough.”_


I attached the cables as instructed, which caused the suit to light up and start unhinging. The front of the suit opened up, revealing Mike’s completely mangled body.


_“What the hell?”_ James asked.


_“That’s not pressure damage.”_ Henry responded.


Mike’s ribs were broken outwards, though they had not torn apart his flesh, his chest seemed to have expanded to almost twice its normal size. 


I continued to remove the helmet, pulling it off his head. I looked into his eyes for a brief moment, baffled as to what could have caused his internal organs to essentially explode. For the briefest of moments, it seemed like his eyes moved to meet my gaze.


_“Did you just see that?”_ I asked.


No one said a word, we all just stared at Mike, waiting for something to happen. His eyes moved again, darting in random directions as he started gargling, violently contracting his chest.


_“Oh God, he’s still alive?”_ Jennifer asked. 


He opened his mouth, letting thousands of massive worms pour out onto the floor, they immediately crawled in every direction, up the walls onto the ceiling, desperately searching for a way out. Mike continued to spew out more slimy worms.


His mouth tore open in the process, leaving his jaw completely unhinged before falling off. Once all the worms seemed to have exited his corpse, his chest tore open, revealing even larger worms. It quickly became apparent that all of his organs had been consumed, replaced with the disgusting creatures. 


Some of them started clinging to my suit as I swatted at them in panic, none of the others knew what to do, they could only stare at me flailing around. 


As the worms touched each other, their flesh temporarily fused, forming longer versions of themselves, growing in size and then breaking off again. They wrapped around my arms and legs, I begged for someone to help me, but what could they do. 

_“Hang in there!”_ Henry yelled as he fumbled with the panel for the airlock. 


Within seconds, a few small taps emerged from the ceiling, spewing what I could only assume was liquid nitrogen. Whatever it was, the worms froze in place, freezing to the point where I could break them into tiny pieces.


It only took a moment, but all the worms had been killed off, and though my suit had partially protected me from the cold, I collapsed exhausted and shivering onto the ground.


_“Get me the fuck out of here.”_ I demanded, knowing fully well they couldn’t do that until I had dealt with the infestation.


Robert had just returned in time to see what the commotion was about, and upon seeing what remained of Mike lying torn to pieces on the ground he stopped in his tracks.


After a minute of catching my breath I got some sense back. With some morbid sense of humour, and functioning on autopilot, I turned towards Henry.


_“Sorry, but the suit isn’t going to be salvaged, we’re ejecting the whole fucking airlock as soon as I get out of here.”_


Henry turned to Robert, pleading for him to make me reconsider, despite what we had all just witnessed, but Robert took my side.


After removing the recording unit from the EPM suit, I packed the entire thing into an easily ejectable container, while making sure that no worms remained on my suit. All I took was a small sample of a frozen worm, packed into a vacuum container.


I exited the airlock, and handed the sample over to Jennifer, she had prepared the previous parasites brought back by Mike, and I told her to get everything ready so I could determine what we were dealing with.


Robert started the procedure of ejecting the airlock’s content, including what remained of Mike and the EPM suit, Henry pouting the whole time.


James hadn’t moved an inch since the event. He’d turned sickly pale, as if he just realised the severity of the situation. 


_“We have to tell him, Captain.”_ He said quietly after a few minutes.


_“Tell me what?”_ I asked while getting out of the hazmat suit.


Robert took a deep breath, mulling over his options. _“You’re right.”_


_“Tell me what?”_ I repeated.


_[“The real reason why we’re stationed down here.”](https://www.facebook.com/richard.saxon.author)_Grandad’s nighttime visits started when I was 13 years old.

This was a few years ago now, but it only stopped fairly recently. And I still remember the first time it happened.

It was the middle of the school holidays, and my mum was ill. Mum being ill wasn’t something that bothered me too much at the time — it was a pretty common occurrence, something I was even used to by then. Every month it would happen the same way: dad would come to my room and tell me mum wasn’t feeling so good, and that she’d have to go away for a while until she felt better. Then he’d drive off with her in his car, and collect her a few days later. I never knew where she went. Never knew what was wrong with her, either — sometimes she’d come home with scratches up her arms, but apart from that I never saw any other symptoms.

When dad went off to collect her I’d wait by the door for them to come back. I’d wait for her to reappear and scoop me up into her arms.

"I missed you, cubby," she’d always say, planting kisses over my face. "I love you so, so much."

My name’s James, but as long as I can remember mum’s called me cubby. It’s her nickname for me.

Every month, the same routine. Mum getting ill, going away for a bit, then coming back as if nothing was wrong. But the summer I turned 13, things changed. The routine changed. Because that was the first time I started going to stay at grandad's.

My grandad’s a large man with a white beard and a shaved head. He’s from Sheffield originally, and he still has this deep, gruff northern accent. Communicates mainly in grunts. Lives on his own on the edge of the New Forest, in an old ramshackle cottage. We hardly ever saw him when I was little, and when we did I always dreaded the visits. He scared me.

I wasn’t scared of him by the time I was 13, though. Or at least that’s what I told myself. No — the reason I protested when dad told me I’d be staying with grandad this time while mum got better was because I didn’t want to leave the house. I wanted to stay near my friends. The kids I knew in the village would be out climbing trees and going on bike rides. If I was cooped up in grandad’s cottage I’d be missing out.

Dad was having none of it, though. He wouldn’t give me a reason why I had to go, or respond to my protests. Just told me it would be good for me to spend time with grandad. Then he bundled me into the car and we left.

45 minutes later I was standing on the doorstep of grandad’s cottage, raising my hand to knock. Dad had already driven off. I was trying to tell myself I wasn’t a little kid anymore, and there was nothing to be scared of — but as the cottage door creaked open and grandad’s large shadow fell over me, I couldn’t stop my heart from beating a little harder in chest.

\*

Grandad’s cottage was old. The ceilings were low and the furniture was minimal. The carpets were moth-eaten, ancient things that seemed to kick up tiny clouds of dust whenever you put a foot on them. The bathroom had black mould rising up the wallpaper. The paper itself was damp and flaking, and had peeled away to the stone in some areas. Entering the room felt like stepping into a cave.

My bedroom wasn’t much better. It was right at the back of the house, and it had only three pieces of furniture: an oak chest of draws, a dilapidated wardrobe, and a single bed in the corner. I remember my heart sinking the minute I set eyes on it.

Oddly, even though I can picture grandad’s house clearly enough, I don’t remember much about how I spent my days there. Especially during that first visit. I think we mainly kept out of each other’s way. Grandad would be in the lounge watching TV or reading, and I’d be in my room on my phone. Making the most of the one bar of 4G I could find in the cottage. I can’t remember if we spoke to each other much, or what we said if we did. Mostly it’s a blur.

What I do remember are the nights. The first night in particular. I told grandad I was tired, and that I was going to head to bed early. He grunted something in response. Then I spent a bit of time in my room on Snapchat and YouTube — the videos taking painfully long to load — before heading to sleep.

I woke some time in the night. The cottage was silent around me. I could hear the leaves of the birch tree rustling in the wind in the back garden, but that was all. Moonlight spilled through a gap in the curtains. I leaned over to check my phone and saw that the time was a little after 2am. 

For some reason I felt wide awake. My heart was beating hard in my chest and a film of sweat coated my forehead. As if I'd woken suddenly from a nightmare. But if I had, I couldn't remember it.

I tried to relax. Tried to lie back and let sleep wash over me again. But in grandad's cottage, relaxing wasn't an easy thing to do. At first I'd only been able to hear the tree outside the window, but as I lay there on the pillow, staring into the darkness, I began to hear other noises, too. The soft creak of a floorboard. Faint taps. A distant rattling, which I assumed had to be pipes in the wall. And other sounds, as well. Sounds I found it harder to place. At one point I heard something that sounded like a faint snuffling noise, coming from the back garden. Some kind of animal. But when I sat up in bed and strained my ears, all I could hear was the wind.

*Get a fucking grip*, I told myself. *You're 13 years old. Not a little kid anymore.*

It was easier said than done, but I managed it eventually. I don't know how long I lay in the dark for, but after a while tiredness finally got the better of me. My mind began to settle. I felt myself slowly drifting off...

Only to jerk suddenly awake again when I heard a noise outside my room. A soft, deliberate creak. Loud and clear in the darkness. I turned over in bed, trying not to make a sound. My heart hammered in my chest. I pulled the covers down from my face slightly, positioning myself so I could peek over them. So I could see the bedroom door. And as I stared at it, feeling like I was five years old again, I saw the handle begin to turn.

I squinted my eyes shut. I don't know what thought was going through my mind, but right then I reverted to an age-old tactic: pretending to be asleep. Playing dead. I could still see through a crack in my eyelids, but now the room was blurry as well as dark. I lay as still as possible, trying to keep my breathing normal. For a few seconds, nothing happened. There were no more sounds. And then, just as I was beginning to think I might have imagined it after all, the door swung inwards.

Grandad stood in the frame. I couldn't make out his face, but I recognised his towering bulk. He was standing completely still, filling the doorway top to bottom. Breathing heavily in the silence.

*He's just checking on you*, I told myself. *He's come to check that you're okay, that's all*.

But even as the thought went through my head, I saw something that made my blood turn cold. I saw something that made me suck in a sharp breathe and tense my entire body below the covers.

The shape of grandad's head was wrong. It was all wrong. Even in the blurry shadows, the wrongness was unmistakable. His silhouette bulged out in strange places, bulking out around the lower half of his face in a way I couldn't understand. I opened my eyes another fraction of an inch, unable to help myself. And what I saw did nothing to quiet the fear swirling in my chest.

Grandad was wearing a mask. A black mask. It covered the lower half of his face, allowing space at the top for his eyes to peer over at me. The mask covered his mouth and noise, with multiple straps on each side stretching around his cheeks to the back of his head. It looked like one of those pollution masks people sometimes wore in big cities.

I snapped my eyes fully shut. Forced myself to breathe in, then out, then in again. Nice and slow. I kept my ears strained for the sound of grandad's feet on my bedroom floor, but it never came.

After a while later I heard the soft squeak of the door shutting, and his footsteps receding down the hall.

\*

We never spoke about him coming into my room. I never mentioned it to grandad, and he never said anything about it to me. I never told anyone else, either. I thought about telling mum or dad after that first visit, but in the end I kept quiet. Partly because I was so happy to be home again, I think, but mostly because the memory had taken on a strange quality by that point -- it was like an old, half-forgotten nightmare. I could still picture it, but the fear I'd felt at the time had faded. It was as though the whole thing had happened to someone else.

The feeling didn't last, though. Next month mum got ill again, and I was packed back off to grandad's cottage. I protested harder that time, but dad still wouldn't bend. He just told me to stop being selfish, and to give my mum some space so she could get better. Wouldn't look at me as he said it.

And once again, when I stayed at grandad's cottage, he came to my room. Stood in the shadows of the doorway. The same black mask on his face. He never touched me or anything -- I don't want you to think that. This isn't that kind of story. He simply stood on the threshold of my room, on the edge of the moonlight. Staring in at me. Then after a while, he'd leave again.

The ritual happened every time I visited. It's been happening each month for the past three years. And it was only yesterday that I finally learned the truth. Only yesterday when all the pieces clicked into place at last.

Around my sixteenth birthday, I began to get ill. Weak and tired, with no energy. Hungry all the time. I got this prickly rash on my body, too, and my muscles and bones constantly seemed to ache. It was summer, so there was no school, and I stayed in bed all day. Falling in and out of a broken sleep. Dreaming.

The dreams were vivid, and strange. In them it was nighttime, and I was running. Sprinting through the woods as fast as I could. Faster than I'd ever gone before in my life. The moon hung overhead in a purple-black sky, framing me like a spotlight. And at the end of each dream, I'd stumble out into a clearing. I'd see grandad's cottage. And just as his front door began to creak open, I'd wake up in a cold sweat.

Yesterday evening, dad visited me in my room. Came and sat beside my bed. He told me that mum was ill, too, and that he'd have to take her away for a few days. Told me to get lots of rest. But when I asked him what time he'd be coming home, he told me he wouldn't. Not for a few days, anyway. He said he'd be back when mum was better, and in the meantime grandad was going to come round and look after me.

That was when I finally lost it. I was too ill to get properly angry at him, but I did my best. Screamed and yelled. Told him I didn't fucking want grandad to come and stay with me, I wanted him and mum. Accused him of abandoning me. Said I hated him.

He just sat on the chair beside my bed and took it. Listened to me without saying anything. The guy looked more tired and old in that moment than I'd ever seen him look before in my life. And when I was finally finished -- when my throat was so raw I couldn't yell anymore -- he said something to me. Something that started a conversation I'll never forget.

"I know you don't understand why I'm doing this right now, but you will, soon. Grandad will explain everything."

I sighed and lay back against my pillow, exhausted. "I don't fucking *want* grandad to explain anything, dad. I want you here."

"I know you do, James. But I can't stay here. Not right now. It's not safe for me."

I opened my eyes fully and stared at him, suddenly alarmed. "What do you mean it's not safe? Am I contagious or something?"

"No, no." He shook his head. "It's nothing like that. It's just that I... at certain times of the month, I have to..." He sighed again and looked back down at me. Shook his head once more. "It really is best if your grandfather explains all this, James. Your mother can help, too, when she's back. I might know more about it than most, but I don't really *know*. Not like them."

I had the urge, almost overwhelming, to reach out and shake him. I didn't understand anything he was saying. "What do they need to explain?" I said. "Can you please just tell me what the fuck's going on?"

My dad sighed again. He stood up and walked over to my bedroom window, then peered out through the curtains. "Big moon up there tonight," he said after a moment. "Not even dark out and I can already see it." He stared through the glass for a while, then turned back again. Turned to face me.

"James, you know how your mum gets poorly each month?" he said. "How she has to go away for a while until she's better?"

I nodded. Of course I knew.

"Okay, well... the reason she has to go away is because she has this... this rare condition. It only flares up every once in a while, and it's easy enough to predict when it's going to happen. But that's the *only* thing about it you can predict. At her age, they can get... well, your mother finds it hard to... to do certain things, I suppose. She finds it hard to act in a certain way."

"What condition does she have?"

"Your grandad will explain that better than me."

"Why will *he* explain? Why can't you just fucking tell me?"

"Because he has it, too."

"I don't understand why you can't--" I paused, suddenly processing what my dad had just said. "Wait, did you say grandad has it?"

Dad nodded. After a moment he sat down on the end of my bed. Ran a hand through his hair. "It's genetic, James. Grandad has it, and your mum has it. And you have it, as well."

I stared at him, unsure I'd heard him correctly. "I... I have..."

"Yes, you do. It's not a bad condition, exactly, but it's something that has to be managed carefully. Your grandad has lived with it for a long time, and he knows all about it. He'll be able to help you."

Blood was pounding in my ears. Thoughts and memories were suddenly pressing at the edges of my mind like angry dogs. I pushed them away and focussed on dad.

"Is that why you started sending me to his house every month? So I got to know him better? So he could fucking *help me* with whatever the fuck this is I've got?"

Dad stared at me with sadness in his eyes. "It wasn't my idea," he said after a moment. "Your mother said it was best. Grandad agreed with her. When you're coming of age, it's good if you can spend time with older ones of their... well, like I said, your grandad can explain it."

I bit back another urge to scream at him. I still didn't really understand what the hell he was talking about. Or at least, the main part of my mind didn't understand. At the same time, though... *something* was starting to nag at me. Images and memories circled the outskirts of my brain, just out of sight. Monsters around a campfire. I swallowed.

"You said it wasn't safe for you," I said after a moment. "When mum gets ill. You said you can't be around her."

Dad paused, then nodded his head.

"And what about grandad? Are you safe around him?"

Dad opened his mouth, then closed it again. He frowned. "Your grandfather's better at... dealing with his symptoms," he said eventually. "He's had longer to get used to them than your mother has. But... no, I still wouldn't be safe. Not completely."

"So why was *I* safe?" I exploded. "Why did you ship me off to stay with him every month?! Is that why I've caught this fucking thing?"

"No, no! I told you, it's genetic. You were born with it. And besides, your grandfather would never hurt you. We took extra precautions on the worst nights, too, I insisted on it. We made sure you'd never..."

But my dad's voice was suddenly growing distant. The things circling my mind had grown close enough for me to see them at last. They came out of the shadows and were lit up by the flames. Exposed. A barrage of images and memories flew though my head in a blur...

I remembered the times mum had come home with scratches up her arms.

I remembered the dream I'd had where I was running through the woods.

I remembered grandad, standing in my bedroom doorway in the cottage. The black mask covering his face.

And in that moment, I realised something I'd never understood before. Something that filled me with a sickening combination of terror and excitement.

The thing on grandad's face hadn't been a mask after all.

[It was a muzzle](https://www.reddit.com/r/samhaysom/).

\*\*\*

[Part Two](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/ctfv20/my_grandad_used_to_come_to_my_room_at_night/)You all need to stop posting. Right now.

It probably won't take long for this to get deleted, but maybe enough people will see it to make a difference. It's the only thing I can think to do. I've discovered something terrible about /r/nosleep and everyone needs to know. Everyone. So you understand any of this, I need to tell you what I've been through the last few days, so you really get it. It needs to sink in. If no one believes me because they don't understand, everything's going to fall apart real fast.

Okay, first some general principles. Every emotion generates a specific electrical signature in the brain. It's so specific that a specialist can reliably determine your emotional state from evaluating live measurements. Electricity creates fields. In the case of our brain activity, the field effect generated by our emotions is so weak it's never been observed, but by the numbers, it's there. Okay, that's one knowledge nugget you need to swallow, here's the next. 

Our Universe - our reality - is ours alone. The reality we all share together is a comfortable agreement, though not objectively the same, and it's reasonable to assume most life in our reality is happy with that arrangement. In fact, evolution has probably  built most life to be that way. Our Universe, our reality isn't the only one though. There are an infinite number that sort of grow outward from our own with decreasing levels of relative probability. What that means is that likely alternate realities are pretty close by, and unlikely ones are way "further" away. If probability were distance. I hope that makes sense. But the real weird part is all that is just a tendency. Some real weird probabilities are actually right next to us, because there are infinite probabilities. And the likelihood gradient I mentioned is only the tendency. It's hard to wrap your head around, I know. It gets easier with practice though.

I'm telling you all this, because there's a really bad reality nudged up right next to ours right now, and some of the things in it are leaking through. One of those things is our mods. It runs all the accounts. It, like us, has emotions and they generate a field - a positronic field, not electrical. Somehow their matter is inverted to ours, which is why I'm trying to get the message out. They're addicts. When we're afraid - when we read our posts and get that chill up our spines - to them it's pure Ecstasy. And their joy? It feeds back to us as terror. There's no sense of shared place or time between our realities, so all fear, everywhere feeds their joy - and their elation pours into our world as a general growing anxiety. People do terrible, horrible things when they're afraid. They make bad choices for the wrong reasons. They destroy things and feel justified. You've seen it. You know what I'm describing. It's been getting worse and worse over recent years too. That's because they're addicted to our fear. They know it now, and they've somehow managed to send agents to our reality to encourage our fear. 

That's how /r/nosleep came to be. The "mods" are all under the pull of a single entity, and it encourages us at every opportunity to embrace and deploy as much discomfort as we can. Please. Please believe me, and do the right thing. It's time to share your personal stories of hope, and sour the milk for them. No more terrifying recollections, it only makes them stronger. Alright, let me tell you what happened to me.

The other day, I posted about something on here, and it got a few dozen upvotes. Not the best visibility, but way more eyes than my worst. I was in a good mood. I thought by sharing terrible events that happened to me, I was making people safer. Apparently though, some readers got uncomfortable about one of the situations I described. They contacted me, and told me they would report me to the mods. I didn't understand why, and I got scared. I love posting here, it's been helping me get through some tough times. A kind of therapy for the things I've seen in my life. Soon after, I got a PM from a mod, she conveyed her gratitude to me for sharing my experiences, but that one Redditor had been incredibly upset. I kept reading her PM, expecting an explanation for an incoming ban, when the next paragraph I read set off all kinds of red flags.

"We don't mind though. Nosleep runs on fear, and if you're good at causing it, then by all means keep at it. We know what the rules say, but it's more important that people see them and less so that they follow them. So please, keep writing - and if you need some inspiration, check out this video: [Link Redacted]. Byeeeeee."

Most mods on most forums seemed irritatingly strict about following the sidebar rules, so I was pretty confused by her statement. Then, without thinking, I clicked the link. I've not included it here because you really don't need to see it. You need to know about it though. The link was to some numbered IP, which is probably something I should have checked before clicking - oops. It was a big GIF that took almost a minute to load. When it did appear, it was high definition one, like something from /r/highqualitygifs. I thought it was bugged though, because when it loaded, it was just noise. Like old school TV noise. At first I just waited for a few seconds, to see if it got past the corrupted part to something visible, but it didn't. Instead the noise started to make sense, visually. Like one of those stereograms from the 90's. An inverted image began to form, and what I saw was nearly indescribable. Everything in the GIF I watched was ... backwards. I'm not saying that the video was flipped, or upside down - I mean the stuff in the actual imagery was backwards - inverted, inside out, the opposite of what it was supposed to be. I don't remember all of it. I barely remember any of it. Grass grew downwards and had a strange, unknowable color. Birds didn't fly. They were glistening sacks of meat and bone with bodies filled with feathers, and they dug warrens in the air. It makes no sense, I know. The sun in their sky was a black void that radiated darkness. Even my description falls short of the mark. Everything was they absolutely wrong, and it was this wrongness that broke me. I had a horrible panic attack that lasted most of the day, and it got so bad I had to take time off work. It's only now, after a week of trying to calm down, that I'm able to even write about it. 

I wanted to forget it, but today I got another PM from a mod that said, "Delicious. Click this next: [Link Redacted]."

I closed the browser immediately.

I don't know much about computers, so I asked my brother about the IP and if it could tell me anything about who posted the GIF (No, I didn't send him the link). He said it sure was, but that the likelihood of a file being hosted on a computer in someone's house was remote, and that it was way more likely to be on a box at a hosting facility somewhere. He looked up the IP anyway, and immediately got interested. It was coming from an old particle accelerator facility buried a few hundred miles east of the Cheyenne mountains. The company that owned it closed it down almost a decade ago due to bankruptcy. My brother is kind of a science buff and just knows shit like this. He pulled some records from some lookup site, and found out that an LLC had bought the land just afterwards. Then had done nothing with it. No construction. No sales. On the business registration document, there was a phone number. He gave it to me and asked me to let him know what I found. 

I called the number, but got no answer.

Almost instantly another PM appeared in my inbox from a different mod, "Never call this number again."

At this point, I'm aware something really gnarly is happening. I call my brother back, and we start talking about things. I finally show him the video, and he only watches a few moments of it before switching it off. He says he's seen something like it before. Then he links me to some fringe science websites, and I give him a hard time because usually, usually that stuff is just for wackos. But this time one of the articles describes everything I wrote above. There's a link to a video the author generated using some kind of algorithm or something. Some math equation for complete inversion. He took a video of a treasured family vacation, and ran it through the filter. Apparently the output was so unsettling, it ruined his life. He couldn't be with his family anymore, or do his work, or focus on anything but memories of the filtered video. A few years later, the poor guy apparently killed himself because he couldn't deal with what he saw (which makes me real nervous when my brother tells me).

Then the whole science blog site goes down, and another PM appears in my inbox. This time from a different mod, "What did we tell you?"

Ever since then, my phone has been getting texts non-stop with video links, my email is blowing up, and I can't even glance at my inbox anymore. I feel like it's only a matter of time until I accidentally see one of these videos again, and it sends me over the edge. Before that happens, I wanted to let you all know about this threat. That it's here, it's real, and it could be in your inbox right now.

Sorry for any typos, I'm in a hurry. I'm headed out to a family cabin to try and isolate myself until this blows over. Be careful, and if you do decide to post, write about joy and happiness instead. Give them something to cry about. Good luck, stay safe.

---

**Edit:** Hey everyone. Sorry. I just wanted to apologize for this post. I'll leave it up as a reminder to us all not to let anxiety rule our lives and dictate our actions. I was totally off my shit. Sorry about that. I finally got tired of my phone ringing, so I dried it off and answered it. Boy, am I glad I did. I've been happily chatting with the kind and empathetic mods over at NoSleep for the last twenty minutes. They sent me a PM and invited me to their Discord channel, and it's been a real blast. We've been sharing funny links, keeping it light, and they've showed me some things. 

Some wonderful things.

I'm not going to share it all here. I'll wait a few days and talk about it all in a new post. The mods have really helped change my perspective on a bunch of things, and I feel refreshed and energized in a way I've never felt before. The fear that used to rule me almost feels like a secret superpower now. It's so exciting!

I can't wait to show you.

***

[I had more to say.](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/e8zpm5/you_need_to_stop_reading_right_now/?) 

Okay, let’s be up front about this. Yes. I’m a porn star. No, I’m not open to DM’s. No, I’m not including pics or my actual stage name. I’m pretty small time although I’m sure some of you have heard of me, and I don’t want this to damage anyone's professional reputation. I don’t want to piss off the wrong people. I think the reasons will become pretty clear in a bit. 

I don’t think anyone really cares about my biography, but let me just say that I’ve been doing this for a couple of years and for the most part, I like what I do. Like any job, it’s got its ups and downs (lots of them) but I still end up having fun most of the time. There’s a lot of good people in the porn industry, and even after this I stand by that. But with what happened recently… I don’t think I can work again. 

The shoot was a pretty normal gig. It was a scene for a smaller website I’d never heard of before. But they paid so I was fine with it. Admittedly, the pay was a little light, but money is money, right? Besides, the director told me that my role was going to be a little less Porn and a little more Actress, which I was fine with.

I know no one watches porn for the story, but the scene had a simple and kinda generic setup. 

I was supposed to be having a sleepover with the actual leading lady of the shoot. She was a better known actress than me, and I was honestly kind of excited to get to meet her. I won’t drop her name here, so let’s just call her Pepper Petite. If you’re smart you can figure it out. 

My ‘Dad’ would be played by a dude named Kevin Cawk. I’m sure by now you know where this is going. Kevin would come in, flirt with Pepper and they’d fuck on the bed while I pretended to sleep soundly. Not exactly standard, but I was just happy for the easy money. Who wouldn’t be?

On the day of the shoot, I got ready and drove to the set. It was an upscale looking mansion that the director had rented for the week. I figured he’d probably been shooting almost constantly since he’d rented the place. It was clean, as most sets were and there wasn’t much of a crew there. Just the director, a couple of camera guys and a boom operator. 

I’d never actually worked with this director before. His name was Jackson Masters. I got the feeling it wasn’t a stage name. Jackson didn’t give me any odd vibes. He seemed friendly when he greeted me at the door, offering me a beer from the stash he kept in the fridge. I accepted, because I figured it would be easier to pretend to sleep if I was a little buzzed.

  “So glad you could make it out today!” He said with a warm smile, as if we were at some summer beach party as opposed to a porn shoot. 

  “Oh, well it’s my pleasure.” I said, “I’ve heard really great things about you and when I saw it was you, I thought it would be a lot of fun.”

All complete bullshit. But he didn’t need to know that. Why not make the connection, right? Especially if it might lead to more work in the future.

He actually blushed when I said that and took a sip of his beer.

  “Ah, well. Y’know. I’m just starting out. Hey, we should go meet the rest of the cast! They’re right upstairs!”

He gestured for me to follow and led me up to the bedroom where the other two actors were talking. Pepper Petite lived up to her name in person. I know her entire gimmick was being very petite, but damn. She was really tiny. Her infectious smile widened a little when she saw me enter the room. I wasn’t sure if it was genuine or not. She got up to greet me and exchange introductions. I’ll admit, I was a little awkward about it. 

  “Nice to meet you.” I said, “I’m a huge fan!”

What a great way to ruin an introduction. Good job me. Pepper didn’t seem offended though. She just laughed and tossed her golden hair back. 

  “Really? I’m so glad! I saw some of your work too y’know. You’re really great! I’m glad you get to join us today!” Her smile widened, “Maybe we can do another scene together sometime… I was a little disappointed when I heard it was just me and Kevin.

My heart fluttered a little at that. Pepper was attractive, but that wasn’t what got to me. It was the idea of working with someone I truly admired. Now that was something interesting!

  “By the way, let me introduce you to Kevin…” Pepper said, taking my hand gently. She led me towards the man in question. 

Kevin Cawk was just about what I expected. I don’t think I even need to describe him. He looked like someone who’d call himself Kevin Cawk. 30s, tanned, lean and with the general short cropped male haircut. I had a feeling I’d forget he even existed when I left that house later.

Pepper and I did a few run throughs of our scenes together, although none of it went really well. I was kinda impressed by her as an actress. Obviously, she wasn’t quite in Hollywood league, but she seemed so full of energy.

  “I’ve really been looking forward to this all week.” She said, “We’re going to have so much fun together!” She didn’t even look at the script, not that there was much of a script. 

A finger brushed against her lips. She sucked on it seductively.

  “Will… your Dad be home?”

  “I think he’ll be in his office. So he won’t bother us too much.” I replied. My lines felt stilted. At least we weren’t filming. 

  “Oh.” Pepper sounded genuinely disappointed. She put on an exaggerated pout, “Well, hopefully he’ll at least come to say goodnight to us!”

God that writing was cringeworthy. Not even Pepper could have saved it. 

We did a few more run throughs before Jackson actually started filming. He only did a few takes. This wasn’t what people would be paying the very fine porn site to see after all. 

The next shot was to be us getting into bed and going to sleep. My time to shine! Pepper went to get a bottle of water before the actual fun began, while I had another beer.

  “Quick note before we start.” Jackson said, going up to me. I was halfway through my bottle.

  “We’re going to be moving the camera around a lot. I just want to make sure I’m reminding you. No matter what, don’t open your eyes. You’ve got to sleep through the entire shoot.”

I nodded.

  “Yeah, sure thing.” I said. Jacksons smile faded.

  “No matter what. Don’t open your eyes.” He repeated, “Promise?”

I nodded.

  “I promise. I’ll keep my eyes closed until you tell me to open them.”

He seemed satisfied with that and let me finish my beer in peace. Pepper came back with her bottle of water and finished it off halfway before leaving it on a table out of the shot. I put my beer beside it.

  “Ready to get paid?” I teased her. Pepper giggled.

  “Always.”

  “We’re going live!” Jackson said, and Pepper and I got into our positions. Jackson counted down and the scene began. 

Pepper and I both climbed into bed. I pulled the duvet over me. I could feel her tiny body beside me, almost dwarfed by me.

  “Goodnight Pepper.” I said.

  “Goodnight!” She replied, chipper as always. Although the lights were still on, we both mimed sleep. I kept my eyes closed tight, but listened intently, knowing what was about to come. 

I heard Kevin’s footsteps outside the bed, and listened as he sat down on it. I felt his weight on Pepper’s side of the bed.

  “Mr. Smith, what are you doing?” Pepper asked with flirtatious indignancy. 

  “It’s alright. I just wanted to say goodnight.” Kevin crooned, “After all, when my little girl brings my favorite one of her friends over, I’ve got to say hi, right?”

  “Oh Mr. Smith!” Pepper giggled. “You’re so nice!”

  “Yeah? You wanna be nice to me baby?”

  “Oh yes Mr. Smith!”

And that was when the kissing started.

I lay there listening as the two made out, and let my mind wander. This bed was awfully comfortable. I liked the duvet too. It was really warm. I might actually have dozed off!

I heard the shuffling of Kevin’s belt buckle and the wet sounds of work being done. It was all things I’d heard before. Nothing special. I was busy thinking about how much I liked the pillows and focusing on not opening my eyes.

When the first satisfied moan escaped Pepper, I shifted a little to make room as the two bodies lay down on the bed beside me.

  “Oh Mr. Smith, what if we wake her up?” Pepper asked.

  “She sleeps like a rock. It’ll be fine.” Kevin assured her. Sure enough, the term ‘rock’ was associated with what was happening in that bed. But it wasn’t in relation to my fake sleeping. 

Pepper moaned and swore under her breath as they did their job. I could hear his breathy dirty talk.

  “You’re such a bad girl. You’re a dirty slut. I love how dirty of a slut you are.”

Real original. 

For fun, I took everything I heard as out of context as possible and made up silly scenarios in my head as I feigned sleep. Everything seemed to be going according to plan and I’d likely be done in about 45 minutes or so.

Then I heard the first cry of pain.

  “Owch!” It was from Kevin surprisingly, “Not so hard!”

Pepper giggled.  
   “Sorry.” I could hear her smile in her voice. Kevin cried out again.

  “Ow! No… What are you… No… No, NO!”

His word was broken down into a long, drawn out and horrified scream. The change was so sudden that it made me physically jolt. I almost got up and looked over my shoulder to see what was happening. But Jackson’s words stuck with me.

*No matter what happens. Don’t open your eyes.*

Was this supposed to be part of the shoot? I could feel Kevin thrashing on the bed. Squirming and writhing as if he was trying to fight off Pepper. That shouldn’t have been difficult though. She was less than half his weight! Why was he struggling?

I heard nothing from Jackson or the crew… Just silence. Were they still filming? They had to be.

I curled into a tighter ball and kept quiet, letting everything unfold behind me.

Kevin's screams reached an awful, ear splitting crescendo before they ended abruptly. I heard a low gurgling sound escape him before all movement ceased. Then I heard a wet, tearing noise. Just that sound sent shivers down my spine. I wanted to look, but I told myself not to. Jackson was still filming! This had to be part of the film! This was just some sort of fetish porn. That made sense, right? I didn’t know much about the company, so it only made sense they were making some niche shit! I should’ve asked more questions. This was my fault.

The tearing sound came again and just the awful wetness of it made me want to vomit. I remained still, keeping my eyes closed and pressing my hands over my mouth.

The world around me was silent save for the tearing of flesh and… chewing… That had to be it, chewing! I heard it clearly now. Was… was something eating Kevin? Where were Jackson and the crew.  
I almost opened my eyes, but thought better of it. What if what was behind me was something I didn’t want to see? 

Slowly, my reluctance to open my eyes turned from professionalism to fear. I don’t know how long I lay there, listening to that sickening tearing and chewing… but it felt like it went on for hours.

Then I felt the weight on the bed shift. I felt something climbing on top of me. Pepper?

I could feel her lips close to my ear. I could smell her rancid hot breath and feel the blood and saliva dripping from her mouth. Her breathing was heavy and feral. I kept my eyes closed.

Pepper seemed bigger than I remembered. Her arms were over my head. Her legs were down past where my legs were. Maybe it was because I was curled up, but she seemed longer and spindly. My eyes remained closed tight. Whatever horror I imagined was standing over me, I only wanted to imagine it. In my heart, I knew that seeing it would only make things worse.

Pepper continued to stand over me, still letting her heavy, rancid breath wash over me. The silence ticked by. She didn’t move.

Then, at last I felt her weight shift. I heard her bodyweight against the floor as she left me there. I heard her footsteps going further and further into the house as I lay there, feigning sleep, too afraid to open my eyes out of fear of what I’d see.

The Police found me in that bed, curled into a ball and shaking, my face wet with tears. When I felt the Officers hand on my shoulder, I cried out and curled up tighter.

  “NO!”  
   “Shit… We’ve got a live one!” The Cop called. I heard other movement, and felt hands on me, easing me up out of the bed. My eyes remained closed. 

  “Honey, are you okay?” A man asked me. I shook my head. I still didn’t want to open my eyes.

  “No… No, please get me out of here…” I whispered. He did as I asked. I never actually saw the state the bedroom was in. I’m glad I didn’t.

Down at the station, the Police asked their questions. I told them the same story I’ve told here. They showed me the pictures of the ‘crime scene’.

Oh God.

Body parts all around. Pieces of meat. Blood coating the floor… I don’t know what happened. I don’t want to ever know, because I already know too much.

I know that all the bodies found in that room belonged to men. There was no sign of Pepper Petite. There was no evidence that she’d ever been there. I told the Police that I may have been mistaken. I don’t know if they’ve tried to reach out to her. I haven't seen anything in the news. I don’t care either.

I don’t think I’m ever working in the porn industry again.I was sitting at the nurse’s station, reading trashy tabloids and drinking coffee when Olga -- the other nurse on duty -- poked my arm.

“The little girl escaped,” she said, with a giggle.

“What?”

She pointed to the security camera feed.

Little Madeline was standing in the hallway, her image grainy and pixelated.

We’d admitted Madeline at 8:23 PM. A little girl, no more than six. Her face covered in blood. She’d taken a nasty fall down the stairs. Dr. Thompson was worried she might develop a subdural hematoma, so we were keeping her for overnight.

“Ugh, no. She shouldn’t be up.” I paused, leaning towards the monitor. “And where’d she get those clothes?”

She wasn’t wearing the hospital gown we’d put her to bed in. No -- she was wearing a black dress, white stockings, and shiny black shoes. As if she were all dressed up for church. Or a funeral.

And she kept whipping her head back and forth. As if expecting someone to come down the hallway.

“Well? Are you going to go get her or not?” Olga said, looking up from her phone.

“Yeah, yeah, I’ll get her.” I pushed the chair out, leapt up, and speed-walked down the hallway. “Madeline?” I called, as I rounded the corner. “Madel --”

My breath caught in my throat.

There was no one there.

I walked up to her room. “Madeline?” I called, poking my head in.

She was sleeping peacefully in bed.

In her hospital gown. With her IV still attached.

*Weird.* I walked back to the nurse's station. I couldn’t help feeling a bit unsettled. I know kids sometimes do freaky shit, but there’s no way a 6-year-old could reattach an IV.

I plopped back down at the nurse’s station.

Olga raised her eyebrows at me. “You found her?”

“Yeah. She’s sleeping in her room.” I leaned towards her and lowered my voice. “This is going to sound really weird, but I don’t think… I don’t think she ever got out of bed.”

“Oooh, spooky,” she said, with a grin. “Maybe she’s [possessed by that slime thing](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/bdojla/im_a_nurse_i_saw_something_in_the_emergency_room/) you wouldn’t shut up about last week.” Back to texting.

I narrowed my eyes at her. “That’s not something to joke about.”

“Oh, really? What are you going to do, murder me?” She held up her hands in front of her. “I’m so scared!”

I rolled my eyes and turned back to reading about the half-mermaid that apparently washed up on the shores of Lake Erie. *Psh, I can’t believe people actually believe this stuff,* I thought.

It was 3:40 AM when it happened again.

I happened to look up at the hallway, and the security monitor caught my eye. Madeline was standing just outside her door. In her dress and stockings.

Except she looked scared, this time.

“Look. It’s Madeline again,” I said, poking Olga.

As I said it, one of the lights flickered out at the far end of the hallway. The video feed grew darker.

Olga looked up from her texting (who was she even texting after 3 AM?!) and followed my gaze. “Oh, it's the little demon girl again! Ha, ha!”

I narrowed my eyes at her. “If you think all of this is *so* funny, *you* go check on her.”

Her eyes widened a bit. “Uh, okay.” She slowly got up, taking as long as humanly possible. Then she disappeared down the hallway.

I turned back to the video feed.

Another light had gone out at the end of the hall. The video was darker and grainier now. But I could still make out Madeline’s little form standing in front of the room -- barely more than a silhouette.

*Click!*

Another light went out.

Then another. And another. The hallway was quickly engulfed in darkness, until the only light on was the one above Madeline's door.

“Well, crap,” I muttered to myself. “We’re going to need an electrician.”

I drank the last dregs of my iced coffee. When I put the cup down, I saw it.

My blood ran cold.

It was a shadow. A grainy, pixelated silhouette, roiling and shifting in the darkness. At first I thought it was Olga, coming from the other end of the hall.

It wasn’t.

It was too tall, stretching from the ceiling to the floor. Too thin (no offense, Olga.) I leaned into the monitor. *What the hell?*

The shadow got darker. Larger. It slowly bled out of the darkness and into the light of the hall.

Right next to Madeline.

It was so dark and subtle, I thought it might be just some trick of the camera. Some error of the low light.

But Madeline saw it too.

Because she was backing away. Stretching her arms over the open hospital room door. Shaking her head violently.

The shadow advanced.

*Beep! Beep! Beep!*

My eyes snapped away from the security system to the nurse's console.

*No.*

Madeline's vitals were plummeting. Her heart rate, blood pressure…

I shot up and sprinted down the hallway.

Olga had just gotten there, her hand on the doorknob. Half the hallway was dark, just like in the feed. But no tall shadow like I’d seen, no Madeline standing in the hallway.

“Call Dr. Thompson!” I screamed. “She's in trouble!”

I flew past her, into the room.

Madeline lay still and motionless on the bed.

Her heart had stopped.

I ran over. Started CPR. *Come on, come on,* I screamed, internally. *Please don't take her from us. Please --*

*Blip. Blip. Blip.*

Her heartbeat returned just as Dr. Thompson rushed in.

I fell against the wall and began to sob.

\*\*\*

We kept Madeline in the hospital for a few more days, but I don't think we needed to. She seemed to recover quickly. As I checked her vitals to release her, I’d nearly forgotten all about the shadow.

“How are you feeling?” I asked her, as I took her blood pressure.

“Great,” Madeline said. She turned to her parents. “She saved me!”

“Aww, it was nothing.”

She glanced at me. “Not *you,*” she said, condescendingly. “Maggie.”

*Maggie?* I furrowed my eyebrows at her. *Ungrateful little kid.*  “Who's Maggie?”

Madeline’s mother uneasily stared at the floor. Her father wrapped an arm around her, and coughed strangely.

*Okay, then.*

“You’re all set,” I said, ripping off the blood pressure cuff.

“Yay!” she squealed. She grabbed her mom’s hand, and the two of them walked into the hallway. But the father stayed behind.

“Thank you so much for everything,” he said, with a smile. “As I understand it… you saved Madeline’s life.”

“No, that was *Maggie,”* I said, rolling my eyes.

He coughed again, strangely.

The curiosity bit into me. Completely overstepping my bounds as a nurse, I asked: “Who’s Maggie? Her imaginary friend?”

He sighed heavily. “Uh… sort of. When my wife was pregnant with Madeline… she was actually pregnant with twins.”

My heart stopped.

“Identical twins. But one of them passed away in the womb,” he continued. “We told Madeline, since we don't believe in keeping secrets. But it appears we made a mistake. Little Madeline has an overactive imagination. Always talks about ‘Maggie,’ as if she’s actually still with us.”

He coughed again, strangely, and I realized it was to stop an impending sob. He reached out to shake my hand. “Thank you so much again.”

He turned and followed his family down the hallway.

But all I could think about was the little girl.

Who looked exactly like Madeline, standing outside her door.

Protecting her.It was weird, one day I was an only child, the next I had an older brother.  My parents didn't even warn me.  Just one day he arrived and took my room and I had to sleep in the basement.

He arrived in a large waxed raincoat.  I remember the water droplets that hung to its surface as he leaned over me and offered his hand.  I ran behind my mother's legs and stayed there.  He smiled back.  My mother apologised for me and that was that.

It was obvious after a few days that he was their favourite.  I had a lot of issues and I knew I was a disappointment to them.  I visited a therapist twice a week, though I didn't talk much.  I never did.  I think that was my main problem.  I was fine.  My parents thought otherwise.

One day, my new brother came downstairs and handed me a used painting set and canvases.  I ignored him, upset he'd usurped me.  He didn't say anything, instead, set up the easel and began to paint.  He was incredible.  I watched in awe as within minutes he had painted things I couldn't imagine were possible from a paint brush.  He finished with a painting of a door.  It looked familiar but I wasn't sure.  He set down the paints and walked back upstairs.  I stared at it for weeks.  Then one day, I decided to try for myself. 

At first I was terrible, but as the months rolled on I got better and better.  I still didn't have the confidence to speak to my brother, but every now and then he'd make his way into the basement and look at what I'd painted.  He'd stare at them with nostalgia in his eyes.  He would cry.  I though, hid behind the sofa, watching him mentally critique my work.

"Keep it up," he said in a hushed tone.  The hairs on my neck stood up and I felt a warm glow around me, something I'd not felt before.  So I continued to paint.

By the time I was a teenager, my brother was around less and less, but my painting was as good as what his was when he first showed me.  I really wanted him to see what I'd created.  It was all because of him after all.

I waited one day, in the living room.  I stole glances out of the window, waiting for him to come home.  When he did, I jumped out of my chair and ran to the door to greet him.  He stepped back, as if not wanting to embrace me.

"Look at what I painted," I said to him.

My parents appeared surprised.  Even though I was sixteen, I rarely spoke.

I ran to the basement door.

"I think you should follow him," my mother said to my brother.

I waited for what seemed like hours, until my brother walked down the stairs.  I could barely see his face under the hood of his waxed jacket.

"What do you think?" I offered.

He stepped into the light, examining the painting.
Tears rolled down his cheeks.  I put my hand to my mouth.

"It's beautiful," he said quietly, and he began to cry.

Upset I raced over to him and hugged him.

"Thank you for teaching me," I said.

I then felt his body sway, I tried to hold onto him, but my grasp wasn't strong enough.  He collapsed, hitting his head on the side of my desk and onto the floor.

***

The following months were the worst of my life.  My brother was dead.  With my mental history, I was sent to a psychiatric hospital.  They said I had an episode and tried to kill my brother.  I didn't.  I swear.  He fell.

They said it may have been a side effect of the medication I was on or my psychosis in general.

After many sessions with the in house psychiatrist, I was allowed access to painting material.  To be honest, it wasn't that bad.  I saw my parents once a week and I was able to paint.  I thought about my brother a lot.  I thought about that painting he did for me, the one of the door.  I tried my best to remember it, and over and over I tried to paint it.  Each time, I stood back and looked at it.  Something wasn't right and I never knew what.  Until one day, I got it spot on.

That's when I realised what it was of.  It was the front door of our house.  Seeing it in front of me, it was so obvious.

I peered at it from different angles.  I remembered it all.  I started to paint in all the little details.  The room began to get cold, so I put on my jacket.

I placed the paints in my pocket when I was done and gazed in awe.

It was almost real.

I stared and cried.  I wasn't going to see this front door for a long time, if ever.  That frightened me.  The longer I gazed, the more I wished I could just be standing outside it.  Knocking on it.  Waiting for my parents to answer.

I pretended I was standing outside.  For the first time in months I felt free.  I imagined the wind blowing as the rains fell.  I imagined reaching out to turn the handle.

I closed my eyes and reached.

I could feel the rain on my forehead.  I could feel the cool air.  I could hear the water slap against my jacket.

I opened my eyes.

I was there.  Outside my parent's house.

I panicked briefly before, almost on autopilot, walking towards the door.

I knocked.

I felt I must be dreaming.

Then the door opened.  My mother stood there.

"Can I help you?" she asked.

"Mum, it's your son."

She tried to close the door.  I placed my foot in the way.

"Please, just listen to me."

She looked into my eyes.  There was a recognition in them, she knew I was truthful.

"Come on in," she said, confused.

I saw a little boy in the living room.  I knelt down to talk to him.  He ran behind his mother's legs.  I smiled, remembering myself doing that.

I tapped my pocket, feeling the painting set in there.   I knew what I needed to do.

[xx](https://www.facebook.com/theedwincrowe/)He’s always been here. Although, I actually don’t know if he’s a ‘he’, and though I wouldn’t want to assume anything, the voice is definitely a male’s voice. I’ve never seen his face; always the back of him. He wears a black trench coat with a popped collar so that all I can really see is the very top of his head and part of his black boots.

I can’t communicate with him, and I figured this out a few years back. He just stands a few feet away from me at all times, his back to me, narrating my entire life. No one else can see him, I figured this out a few years back as well, nor can they hear him.

My day usually starts off the same, I always wake up to the same sentence.

“Natalia wakes up and rolls over in her bed.”

Every single day he says that because that is what I do. It’s all very mundane; my life is not that interesting after all.

I’ve sort of learned to live with it, and I can almost tune him out now. I’ve never really told anyone else about him because I know that no one would believe me. So I really don’t have much of a choice, other than learning to deal with it and tunning him out when I really need to.

About a week ago, I was cooking dinner; mashed potatoes and black bean tacos, and tunning him out as normal. As I was chopping up some cilantro for my tacos however, he said something that caught my attention.

“Natalia is innocently chopping cilantro, without any knowledge that she is in grave danger.”

I froze, the knife in the middle of my small pile of cilantro, and looked over at him. He was standing on the other side of the kitchen island, facing my dinner table.

“What?” I asked, knowing that he wasn’t going to reply.

At this point, I think I’d be more freaked out about him replying than him not.

He said nothing for a few minutes, so I finished chopping, wiping the pieces of cilantro that got stuck to the blade, with my finger and cutting it in the process.

“Fuck!” I walked turned around and turned on the faucet, rinsing the knife and my finger.

“Natalia cut herself, and her blood oozes out, pleasing the one who watches.”

I turned the faucet off and turned around.

He hadn’t moved, but I was sure that I heard him correctly.

I walked over to the window on the wall to my left and pulled on the cord, shutting the blinds as I became paranoid.

I managed to eat my dinner and do the dishes without any other weird comments and got ready for bed.

As I got sleepier, I reached over and turned off the lamp by my bed, rolling over onto my left side and closing my eyes.

“Natalia rolls over, closing her eyes and peacefully lying in her bed. What she doesn’t know, however, is that she will soon face a horrible fate that will end in her death.”

I opened my eyes, sitting up and looking over at his silhouette, slightly lit by the moonlight. I waited a few minutes, but he said nothing else, and I eventually fell asleep.

I woke up the next morning as my alarm went off.

“Natalia wakes up and rolls over in bed, one day closer to her inevitable death.”

I got up, walking into the bathroom and slamming the door shut, annoyed and a little bit scared.

He had been narrating my entire life, and had never said anything creepy or out of the ordinary, so what was going on now?

I opened the faucet and began splashing water onto my face.

“Natalia washes her face, but she doesn’t seem to realize that it is much easier for someone to attack when her eyes are closed.”

I rinsed the soap away from my eye area and looked at my reflection in front of me, and at his, standing behind me.

I finished rinsing my face with my eyes open and managed to dry it without completely covering my eyes. The rest of my week went pretty similar; normal narrations for the most part, with some creepy stuff sprinkled in.

“He is coming for her very soon. It is unavoidable. Natalia must die.”

Every time he said something, I looked around at my surroundings, paranoid. I spent the entire week anxious and paranoid. I barely slept, fearing that I would wake up in the middle of the night to some performing spontaneous surgery on me. I put a knife in my bedside drawer and pepper spray under my pillow.

Yesterday, there were more creepy things than usual.

“Natalia’s days are numbered.”

“Natalia has been feeling anxious; as she should.”

“The one who watches is arriving shortly.”

“The one who watches is very excited to kill Nataliia.”

“There will be no escape; only death.”

I didn’t go out anywhere, for fear that would somehow cause whatever was going to happen, to happen sooner.

Last night, I was getting ready for bed, brushing my teeth and staring at his reflection behind me in the mirror. As I swished mouthwash around in my mouth, he spoke again.

“Natalia brushes her teeth for the last time. Tomorrow, she dies.”

I spit out the mouthwash, choking on a bit that had made its way down my throat. I coughed and wheezed.

“Natalia choked on the mouthwash, feeling like she was dying. But it’s not her time yet. Her time is tomorrow.”

I managed to catch my breath and walked over to my bed, crawling in and leaving the lamps on. The last thing I needed was to be woken up at midnight and have to fight off a killer in the dark.

I woke up today a few hours before my alarm and got up. I was still alive, and nothing was out of place. Maybe I wasn’t going to die today. Maybe it was all some sort of fluke.

I walked into the bathroom and grabbed my toothbrush. I squeezed out some toothpaste to brush my teeth and put the toothbrush in my mouth. I looked up into the mirror, at my reflection, and then I froze.

I  spit into the sink and looked around the bathroom. I stuck my head back into my bedroom and looked around there as well. I made my way through every single room in my house, but he was nowhere to be seen. He was gone.

Twenty-five years following me around and narrating my life, and now suddenly, when I was supposed to die, he just disappeared.

Somehow, this made me feel worse, as I realized that while the things he was saying were creepy, they were also helping me by warning me how much time I had left. Now I had no warning and no choice but to wait it out and see what happened.

I can’t shake the feeling that I’m definitely going to die. But how? And by who? Who was “the one who watches”? What did that even mean?

I’ve spent my entire day in the kitchen; I figure there are more exits here as well as weapons, and I’d probably be safer here than in another smaller room of the house.

So far, nothing has happened. I’ve been sitting in silence, which is odd because I’ve never been in complete silence.

About an hour ago, all the lights began to flicker in the house, but that only lasted a few seconds, and it’s gone back to normal now.

I still don’t know what to expect, but I think I’m probably safer at my house. Well, I thought I would be, until the doorbell rang.

I got up and walked into the living room, walking up to the door and peering out of the peephole. It was him. He was standing outside on my porch, with his back to me as usual. I didn’t move; I didn’t even breathe as I just watched him standing there.

He’s still out there now, but he hasn’t said a word. I’m still in my kitchen, not knowing what to do. I could head him mumbling outside the door a few minutes ago, and I finally decided to get up and listen.

“Two thousand, one thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine, one thousand nine hundred and ninety-eight, one thousand nine hundred and ninety-seven…”

He’s still counting down, and I’ve now got about twenty minutes left. I can see that it’s getting darker and darker outside as he counts down, even though it’s not even three o’clock in the afternoon yet.

Every time I look out the window, something disappears; a house on my street, a car, a tree. Whenever something vanishes, it’s replaced with darkness. And he keeps counting down.

This might be my last chance at communication. I’m going to die today.I admit it. I am a simp.

And no, I am not proud of that fact. If I could go back in time and stop myself when I first started acting like one - I would. In a heartbeat. But I was a horny little goblin back then and just the tiniest bit of attention from a woman was enough to fry my brain.

In my defense though, *she* was absolutely gorgeous. Brown eyes that twinkled mischievously; plump, kissable red lips that parted to reveal white teeth like perfect little sugar cubes and thick dark hair that gently tickled her shoulder blades. Her dresses clung to her like they couldn't get enough of her body. And I understood why. She had just the right amount of curves in just the right places. I wanted to sink my teeth into them. Just... scrumptious.

I couldn't believe when she smiled at me. Jaw dropped open like a drawbridge, I stared at her from my seat in the cafe, wondering when the dream would end. It didn't. Not even when she got up and *click-clacked* over to me, her heels making her hips sway hypnotically. She slipped into the chair in front of me and asked whether I was staring at her. Dear God, her voice. It was like she was pouring nectar into my ears. I shook my head like an idiot. She laughed, and it was music, like birds singing an ode to the falling leaves on an autumn morning. *Cute*, she said, and bit her bottom lip. 

And that was that. One meeting and she had me wrapped around her fingers. To say that our relationship was a whirlwind romance would be an understatement. It all feels like a blur to me, like the view inside a train that is zooming past yours in the opposite direction. I had no idea how she so quickly wriggled her way into my life, settling in like she had always belonged there. I felt like God himself was smiling down on me, and not one to spit on my blessings, I agreed with whatever she suggested, unknowingly losing myself in her piece by piece.

I changed my dressing sense for her, dropped my childhood friends like the dead weight that they were, quit playing video games because it is a child's hobby, not something a grown man in his mid 20s should ever waste his time with. I sold off my GI Joe collection, got a job I hated, bought a car that was too expensive and took out a loan for a house much bigger than we could have possibly needed and added her name to the fucking deed. All to please the pert little succubus.

At least the sex was heavenly.

So heavenly in fact that I didn't even protest much when she told me she was going to start an onlyfans account. *It'll be good for us*, she said, flashing her slender wrists at me, making my heart melt. *We need the money, babe. Besides, they only get to look. Only you can touch me.* I sighed, loosened my tie and grunted. *Just don't tell me what you post on there. I don't want to know.* She squealed with joy and jumped on my lap, reminding me why I was putting up with all this shit in the first place.

That's when things started to go wrong. Terribly, horrifyingly wrong.

I would wake up from nightmares I could never remember, more exhausted than I had been when I crashed into bed that would get soaked to the wood with my sweat. I began sleeping longer, but had absolutely no energy during the day. My skin was losing its colour, my eyes had dark circles deep like gorges and my hands would tremble with weakness.  

At first I chalked it all up to stress. I was overworked, without friends, stuck in a superficial relationship and burdened with staggering financial obligations. Of course my body was finally starting to give out. I wasn't a machine after all, was I?

But then the bruises started to appear. On my hands, thighs, back, knees, elbows - my body was being dotted with these little red marks that would inexplicably appear each morning. And they would hurt - like the bite of a fire ant. She had no clue what was causing this, but I did. It all began with that damn onlyfans account and I knew I was going to get my answers there. 

I quickly set up an account and subscribed to hers. But to my utter disappointment, there was nothing out of the ordinary there. Just lingeries pictures, a couple of full body nudes. That's it. Nothing that would explain what I was going through.

This was because she had another account. Under a pseudonym, one that she never told me about. Thank god for my connections in the IT sector. I was only able to track it down thanks to them. As soon as my phone buzzed with the message telling me about her alt account, I ran into the bathroom at the office and locked myself in the first empty stall.

I wiped the sweat off my hands and unlocked my phone. With shaky thumbs, I made the payment and got access to her account. And what I saw made my head spin in fear.

It was just the most bizarre collection of pictures. Animal skulls mounted on some sort of a greasy altar, candles arranged around a strange chalk diagram on the floor of our basement, grainy photos of rotting carcasses of dogs with their entrails ripped out and laid in a circle around them. Close up pictures of accident victims in their cars - limbs cut off, flesh burnt black, skin melting off, eyes crushed to a viscous jelly. How the fuck were these photos up? How did she even get them? Why had the folks over at onlyfans not deleted them? I could feel bile rise up in my throat as I scrolled past those pictures. And the comments to those pictures were just as confusing.  Strange symbols and squiggly lines that I had never seen on a fucking keyboard made up the comments. All of them. Hundreds of comments, all in what seemed to be a completely new language. 

But what terrified me the most were the videos. A primal terror clutched at my chest as I watched those videos. Unlike the pictures, she starred in each and every single one of them.

As did I.

Some of them were innocent enough. They'd start with her holding the camera and pointing it at her face. She would bring it closer and closer to her mouth until her blood red lips were almost touching the lens and then she'd start whispering. I plugged in my earphones and turned the volume up to the max to hear what she saying - but it was utter nonsense. I couldn't make heads or tails out if it. It sounded like no language I had ever heard, yet scared the shit out of me. It was like she was running her tongue around inside my ears, threatening to condemn me to a fate worse than death. She would then walk and come stand over my sleeping form. The video would now speed up and she would stand over me for hours. For fucking hours as I tossed and turned, tormented by my nightmares, she would stand over me, pointing the camera down on my face.

I took a second to calm my heartbeat which *thumped* against my chest, my ears and my temple before moving on. 

Another video. This time the camera was set up on a tripod next to my bed. She was there again, hunched over my sleeping form. But this time she didn't just watch, she bent over, splayed my forearm out and drove a little needle into it, quickly licking the drops of blood that bubbled out, before turning and grinning at the camera, the greenish night vision making her eyes gleam. I gasped and almost dropped the phone. There were so many of these videos - her injuring me, licking the blood off and then grinning at the camera. Literally hundreds of them. All with the same script.

And then I moved on to the most recent video. The screen flickered to life and our basement came into view. It didn't look anything like I was familiar with. Lit up by candles that bathed the room in a dull orange glow, the entire basement had been turned into some sort of an altar, like the pictures I had earlier seen. Unclean cattle skulls were strewn across the room, the floor was slathered with squiggly chalk lines set up in strange symbols, tapestries with dizzying designs embroidered on them hung from the rafters and smoke arose from somewhere off screen. In the middle out of it all though, was the love of my life. Nude, with her entire body soaked in blood she was writhing on the floor, touching herself and moaning in a hoarse and guttural voice. Propped up on a small table in front of her was a framed picture of me with the eyes burnt off, probably with a cigarette. The fear that crashed into me brought tears to my eyes. She began rubbing herself faster. And faster and faster and faster and faster until her hand was just a red blur on the screen.  

Sharp shadows danced on her face as she began speaking. *Soon,* she said. *Soon. Soon. Soon. Soon. Soon. Soon. Soon. Soon. Soon.* Her voice rose with each words until she was screaming in a manic frenzy, until the words reverberated like gunshots in the basement. And then the video came to an abrupt end.

I blinked furiously to clear my rapidly fading vision, trying to wrest control of my body from the terror that threatened to shut it down. And then my phone buzzed again, and I almost had a heart attack when I saw the message.

*"Hey babe ;) When are you coming home tonight?"*

[M](https://www.reddit.com/r/Mandahrk/) || [T](https://www.reddit.com/r/TheCrypticCompendium/)“911, what is your emergency?”


“Yeah, hi, um...This is going to sound kind of strange but there's a man stumbling around in circles in my front yard.”


“...could you repeat that, sir?”


“He looks...sick, or lost, or drunk, or something. I just woke up to get a glass of water and heard snow crunching around underneath my front window so I peeked out...I'm looking at him now, he's about ten yards away from my window. Something's not right.”

“What is your address, sir?”

“1617 Quarry Lane, in Pinella Pass.”

“I'm going to send a squad car your way, but that's quite a ways out. Are you alone in your house sir?”

“Yes, I'm alone.”

“Can you confirm that all of your doors and windows are locked? Stay on the phone with me.”

“I know that my front is definitely locked, but I'll go check my back door again really quick. 

…

I appreciate your help, by the way, I know this is kind of strange but I really hope that –“

...

“...Sir? Are you still there?”

“He's...he's still in the yard yard. But he's...what the fuck...he's upside down...”

“Sir? Stay on with me, what is happening?”

“He's staring right at me...but he's...he's standing on his hands now. He's perfectly still, staring straight at me. He's doing a handstand and he's smiling at me and not moving.”

“He's...he's doing a handstand, sir?”

“I...I don't know how he...yeah, he's facing me and standing on his hands and he's got this huge smile and he's perfectly still...what the FUCK...please get someone out here NOW.”

“Sir I need you to remain calm. I've put out the call and an officer is on his way.”

“His teeth are so *huge*...what the fuck, please help me...”

“Sir I want you to try and keep an eye on him but make sure your back door is locked again. We need to make sure all possible access points are secured. Can you talk me through and confirm that your back door is locked?”

“Okay...I'm walking backwards now and keeping him in my sight...

My hand is on the back doorknob now...it's locked. I need to check the deadbolt so I'm going to take my eyes off of him for a split second.”

“Alright sir. Help is on the way. Just stay on the phone with me, everything's going to be alright.

Sir?


…


...Sir? Are you still there?”

“He's...his face. It's up against the glass.”

“Sir, I need you to speak up. What is happening?”

“I looked away for a split second and now...his face. It's pressed up against my front window. His teeth are huge and he's still smiling...There's no color in his eyes...Jesus please help me, why won't it just fucking *move*...”

“Sir, I need you to go to the nearest room and lock yourself inside of it. Do you have a basement or a bedroom that you can lock yourself in?”

“He won't stop staring...he's going to hurt me...”

“Sir I need you to listen to me. Lock yourself somewhere safe until the officer arrives at your house. Can you hear me?”

“I...yes...yes, I'm going to lock myself in my room.”

“And you're positive that you're alone in your house, correct?”

“Yes, I'm alone in the house...

…wait a moment...

he's moving. He's shaking his head. He's telling me no. He can hear us. 

He's telling me I'm not alone.”

…

…

…

“Sir? Sir are you still there? I heard a loud noise, is everything alright?

…

…

“Sir?”



--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Author's Note:

I highly recommend reading along with the [fantastic dramatic reading](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kh6RXypxdp0) by /u/Cryaotic. 


Also find out more in [Part II](http://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/2xbeib/urgent_update_im_the_911_operator_that_took_the/)“Son, we need to have a chat about Internet Safety.”  I slowly crumpled down onto the floor next to him.  His laptop was open and he was playing Minecraft on a public server.  His eyes were locked into the action.  Comments scrolled down the side of the screen in a chat box.  “Son, can you stop your game for a minute?” 


He exited the world, closed the laptop, and looked up at me.  "Dad, is this going to be another cheesy scary story?"  


"Whhaaaat?" I faked hurt feelings for a second, and then grinned at him, "I thought you liked my cautionary tales?" He grew up listening to my stories about children who encountered witches, ghosts, werewolves, and trolls.  Like many generations of parents, I used scary stories to reinforce morals and teach lessons about safety.  Single dads like me should use all the parenting tools at their disposal.


He scrunched his face a little, "They were fine when I was six. But now that I'm getting older, they don't scare me anymore.  They seem kinda silly.  If you are going to tell a story about the Internet, can you make it really, really scary!?” I squinted at him incredulously.  He folded his arms, “Dad.  I’m ten and I can handle it."  


"hmm… okay...  I’ll try."  


I began, “Once upon a time, there was a boy named Colby….”  His expression indicated that he wasn't impressed with the terror of the introduction.  He sighed deeply and settled in for one of Dad’s cheesy stories.   I continued...


>Colby went online and joined several children's websites. After a while, he started talking to other kids in-game and on the message boards.  He made friends with another ten year old boy named Helper23. They liked the same video games and shows.  They laughed at each other's jokes. They explored new games together.


>After several months of friendship, Colby gave Helper23 six diamonds in a game they were playing. This was a very generous gift.  Colby's birthday was coming up and Helper23 wanted to send him a cool present in real life. Colby figured it wouldn't hurt to give Helper23 his home address - as long as he promised not to tell it to any strangers or grownups.  Helper23 swore he wouldn't tell anyone else, not even his own parents, and set about mailing the package.   


I paused the story and asked my son, "Do you think that was a good idea?”  “No!" he said shaking his head vigorously.  In spite of himself, he was getting into the story.


>Well neither did Colby.  Colby felt guilty about giving away his home address - and his guilt began to grow.  And grow.  By the time he put on his pajamas the next night, his guilt and fear were larger than anything else in his life.  He resolved to admit the truth to his parents. The punishment would be steep, but it was worth it to have a clear conscience.  He squirmed in his bed as he waited for his parents to tuck him in.  


My son knew the scary part was coming up. In spite of his tough talk, he leaned forward wide-eyed. I spoke quietly and deliberately.


>He heard all the noises of the house. The washing machine bounced around in the laundry room. Branches scraped against the brick outside his room. His baby brother cooed in the nursery. And there were some other noises he couldn't... quite... pinpoint.  Finally, his dad’s footsteps echoed down the hall. “Hey Dad?” He called out nervously. “I have something to tell you.”


>His dad stuck his head in the doorway at a weird angle.  In the darkness, his mouth didn't seem to move and the eyes were all wrong. "Yes, son" The voice was way off, too.  "Are you okay, Dad?" The boy asked. "Uh-huh" sung the father in his strangely affected voice.   Colby pulled his covers up defensively. "Ummm... Is Mom around?"  


>"Here I am!" Mom's head popped into the doorway below Dad's.  Her voice was an unnatural falsetto.  "Were you about to tell us that you gave our home address to Helper23?  You shouldn't have done that!  We TOLD you never to give out personal information on the Internet!"


>She continued, "He wasn't really a kid!  He just pretended to be one.  Do you know what he did?  He came to our house, broke in, and murdered both of us!  Just so he could spend some time with you!"


>A fat man in a wet jacket emerged in the child's doorway holding the two severed heads. Colby shrieked and gasped as the man dropped the heads on the ground, unsheathed his knife, and moved into the room to work on the boy. 


My son screamed too.  He twisted his hands defensively over his face.  But we were just getting started with the story.


>After several hours, the boy was almost dead and his screams had become whimpers.  The killer noticed the wailing of a baby in another room and removed his knife from Colby.  This was a special treat.  He had never murdered a baby before and was excited about the prospect. Helper23 left Colby to die and followed the cries through the house like a homing beacon. 


>In the nursery, he walked to the crib, picked the baby up, and held it in his arms. He moved towards the changing table to get a better look.  But as he held the baby, the crying died down.  The baby looked up and smiled.  Helper23 had never held a baby, but he gently bounced it in his arms like a pro.  He wiped his bloody hands on the blanket so he could stroke the baby's cheek, "Hey there, sweet little guy."  The beautiful rage of sadism melted into something warmer and softer.


>He walked out of the nursery, took the baby home, named him William, and raised him as his very own. 


After I finished the story, my son was visibly shaken. Between ragged staccato breaths, he stammered, "But Dad, MY name's William."  I gave him a classic dad-wink and tousled his hair.  "Of course it is, son."  William ran up the stairs to his bedroom in a fury of sobs. 


But deep down... I think he liked the story. 

***
EDIT: Thank you so much for gold and the October Trophy.  If you are interested, I blog about single parenting tips and some of my "other activities" at [www.ovenfriend.com](http://www.ovenfriend.com)I’ve been a wedding photographer for nearly ten years and I thought I’d seen it all. Trashy, beautiful, tragic, hilarious, or just bizarre. I have *stories*. I have the typical groom getting caught getting it on with the maid of honor, family getting into brawls, brides OD-ing in the bathroom, gay couples having no one attend their wedding (or worse, the one uninivited homophobic relative crashing to just be a dick) stories. But we aren’t here for the typical stories. If we were, we’d be here all day. We’re here for the wedding from last October.  

Fall weddings are probably my favorite, if I ever get married I’ll probably get hitched in the fall. It was the parents of the bride who came to me, asking for my services for a wedding in two weeks. Their original photographer apparently up and quit on them and they were desperate to have their darling daughter’s wedding immortalized in picture format.

Luckily for them, I had a clear schedule. I did charge them quite a bit extra for the suddenness of it all, but judging by the father’s Rolex it wasn’t that big a deal. One thing I’m good at guessing is a family’s wealth status. And once again I was on point- the Seawrights were *rolling* in dough.  

Not that I really liked them though. I’m not required to like all my clients, although it does make things a bit more relaxing. Harold Seawright absolutely leered at my chest whenever he thought I wasn’t looking and Carol was clearly the trophy wife that was over the hill. I’ve never seen a human being that genuinely looked more like plastic than her. Nothing wrong with plastic surgery or Botox, but there’s gotta be a cut off at some point.

I think I should’ve been more off put by the parents coming to me rather than the bride, but I just figured said bride was busy with other wedding planning shit and didn’t think too hard on it.

Day came and uh… oh boy I realized I was getting into something I didn’t want to be a part of right away.

First time I saw the bride, Tanya, I had a brief moment of ‘I don’t know how old this girl is’. She could’ve been sixteen, she could’ve been *just* eighteen. Definitely not over twenty though. I’ve seen young marriages when it’s a shotgun affair, but then I met the groom. Marcel Wingate. Who was definitely no younger than thirty. And Marcel was just… something felt off. The man was a giant for one, he towered over *me* let alone Tanya. With his long, pale face and sunken eyes he could’ve been fuckin’ Lurch from the Addams Family.  

When he shook my hand and introduced himself, I barely repressed a shiver. But years of practice helped me to smile and act like there wasn’t something slimy about all of this.  

Tanya never said a word when she was made over for her big day. Only Carol did, chirping and twittering about ‘how about you make her hair a little bigger’ or ‘make her eyes pop, she has such pretty eyelashes’. Luckily Carol had to go have a smoke every fifteen minutes so the make up and hair people could have a moment to actually work. By the time it was all over, Tanya looked perfect. Her dress was basically a white ballgown, a tiara was placed in her strawberry blonde hair, cheeks blushing a perfect pink. But unlike most brides, she still hadn’t said a word and those weren’t sure as hell tears of joy she was holding back.

I’m sure you’ve heard about the ‘first look’ photo fad. I find it great to get that perfect expression a groom makes when he sees the bride in her dress for the first time. It’s usually quite cute. This was the first time I’ve shot a first look photo where I truly believe it was the first time the bride and groom have actually looked at each other.

Marcel did seem to have his breath taken away by his lovely bride, but her expression was less than thrilled as he took her hand and give it a tight squeeze. My stomached turned when he leaned in for a kiss on the cheek and she quite obviously flinched.  

It’s time I put a pin on the myth that arranged marriages only happen in foreign countries, and only people from certain cultures take part in it. They happen all the time in the US, and more often than not it’s an old man who wants a ‘virgin’ bride, and by virgin I mean ‘still in fucking highschool’. This wouldn’t even be the first one I was hired to photograph.  

I managed to catch Tanya alone in the room she got ready in, sitting next to the open window and twirling an unlit cigarette between her fingers. “Need a light?” I offered as I came in.

“No thanks. I don’t smoke, but they say it makes you feel better, right?” She said, looking up at me with those doll like blue eyes.

“It also gives you lung and throat cancer.” I took the cigarette from her and lit it up for myself. “But I’m a bad example, so do as I say, not as I do.”

Now that got a smile out of her, even if it only lasted a second. “How often do you smoke?” She asked.

“Depends on the day. Usually I have two or three. Bad day I can have a few more.” I lowered the cigarette and looked down at her. “How old are you, Tanya?”

“Nineteen. Twenty in a few weeks. I have a bit of a baby face.” She poked one of her cheeks. “Why do you care?”

I glanced at the door to make sure Carol wasn’t going to barge in. “Tanya, are you not okay with this? The wedding?” I asked quietly.

Tanya’s eyes widened. “Damn, you’re good,” She also glanced at the door, “… Harold, my stepdad, arranged all of this. If he had it his way it would’ve happened when I was fifteen, but Marcel kept delaying. Business, apparently. He tried to delay another year but my dad implied he had other offers.” She shivered and wrapped her arms around herself. “If I said no, Harold would kick me out and cut me off, frozen my bank account. I’d have nothing and no one, and… I don’t know what I’d do if that happened.”

I reached into my purse and pulled out one of my business cards. “Flip the card over, it has a number for a woman’s shelter- they specialize in helping women escape from dangerous home situations. Hides them, helps them get started in a new city if need be. Below that is my personal home number, if you just need to talk, okay?”  

Tanya took the card and clung onto it tightly before tucking it into her bra. “You might be the nicest person I’ve ever met,” She murmured.

I gave her shoulder a squeeze. “I try,” I said before extinguishing the cigarette on the windowsill. “If you need to escape any time tonight, just ask me to help you go to the bathroom. We can pull a whole runaway bride,” I joked.  

That got another laugh out of her, just in time for her mom to pop into the room. “Well, what’s taking so long? Hurry up, the wedding’s going to be starting in fifteen minutes, and I don’t want you to cry and make your face all blotchy and ugly!” She whined.

Tanya’s brief joy faded and she gave me one more sad look before following her mother out.  

The ceremony would’ve been so much more beautiful if I didn’t know the dirty little secret behind it all. Tanya didn’t smile once. I don’t think even one of those bridesmaids was an actual friend of hers, or at least not a sincere one. When the priest said ‘you may kiss the bride’, Tanya let one tear slip down her cheek when Marcel leaned down to kiss her.  

I was seriously considering calling the cops, but what could they do? Tanya would likely cave and say nothing was wrong, and since she wasn’t a minor they couldn’t label Marcel a pedo and her stepfather a child seller. It still didn’t make the situation any less shitty. All I could do was snap pictures of the worst day of Tanya’s life.

At the reception I was constantly being nagged by Carol about what pictures to take to the point where I wanted to rip her hair out, but I did notice something different about the first dance between the couple.

Tanya at first was stiff as a board, reluctant to even touch Marcel, but he leaned down and whispered something in her ear. Her entire demeanor changed in a blink of an eye to one of surprise and I managed to read her lips- ‘really?’ Marcel nodded and I managed to catch a picture of the first smile Tanya had since she said ‘I do’. By the end of the dance, she was actually starting to get into it, resting her head on his chest as they swayed to ‘A Thousand Years’.

It was a complete 180 change, Tanya was now one of the happiest, and dare I say it flirtiest brides I’ve ever seen. She even leaned up to kiss him on the cheek as they sat down, something that took even Marcel by surprise judging by how he blushed.

I genuinely started to wonder if Marcel slipped something in her drink to get her acting so happy when Carol started to nag me again about where her husband was. She was the kind of mother who forgot this was her child’s wedding instead of her own and she wanted pictures of her and ‘Haaarold’. In order to get the fuck away from her I told her I’d go find him. He’d been hitting the open bar a little hard that night, I assumed he was in the bathroom either throwing up or cheating on his wife. It could’ve gone either way at that point.

When I approached the men’s room, I heard something that sounded like gargling or swallowing. Ew, I know, but I kinda hoped to ruin this nasty bitch’s day if her husband really was cheating so I opened the bathroom door with my camera at the ready.

I made eye contact with Harold.

Or rather, I made eye contact with Harold’s *head*.  

It was sitting in the sink, expression twisted in abject horror. The room was soaked in blood, body parts strewn around the floor. Meanwhile, Marcel had stripped out of his tuxedo and was currently swallowing Harold’s arm. Whole.  

Now I was wondering if I’d had something slipped into my champagne. Humans can’t just unhinge their jaw like that, each gulp taking Marcel’s arm deeper down his throat. I saw the tips of Harold’s fingers disappear with a small wave of goodbye… and then I dropped my camera.  

Yes, I heard something break, no I didn’t care. I just saw the groom *eat the goddamn father of the bride.* Marcel’s head shot up and his eyes, before now they were a dull, watery gray but now they were mottled brown and red with slitted pupils. I felt frozen when those eyes looked at me.

“Oh, I’m terribly sorry, one moment.”  

Marcel turned to the sink that was free of a man’s head and vomited, I heard several things clatter on the porcelain before he fetched them out and washed them off. With an embarrassed clearing of his throat, he walked up to me and pulled me into the bathroom.

I thought I was dead, but instead Marcel placed several diamonds in my palm. “For the camera, I didn’t mean to startle you,” He said.

“Uh huh,” I managed to get out as I stared at the literal handful of diamonds. This would pay for more than the camera. “… Why did you-”

“Devour Harold? Oh, I’ve wanted to do that for years,” Marcel chuckled as he grabbed some paper towels to wipe off his chin, like that would take away from the fact he was still naked and bloody in front of me. “A terrible person actually tastes quite divine. You would taste absolutely terrible. It’d be like swallowing nails. Meanwhile, a man who offers his own daughter as a sacrificial lamb to something he *knows* eats humans, he tastes like the richest cut of steak, cooked medium rare and seasoned to perfection.”  

Jesus Christ, this twisted situation had taken on a whole new level of fucked up. “Wait, he seriously-”

“Oh, absolutely,” Marcel snorted, “And he’d do it again. All for what happens when my stomach processes human bone.”

I clutched the diamonds. “… You’re not going to hurt Tanya?” I asked.

Marcel shook his head vigorously. “God, no! I kept delaying the wedding in hopes that she’d manage to find a way out, but I think Harold was getting bored with my cold feet. There would be plenty of other people willing to pay for her, even if my payment would be easily thrice what others would offer.”

God, I was starting to feel a little dizzy. Here I was, talking to a human eating groom. I glanced out the door and a horrible idea entered my brain. One that would surely earn Marcel’s good favor and help out Tanya. “… So if I told Carol she could find her husband in the men’s room?” I asked.

Marcel seemed puzzled for a second but caught on quickly. With a nod, he picked up the head and tossed it into one of the stalls. I heard it splash in one of the toilets and I almost started giggling, I was nearing hysteria. “Go right ahead. I’ll be waiting,” He said as he kicked more limbs out of sight.

I almost left when I had to ask one more question.

“What the hell *are* you?”

Marcel cocked his head to the side before he changed, just for a second. One moment he was a blood soaked man, absolutely horrifing but normal, the next he was a snake… sort of. His body was gone, replaced by the body of an anaconda, but his head was still the same, minus the flick of a slim, forked tongue from his mouth. Then he was back to ‘normal’. He responded with a shrug.

“Funnily enough, I was hoping you’d tell me. I don’t have a clue.”

I left the bathroom and bumped into Carol almost immediately in the hallway. “Well, where is he?” She snapped.  

I just pointed a thumb towards the bathroom. “Think he’s not feeling so well,” I said before I was nearly bowled over by the grumpy bitch.

I watched long enough for her to open the door and for a scaled tail to shoot out, snag her around the arm, and drag her into the bathroom before I headed back to the wedding.

The problem seemed to solve itself that night. Marcel came back, the men’s room locked after apparently someone got quite sick in there. Tanya no longer had to behave a certain way to please her mom and I think she had a good night. I used my back up camera to make sure to get all the pictures of her smiling. Carol and Harold vanished into thin air, never to be seen or heard from again. And those diamonds paid for quite the nice new camera.  

Like I said, it’s been a year. I sure as hell haven’t forgotten that wedding, but what prompted me to share it was that I got a friend request from Tanya on Facebook. I normally don’t accept friend requests from previous clients, but this one time I chose to make an exception. She does look so much better, she’s going to college, she now sculpts and paints, she regularly volunteers at the woman’s shelter I directed her to when we first me, and every Friday night is group date night at the local arcade with some of Marcel’s friends that now appear to be her friends as well. Apparently Marcel is quite the Dance Dance Revolution master, but is terrible at shooting games.

Her most recent picture was her and Marcel, smiling. And she was holding up an ultrasound picture[.](http://theoddcatlady.com/)  When people talk about child marriages, most of the time they aren’t thinking of America.  As though America is some kind of utopia where things like that just don’t happen.

It’s not true, though, is it?  Child marriage may not be as common here, sure.  But it does happen.  In fact, only [ten states]( http://preventforcedmarriage.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/Tahirih-MEMO-State-Criminal-Laws-Forced-Marriage.pdf) actually have laws against it.

Guess what?  I didn’t grow up in one of those ten states.  Even better, I grew up in a cult.  Our leaders really emphasized the idea of “pure” brides and virginity and virility… I was taught, as a child, that only a young woman embodied these traits.

“Young woman” does not mean a twenty-year-old, by the way.  Or even an eighteen-year-old.  That would make it almost understandable, wouldn’t it?

I was sold into marriage when I was fourteen.

In a way, I was one of the lucky ones.  See, in our cult, a girl “came of marriageable age” when she had her first period.  My older sister got hers at nine years old.  I still remember her screaming in the bathroom when it happened – my mother hadn’t told us anything about periods, or our bodies.  My sister saw all that blood and really thought she was dying.

Maybe that *is* what it meant for her.  Because only a few months later she was married off.  Her husband was in his mid-twenties.  She cried herself to sleep every night until her wedding.

I never saw her again.

Since the day I turned nine, I lived in mortal fear of ending up like my sister.  I prayed and hoped to our version of God that I would never “come of age.”  It was like a curse to me, to meet the same fate she did.  For a while, it seemed that something had answered my prayers, because year after year passed and it didn’t come.  My parents grew restless.  When I was twelve, my father checked my panties every night to make sure I wasn’t hiding anything from him.

But then, halfway through my fourteenth year, it came.  It came during the night and stained my sheets and there was no hiding it.

My parents were so relieved.  I was so upset I actually vomited when I saw the proof, those stained sheets that I couldn’t pray away.

The man they gave me to was forty-three years old.

Can you imagine that?  Can you imagine your own parents just… giving you away to someone like that?  Even though I always knew it would happen to me, it still hurt.  It still poisoned something deep inside me.

They didn’t wait as long for my wedding as they did with my sister.  Apparently my soon-to-be husband was in a rush because we were married only a month later.

I won’t bore you with details about my wedding, or the first time meeting my husband, or the ride to our new “home” – I had to be dragged into the car, kicking and screaming.

Instead, I’ll tell you this: everything changed on the balcony.

Once he brought me home, he ushered me into the master bedroom and, thankfully, left me there on my own for several hours.  He told me he wanted nothing more than to “attend” to me the way a proper husband should – and we all know what that means, don’t we? – but that he had to take care of some business first.  Before leaving the room – and locking it for good measure – he told me to dress in the lingerie that he had left for me on the bed.  I eyed it with disgust before throwing it on the floor and stalking out to the balcony that I discovered behind some thick floor-to-ceiling curtains.  My parents must have been proud to marry me off to someone so rich.

The night was freezing cold and there was a light snow falling, slowly covering the ground below.  Briefly, I considered throwing myself off the ledge, but I was too afraid.  I thought that there was a small chance I might survive, and I didn’t want to think about what might happen to me if I did.

I’d made up my mind to go back inside and was halfway to the door when I heard something behind me.  Curious – and not a little afraid – I turned back around.

The thing that sat on the balcony railing was strange.

It was perched there on its hind legs like an animal.  Its arms trailed down to the balcony floor – they were so long I thought they might be able to reach me across the balcony where I stood.  Each arm ended in a claw that looked sharp enough to cut leather.  Its body was skinny – so much so that I wondered how it didn’t simply fall apart.  It swayed in the breeze and its feet – well, its other set of claws, I guess – tightened their grip on the balcony.

The skin on its face was dried and wrinkled.  In fact, it looked almost decayed, like it was some sort of mummy.  Its mouth was nothing more than a gathering of bunched up flesh that pulled and tugged every time it stretched its jaw.  Its eyes were huge – the size of baseballs – and totally white.  It stared vacantly at me and I stared back at it.

The last thing I noticed was its throat.  There wasn’t much to notice there, really, except that it had a small slit that pulsed with every breath it took.  I wondered what it was for.

The thing stretched open its mouth and left it open wide for a second, giving me the chance to count its tiny, sharp shards of teeth.

It tilted its head to the side and it asked me, “Why are you crying?”

I lifted my fingertips to my cheek in surprise.  I didn’t realize I’d started crying again.

“Because… my parents made me marry someone I don’t want to… and I’m scared and… and I want to go home!” My voice broke at that last bit.  To be truthful, I wasn’t really sure I wanted to go home after all, but I knew that at least I didn’t want to be here anymore, in an unknown house with an unknown man who had anything but unknown intentions.

The creature blinked in surprise. “Marriage?  You are but a child.  How can this be?”

I buried my face in my hands at that and cried harder.  Hearing it said aloud like that somehow made everything worse.  It made everything more real.

I heard a scraping sound and looked up to see the creature hunched in front of me.  Even squatting on its hind legs it was taller than me.  It reached out and ran a tip of its claw down my cheek very, very gently. “Do not cry, little one,” it said.

I stopped crying, more out of shock than anything else.  For a second I wondered if I should be afraid of it.  It didn’t give me enough time to make a decision.

“What is your name?” it asked.

“Um… Mary.” That’s right, like the Virgin Mother.  Hilarious, right?  Like a joke I wasn’t let it on until it was too late.

“Hmm.  Mary.” It nodded to itself and retracted its hand.  Its claw had drawn a bit of blood from my cheek.  I hadn’t noticed. “Mary.  Do not cry anymore.  I will help you.”

“You will?!” I cried.  A burst of joy flooded my chest.  It quickly turned to ice when the creature turned to go.  It climbed up on the balcony railing and I ran after it. “Hey, wait, where are you going?!  Aren’t you going to help me??”

It looked back at me and its eyes looked almost sad. “In time.  I need something from you first.”

“What do you want?  I’ll give you anything.” I was breathless with fear.  I didn’t want it to leave, not yet.

“I need your hate.  When you have enough of it, I can help you.”

I felt my heart sink right through the floorboards.  I hated.  I hated very much.  I hated my parents and the man in the other room and everyone else who watched my sham of a marriage and did nothing to stop it.  I had so much hate, and yet it wasn’t enough.  I was so sure at that moment that it would never be enough.

“What do I call you?” I asked.

It blinked slowly, then said, “Yours.  You may call me ‘Yours,’ because that is what I am.”

With that, it crawled down the balcony and disappeared into the night and the snow and the quiet.

And I was once again left utterly alone.

***

I was sitting on the floor of the balcony, half covered in snow when he returned.  He dragged me back inside in disgust, furious that I’d refused to wear the lingerie he had picked out for me.  He beat me, ripped off my clothes, and forced me to put it on in front of him while I sobbed.

You and I both know what happened next.  It’s a story many women have told throughout history and they’ve all told it better than I could.  So you’ll forgive me, I hope, for skipping the details of the next part.

The next day I woke up covered in blood and bruises.  He sent me downstairs to make his breakfast.  I could barely walk.  In that moment, I hated him.

But I guess I didn’t hate him enough, because Yours didn’t come back.

He didn’t come back until a month later.  My ‘husband’ treated me like a slave, having me do all the chores and cooking during the day.  And then he’d rape and beat me during the night until there was blood in my urine and it hurt to sit down.  One night, I accidentally overcooked supper.  Not burned, just left it on the stove for a few seconds too long.

He beat me until I threw up, which he made me clean it up.  He locked me on the balcony and made me sleep outside in the snow.

And I hated him.  Oh, I hated him so *much.*

Yours came to me that night on the balcony.  If it hadn’t, I probably would have died from the cold.  It curled around my body and kept me warm – it was surprisingly warm, you know, for a… whatever it was.  It whispered assurances to me and held me close while I slept.

I didn’t see Yours for another few months after that.  The days went by with relative monotony.  It wasn’t until about six months after we were married that I realized something was wrong.

It’s funny in a grim sort of way.  He was the one who figured it out.  I was throwing up one morning and he walked into the bathroom. “When was the last time you had your period?” He asked.  It hadn’t been for over two months, and I told him as much.  Stupid as I was, I didn’t even realize you should have one every month.

“I knew it.” His eyes were practically glowing with excitement as he moved behind me and snaked his arms around my belly, caressing it on the way.  I suppressed the urge to vomit again. “You’re with child.  You are going to have my baby.”

He was absolutely elated.  I was shaking with terror.  A baby?  Me?  I didn’t know much about having babies, but I knew it wasn’t pleasant.  It hurt and it made you sick and at the end you had to take care of the thing and how was I going to do all that?  When he left for work, I sank to the floor and cried my eyes out.  I cried for a full hour before managing to get up and do my chores.

That night, I waited on the balcony.  That night, Yours came.

He sat there from his perch on the balcony, staring at me.  My eyes and chest were hollow.  “I hate him.  I truly hate him,” I said.

“Do you?” said Yours.  I nodded.  It beckoned to me, “Come closer.”

It reached out and trailed a claw down my cheek, staring at me.  Its eyes held mine for a long minute before it shook its head. “No, no.  It isn’t enough.”

I cried out as its claw fell away. “When will it be enough?  I can’t hate anymore.  I *can’t.*  I hate him as much as I’ve ever hated anything.  What am I supposed to do?”

Yours leaned towards me and pressed its mouth to my forehead in a strange imitation of a kiss. “In time,” it said.  That was all the comfort it gave before it scuttled down the balcony and left me to my darkness.

In the months that followed my stomach grew bigger.  My worries ballooned at about the same pace.

My husband wouldn’t take me to see a doctor.  He told me that I would have a home birth.  He wouldn’t get me any medicine.  He wouldn’t tell me what I was supposed to do to keep the baby healthy.  I didn’t know anything about my own pregnancy.

Worse still, I kept worrying about what would come *after* the birth.  What if it was a girl?  See, if it was a boy, I wouldn’t have to be so worried.  Boys were allowed to go to school.  They were allowed to choose their wives.  They were allowed to come and go as they please.

But not girls.

What if I had a daughter?  I wondered what my husband would do to her.  How he would look at her.  If he would… touch her.  I thought about marrying her off to someone twice her age.  I thought about never seeing her again, just like I’d never see my sister again.

I thought an awful lot about that.

So I suppose you might say what happened was a blessing, although at the time it certainly didn’t feel that way.

My husband came home drunk one night.  Angry.  Looking for a fight.  Something had gone wrong at work, I suppose.  He had some nights like that.  But I foolishly thought he’d leave me alone this time.  After all, I was several months along at that point – I don’t know how many, but my stomach was protruding rather obviously from my skinny frame.  He didn’t much care about me other than as a sex doll, but I knew he cared about the child.

Apparently he didn’t care enough.

That night when he beat me, I begged him to stop.  I told him he would hurt the baby.  Somehow that made him even more angry.  And when he punched me hard in the stomach, I knew he felt no remorse for what he did.

I fell to the floor, holding my belly, clutching at it while I screamed.  He screamed at me in turn, blaming me, of course.  Blaming me for losing the baby.  Because we both knew it was dead.  It couldn’t sustain a blow like that and live.

An hour later, the blood started.  I hadn’t particularly wanted that child, but I still cried.  I cried for it and for myself and for what had become of my life.  I cried even as he screamed at me through the bathroom door for being a stupid slut, a whore, a Babylonian skank, a Devil’s curse.

Once he was done with his screaming, he stumbled to his bed and collapsed into a drunken slumber.  I waited until I was sure he was out cold before unlocking the door.

I dragged myself out onto the balcony, a trail of blood following in my wake.  I collapsed on the balcony floor, looking up at the moon, wanting to curse it like I had been cursed.  I sat there on my knees and screamed at the sky, trying to pour out all the hate and rage and anger.  Instead, I made it grow bigger and bigger and bigger.

Yours appeared over the balcony railing.  It knew something was different this time.  It came and sat next to me, running its claw through my hair.  It was trying to soothe me.  There was nothing left to soothe.

I could tell it was waiting, so I spoke.

“I hate him.” I said.  I was calm.  I didn’t raise my voice.  I didn’t cry.  I simply spoke from somewhere in my chest that had been locked until that very moment. “I hate him for what he has done to me.  And to the baby.  I hate my parents for giving me to him.  I hate the people who looked on and who did nothing.  I hate them all and I want them to *suffer.*”

I don’t know what I expected from Yours just then.  If I thought it’d be triumphant or sadistic or happy.  All I know is that I didn’t expect the way it looked at me – sad, compassionate, resigned.

“It is time, then, for me,” it sighed, its voice a rasp on the wind that I could barely hear. “If I do this, a piece of you will come away with me forever.  Do you understand?”

I nodded at it.  There was so little of me left, but if it wanted me, it could have me.  It could have all the pieces – I didn’t want them.

It moved to a crouch then, just low enough that it could slip its claw into mine.  It held my hand as it brought me into the room where my husband slept.  It looked at me with its blank eyes and said, “Watch.” I did.

Yours straightened its spine.  As it did so, its neck became longer… and longer… and longer.  I could hear its spine cracking and creaking as its neck unfurled.  The slit in its neck began to widen until it gaped open, exposing the darkness of its innards.

From inside the slit, two muscles darted out.  They were long and firm, resembling spider legs but for the fact that they had no fur on them.  They didn’t even seem to have skin.  It was just red, pulsing flesh crawling out from somewhere inside it.  A deep hacking sound emanated from inside its chest as they continued to grow until they reached maximum extension.  Tipped with a sharp, bony point, the two appendages rested on the floor, tapping impatiently against the floorboards.

Yours shifted until it was on all fours, its body about the height of my head.  It moved forward at a painfully slow pace, approaching the bed where my husband slumbered.  I noticed its eyes were closed and it used its throat appendages to feel around the bed until it found his flesh.

Once it had a sense for where my husband lay, its claws came forward.  One grasped my husband near his collarbone, the other grabbed his pelvis.  Yours leaned forward and all was still for a moment.

Then, it pulled.

It yanked its claws apart hard, so hard that my husband’s body ripped in half.  By the time he awoke and began to scream, he was already in two separate parts, his internal organs spilling out between them.  His agonized screams were soon drowned out by the blood filling his throat.  As he sped towards death, the strange muscles extending from Yours’ throat began to comb through his organs, picking them apart and bringing them back to the maw in its neck.  It swallowed my husband down piece by piece while its claws raked along his body, flaying him open.  By the time Yours had eaten its fill, he was half-consumed, a mess of blood and flesh that was unrecognizable as human.  He twitched for a long time after he died.

Eventually, the appendages retracted back into Yours throat.  The process took several minutes, during which time I stared at the bloody mess on the bed.  I wondered if I’d always remember that… if maybe, one day, images of his face would be replaced with this image of my triumph.  I could only hope.

When Yours was finished, it crawled back to me.

“What happens now?” I asked.

“I am Yours,” it replied. “You must choose.”

* * *

A kind old man in a pickup truck brought me into the hospital several hours later.

He’d found me walking on the side of the road, covered in blood – most of it mine – and had offered me a ride, no questions asked.  I wasn’t afraid.  I knew that I had a protector watching over me.  A guardian angel missing its wings.

The police came, of course.  I told them every detail of what happened.  At first, they were appalled, then bewildered.  By the time I finished, they were convinced I was crazy.

They were a little less convinced after they found my husband’s body.  Or what was left of it.

I was surprised how little I had to deal with the police, actually.  I thought maybe they’d lock me up or open some big investigation or something.  Instead, they informed me that my husband had been a very powerful man.  That if they made his marriage to me known, I might become a target.  I would be blamed for his death.  I would be treated like a whore who had him killed.  After all, among rich men, such things as what he did to me can be overlooked.

The official news story said that he died of a heart attack.  The police knew that I didn’t kill him – there’s no way I physically could have done something like that, especially to someone more than twice my size.  They probably thought that I had somebody kill him.  I suppose they aren’t wrong.

They wanted to put me in foster care.  I didn’t entertain that thought for even a second.  As soon as I was able to, I left the hospital and never looked back.  They didn’t look very hard for me.

The next visit I paid was to my parents.  It took me a while to find them – I’d barely ever left my house growing up and I didn’t even know my own address.  But I found them.

They were surprised to see me.  And uneasy.  I wonder if they ever felt guilty for what they did.  Either way, it didn’t matter.  I asked them what happened to my sister.  They told me they didn’t know, but I could tell they were lying.

Yours helped me take care of them.  It held them down and skinned them slowly, keeping them alive for hours as they screamed and begged for mercy.  Finally, they told me the truth: my sister had been murdered by her husband two years after she’d been married off.

I let Yours kill them then.  I didn’t have any more use for them.  As he finished them off, I searched the house and stole as much cash as I could find.

I drifted for the next few years.  I used the money I took from my parents to forge some documents so I could get work.  They were obvious fakes, but some employers don’t really care.  A lot of them gave me work out of pity, I think.  They thought I was alone in the world.

But I was never alone.  I always had Yours to comfort me.

I still don’t know much about Yours.  I don’t know what it is or where it comes from.  Of the few people I’ve told, most seem to think it’s some kind of a demon.  I know that’s not true.  Nobody can live through what I’ve lived and still believe in God.  People like me don’t have the luxury of that kind of fantasy.

No, I think Yours is just another creature, like you or me, trying to make its way in the world.  And it has grown quite fond of me, I can tell.

I know now what it meant when it told me that I had to give it a piece of myself.  Each time I command it, you see, it takes away a little piece of my humanity.  I couldn’t feel it at first.  After all, I didn’t think I had any humanity left.  But after it took both my parents, I could feel that something in me was changing.  It happens just a little at a time, but it happens nonetheless.

It didn’t want to do that.  It didn’t want to take anything away from me.  But it was the only way to save me.  It’s what must be – the consequences of our deal.

It mourns for me.  It mourns for the humanity I’ve lost and for the childhood that I never had.  It mourns because I cannot love.  Well, that’s not true.  I love Yours.  I don’t love anything else.  I don’t think I ever will.

Each day when I look in the mirror, I see something that’s a little less than human.  Maybe that is its doing.  Or maybe a substantial part of my humanity died when I was forced into that marriage.  I’ll never know.  What’s more, I don’t particularly care.

Lately, I have been thinking about all the other little girls trapped in these marriages all across the US.  The ones who think they’ve been abandoned, forgotten about.  The ones who are waiting for someone to come save them, because they cannot save themselves.

But I could save them.  I could do it.  I don’t know how much humanity I have left to give, how much until I no longer even remotely resemble a person.  But I think that it’s worth it.  If I can save even one child from the fate I was given, from the choices I had to make, it will be worth it.

It mourns for me now, too, that I’ve made my decision.  But I won’t regret it.  I won’t regret giving my life and my humanity for something bigger than myself.

Perhaps in time, I, too, will be like Yours.  Or Yours will be like me.  I only hope it stays with me so I don’t have to go it alone.

Yes… that’s what I must do.  I’m ready now.

Are you?

***

[+](http://www.girlsnotbrides.org/about-child-marriage/)
The title basically says it all. If you're wondering who "they" are, well that's the strange part. It's your family, or roommate or whatever. I've never heard of this happening before so I'm not sure what I can really do about it. Other than pretend I'm sleeping of course... That's the only thing that really seems to keep them docile. Lemme explain what's been happening in a little more detail.

This has been going on for the past 3 nights now. I didn't really think much of it the first night. because I honestly thought my family was pulling some prank on me. That is until last night, when I was attacked by my wife...

The first night was a pretty early night for my wife Kelsey, and my twin boys Eric and Erin. All of us were out cold by 9:00 p.m. we had a pretty long day of splitting wood to stock up for the upcoming winter. That night I woke up too an odd silence in the house. Like everyone had left and I was alone in the house. I grabbed my phone and checked the time, 1:09 a.m. I rolled over just to check if my wife was still sleeping and when I found the bed empty I sat up and looked around. The house was pitch black other than the hall light by my boys room we left on and with that dim light I could see 3 shadows cast along the hall way wall as my bedroom was left open.

"Kelsey?" I groggily called out.

I could see all 3 shadows twitch at the sound of my voice. Like they were startled. 

"Kels!" I called a little louder.

This time a shiver was sent down my spine as all three heads of the shadows looked in my direction. "What the fuck?" I whispered to myself, tossing the blankets off from me as I got up to investigate. I tip toed to my door with a feeling of unease growing in the pit of my stomach. Once I got to the door I peeked around and was pretty creeped out at what I saw. Kelsey and the boys were standing still as statutes with their bodies turned towards the boys's room, their necks however strained to stare directly at me. Huge smiles that looked painful to maintain plastured on all of their faces.

"What the hell are you guys doing?" I asked with a chuckle, thinking they were playing a joke on me.

Now that I think back it didn't make much sense thinking they were joking. After all, why would they get up in middle of the night for that with no guarantee I'd even wake up? 

Their bodies made an unnatural twitch at the sound of my voice which made me jump back in surprise. This was when I really started to think something might be wrong. A feeling of dread washed over me and I began to sweat. Then the sound of the clock on the microwave beeping as if it reset rang through the house made me jump in the air as I let out a startled yelp. My boys turned instantly and walked back into their room, Kelsey doing the same. Her smile disappeared and she walked by me like a zombie and crawled back in bed, snoring as if she were sleeping the whole time. Confused as hell I walked back to my side of the bed and checked the time on my phone. 

"What the..." I said to myself as I noticed the time.

1:10 a.m. No way only a minute had passed since I first woke up. It had to have been at a very minimum of 5 minutes. Still though, I shook it off and got back into bed, deciding to bring it up to Kelsey in the morning.

The next morning I woke up and everything was back to normal. I could hear the boys playing in the living room and smelled bacon and eggs as Kelsey cooked breakfast. I got up and walked out with a smile as I remembered their little joke from the night before.

"Good morning pranksters..." I said with a laugh.

They all stared at me with a confused look on their faces.

"Huh?" My wife finally said.

"Last night? All of you standing in the hallway smiling at me? Gotta admit it was a good one, creeped me out a lil bit." I said shaking my head.

"Ryan don't even joke like that, you know those creepy smiling people stories freak me out." Kelsey scolded.

"Hey you're the one trying to freak me out in the middle of the night!" I laughed. "By the way how in the hell did you get the phones to stop time at 1:09? That was a good touch."

My whole family was looking at me like I was a nut job. Then simultaneously they all started shouting it wasn't funny and that I was scaring them. I was bewildered. I didn't know if they were still in on the joke or if somehow they had all been sleep walking. That wouldn't explain the time though.

"Ok ok ok!" I shouted. "I must've been having a damn dream Jesus Christ! Don't freak out on me damn..." 

I turned and walked back into the room moor confused than ever. I knew I wasn't dreaming. Were they this serious about their little prank or did they really not remember? Either way, I figured I'd settle it that night. I'd simply record them with my phone if they tried it again, that'd ruin their little joke pretty quick. 

Satisfied with my plan I went about my day. The boys helped split and stack more wood while Kelsey did some running in town. Before I knew it it was night time again and we were all in bed. I made sure to have my phone charged and right next to me, ready to catch them in the act. 

Once again I woke up hours later, that same eerie silence filled the house. This time my adrenaline started pumping as the feeling of dread hit me like a ton of bricks. I grabbed my phone and lit the screen up. 1:09 a.m. I tried to switch it to record but my phone was frozen.

"Fuck!" I whisper yelled.

I looked over to the hall and seen the same shadows as the night before. This time, a little closer. My blood ran cold as I noticed out of the corner of my eye that the t.v. was left on, but the picture was froze. It seemed all electronics were froze or something, adding to the creepy feeling that engulfed my body.

I got up once again and tip toed to the door. I peeked my head around and had to cover my mouth to stifle a yelp. Kelsey and the boys were standing facing me directly this time, only somehow their smiles even bigger than before. Now that they were a good 5 feet closer I could see just how wide open and blood shot their eyes were. 

When I moved my hand to cover my mouth all three of them took a giant step forward. Naturally, I took a step back. They mimicked with another huge step forward, this time since Kelsey was bigger than the boys she stepped ahead. She was now maybe 3-5 feet away, her eyes opening even wider, as she looked extremely excited. I turned around to jump back in bed and as I did so I heard loud booming as they gave chase. I felt huge blows hit my back, far harder than any of them should be able to inflict.

"What the fuck! Oww!" I shouted as my back ached from the impact.

I was now in bed and I yanked the covers over my head. Childish I know, but hey, I wasn't about to strike my wife. Thankfully as I layed still the blows stopped and I heard heavy breathing from what I assumed was Kelsey, only it sounded way too deep and raspy. Then the breathing stopped all together and silence filled the room.

"I know you're not asleep..." She whispered so fast I barely made out what she said.

Just then the beeping of the microwave filled the house and the t.v. resumed. I heard the sound of soft footsteps leave the room as the boys went back you their rooms, followed by pressure next to me in bed as Kelsey climbed back under the covers. I quickly grabbed my phone and checked the time, 1:10 a.m. this didn't make any fucking sense...

I did my best to go back to sleep but needless to say, I didn't sleep much. I tossed and turned as I tried to figure out what in the hell was happening. I tried to figure out what steps to take next. The only thing I could think of was to pretend I was asleep next time since my lack of movement seemed to stop the blows. If they thougt I was asleep all together maybe they'd just stand creepily in the hallway? It was worth a shot I guess...

I'll update tomorrow and let you guys know how last night went for me. It was still extremely scary but hey, I didn't get attacked so that's a start right? I've got another plan for tonight too but I'll just put that in the update tomorrow. Wish me luck and if anyone's got any ideas as what to do here please, feel free to help...[Read Part 1 Here](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/dlk100/ive_been_flying_for_almost_thirty_hours_and_the/?st=k269q0gn&sh=f6440917)

[Read Part 2 Here](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/dm86h5/ive_been_flying_for_almost_thirty_hours_and_the/?st=k269q1qh&sh=b655a8d9)

After another dozen hours or so, I opened the bathroom door. The lights in the cabin were back to normal and I couldn’t smell any sulfur. 

I cautiously made my way back to my seat and almost cried when the grinning crying flight attendant came by offering a meal. That crappy airline food was the most delicious thing I’d ever eaten. 

When I’d finished, my mind immediately turned to Mary. What had happened to her?

I crept down the aisle towards first class, trying to keep a low profile. Surprisingly, the flight attendants were nowhere to be seen. They’d almost seemed to ignore me, almost as if they wanted me to find her.

She had a row to herself and was staring down at her phone in the window seat. I slid into the aisle and shook her arm. 

“Mary!” I hissed.

She pulled out her headphones and stared at me with a surprised expression. “Yeah? What’s going on?”

“Are you ok?” I asked. “What did that thing do to you? What did they do to you?”

“I’m sorry, remind me how I know you?”

“What do you mean? We just-” I realized with sinking horror that she had no idea who I was. I fought back tears. “Mary, how long have you been on this flight?”

She checked the watch on her wrist. “Well it’s 4:03 AM so a few hours at least.” She stared at me the same way you’d look at a person claiming they were the second coming of Christ. Her tone was low and reassuring. “Hey, don’t worry so much. Look on the bright side; we’ll be landing in about an hour.”

I felt an iron grip on my arm and looked up to see two flight attendants. “Sir, this area is for first-class passengers only.” 

They were still crying and grinning, but just with tears this time. I could still see streaks of blood staining the front of their uniforms though. 

I was escorted back to my seat where I spent the next several days. Attendants continued to stop by with food, I would use the bathroom, and soon was going absolutely crazy with the monotony. 

In retrospect, those few days weren’t so bad. There’s a lot of content on the internet after all, even with crappy plane WiFi. No, it didn’t get really bad until around ten days later when the WiFi failed.

It was sometime a week later that I lost control and began screaming for a flight attendant. They didn’t come for several minutes, but eventually one did.

“Just...just let me see the Captain,” I asked.

The flight attendant bent low and spoke with that same customer-service voice: “I’m sorry sir, the captain has made his decision regarding you quite clear. You didn’t answer his call, and will, therefore, wait.”

“How long?”

“Quite a while I’m afraid. Don’t worry though sir, we’ll be landing in about an hour.” She straightened and walked away.

I started making notches on various parts of the seatback to keep track of different things. One notch for each time I used the bathroom, one for each meal, one for every time I watched a given movie, that sort of thing. 

It was hell. I watched every movie in the seatback a dozen times over. If I ever acted out badly enough, I would be escorted back to my seat by one or more flight attendants. Any attempt at conversation with other passengers was met with confusion by them followed by a quick escort back to my seat.

I’d guess it was on or around day thirty that, in a moment of panic and psychosis, I broke my laptop and phone, screaming at the top of my lungs. No one around me reacted in any way. 

Two months later, I stunk. The muscles in my legs were tight and cramped constantly. I finally concluded that suicide was my only option after my hundred-and-twenty-eight rewatch of Thor Ragnarok. 

I got to my feet and limped towards the emergency exit. I knew normally the pressure inside the airplane forced the doors closed, but I figured that nothing about my situation was normal. If this didn’t work, I’d find some other more painful way to go. 

I grabbed at the handle and swung it up. To my shock, the door opened easily, though no wind of any kind whipped around the cabin. It remained the standard slightly-too-cold temperature that it’d been for the past who-knew how long. 

The open door called to me, a black portal out of the plane. I stared at it for a long moment, almost too long. An attendant’s hand grabbed my shoulder, pulling me away. In a fit of anger and strength that surprised me, I wrenched away and jumped out of the plane. 

The wind whipping past my face was almost magical, a new sensation after so many months of the same. The ocean below me grew closer and larger, and I realized that suddenly, I didn’t want to die after all. 

It grew larger and larger and larger until it seemed that all I could see was darkness and waves.

I impacted the surface of the water so fast and hard that my entire body jerked around in the seat. I pulled my hand back, sucking at my bruised knuckle. I’d hit it on the seat in front of me.

“No,” I whispered. Then shouted. “NO! NO! NO!”

A flight attendant ran down the aisle, kneeling beside me. “Are you OK sir?”

I clenched my hands into fists, almost swinging at her. But then I realized. 

She wasn’t grinning.

She wasn’t crying. 

To be honest she looked a little scared of me.

I reached my right hand down to my pocket where I could feel my now-unbroken phone. 

4:04 AM.

“Sir, if you can calm down we’ll be landing in about an hour.”

My mouth tasted like ash. “Thank you,” I managed. “I will.”

I stared unblinking at my phone. It now displayed 4:05 AM.

Then I looked out my window and began to cry at the sight of city lights below me. 

We did land in about an hour. I can’t even begin to explain why or how, but I’m currently sitting in an airport cafe typing this out. I’m free. I’m out.

And I’m never going flying again.

---------------------------

---------------------------


EDIT: I sure hope the bartender here at the airport just has a naturally wide grin.

---------------------------

---------------------------


[More](https://www.reddit.com/r/WorchesterStreet/comments/gbpc8t/a_huge_storm_swept_through_my_town_a_week_ago_it/)  

I was born into one of those old families of the South, the kind that has long silence toppled and decayed, attempting desperately to hold itself together. We’d had money, once, as evidenced by the grand old buildings that sat on our property. But the old barns and guest-houses sat empty and abandoned, choked with cobwebs and weeds and Spanish moss. The forest had begun to reclaim the property. 

My family was like many others of its kind. A long, winding lineage marked with rape and slavery and pain. But one thing set us apart- there were no women in my family. I had no mother, no sisters or grandmothers. Every member of my family was male. 

My five brothers and I never thought it strange, though. We were uneducated and mostly separated from the outside world. Our days were spent laboring on the decaying property, all of our efforts inevitably useless. When we weren’t plucking weeds or clearing out the decades of trash from the various buildings, we played. The quasi-wilderness of our home was a perfect stage for our games. 

My father was a kind man, but strict. Our self-contained life came with a strange set of rules. There was a chapel on the property, a small white thing half-hidden in the woods. It was in better condition than anything else, due to my father’s doting care. We were not allowed inside the chapel without him, however. A padlock on the door prevented us from sneaking in.

We were, on occasion, allowed to go to town. It was a half-hour walk through the woods to get there, and excursions were highly anticipated. There were conditions, though- we had to stick together, and we weren’t allowed to talk to women.

We could talk to men and other boys, but my father strictly forbade us from talking to women, girls, even old maids. He instructed us to say hello and good day and yes ma’am and thank you ma’am like good little Southern boys. But other than that, not a word. 

This was weird, of course, but everyone in town seemed to abide by these rules as well. The women would give us curt nods and avoid us otherwise. It was so engrained into our daily lives that none of us ever questioned it.

It wasn’t going to work forever, of course. My oldest brother, Jamie, started making eyes at the pretty girl who worked at the drugstore ice cream counter. She made eyes back. Soon he was sneaking off to be with her during our visits. He would leave my brothers and I at the drugstore or the park, buying our silence with penny candy and ice cream. 

Jamie’s little tryst didn’t last long, though. Lazlo, the second youngest, had always been loose-lipped. One day when we came back from town, our father asked us what we did.

“Jamie snuck off,” Lazlo blurted. “He always goes and sneaks off to see that ice-cream girl.”

Pa’s face grew very pale. He turned to Jamie and seized him by the shoulders.

“Is that true?” he asked in a voice that was much too quiet. “You’re seein’ a girl?” 

A tense silence hung over us. Jamie opened his mouth, closed it. 

“Jamie, come join me on the porch,” Pa said icily. 

My father never hit us; I want to make that clear. But when he was truly angry or upset, he had a way of talking that cut you to the bone, that made you feel like absolute dogshit. When I was really little and got in trouble, I would hide and cry for hours afterwards, consumed by guilt.  

Jamie and Pa went onto the porch. The rest of us dispersed throughout the house, the happy mood of the day soured. For a couple weeks afterwards, we beat on Lazo especially hard, and gave him the worst roles in our games. After that he mostly kept his mouth shut.

Jamie returned with a pale face. He didn’t talk to any of us until the morning, where he tried to act like nothing had happened. 

I caught him alone that day. I tugged on his sleeve and asked him, “What did Pa say to you the other night?”

Jamie looked down at me. His face suddenly seemed very old. But he gave me a weak smile and tousled my hair.

“Not yer business,” he said. “Don’t worry about it.”

I wasn’t in the habit of displeasing my older brother, so I went along with my life.

The next time we went to town, the ice-cream girl batted her eyes at Jamie, but he stared straight away from her, and she frowned sadly. She wasn’t as nice to us after that.

There isn’t much else to say of my childhood. It was unique, surely, but we had always lived our lives that way, and I was not the questioning type. Our existence continued rather uneventfully for years. My brothers and I cleaned old houses that would never be occupied, and weeded yards that would never be used. The forest grew in faster than we could pluck. 

Then came the day when Jamie turned eighteen. Birthdays were frequent in a family of seven, but turning eighteen- that was special, according to Pa. 

On the special day, Pa got us all up early and scrubbed our faces with a spit-wet cloth. He made us put on our best clothes, moth-eaten from disuse. He gave Jamie one of his old suits, and it hung baggy on his thin frame. Then we gathered in the chapel. 

Inside, the air was still and silent. I remember feeling disappointed at the sight of the perfectly normal interior. I always expected there to be some great, terrible secret that my father was guarding. But it was just an old chapel.

We sat in the front pew, all in a row. Pa and Jamie hung back at the door. They exchanged some quiet words, and then began to walk. 

They marched arm in arm, staring stiffly ahead. They stepped in time to some silent rhythm. Slowly they made their way up the aisle.

My father bent behind the pulpit, and the sound of creaking wood broke the terse silence. He had opened a trapdoor.

Pa and Jamie, still arm-in-arm, descended into the door, down stairs we couldn’t see from our angle. My brothers and I sat uncomfortably in the pew, restless but still quiet.

I felt a strange swelling sensation, like something enormous was happening that I couldn’t comprehend. I channeled this by plucking wildly at the loose threads of my ill-fitting pants. My brothers and I sat nervously for a long while, until Pa emerged again, alone. He shut the trapdoor behind him.

“Time to go home, boys,” he said. 

I wanted to ask where Jamie was, but my tongue felt heavy. Instead I fell into step behind him, and we made a solemn procession back to the rotting mansion where we lived. 

Jamie was there the next morning, snoring in his bed next to mine. We all scrutinized him for some change, but he was the same Jamie he’d always been. The only answer to our questions we received was a hard sock in the arm when we bothered him too much.

A few months later, Pa came into our room in the middle of the night. I had been lying awake, but I pretended to sleep as he quietly roused Jamie and led him out the door. I dozed very lightly, only to be re-awoken when I heard them coming back up the stairs.

Jamie made his way to his bed slowly. In the faint moonlight, I could see that his shoulders were shaking. He crawled under the covers. I could hear the muffled sound of him sobbing.

After that, Jamie was different. He was withdrawn and angry. He stopped playing with us and was quick to yell. There was an angry tension between him and Pa. Even as young as I was, I knew the change had something to do with that strange place in the chapel.

I wouldn’t have to wait long to find out the secret of our family. After all, I was the second oldest. My birthday came that November.

I remember every second of that day.

Pa woke me before my brothers. He brought me into the master suite where he spent the nights of his lonely existence. The room might have once been grand, but now the walls were ashy with cigarette smoke and it smelled like stale living. The bedsheets were rumpled on only one side. It made me sad to think of Pa sleeping alone every night in that huge, motheaten bed. 

Pa dressed me in the same suit that Jamie had worn. It fit me a little better; I was fuller and shorter than he was. I looked in the mirror and felt a flash of pride. I was a proper gentleman for once, like those clean-cut men in the old magazines we sometimes found while cleaning; no longer a dirty-faced little boy. 

Pa stepped back after fixing my tie, his eyes shining. The harsh line of his mouth wobbled as he rubbed his thumb across my cheekbone. 

“I’m so proud of you,” he said, and hugged me. My chest swelled with warmth and pride.

We walked through the woods to the little white chapel. It was cool, and the woods were alive in red and orange. My brothers gathered in the pews while Pa and I waited outside the doors.

He looped his arm through mine and looked at me.

“Just follow my lead,” he murmured, patting my arm. His words soothed me. The doors of the chapel swung open on their own, and the sound of church bells echoed through the woods, though the rusty bell in the tower sat still. But I wasn’t afraid.

Pa walked me down the aisle, towards the empty pulpit. We walked in time to the toll of the bells, something I realized only the two of us could hear. My brothers whispered and fidgeted in the pew. Jamie sat on the far end, staring straight ahead, his eyes dull and back stiff. 

We ascended. Behind the pulpit lay the secret trapdoor, ancient and moldered. Pa gave the rusted brass ring a mighty pull, and it opened with a creak.

Before us lay a stone staircase, riddled with cracks and dappled with moss and mushrooms. The shallow stairs led into the dark. 

For the first time that day, I felt something other than anticipation and pride. I was afraid. But I think, looking back, that I would have been unable to leave if I tried.

Pa and I walked carefully down the stairs. He still held tight to my arm. We emerged into an earthen tunnel, tall enough for us to walk upright, though roots from the ceiling brushed our heads. 

For a moment, we stood still. There was a strange sputtering sound, and a breeze blew from the darkness ahead. That should have been impossible, as the tunnel seemed to only go deeper into the ground. But as the breeze came, so did light. Alcoves had been scooped into the earthen walls, and tens of candles suddenly burst to life in their wax-filled recesses. I jumped as the sudden light revealed hundreds of moths. They took off, excited by the flame. Their soft wings flapped and brushed against my cheek. 

As Pa and I walked down the tunnel, my apprehension grew. I started shaking. Pa stood resolute by my side, his presence steadying. 

I don’t know how long we walked in silence. The tunnel was not without its own sound- the pop of fat from the candles, the drip of moisture from the ceiling, the tamping of our shoes and the fluttering of moth’s wings. They landed on my shoulders and my head, and bounced off of my face often.

I wanted to ask Pa where we were going. But, yet again, I stayed silent.  

Soon, I became aware of a faint sweet smell. Almost at the same time, the candlelight revealed a door. Moths were clustered around it so thickly that it appeared the frame was made of a canvas of pale shivering wings. 

Pa turned to me. In the flickering candlelight, the hollows of his face were cast in sharp relief. He looked more like an ape than a man. 

“This is where I leave you, son,” he said. He put his hands on my shoulders. “Don’t be afraid. You won’t be hurt, I promise. Just do what Nature tells you to do.” 

He saw that I was shaking, and he laid his hand on my face.

“This is our family’s legacy, Eli. Jamie did this, I did this, my father before me did this…it’s as old and ancient as our blood. Older, even. Nothing is going to harm you.” 

“Okay,” I choked out. My father smiled wanly, then turned and left me before the door.

He disappeared back the way we came, and I was alone. 

Cautiously, I pushed open the stone door. The moths fluttered away from it, forming a cloud that I had to bat away to see. 

The chamber that I emerged into was huge. The walls were lined with hundreds of alcoves with candles burning bright, and more candles were spread across the floor. Across from me, there was a great white bed, surrounded by gossamer curtains. The sweet smell was overpowering, undercut by something primal and funky, like body odor.  

Then, the bed moved. From its side unfolded pairs of strange appendages. I struggled to comprehend what I was seeing. They were arms- human arms, ending in human hands. But they bent in too many places, and they were too long and pale. Long tendrils like feathers flared from their elbows. 

It wasn’t a bed.  

It was a person, perhaps in the loosest sense of the word. Its body was huge, white and bloated. What I had thought were pillows were actually huge pendulous breasts, bare of nipples. The swell of the ‘bed’s’ comforter was a huge stomach, sagging down to the ground in ripples of white flesh. 

As I watched, a pair of the arms reached to gently part the gossamer curtains, like a bride lifting a veil.

Its face- how to describe its face? Once, cleaning trash out of our house, I found an old china doll. It had a puffy, exaggerated expression of innocence, though time had worn the paint from its face and gave it only the barest imitation of humanity.

The creature’s face looked like that doll, but its eyes were large and bulging, and completely black. 

Most notably of all, from its forehead sprouted a pair of long feathery antenna. They were as long as its arms, reaching towards the high ceiling. They waved back and forth gently like ferns.

As I took it in, stunned by the wrongness of it all, the creature smiled at me. Its pale, fleshy lips parted, revealing a dripping black mouth with no teeth. And then it spoke.

“Hello, sweet Elias,” it said. The voice was so wrong. The intonation and words were clearly English, the voice feminine. But it had a weird buzz to it, and a thick quality like someone speaking with their throat blocked. 

I was somehow able to find my own voice.

“What are you?” I asked. “How do you know my name?” 

A strange buzzing and clicking noise came from the creature. The fat on its body rolled like waves, and the toothless mouth gaped wider. It was laughing. 

“I am you,” it said. “You are the fruit of my loins. I birthed your brothers, and your father, and your father’s father, and his father before him. I know every inch of you, your flesh, for it grew and pupated within me. Now, the time has come for you to give of yourself, so I may have your son.”

I understood almost immediately. I felt a mix of horror and revulsion, but it was far-off, suppressed. The sweet smell filled my nostrils. It made my head swim. My skin was hot and itchy in the ill-fitting suit. 

I should have been terrified. I should have been disgusted. I am, in retrospect. But I was under the spell of the creature, the scent of its pheromones too powerful for my brain to comprehend. In that moment, I knew that my body served a singular purpose, and I knew what that purpose was. 

Then I was before the creature. Its many arms petted my hair, my body, my face, the soft feathers tickling me. It cooed and spoke to me as I climbed on top of it, my body sinking into its soft and yielding flesh.

I lay on its stomach, its bosom as my pillow. Lying against its skin, though it was tacky like dough, I felt a comfort I had never known nor have ever known sense. I was safe, I was swaddled, I was *loved.* It wrapped its spindly arms around me, its buzzing words of encouragement burrowing into my brain like worms.

And then I began to move my hips, and I was in heaven.

I’ll spare you the mechanical details of that coupling. Me recalling having sex with a moth-monster who was also apparently my mother and grandmother is just as traumatizing as you reading about it. 

But what I must say is that I have never felt pleasure like that since. I have never once felt so held, so loved, and so safe. I know now that I wasn’t in my right mind, and recalling it makes me nauseous. But there are still nights I jolt awake feeling a ghost of that heavenly pleasure, and for a moment I grieve that I’ll never feel it again.

I don’t know how long I was in the chamber with that thing. I vaguely remember dressing myself slowly, still drunk from the pheromones in the air. I remember the creature rubbing its belly as I left, followed by a cloud of moths. 

I slept dreamlessly for hours and hours. Over dinner, I made eye contact with Pa as I was shoveling spaghetti into my mouth. He beamed at me proudly, and I felt good.

But Jamie was looking at me also. He didn’t return my smile, his mouth now permanently set in a grim line.

As the encounter with the moth creature faded like a dream, Jamie continued to bother me. Hadn’t he experienced the same heavenly pleasure I’d had? Sure, there were lingering dregs of fear, even disgust at what I’d done, but if everyone in our family had done it, what was the harm? It was our legacy, after all.

More time passed, and my confusion turned to anger. Jamie barely interacted with us anymore. Did he think he was better than us? Did he think that his feelings made him separate from the family, somehow? 

I never got the chance to confront him. He came to me.

It was about five months after my eighteenth birthday. Life had continued as normal. But one morning when we woke up, there was a strange feeling in the air. I made a comment about it to my brothers, but they just looked at me blankly. As we went about our chores, I felt strangely happy.

We were walking out of one of the old guesthouses when Jamie grabbed me roughly by the arm and pulled me away. He was nearly nose-to-nose with me, and his eyes were bright and wild. 

“You listen good now, Eli,” he hissed. “Why the hell do you think Pa never let us talk to the girls in town?”

I looked at him in confusion. 

“That *thing* in the chapel,” he continued. “It doesn’t want outside…competition. It gave birth to all of us. Boys. But it can’t control the gender of the baby it makes. Why do you think there’s no girls in our family? What do you think *happens* when one is born?” 

The beginnings of dread begin to creep up from my stomach.

“Yours is coming today,” Jamie continued, his mouth turned into a scowl. He let go of the vice grip on my arm. “And for your sake, I hope it ain’t a girl.”

His face fell. “I wasn’t so lucky.” 

Before I could say anything, he was gone, stalking off after the rest of our brothers. I stood staring after him.

As night came, my dread grew. Gone was my pleasant mood from before. Night found me sleepless, and I stared at the ceiling for hours.

When the door creaked open, I knew it was Pa. He came to my bedside and motioned for me to join him.

We made our way through the dark woods to the chapel. The bad feeling was everywhere, soaked into the very air. The creatures of the night were silent, and it was cold.

The chapel stood a white smear in the darkness. We went inside. The floorboards seemed to vibrate, and when Pa opened the trapdoor, I heard it.

A terrible, buzzing wail, full of anger and pain, punctuated by inhuman squeaks and growls. I had heard the sounds of animals in pain before. This was like some sort of horrible symphony of all of those cries. 

I recoiled at the sound, standing rooted to the spot. I looked at Pa to see if my horror was reflected in his face. It was, to some extent, but over it lay a veneer of hardness. I realized then that whatever was happening was no mystery to him. He had probably experienced it a hundred times before.

He took my arm and practically dragged me down the tunnel. The moths were flapping around wildly, diving at us and bouncing off the walls. A few of them flew into the candle flames, their feathery wings burning as fast as paper. 

The screaming got louder.

We came to the chamber. The creature was in the same spot, but this time, its body was rippling like a wave. Some of its arms were braced on the walls and floor. The sweet smell was gone, replaced by that of blood and viscera. 

The creature’s puffy doll-face was twisted in a horrifying mask of pain and rage. Spittle flew from its black mouth as it wailed, the sound bouncing around the chamber. Its antenna swiveled wildly around its head, every feather twitching and shaking.

At the sight of us, its pallid face contorted further. 

“LEVI!” It bellowed my father’s name. “WHAT HAVE YOU WROUGHT? THE FRUIT OF YOUR LOINS BEGET ME ONLY CURSES!” 

I was transfixed by the creature’s rippling body, bile rising in the back of my throat. It was pushing something out, I realized. A dark puddle was forming on the floor beneath it. 

My father moved towards the creature like he meant to comfort it. A pair of arms sideswiped him with surprising strength, sending him careening into the wall. He tripped over the candles. 

The creature let out a deep, throaty groan. Its body gave one more powerful ripple, and there was a wet noise as something dropped to the floor of the cave. 

What lay before me was, essentially, a cocoon. It was roughly watermelon-sized, white, and it glistened with fluid in the light. The creature’s screams died into rattling breaths.

As I watched, the cocoon began to tremble. A tiny red fist tore its way through the gauzy membrane. From the hole, I heard a cry, weak and plaintive. It was a baby.

Something came over me. I somehow knew that the baby was *mine.* I’m sure others can tell better stories of parental instincts kicking in, but that’s what happened to me at that moment. While my father and the creature struggled to recover, I knelt down and began ripping the cocoon apart, trying to free the baby within.

The cocoon had the texture of spider silk, thin and sticky. It dissolved at my touch. Soon the baby was free. Its skin was red and blotchy, and it looked like a lumpy potato. But its face and cry were wholly human, and as I held it in my hands, I could feel the very gears of the world turning. My fate was changing. 

“Elias,” the creature rasped. I looked up at it. Its expression had relaxed, its black eyes grown wide and shining, reflecting the candlelight. Its antenna had calmed, resuming their slow and gentle waving. It reached its nearest pair of arms out to me. 

“Bring it to me,” it demanded. I lifted the baby in front of me, and realized with sudden dread that something on it was missing.

The baby was female. 

The creature’s arms strained for the baby, and I instinctually clutched it to my chest.

“Why?” I asked.

“It is a usurper,” the creature spat. “It is a curse, and the labor was long. I am *hungry.*” 

It licked its lips, leaving behind a film of gray spit from a black tongue.

Jamie’s words came back to me then, and I realized that he was right.

Pa had gotten to his feet. He clutched his side, clearly hurt, and his clothes were singed from candle flames. 

“Just give it to her, son,” he wheezed. “It’ll be over soon.” 

I looked down at the baby. It was crying and squirming. It grabbed onto my shirt as tightly as it could, its little fist balling in the fabric. 

For the first time in my life, I made my own decision; I turned away from my family.

And I ran.

I held the baby tightly to my chest as I sprinted into the tunnel. My father called after me, but his voice was drowned out by a buzzing wail that grew in volume until it seemed a physical thing, a wave pushing me out. Moths bounced off my face. As I ran past the candles, they blew out, filling the tunnel with darkness. 

I thought I heard my father scream, a sound of terror beneath the creature’s anger. I don’t like to think about it.

I left our property towards town, the baby still bawling loudly. Finally I had to stop running, my lungs burning and my legs cramping. I have never been as afraid as I was limping through that dark forest, my daughter’s cries a dead giveaway to any who would follow. But nothing did.

I walked through the town, knocking on doors until someone answered. My daughter’s sobs had tapered from a steady stream to quiet whimpers, and I knew she needed care soon.

The ice-cream girl answered the door, her hair mussed with sleep. She took in the sight of me, recognizing me immediately, and her eyes widened at the baby in my arms.

“Please help us,” I croaked. It was the first time I’d spoken to a woman, really spoken. 

Shirley’s family took care of me for a while. They taught me how to care for my daughter, how to change diapers and prepare formula and burp her. I never left their house for fear of seeing my family. I was there for only a week or two, then my daughter and I hit the road again. We went from town to town, surviving on the kindness of strangers. It was usually women who ended up helping us. I met all kinds of women- women hardened by the world, bitter ones, gentle ones, fiery ones. They taught me about the world, about all the things I’d been missing. 

When we were far enough north that I felt safe, I began trying to settle down. My daughter was growing into a healthy, fat little toddler. She was the axis on which my world turned- everything I did, I did for her. Eventually I named her Deborah- Debbie for short.

I found a decent job, with on-site daycare for Debbie. Back then, it was a little easier to provide for a child than it is today, I won’t deny. But I still worked myself to the bone. It was the easiest way to chase away the shadows that plagued my mind.

I had lovers here and there, both men and women, but nothing lasted. Sex was difficult for me, considering what I had been through. I always felt disgusting afterwards, always unable to ignore the simple fact that it would never feel as good as *that*. And that knowledge made me feel like a monster. Eventually I stopped trying to feign interest in sex, and I was happier for it, but it meant that I never got into a real relationship. 

I didn’t need a relationship. I had Debbie. And as the years passed and she grew bright and smart and funny, the shadows of my past seemed farther and farther away.

But I was a fool to let myself be comforted by time. I cannot escape the curse of my blood, no matter how far I run.

Yesterday was Debbie’s fourteenth birthday. Today she locked herself in the bathroom in the morning, crying for hours. When she finally let me in, I could barely contain a scream.

Because there, bursting from my daughter’s forehead, was a pair of long feathery antennae.That’s what my dad always used to say, with a chuckle and a pat to my head. ‘She’s a keeper,’ he’d say to a grocer or clerk at a convenience store. People used to fawn over the cute pigtailed gal by her daddy’s side, always said her pleases and thank yous, never threw a tantrum, was an absolute angel.  

Maybe this is why when I grew up I always need someone giving me a pat on the back. If I’m not getting a compliment about how I look or how well I did at work, I’m gonna assume I did something wrong or I had a piece of lettuce stuck in my teeth all day.  

This hasn’t always worked out for me. I’m a keeper, but I can also be a sucker. Like what’s been happening with my boss.  

I love working as a secretary, it’s a job that makes me feel really fulfilled. This makes me a bit of a stereotype though with how I practically melted when Jonathan Price, my boss, complimented my blouse and my work ethic on my first day. I just reminded myself by looking at the silver ring on his left hand and the picture on his desk with his children that I shouldn’t read too much into it.  

Jonathan was perfect though, and over time I realized I read him just right.  

I never wanted to be the other woman. I just wanted to be loved. And being around Jonathan, working late nights just to have a moment to talk with him, having drinks after work… the inevitable happened. He kissed me after a few too many beers, and we ended up going back to my place. We slept together.  

I poured my heart out to him after that, how I’d liked him for so long, and that I really felt a connection with him. He just smiled and brushed the hair from my eyes, telling me that I was the kind of girl you didn’t just let get away.  

Of course I believed him.  

Of course I swallowed the lump in my throat whenever I saw Mariana coming to visit her husband. My lover.  

Of course I ignored how I was the choice topic of office gossip, how the guys smirked and the other women gave me the side eye and the cold shoulder.

Of course I listened when Jonathan said he was going to leave her soon. He just needed to make sure he didn’t hurt her.  

And of course, whenever he called me to meet him at our typical meeting spot, a hotel in downtown, I was there with bells on.  

Yeah, I know what you’re thinking of me. I think it too. I’m not the brightest bulb in the package, but like I told you, I’m pretty easily manipulated. But I love Jonathan, I love his work ethic, I love how he takes care of his kids, kids that he learned soon enough I couldn’t have. I wonder if that was part of my appeal to him. That he couldn’t accidentally knock me up.  

He doesn’t… didn’t love me. I was just an easy lay, a stereotype in every sense of the word.  

I only started wising up last week, when it occurred to me that Jonathan really wasn’t slowing down his relationship with his wife and certainly wasn’t preparing for divorce proceedings. She was pregnant with their third child, I saw the pictures he posted on Facebook of their anniversary dinner.  

It hit me like a semi truck when I read his status about enjoying their fifteen years together and couldn’t wait to see what the next fifteen will bring.  

I cried. I drunk a lot of wine. And then I asked him to come to my apartment. That we needed to talk.  

Scary words for a guy, right? Took Jonathan a while to drag his ass over, which by then I was even more drunk. I don’t drink often, and certainly not in excess, but can you blame me? I’d just had that reality shattering realization I was just his pet to call on whenever he wanted to fuck and spew nonsense words at. Nonsense words I fell for.

Well, I did what I should’ve done about six months ago. I called him out on his bullshit. Said that he was never going to leave his wife but he wasn’t going to stop keeping me as his side piece. He tried, oh he tried to calm me down, but I wasn’t going to back down to his pretty words this time.  

“Either pick me or stay with your wife. Else I’ll call her and let her know the truth.”  

My ultimatum I’d spent the previous hour preparing. I felt super proud of it when I spat it out, expecting him to pick at least one of the options so this nonsense could end.  

Jonathan’s face went white, then red, and then… he picked a third option.

He killed me.

Jonathan picked up the empty wine bottle while he muttered something about me being too much trouble, and then he brought it down right on the top of my head. Caved my skull in on the first smash, sending shards of glass all over my living room. I dropped like a rock. But I guess Jonathan was just too pissed off, cuz he used the remains of the bottle in his hand to keep stabbing me, again and again in the throat and neck. I was about decapitated by the time he came to his senses.

Of course Jonathan freaked out. Panicked. Just washed the blood off his hands and wiped down the bottle before escaping the apartment. Left me there. All alone. Head nearly off my shoulders, my living room a mess of blood, wine, and glass.

Man, you should’ve seen the look on his face when I came into work today. I was at my desk by the time he came in. He looked like hell, understandably, he just killed a woman two days before. But he froze in his steps when he saw me sitting at my desk, tip tapping away on my keyboard while scheduling another appointment later that week.  

I just waved to him real quick before going back to work. Out of the corner of my eye I saw Jonathan bolt for his office and slam the door.  

Oh, that felt so good. Watching him be the one to run in fear. Was he doubting his memory? Was he trying to convince himself that he’d just had a really bad dream?  

I clocked out after that, complaining about a cold, it’d been passed all around the office. But I didn’t go to my home.

I went to Jonathan’s home. A nice house, in a nice part of town. I saw his wife working in the small garden out front and, after adjusting my scarf, I got out and walked up the drive.

She didn’t see me until I was right behind her. Marianna was a pretty woman, even right now with a smudge of dirt across her face, no make up, and her auburn hair held back with a yellow bandanna. I cleared my throat and she nearly dropped the flower bulb she had in her hands. She glanced up, immediately recognizing me. “Oh, hi, Nicole. Is something wrong?” She got up, brushing off her hands and smiling from ear to ear. Her pregnancy was just starting to show, her belly just so slightly growing.  

“Can we talk inside?”  

“Oh sure, sweetheart. The kids are at school, won’t be back for a few more hours. Are you all right, your voice sounds a bit raspy.”  

“I’ll be fine.”

I waited until she was sitting down before I began the most difficult conversation of my life. And I got the most difficult part of it out of the way first.  

“Your husband and I have been having an affair for almost a year.”

It was so sad to see how Marianna just… sighed. How she just nodded. “I figured, with all the late nights at work and business trips that didn’t take him out of town. I was just about to hire a private investigator to start checking in on him, so you saved me a chunk of change. Are you still sleeping with him?”  

I shook my head. “No, I figured that ended when he about took my head off with a wine bottle,” I said.

Her brow knitted in concern, so I decided to show her. I undid the scarf around my neck and showed her what I’d been hiding all morning at work.

My neck is a sight right now, all purple and black and covered in decaying, cut up flesh. I can’t even imagine how the smell must be to someone not used to it. The putrefaction had spread down to my chest, which I showed her by unbuttoning my blouse. I’d had to start tearing my skin off to get any sort of relief, you can’t imagine how horrid the itching gets when your flesh starts rotting off the bone with your skin holding it all in. I even removed my gloves to show off the pus filled sores and bubbles forming in my wrists and fingers.  

Marianna went white as a sheet as she took it all in. It look so wrong, my face perfect as it always has been but from the neck down I look like rotting roadkill. When the wave of stench finally hit her she bolted for the bathroom. I could hear her violently throwing up from where I sat.

I’d just about buttoned my shirt back up when she came back, teetering a bit and still looking pale but managing to remain steady. “Wait. Show me again.”  

I shrugged and unbuttoned my shirt again. If she wanted a reason to barf again, she was welcome to it. But she didn’t. She sat beside me, her expression of disgust melting away into one of wonder. “… Before Jonathan insisted I take care of the kids full time, I used to be a surgeon. You… you shouldn’t be alive. You *can’t* be alive. Are you a ghost?”  

“No.” I shook my head. “This just happens sometimes. I’m surprised it happened after your husband killed me, I thought I was a goner. But then I woke up with my body falling apart, maybe I was due for a shedding, maybe this just happens when I get hurt real bad, I dunno.”

“Jonathan…” She shuddered and shook her head, “He’s a bastard, but he wouldn’t-”

“He beat me with a wine bottle, Marianna.” I pulled the bloody shards out of my purse. “And then when it broke, he stabbed me in the neck. All because I told him the affair was over.

Now she was crying. Tears rolled down her cheeks as her bottom lip wobbled with her sobs. “No… no… oh my god, I’m so sorry, sweetheart. I never thought… I never-”

“I need your help.”  

I rebuttoned up my blouse, but I left the scarf on my lap. “It’ll take me a few weeks to really come back together, but my daddy told me of a way to help me heal faster. His sister was like me. Fell apart, rotted like a corpse, and then looked just as pretty as ever in a few days. It took longer though, much longer… before she started working as a mortician.”  

It didn’t take any effort at all to convince her to help me. The kids are having a sleepover at grandma’s tonight, they really are cuties. There’s a wine glass laced with sleeping medication ready for Jonathan when he gets home, and I’m waiting in the basement, passing the time by ripping off more rotten skin, wondering what human flesh will taste like. Marianna’s already said I can stay here while I recover. She wants to study me. I’m something she’s never seen before and she’s fascinated.

She says I’m a real keeper[.](http://theoddcatlady.com/)When he told me he wanted to play “pretend”, I thought it was something to do with sex. And the funny thing is if he’d whipped out a Wonder Woman costume, I would have gone along with it. Things had been cold between us for years. One word replies and tense conversations had become the norm. I was prepared to do what was necessary to try and patch things up. When he clarified he wanted to pretend to be young, I felt a lot more hesitation. If this was a sex thing, I thought, it could get pretty weird. Even as he explained it all, I just kept waiting for it to turn in that direction. I figured that’s what it had to be, right? But he said it wasn’t like that at all. He just wanted some time, now and again, when he could behave like a child. Nothing too weird, just sort of therapeutic roleplay.

I’ll admit, it wasn’t what I thought. He wanted me to pack his lunches and kiss his cheek before going to work, he said. He wanted me to give him the kind of things you’d give a kid, so I packed him a yoghurt, a ham sandwich, and an apple. There was also a small carton of juice, all tucked neatly into a brown paper bag. His whole face lit up with joy when he saw it. I came up with the brown bag myself and he told me it was a nice touch. I remember thinking it was the first sincere compliment he’d paid me in years. I felt a rare pang of pride at that.  

After that I got the gist pretty quickly. He wanted me to run him baths and sit there beside him while he played with toys. He wanted to ask me for permission before going out to play in the yard. He wanted spaghetti and hotdog for dinner, and jelly and ice cream for dessert. I did it all with a smile. He never really looked me all that much as a wife. But as a caregiver? It was like every little gesture was the greatest thing to him. I thought it was messed up, sure. But I don’t know, those first few weeks were actually quite nice. One day he came home, and I had the telly set to old cartoons from his childhood and he just burst out into tears. I’d bought the DVDs as a little surprise but didn’t expect that kind of reaction. I ran over and held him and we stayed like that, huddled on the sofa, for hours. I’d never felt that kind of closeness or vulnerability from him or, well, anyone else I’d ever met. 

It was… confusing. But I liked it. We’d always been each other’s closest friends and now he was spending more time with me than ever before. And he cared about what I had to say and genuinely paid attention to me. I once baked him a cake and he sat on the counter, kicking his legs, asking me questions the whole time. I told him about the recipe, about how my grandmother had brought it over with her when she emigrated, about how it’d been passed down for generations, and I could see that he wasn’t play acting. He really was blown away by the whole story. 

But the requests just kept coming, as did the amount of time he spent roleplaying. It started out as something before and after work, but he soon quit his job and without notice, it became an all-day activity. Like I said, it was part of the fun and I didn’t put any limits on it. He did what I imagine most kids do all day long. He watched TV, played with toys and video games, ran around making silly noises. He also wanted to the less fun stuff, so I had to set him chores, bathe him, brush and cut his hair, make him eat vegetables. He even asked me to start organising him “homework”, so I bought some old exercise books for low-level maths and English. He was never a “naughty” but he did like to make a fuss when I told him to do these things, but sometimes I’d catch a sly smile or a twinkle in his eye and I knew he really liked it. There was something inherently bizarre and actually kind of funny about watching an accountant sit there and struggle when carrying the one. Still, it was a far cry from the very guarded and deeply arrogant man I’d married. 

I guess I’m just trying to put it all in order for you, but I’m not sure I can. There were times it felt… wrong, I suppose. All my attraction to him went right out the window but I didn’t care because we didn’t have sex that much as husband and wife, and even when we did it wasn’t very good. Maybe if you understood that I’m not a social person you could see why I let this all happen. I don’t have friends, never have, not even when I was in university. His company, his placid warm and adoring company, it worked a kind of magic on me. I think, also, that I actually quite liked looking after someone. In hindsight, I probably should have just got a cat. At the time I just liked the change of pace and I always suspected there was some dark secret lurking beneath him—my mother had warned me about this with men—and I was just glad he didn’t like killing hookers. 

This seemed safe, harmless… at least at first. 

As we settled further into a routine, I started to feel lonely again, only it was different. This wasn’t the bored listlessness of a day spent at home trying to look busy. It was more like standing over an ocean and looking down. I think it was the way he started to change, physically. I thought they were all deliberate changes, things he did to *look* less like an adult. Sometimes he looked at me and I didn’t like it. It was a hungry look. I met a boy once when I was younger, and he looked at me like that and I liked it. But coming from my husband in blue pyjamas with a pacifier in his mouth and a rattle in one hand… God I could have been sick. 

And come night-time the house started to feel different, larger and colder than usual. I started drinking for some reason, I think partly just to unwind. When things broke it was up to me to fix them, or to answer the phone, or deal with bills. We had plenty saved up, so don’t get me wrong it wasn’t like we were in dire circumstances. But there was no one else to share the endless responsibilities with and I felt it like a weight on my shoulders. Come morning I’d have to go through the motions with a pounding headache and I found that the days started to blur. Months passed, maybe even a whole year. It’s hard for me to remember any of these events in a straight line and that’s not all my fault.

I remember thinking that he was a *growing boy* but that wasn’t true at all. We ordered new shoes for him online and they were a different size to the usual. Smaller. He’d said it was because he wanted the light up ones, but he’d been a size 11 as an adult and the ones we bought were for a young boy. I don’t know how, but he wore those new shoes just fine. I pinched the toe and told him he’d grow into them.

I have vivid memories of watching him struggle to put a stuffed toy on the top shelf, but he’d always towered over me at 6’3. Even now I’m putting it all back together in my head and finding little surprises. There was always the sense that if I stopped too long to think then everything would rush past me and I’d miss it. Even trying my best to just go with it, I found myself feeling like a stranger in my own house. Things moved, rooms were rearranged, and new toys just appeared, all without me knowing how. A whole swing set was installed in the garden without me remembering but when I checked, my signature was on the invoice.

At one point he began wearing diapers and I didn’t even notice until days passed. It just kind of made sense somehow? In the moment it had felt so natural and looking back I seemed to remember my husband as a child, not a fully grown man. I’d been feeding a toddler, hugging a toddler, watching a toddler play games. But at the same time, it wasn’t any of that… it was my husband sitting there with his long legs crossed and crumbs in his beard.

One morning I woke up to a dog, and the next day it was gone. I searched for hours, feeling like I was going insane but sure enough, there was a bowl and dog food right by the kitchen door, so it wasn’t like I’d imagined it. There was no dog in the house though, nor in the garden. Exhausted and beaten, I went into my husband’s room for a final check when, at the sight of him, this strange apprehension came over me. I couldn’t get the thought out of my head that he’d done something. After all, if he was a child, he was a bit odd, wasn’t he? He didn’t play with other children, he didn’t misbehave, he barely spoke. He was a good little boy, sure, but not necessarily all that normal. 

And of course, he *wasn’t* a child. He was… he was something else. Standing there I appreciated just how odd he had started to look. His hair was thinning – not just falling out, mind you. It felt downy to the touch, soft, like a newborn’s peachy fuzz. And good God the smell. It was *like* a baby’s smell, but foul like sour milk. And it clung to him no matter how much I bathed him and washed his clothes. There were days when it felt like I could choke to death on it, and I learned to breathe carefully through my mouth whenever we were together. 

His pupils were huge, too large for those small sockets. His eyes had always been spaced far apart, but placed on a child-shaped head, he looked like he was wearing a bad Halloween mask with doll’s eyes instead of his own. Sometimes I’d catch him staring at me from around a corner, or at the bottom of a long corridor. Sometimes that meant him standing there in the dark, audibly breathing as his shoulders rose and fell while some unseen thought excited him. Other times it meant glimpsing his grey head disappearing behind a wall or door the second I turned. He drooled almost constantly and wiped the excess on his sleeve, but a lot of it landed on the floor anyway. There were times I’d find small puddles of spit in locked rooms, often just behind where I’d been standing. Other times I could hear his difficult breathing inches from my back, but he was never actually there when I turned around.

I was afraid of him, I realised. And I nearly cried out when, standing in that dark and quiet room, he rolled onto his back as he slept in the crib. He opened a gummy smile and I saw that all his teeth had fallen out barring just a few. And the closer I looked, the more I certain I became that even those were not his original ones. They were too white, too small, too peg-like to be an adult’s incisors.

I secretly hoped I was going insane. The alternative was somehow even worse.

\-

I was on the toilet when the doorbell rang. It was a shrill screech that grated, and I jumped so badly I dropped my phone. I quickly finished up and waddled over to the window with my pants still down. There was a van just outside the front gates which were open, but there was no sign of anyone walking around down there. Normally, this kind of problem would just go away, and they’d leave the package on the doorstep. But something felt wrong. I couldn’t hear my husband anywhere in the house. No footsteps, no babbling, no clacking toys or rolling wheels. 

That van looked strange. The driver-side door was still open, the engine still running. I tried to digest what it all meant while running downstairs, stopping only when I saw the front door open. A gust of wind blew through the main house, drawing out all the homely warmth. I had images of our roleplay being found out, and fears of humiliation and embarrassment filled my head. There was something else muddled in with all the thoughts as well. We’d spent so long locked up together, my husband and I, safe and far away from the rest of the world. 

How would he react to this intrusion?

As if in answer, someone cried out from the living room. I ran down the last few stairs and pushed open the door to find a small man shaking where he stood, brown cardboard box clutched to his chest for protection.

“Wh—wh—what,” he stuttered. 

I put my arm around his shoulder and started to move him towards the door. I couldn’t see my husband, but he was never too far away from me and I couldn’t help but notice one of his favourite toys lying on the floor. 

“He let me in,” the man continued. “Looked just… looked just like a…” Suddenly he turned to me and gripped both my arms. “What’s wrong with him?” he asked. “I’ve never seen anything like that before.”

I don’t remember what I said but I kept pushing him towards the front door, out of the living room and into the kitchen. A quick turn of my head and I saw my husband ducking back down beneath the sofa. He was the wrong size to be so quick and sneaky, but he had a way of hiding and moving around the house so that you almost never saw him unless he wanted you to. 

“Come on,” I muttered, but the deliveryman’s feet were slow and cumbersome. It was like his head was all muddled up. 

“It was just a child,” he cried like it had just dawned on him. “Oh no! I frightened him, didn’t I?” He tried turning back but I stopped him. “No, I didn’t mean to scare him. I just… I just… his f*ace*.” He stopped resisting and his shoulders slumped back down. “What’s wrong with him?” he asked. “Why do my eyes hurt?”

“He’s sick,” I answered, finally pulling him the last few feet to the door. I shoved him back past the threshold and stood, panting, to catch my breath. “He’s just very unwell,” I said, stifling a sob – part lie, part truth. “It’s a condition.”

The delivery man looked as if he still was trying to sort his own head out, but it seemed like he bought it. He went to leave, putting one foot down on the porch steps, before suddenly deciding that he needed to make amends. “Please don’t report me!” he cried, and I jumped a little. “I didn’t mean to come off as rude.” My heart started to race. I could smell my husband, the stench nearly over-powering. He was so close I could practically feel him but where he was, I couldn’t say. I just needed to get this man away before something terrible happened. He was babbling endlessly about offending me.

“Please,” I said, on the verge of tears. “Please leave.”

Did he understand? I wonder. Sometimes, when I think back, I see a flickering of understanding in his eyes. It looked like empathy. I can’t be sure because it all kind of just blurs together. The shock in his eyes as my husband’s arm grabbed his ankle cannot be understated. Neither of us expected him to be down there. I still don’t know how he did it. But he *was* down there, giggling in an unhealthy falsetto rasp. Before anyone could speak, he yanked so hard the deliveryman fell down backwards and his leg disappeared into shadow. With one hand the crying man clamped down on the thigh as if to soothe some unseen pain, and with the other hand he tried to push himself back out from between the wooden slats. 

But my husband was always a big man. And now he had a strange sort of air about him. A quiet, crackling power, that followed him from room-to-room. The struggle was one-sided, and the deliveryman screamed and howled. He gave up holding the one leg and tried using both hands to pull, or push, or drag himself away. I didn’t know what was happening out of sight, but his face drained of blood and his screams just kept getting worse. I’ve never heard a man make a sound like that before, not an adult man. It was scary in a way I wasn’t prepared for. I think he asked me to help at one point. I contemplated calling the police but never did. I was so terrified; I couldn’t even bring myself to move. Occasionally one of my husband’s thick-knuckled hands could be glimpsed as he pulled more of the man inside. Those hands looked so large, so pale, so deeply unhealthy. I could hear what he was doing, but that didn’t really come to my attention until I unpacked it all mentally long after it was over. But yes, I could hear bone crack and something like paper being torn. 

Was it an hour? Or just a few minutes? I don’t know. The man just kept crying and pleading and my husband just kept pulling. 

And pulling. 

And pulling. 

The stairs started to buckle but the wood was thick and strong. The final question came down to what would break first, a pelvis or a post? The deliveryman’s cries told me what he thought would happen. He was right. With a tremendous yell of joy—just like a child on their birthday—my husband latched another fist around the man’s other leg and pulled so hard there was a sudden *crack!* And his victim fell limp like a toy losing power. What followed was a silence so heavy it hurt my ears, broken only by the faint wet sound of my husband dragging the rest of the man into the dark. The space between each step couldn’t have been more than six inches, but brute force won out. The last I remember of the man’s face, he was pale with bulging eyes. The arrangement of his arms and legs didn’t even make sense anymore. He looked like a spider after you step on it.

I stayed there for a while longer, hoping to hell and back I’d hear an ambulance or police siren. But like I said, we lived far out of town. By the time it occurred to me that no one would rescue the man—or me—the blood on the steps was congealing. My husband was still just out of sight, giggling and clapping like a kid making mud pies.

“Come on,” I finally managed to say, speaking like the doting mother I was. “Put your new toy away. I’ll make you some lunch.”

\-

I was washing dishes and staring into the yard. It resembled somewhere I’d seen before, but I couldn’t remember where or why. My husband was somewhere upstairs, and I was alone. I’d often hear him thunder around up there, doing God-knows-what, his bare feet slapping on hardwood floors he’d once picked out in a turtleneck and chinos. That seemed like a different person’s life now. Hard to believe it was the same man who brought me something just days before that made me sick. He’d made it himself and it had hung on the fridge for a whole afternoon like just another piece of macaroni art. *Was that thing where the dog ended up?* I wondered, running a dishcloth over the same plate for the second hour in a row. 

Movement caught my eye. Out in the garden, something floated down past the tall hedges that walled in our yard and landed plainly on the overgrown grass. It was a bright luminous yellow that glowed like a safety vest. For some reason I held up the plate in my hand looked between the two. God I was so out of it. It was like a worm in my head. I could feel it, maybe even reach out and grab it if I could just focus on it for long enough. But each time I closed my mind around it, each time I started to feel out the shape of this intrusion, this rewriting of my own brain, it slithered away.

“Frisbee,” I muttered. 

And then just like that she was there. She was maybe nine or ten. How had she wound up here? I wondered. Maybe she was lost. She was looking around like she didn’t know where she was. I could see she was scared, and my heart sank as I realised how awful our home must have looked to her. There was a time I was house proud but now we lived in decrepit filth. Of course, the little girl looked scared, I thought. This was the scary house every child feared, with broken windows and overgrown bushes that choked a yard filled with rusted swings and abandoned toys. And this poor girl had lost her frisbee and…

“No,” I said, first to myself and then once again to the room. “No!”

But it was too late, I could hear him scuttle around before the house fell into quiet. From outside, the girl started to say something. A greeting perhaps?

There was a knife in my hand that I didn’t remember taking, and I was outside before I had time to even think. The little girl looked to me and instantly burst into tears. I was sprinting towards her with a knife in one hand and a murderous look straight out of a horror film. But before that, before she’d seen me, she’d been looking towards a thicket of grass with disgust on her face. 

“No!” I screamed, not at her, but at him.

I picked her up in my arms even as she batted me away. I didn’t care if this girl thought I was Satan himself, if she ran back home and told her parents about the mean creepy lady and they called the police and this all ended with me safe and warm behind bars. I didn’t care. I clutched my arm around her waist and willed it into a band of steel to keep her safe. She squirmed but could not break free and I ran towards the gate as fast as I could carry her. 

“It’s okay,” I cooed. “He won’t get you.”

I was half-way there when her screaming and wriggling stopped. Her head was over my shoulder and all of a sudden, she gripped me like I was a life raft. The change was instant, and it made me falter. For a brief moment, I heard his feet pulsing towards me. I turned brandishing the knife like a torch against the darkness, but nothing was there. The girl started screaming again, the sight of my husband sinking, and she held onto me with dear life. 

“Not the baby!” she screamed. “No no no! Not the baby!”

“Not the baby,” I repeated. “I won’t let him.”

I backed up to the gate carefully and began to wonder what next when, out of nowhere, he leaped into sight and grabbed the girl’s hair, yanking her head back while she screamed so hard her face turned beetroot-red. He jumped up and down, hollering and crying like a giddy toddler with a Christmas present. His misshapen face was grinning, his gums black and bloody, but his hands threatened to tear the girl’s scalp right off. I started to feel nauseous at the sight of him. His size seemed to change with every glance. I couldn’t make sense of it and I felt that worm inside my mind wriggle and dislodge more of my thoughts. Sometimes he was waist-high, sometimes a full-grown man. But always those hands were too large for his frame and the brown flakes of blood still trapped beneath his chipped nails reminded me exactly what he wanted.

“No!” I screamed and lashed out with the knife. The motion that came to me in the moment was a downward thrust, and the knife was left embedded in my husband’s right shoulder. 

He let go immediately and started to howl and sob. He seemed to shrink before my very eyes and I quickly set the girl down and pushed her through the gate. I pulled the bars shut, screamed at her to run, then quickly turned back to my husband who was sucking his thumb and trying to pull the knife out with his remaining hand. After some awkward fumbling he grabbed the handle and threw the knife to the ground. It clattered to the floor, blood glistening in the sun. 

“You’re just like her,” he said, his voice breaking and returning to the calm authoritative man I’d once known. His beady eyes bored into me and I could’ve collapsed under that stare. The change in cadence was as sudden as a sheer drop off a cliff. “I just wanted what she never gave me. But you’re all the same.”

Suddenly his whole face bunched up into a twisted infantile smile and he declared with joy and delight in a voice identical to a child’s,

“I’m going to crawl inside you!”

\-

Dinner was cold. It was the first meal I’d made him after our little fight. I’d fidgeted over it for hours, filled with doubts and fears. But it all came to naught. He was too smart to fall for that, whether he’d seen the rat poison or not. He hadn’t come for dinner. Now I was left with a problem. I’d stayed fixed to the spot in the kitchen, working away with endless looks over my shoulder, and night had fallen. The only light was in the kitchen and it was a big house filled with inky black shadows that swallowed entire rooms and corridors. Often, I would glimpse a sliver of movement, like a shark’s fin cresting a wave I might see a blue piece of fabric catch the moonlight before disappearing back into the dark. He was out there.

I had a new knife, at least. And something about the adrenaline in my veins helped me think more clearly. When I looked back in my thoughts, I no longer saw a child, but something twisted and deformed with delusion and malice. A disease had festered not only in our heads, but the space we shared and the world we lived in, spilling out into reality like a migraine aura made real. I didn’t know if it was an intruder or just something dark that had spread from within, but it belonged to me one way or another.

I couldn’t let it live.

“Dinner’s ready,” I cried. “Come on!”

There was a shuffling somewhere out front, by the stairs. I don’t know why I bothered saying anything. He must have seen me. I cried out again, my voice faltering from fear and exhaustion. I picked the plate up and put it by the threshold of the kitchen, its edge just inches from the darkness. “You must be hungry,” I said, doing my best to smile. “Please eat it,” I added. “For me?”

A single chubby finger peaked through the doorway and slid the plate across. It was so loud in the silence, grating across tile. Something felt wrong, but in the moment, I just hoped it was the sheer panic trapped deep within my chest. 

The plate whipped out of the darkness and struck me in the face. My nose cracked and my head snapped backwards and before I knew it, I was on the floor, the plate rolling to a noisy stop a few feet away. It was whole, but one edge was coated in blood. I became aware of a coppery taste in my mouth and realised it was mine all over that plate. It felt like I was lying there for a good few seconds, agony ringing in my ears while I opened and closed my jaw in disconcerted shock. Slowly, layer by layer, things started to right themselves. There was a sharp pain in the back of my head, and I realised I must have hit it when I fell over. And there was a weight on top of me, pressing down making it hard to breathe. Had I broken a rib? I wondered. But it didn’t feel much like that. It felt like something was moving around, something sharp and painful. 

I looked down and saw husband’s cabbage-shaped head bobbing away at my breast. I screamed and pushed him away, but he clamped down hard, those nasty little peg teeth burying themselves into my flesh and refusing to dislodge. I was overcome with disgust and started beating away at him, scratching deep gouges in his scalp and shoulders. Only when I buried a thumb in his nasty little eye did he relent and let go. He sat up and my thumb slid out of the socket with a *pop!* and for a moment he looked overcome with naïve sadness. But then hatred washed over his face and his remaining eye glared at me with murder.

He started to choke me, those terrible fists clasping around my throat like bands of iron. I struggled, lashing my hands out at the floor and furniture desperate for something, anything that might help. Thankfully my hands alighted on the knife, and I drove it, hard into the soft flesh of his armpit. For a moment he carried on as normal, but by the time I drove the blade between his ribs, once, then twice, the blood had already drained from his face. It soaked us both, and to my horror it stank of sour milk and talcum powder. I watched the realisation of his wounds dull the fire in his eyes. He stumbled backwards, his face scrunching up as he let out a horrific bawl.

Pink foam seeped from his mouth and he gasped and choked. His lungs were filling with blood, and I watched him die slowly before me. By the time it was done he was a man again. A strangely dressed, emaciated wretch of a man, but nothing more. I touched my throat and it felt sore, and my chest was a ragged mess.

“Was it good for you?” I asked, a laugh rising unbidden from my lips. The sound of my own voice scared me. I sounded deranged. But I couldn’t stop laughing at the joke I’d made, and before long my breath became short and consciousness slipped away in its entirety.

\-

It’s been some time—how long, I don’t know—and I still wonder whether he was ever real. I burned the house down and I finally got to hear the sound of sirens coming to take me away. It was a weird problem to explain to the police. They had evidence of a child living in the home, but no body. They thought I’d offed a kid and burned the house to hide the evidence. Later on, they found one adult body, but it was the deliveryman’s, not my husband’s. And I was arrested just a few short weeks later. 

Of course, I told them the truth, just barring a few of the weirder details. My husband had gone insane, I said. He’d snapped, started acting like a child, killed one man, then tried to kill me. Unfortunately, there are no records of my husband, nor our marriage, nor our life together. I lived alone, unemployed because of a wealthy trust granted to me by family. The mortgage was not paid by my husband, but rather the trust. 

All of this was news to me. 

He was real, I know that much. I still have the wounds to prove it and they found that little girl who testified, somewhat, in my defence. She really had seen a man dressed as a baby, she said. Although when asked to give a description of what he looked like, she broke down screaming and had to be sedated. I knew what that felt like. I couldn’t tell you my husband’s age, his eye colour, his birthday, or even his name. It’s all worked against me. I think I’m on my second appeal, but my lawyer told me to lower my expectations. No marriage certificate, no wedding invitations, no relationship status on Facebook, no photos, no plane tickets for the honeymoon, no official documentation. Every conceivable trace of this man’s life simply doesn’t exist.

I managed to get a brain scan and they say my brain should belong to a dementia patient, except I’m just 36. It’s all full of holes. Lesions, they call them. That’s a good name for it. I said there was a worm, didn’t I? It was eating through my head like an apple core. Not a literal worm, of course. Well, I don’t know that for sure. But still, I think he did something to my head because even now just the thought of him can give me a nosebleed. I don’t remember much of my life before. He wrote over it like a computer file and deliberately blotted out whatever didn’t suit his purpose. And of course, they never did find his body, did they? Bit of a cliché, I know. I think it was childish of me to ever believe that a few holes in the torso would kill him. 

*It,* I should say. After all, he was “playing pretend” at being human just as much as being a child.Hi everyone my name is Ava Wayne and today I am eight years old :) . I was eight yesterday for the first time but now I am even older! I got to use my mom’s computer today (but shhh don’t tell her!). Last night when my dad came home from work he brought me a big chocolate cake with vanilla frosting that had my name on it and I got to blow out the candles. I didn’t even have to eat dinner first! It was the best day even though I didn’t have a party.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

It doesn’t matter though because I’ve never had a party before. My mom and dad say that I’m not allowed because we can’t have any other people in the house. They lie and tell me that it’s because we live too far away but I know that it is because of my friend Eevie who lives with us. Eevie looks exactly like me and we are like sisters. She is not really my sister though, we just say that.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

Eevie can do this really cool trick where she can move my arms and say things in my voice. Sometimes it is a little bit annoying but she’s my friend so it’s okay. My mom and dad don’t like Eevie though and this makes her very mad.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

My mom says that Eevie needs help and we have to see someone for her. I don’t know what she means, but Eevie says that my mom is a liar and I don’t like telling Eevie that she is wrong. My dad gets really mad and yells at Eevie to stop and to shut up and leave me alone but that just makes her more mad. I’ve tried to tell him to stop but he doesn’t listen.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

Yesterday when my dad brought home the cake he asked me if I liked it and I told him yes and that Eevie liked it too. He got really mad but my mom told him that it was not the time and he didn’t say anything about her.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

When they lit the candles and told me to make a wish I didn’t know what to wish for. I kind of wanted some new paints so that I could make more paintings for my room, but I also wanted a puppy or some new toys. Mostly I wanted to wish for Eevie to stay but Eevie thought that was a stupid wish because she says she’s always going to be with me forever so I didn’t wish for that.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

I asked Eevie what else I should wish for and my dad got really mad and told me to just make a wish already because this was none of Eevies business. That made me a little bit sad because it was Eevies business and she was with us and that was rude of him to yell at her like that. My mom said it was okay but dad said that it was not normal. Eevie was also getting mad because dad said she wasn’t normal. Everyone was just mad mad mad and I almost cried but then Eevie told me to just make my wish because she would make any of my wishes come true.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

I thought about it really hard but then mom told me to hurry up or else the cake was going to get ruined so I finally decided to wish for my parents to leave Eevie alone and be nice to her. Then I blew out the candles and my mom clapped but I could tell that my dad was still mad.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

We ate cake anyway but I didn’t ask if Eevie could have some because it was finally a good time. We finished the ENTIRE cake all by ourselves and I was even allowed to have TWO WHOLE PIECES. It was awesome.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

Last night I had a really scary nightmare that I stabbed my mom and my dad in their bed when they were asleep. It was really scary and I woke up and cried but I don’t think they heard me because no one came to check on me. Only Eevie was there and she said it was okay.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

When it was morning I got up but my mom didn’t make any breakfast and she didn’t answer when I was yelling for her. Eevie says that they are still asleep and that I shouldn’t go up to their room so I didn’t.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

Eevie helped me to make breakfast. She showed me how to make a burrito with eggs and some chicken that she bought. It was really messy because Eevie said that it was fresh meat that had just been killed. I already know that they kill animals for food because my grandpa has a farm and I had seen them make a turkey before so I knew that it was very messy.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

After I ate Eevie said that we could watch tv. She said that I didn’t even have to clean up because mom and dad weren’t going to even see it. She told me that she made my wish come true and that they weren’t going to be mad at us anymore and they weren’t going to yell at us either. Eevie says that now we can do whatever we want.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

I had ice cream and I watched cartoons all morning instead of going to school and when the phone rang and the school called Eevie talked to them and she sounded just like my mom! She told them that I was sick and the lady believed her! It was so fun and I didn’t even know that she could do that!

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

Eevie let me use my moms laptop because she says she knows the password. She told me I could write on here like a diary and post it so other people could read it! Isn’t that so cool? I wonder who is reading this haha :).

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

Eevie just made me lunch and it was a sandwich with meat again. I don't eat this much meat because my mom likes for me to eat my veggies but Eevie says that mom is not the boss anymore so I can eat whatever I want. I had a lot of chips and my tummy started to hurt and I really wanted my mom but Eevie said that it was okay and she could make it feel better.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

Eevie told me to take a nap and so I did but I had another scary dream that I was cutting up mom and dad because Eevie was making me. When I woke up Eevie said it was just a dream because mom and dad were still asleep upstairs. I want to go and see them but Eevie says I can’t or else it will ruin the wish and we will get in big trouble for making a mess and eating junk.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

I think I’m going to go play hide-and-seek with Eevie now. :)

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

Love, Ava <3It was December of 1999 when ‘she’ infested our quiet, midwestern home. My father called for me from downstairs— I assumed it was time for dinner. He was standing at the bottom of the stairs and had his hand up in an effort to keep me from coming down. 

The moment I saw the panic in his eyes, I knew something was wrong. 

“I want you to listen to me very carefully.” He said. My heart started to race as he continued. “It’s very important that you keep your eyes on me. You’re going to notice... someone else in our home. But you must ignore ‘her’ as much as possible.”

I almost started laughing. My 12 year old mind trying to comprehend what he was getting at, assuming this was some sort of out-of-character joke. 
Before I could respond, he continued. “She’s going to whisper things, follow you, and whatever else she can to get your attention. It’s going to be very difficult,  son, but you must never interact with her. I promise she will leave, but only if you pretend she isn’t there, and try not to think about her. Promise me.”

There were so many things I wanted to ask him, but I was too frightened and confused. I managed to spit out “okay dad.”

“Alright, come downstairs. It’s time for dinner. Hurry, I’ve made ’her’ stronger just by telling you. But I had to, I can’t afford you looking at ‘her’ by mistake. Trust me.  Now stay focused!” He barked. 

I did as I was told and slowly crept down the stairs, keeping my eyes glued to my father’s as he back-peddled into the kitchen. I felt the temperature drop significantly as I reached the first floor. I smelled a familiar, sickening and sour scent in the air. It reminded me of the time a raccoon died in our wall and stunk up the house for a whole week. 

My father and I sat down at the table at the same time, my sister was across from me— her head hung and her eyes stared at the empty, porcelain plate in front of her. My mother pulled a casserole out of the oven, her eyes were swollen and tear stained. 

I kept my focus on my family, but out of the corner of my eye I could see a blurry mess of dark, matted hair, and sickly, grey skin. There was no energy in the kitchen, drained of all the warmth and laughter that usually accompanied our meals. 

My sister grabbed my knee under the table and whispered, “can you see her too?”

I nodded.

“Quiet!” My father hissed.

The woman walked forward with wet, crackling footsteps. The smell was nauseating. She crept towards the table, stopping directly behind my sister, only a few inches away, and rested a decrepit hand on her shoulder. She winced in fear and stared at me. I immediately put my head down. 

My mother served our dinner, doing her best to pretend as if everything was okay. I could see my father clutching my sisters hand underneath the glass table in an attempt to keep her from completely losing it. My sister spent the entire dinner with the skeletal hand on her shoulder, nearly inaudible whispers spewed from the woman’s mouth and filled the room like white noise. 

And that’s how we lived for months— doing our best to live a normal life despite the ever-present, unwanted guest. Even if we left the house, she was somehow able to follow us all. Whenever the four of us were in the car, she could be seen in the rear view mirror or standing on the side of the road. My parents didn’t let anyone visit, and never let us stay at friends’ homes during the months of hell. 

We were able to whisper to one another when it was absolutely necessary to discuss ‘her’ presence, if ‘she’ wasn’t too close. My father made us promise to never tell anyone. That was the only way to quarantine her, the parasite of attention. We concluded that she infected a single household at a time, unable to be seen by anyone outside the home unless their mind had been tainted with knowledge of her existence. 

I learned a few years later that my father was the reason for her arrival. His sister, back in the 70s, had been infected from another and it followed my aunt into their home. In 1999, for whatever reason, my father struggled to keep the thought of ‘her’ at bay. In turn he  brought ‘her’ back into his life... and ours. We kept the promise of keeping her a secret from others, and it was the hardest thing we’ve ever done. 

All of us tried leaving the house as a group, and ‘she’ followed. We couldn’t bring ourselves to break our family apart.

It was hardest for my mother, who was stuck alone with ‘her’ while we’re at school and my father was at work. Everything changed the day my mother broke. It was a snowy February night, we had finished dinner and my mother decided to go to bed early. ‘She’ was sitting on their bed— making ‘herself’ almost impossible to ignore. My mother couldn’t take it. I heard her screaming from the bedroom, demanding that ‘she’ leave us alone. My father sprinted upstairs to try and stop her. 

That was the last I ever saw my mother. A pool of blood on the white carpet was all that remained. The woman was still there, but my mother was gone. In the following weeks, ‘she’ whispered to me. ‘She’ told me I could see my mother again, all I had to do was look and ask how. I never did. 

The reason I am telling you is because... I WANT YOU TO THINK ABOUT HER. 

I saw ‘her’ again, this morning, for the first time in 18 years. I cannot afford to lose my wife or children to the parasite. I need you to think about her dark hair and grey skin. Think about ‘her’ in your home, so that she may leave mine. You’re already infected, and eventually you’re going to notice a woman in your home, you must ignore ‘her.’ It’s for your own good. 

I’m so sorry.Part 1: https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/3iex1h/im_a_search_and_rescue_officer_for_the_us_forest/

Part 2: https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/3ijnt6/im_a_search_and_rescue_officer_for_the_us_forest/

Well, once again, you guys have blown me away with your staggering amount of responses to my stories! There's no way I can respond to each of you individually, so I'm just going to address some common things again, and then move on to the stories. I'm going to write as many as I can think of, in addition to my friend's stories, and I will probably not update again until I get a chance to answer some questions that I myself have for my superiors.

Alright, so the common questions I found you all had:

* I am not comfortable talking about where exactly I work, unfortunately. In all reality some of the things I've mentioned here could get me in a lot of trouble or fired, so it's best if I just don't discuss too much. I will say that I'm in the United States, and in an area that is comprised of a great deal of wilderness. We're talking hundreds of miles of thick forest, with a mountain range and a few lakes.

* There is still a great amount of interest in the stairs, and luckily for you guys my friend has a story that I think you'll all be very interested in. I'll go into that more at the end of this update. As for whether or not I have ever thought of asking my superiors about them, I have, but again, I don't want to risk my job. However, one of my former superiors no longer works as an SAR officer, and it's possible that he may be willing to talk to me about it. I'll be speaking to him later in the week, and I will let you all know what comes of that.

* As far as advice on becoming an SAR officer goes, I think the best advice I can give is to contact your local Forest Service office and see if they offer and training courses, or what the qualifications are. I've been doing this for years, and I started out as a volunteer helping on SAR operations. It's a great job, despite the occasional tragic situations, and I wouldn't want to do anything else. 

Alright, let's move on to the stories:

* The first happened on a case that I went out on right after I got out of training, and was still pretty new to everything. Before I took this job, I was a volunteer, so I had a basic idea of what to expect, but on those calls you're mostly dealing with finding lost people after vets have found signs of them. As an SAR officer, you go out for all kinds of cases, from animal bites to heart attacks. 
This case got called in early in the morning, from a young couple who were up on one of the trails that goes by the lake. The husband was completely hysterical, and we couldn't really figure out what was going on. We could hear the woman screaming in the background, and he was begging us to come up there right away. When we get there, we see him holding his wife, and shes got something in her arms. She's screaming these awful, almost animal-like screams, and he's sobbing. He sees us and he screams at us to help them, to please get an ambulance up there. Now obviously we can't just drive an ambulance up the walking path, so we ask him if his wife needs help, or if she can walk on her own. He's still hysterical, but he manages to tell us that it's not his wife that needs help. I go over while one of the vets tries to calm him down, and I ask the wife what's going on. She's rocking, holding something, and just shrieking, over and over. I crouch down and see that whatever she's holding, it's covering her with blood. That's when I notice the sling on her front and my heart sinks. I ask her to tell me what's going on, and I sort of pry her arms gently open so I can see what she's holding. It's her baby, obviously dead. His head is caved in on one side, and he's covered in scratches. Now, I've seen dead bodies before, but something about this whole situation hits me hard. I have to take a second to compose myself, and I get up and go get one of the other vets, who's standing by. I tell him that it's a dead kid, and he sort of pats my shoulder and tells me he'll deal with it.
It took us over an hour to get this woman to let us see her kid. Every time we try to take him from her, she flips out and tells us we can't have him, that he'll be okay if we just leave her alone and let her help him. But eventually, one of the vets manages to calm her down, and she gives us the body. We took it back to the med area, but when the EMTs showed up, they told us that there was never any hope of saving the kid. He'd died instantly from the trauma to his head.
I was good buddies with one of the nurses who met them at the hospital, and she told me later what had happened. Turns out the couple had been walking with the baby in the sling, and they stopped because the kid was fussing. The dad takes the kid and is holding him, looking out over this little gully by the path. The mom comes to stand next to him, but she ends up stepping on a loose patch of soil, and she trips. She falls into the dad, who drops the kid, who ends up falling about twenty feet down this little gully onto the rocks at the bottom. The dad climbed down and recovered the kid, but he'd fallen right on his head, and was dead by the time he got there. The baby was only about fifteen months old. It was a total freak accident, a series of events that coalesced into the worst possible outcome. Probably one of the more awful calls I've been on.

* I haven't seen a lot of animal bites in my time as an SAR officer, mostly because there aren't that many animals that come around the area. While there are bears in the area, they tend to stay pretty far away from people, and sightings are highly unusual. Most of the animals you'll see are small ones, like coyotes, raccoons, or skunks. What we do see frequently, though, are moose. And let me tell you, moose are nasty fuckers. They'll chase after anything for any reason, and god help you if you get in between a female and its baby. One of the more amusing calls was of a guy who'd gotten chased down by an absolutely massive male moose, and was stuck up a tree. Took us almost an hour to get him down, and when he was finally on solid ground again, he looks at me and says: 'God damn. Them fuckers is big up close.' I guess that's not really a scary story, but we still laugh about that one.

* I honestly don't know how I'd forgotten this story, but it is, by far, the scariest thing that's happened to me. I guess maybe I've tried so long to forget about it that it just didn't come to mind right away. As someone who spends literally all of their time in the woods, you don't ever want to let yourself get scared of being alone, or out in the middle of nowhere. That's why when you have experiences like this, you tend to just forget about them and move on. This is, to date, the only thing that's ever made me really seriously consider if this job is the right one for me. I don't really like talking about it much, but I'll do the best I can to remember it all.
As I recall, this took place right at the end of spring. It was a typical lost-child call: a four-year-old girl had wandered away from her family's campsite, and had been missing for about two hours. Her parents were completely despondent, and told us what most parents do; my kid would never wander away, she's so good about staying close, she's never done anything like this before. We assure the parents that we'll do everything we can to find her, and we spread out in a standard search formation. I was partnered with one of my good buddies, and we were sort of casually holding conversation while we hiked. I know it sounds callous, but you do sort of become desensitized when you've done this long enough. It becomes the norm, and I think to a certain extent you have to learn to desensitize yourself in order to work this job. 
We search for a good two hours, going well beyond where we think she'd be, and we come out of a small valley when something makes us both stop in unison. We freeze and look at each other, and there's almost a sensation like a plane depressurizing. My ears pop, and I have this odd sensation of having dropped about ten feet. I start to ask my buddy if he felt that, but before I can, we hear the loudest sound I've ever heard in my life. It's almost like a freight train passing directly by us, but it's coming from every direction at once, including above and below us. He screams something to me, but I can't hear him over this deafening roar. Understandably freaked out, we look all around us, trying to find the source of the sound, but neither of us sees anything. Of course, my first thought is a landslide, but we're not near any cliffs, and even if we were, it would have hit us by now. The sound goes on and on, and we're trying to yell to each other, but even standing close together we can't hear anything but this sound. Then, as suddenly as it starts, it stops, like someone threw a switch and cut it off. We stand there for a second, perfectly still, and slowly the normal sounds of the woods come back. He asks me what the fuck just happened, but I just kind of shrug, and we stand there looking at each other for a minute. I get on the radio and ask if anyone else just heard the end of the fucking world, but no one else hears it, even though we're all within shouting distance of each other. My buddy and I just sort of shrug it off and keep going.
About an hour later, we all check up on the radios, and no one's found the little girl. Most of the time, we won't search when it gets dark, but because we don't have any kind of lead on her, a few of us decide to keep going, including me and my buddy. We keep close together, and we're calling out for her every couple of minutes. At this point, I'm hoping beyond hope that we find her, because while I may not like kids, the idea of them being out all alone in the dark is awful. The woods can be intimidating to kids in the daylight; at night, well, it's a whole different beast. But we're not seeing any signs of her, or getting any responses, and around midnight, we decide to turn around and head back to the rendezvous point. 
We're about halfway back when my buddy stops and shines his light to the right of us, into a really thick deadfall, or group of dead trees. I ask him if he's heard a response, but he just tells me to be quiet a second and listen. I do, and in the distance, I can hear what sounds like a kid crying. We both call the girl's name and listen for any kind of response, but it's just this really faint crying.
We head in the direction of this deadfall and go around it, calling her name over and over. As we get closer to the crying, I start getting this weird feeling in my gut, and I tell my buddy that something isn't right. He tells me he feels the same way, but we can't figure out what it is. We stop where we are, and call the girl's name again. And at the same time, we both figure it out. 
The crying is on a loop. It's the same little hitching sob, then wail, then quiet hiccup, repeated over and over. It's exactly the same every time, and without saying another word, we both take off running. It's the only time I've ever lost my composure like that, but something about it was so incredibly wrong, and neither of us wanted to stay out there anymore. 
When we got back to the rendezvous, we asked if anyone else had heard anything strange, but no one else knew what we were talking about. I know it sounds sort of anti-climactic, but that call fucked me up for a long time. As for the little girl, we never found a trace of her. We keep an eye out for her, and all the other people who we've never found, but frankly I doubt we'll ever find anything. 

Of the missing persons calls I've gone out on, only a handful have ever resulted in a complete disappearance, meaning no trace of the person and no body ever found. But sometimes, finding a body just leads to more questions than answers. Here are some of the bodies we've found that have become infamous in our team:

* A teenage boy who's remains were recovered almost a year after he vanished. We found the top of his skull, two finger bones, and his camera almost forty miles from where he was last seen. The camera, sadly, was destroyed.

* The pelvis of an older man who had vanished a month earlier. That was all we found. 

* The lower jaw and right foot of a two-year-old boy on the highest peak of a ridge in the southern part of the park. 

* The body of a ten-year-old girl with Down's Syndrome, almost twenty miles from where she'd vanished. She had died of exposure three weeks after going missing, and all of her clothes were intact except for her shoes and jacket. There were berries and cooked meat in her stomach when they did the autopsy. The coroner said it appeared as if someone had been taking care of her. There were no suspects ever identified.

* The frozen body of a one-year-old baby, found a week after vanishing in the hollow trunk of a tree ten miles from the area he was seen last. There was fresh milk found in his stomach, but his tongue was gone.

* A single vertebra and right kneecap of a three-year-old girl, found in the snow almost twenty miles from the campground her family had been at the previous summer.

Now on to  a couple of the stories my friend told me. I mentioned that you were all interested in the stairs, and you're in luck: he's had a closer encounter with them. Though he doesn't have any explanation for them, he does have a bit more experience with them than I do. 

* My buddy has been an SAR officer for about seven years, he started when he was a junior in college, and he had a very similar experience when he first encountered the stairs. His trainer told him almost the same thing mine did, which was to never go near, touch, or ascend them. For the first year, he did just that, but apparently his curiosity got the better of him, and on one call he broke away from the line and went to go check a set of them out.
He said they were about ten miles from the path where a teenage girl had vanished, and the dogs were following a scent. He was on his own, lagging behind the main group, when he saw a set of stairs off to his left. They looked like they were from a new house, because the carpeting was pristine and white. He said that as he got closer, he didn't feel any different, or hear any weird noises. He was expecting something to happen, like bleeding from his ears or collapsing, but he got right up next to them and didn't feel anything. The only thing, he said, that was odd was that there was absolutely no debris on the steps. No dirt, leaves, dust, anything. And there didn't appear to be any signs of animal or insect activity in the immediate area, which he found strange. It was less like things were avoiding them, and more like they just happened to be in a relatively barren part of the forest. He touched the stairs, and didn't feel anything except that sort of sticky feeling you get from new carpet. Making sure his radio was on, he slowly climbed the stairs; he said it was terrifying, because the way they'd been stigmatized, he wasn't really sure what was going to happen to him. He joked that half of him expected to be teleported to some other dimension and the other half was watching for a UFO to come swooping down. But he got to the top with little event, and he stood there looking around. But, he said, the longer he stood on the top step, the more he felt like he was doing something very, very wrong. He described it as the feeling you'd get if you were in a part of a government building you have no business being in. As if someone was going to come and arrest you, or shoot you in the back of the head, at any second. He tried to brush it off, but the feeling got stronger and stronger, and that's when he realized that he couldn't hear anything anymore. The sounds of the forest were gone, and he couldn't hear his own breathing. It was like some kind of weird, awful tinnitus, but more oppressive. He climbed back down and rejoined the search, and didn't mention what he'd done.  
But, he said, the weirdest part came after. His trainer was waiting back at the welcome center after the search ended for the day, and he cornered my buddy before he could leave. He said his trainer had this look of intense anger, and he asked what was wrong.
'You went up them, didn't you.' My buddy said it wasn't phrased as a question. He asked how his trainer knew. The trainer just shook his head.
'Because we didn't find her. The dogs lost her scent.'
My buddy asked what that had to do with anything. The trainer asked how long he'd been on the stairs, and my buddy said no more than a minute. The trainer gave him this really awful, almost dead-eyed look, and told him that if he ever went up another set of stairs again, he'd be fired. Immediately. The trainer walked away, and I guess he's never answered any of the questions my buddy has asked him about it since.

My buddy has been involved in a lot of missing persons cases where there's never been a trace of them found. I mentioned David Paulides, and my buddy said he can confirm that those stories are, for the most part, accurate. He said that most of the time, if the person isn't found right away, they're either never found, or they're found weeks, months, or years later, in places they can't possibly have gotten to. One story he told me really stood out that involved a five-year-old boy with a severe mental disability.

* The little boy vanished from a picnic area in the late fall. In addition to the mental disability, he was also physically handicapped, and his parents explained over and over that he simply could not have vanished. It was impossible. Someone had to have taken him. My buddy said they searched for this kid for weeks, going miles out of the accepted range, but it was like he'd never been there. The dogs couldn't pick up his scent anywhere, not even in the picnic area where he'd apparently vanished from. Suspicion fell on the parents, but it was pretty clear that they were devastated, and hadn't done anything sinister to their kid. The search was concluded about a month later, and my buddy said everyone had pretty much forgotten it by later in the winter. 
He was out on a training op in the snow, on one of the higher peaks, when he came across something in the snow. He said he saw it from far away at first, and when he got closer, he realized it was a shirt, frozen and sticking part way out of the powder. He recognized it as belonging to the kid, because it had a distinctive pattern. About twenty yards away, he found the kid's body, laying partially buried in the snow. My buddy said there was no way the kid had been dead for any more than a few days, even though he'd been missing for almost three months. The kid was curled around something, and when my buddy brushed off the snow to see what it was, he said he almost couldn't believe what he was seeing. It was a big chunk of ice, that had been carved crudely to look sort of like a person. The kid was holding it so tight that it had frostbitten his chest and hands, which my buddy could tell even with the decay that had taken place. He radioed the rest of the crew, and they took the body off the mountain. 
Now, he recapped all of this for me, and to put it simply, there was no way this kid could have both survived for almost three months on his own, or have gotten to this peak. There was no physical way this child could have walked almost fifty miles and ended up on the top of a god damn mountain. To top it off, there was nothing in the kid's stomach or colon. Nothing, not even water. It was like, my buddy said, the kid had been taken off the face of the earth, put in suspended animation, and dropped on this mountain months later, only to die of exposure. He's never really gotten over that one.

The last story I'll share from him was one that took place relatively recently, only a few months ago. 

* They were out doing a recon for mountain lions, because there had been several reports of sightings in the last couple of days. One of our jobs is to scout out the areas where these animals are seen to ensure that if they are in the area, we can warn people and close off those trails. He was out on his own in a very heavily forested part of the park toward dusk when he heard what sounded like a woman screaming in the distance. Now, as most of you know, when a mountain lion screams, it sounds almost exactly like a woman being brutally murdered. It's unsettling, but far from abnormal. My buddy radioed back and let ops know that he'd heard one, and that he was going to keep going to see if he could figure out where its territory started. 
He heard the mountain lion scream a couple more times, always from the same spot, and determined the approximate area of the mountain lion's territory. He was about to head back when he heard another scream, this time within only a few yards of him. Of course, he freaks out and starts heading back at a much faster pace, because the last thing he wants is to run into a god damn mountain lion and get mauled to death. As he got back on the path and started heading back, the screaming followed him, and he broke into a jog. When he was about a mile from ops, the screaming stopped, and he turned around to see if it was following him.
It was almost night by this point, but he said in the distance, just before the path rounded a corner, he could see what looked like a male figure. He called out to them, warning them that the paths were closed, and that he needed to come back to the welcome center. The figure just stood there, and my buddy started to walk over. When he was about ten yards away, the figure took, as he described, 'and impossibly long step' toward him and let out the same scream my buddy had been hearing. My buddy didn't even say anything, he just turned and sprinted back to ops, never looking behind him. By the time he got back, the screaming had moved back into the woods. He didn't mention it to anyone else, just said that there was a mountain lion in the area and that they would need to close those paths until the animal could be located and moved. 

I'm going to end this entry here, since it's turned into a huge wall of text. I'm going to be heading out on a yearly training op tomorrow morning, so I'll be gone until early next week. I'll be meeting with a  lot of former trainers and buddies who work in other areas of the park, and I'll be asking around about any stories they'd like to share. I'm so glad you guys have been interested in my stories, and once I'm back from this op, I'll continue to share them!

**EDIT: Part 4 is up: https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/3jadum/im_a_search_and_rescue_officer_for_the_us_forest/**[Part 1](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/4q03fa/i_dared_my_best_friend_to_ruin_my_life_hes/)

[Part 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/4q6e5h/i_dared_my_best_friend_to_ruin_my_life_hes/)

[Part 3](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/4qcle4/i_dared_my_friend_to_ruin_my_life_hes_succeeding/)

[Part 4](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/4qivk6/i_dared_my_best_friend_to_ruin_my_life_hes/)

[Part 5](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/4qoy4n/i_dared_my_best_friend_to_ruin_my_life_hes/)

[Part 6](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/4quxvv/i_dared_my_best_friend_to_ruin_my_life_hes/)

[Part 7](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/4qzu9h/i_dared_my_best_friend_to_ruin_my_life_hes/)

Well… I’m back.  Hi everyone.  I am alive.

I… well I’ll just start telling you what happened. I’m starting to shake as I even think about writing everything down, but I have to finish this.

After I posted my last update, it was go time.  I’ve been preparing for this event for so long that it was hard to believe that I had just hit submit.  I couldn’t go through and comment to everyone that part 7 was up.  Sorry.  I had to see David’s reaction.

I put my phone in my pocket and watched David from across the street.  He was eating dinner just like I said in my post.  His phone clearly went off, because he perked up his head and grabbed his phone from the table.  I’d seen his phone go off whenever I posted before, so I knew he had set an alert.

I watched his eyes scan the post with interest.  Then his eyes slowly widened.  I knew when he reached my favorite part, because his gaze shot up and looked around the restaurant.  He wrapped up his sandwich and quickly walked out of the restaurant, his eyes scanning the street while stealing glances at his phone to keep reading.

It was a very satisfying scene.  It makes me smile just thinking about it.

I didn’t follow him home.  Instead, I waited for the inevitable email.

Do you want to know why David was so scared of my information release?  He was scared because the Internet was his safe haven.  He was powerful there.  When we had our dare conversation, and for so long after that, I was the computer illiterate one and he ruled that domain.  And now I had managed to track him in his safe place.  Before, I had been weak and an easy target for his games.  Now that I had seriously fought back and threatened him, he was worried.

The email came while I could still see him walking away.  

“Hello Zander.  Bravo, but I’m not going to meet in public,” he wrote.

To be honest, I posted Welles Park online because I figured he would want to change the location if it was a public place, and I didn’t want to release the real address online.  I didn't want anyone crashing the party and getting hurt.  Sorry for lying.  I’ll be apologizing for lying a lot by the end of this post.  

I told him that I’d email him the new address 15 minutes before it was time to meet.  He didn’t respond.  I didn’t want him to have the address too early and show up to set any traps.  He really should have countered with a location of his own, but he didn’t.

I stood up.  Time to go to the warehouse and wait.

The location I had chosen used to be a warehouse of some kind.  I didn’t care what it had been used for, only that it was abandoned and unguarded.  If David tried anything stupid, which I thought he was going to, I didn’t want any more innocent bystanders in the way.

I took an Uber to a suburban area a few blocks away.  When the Uber left, I walked to the warehouse.  

When I arrived, it was already almost 9 PM.  Not completely dark yet, but getting there. I walked around the perimeter of the warehouse, looking for any sign that David had beaten me here.  There wasn’t any sign that I could see.

I approached a side door and pulled a key out of my pocket.  I unlocked the chains from the door handle and stored them just inside the door as I entered.  The soundscape changed from an ambient evening in the city to a tomb.

The factory had a single floor that was one big, open space.  High above it, catwalks ran along the rafters all leading from the warehouse manager’s office, which was a metal cube suspended at one end of the warehouse. 

Shelf scaffolding that had been abandoned broke up the empty space.  Crates and pallets were strewn around here and there, making hiding places.  I had previously come and strategically arranged them in case it came down to a fire fight.  

That’s also when I had put chains on every door.  There were four entrances into the warehouse, not including the windows near the ceiling.  I had chained them all except the one I entered through.  That was my funnel.  If you’ve ever gone hunting for live game, you know what I’m talking about.

There was nothing left to do but to wait now.  I sent him the address at 9:45.

A rattling of the front door alerted me that he was here.  He was a half hour late, which was an attempt to unnerve me.  The door jolted repeatedly, but the chains held it shut.  It was dark now.  The only light streamed in the windows from industrial-style streetlights outside.

“How am I supposed to meet you if you won’t let me in?” David called from outside.  The hair on the back of my neck rose, despite all my preparations.  It was time.

David tried all three doors.  He skipped over the only one that was unlocked until he absolutely had to.  He knew what a funnel was, but he had no choice.  The windows were too high and would result in a very high fall once he got in.

The side door silently opened and in walked David Fucking King.  I stayed where I was behind a wooden crate stacked with pallets.  If he came in shooting, I didn’t want to be an easy target.

Slow clapping filled the echoing room.

“Well done,” David chanted.  I peered through the pallets to see the door shut behind David.  He was alone.

“Where is she?” I said just loud enough to be heard.  

“I’m so very impressed with you, Zander.  Completely unexpected.”  He pulled his phone out of his pocket, lighting up the wall behind him.  He began to read.

“‘Fuck you, David.’  ‘Hashtag, Fuck David King.’ ‘Zander, you brilliant bastard.’  ‘Go get your girl!’ ‘We are coming for you, David.’  Thousands of these, almost all saying the same thing!  How does it feel to have people rooting for you?  Do you feel better equipped to fight me now?”

“Where. Is. She?” I enunciated.

David knocked on the door behind him, and it opened.  In shuffled Katie.  Her face was red and shimmering with tears. Duct tape had been wrapped around her entire head several times, covering her mouth.  Her wrists had been similarly wrapped.  A band of tape also tied her ankles together, but had enough slack that she could take small steps.  A thick arm was wrapped around her neck as a tall blonde man with extremely curly hair guided her into the room.

“I said to leave your partner behind!” I shouted.  It echoed.

“If you don’t want him here, then come kill him,” David said.

I didn’t respond.  God-fucking-damn-it.

“So, Zander, how would you like to proceed?  You’re running the show here,” David called, looking around the warehouse.

“Send Katie forward and leave.”

“Sorry, I don’t have a guarantee that you won’t release all that information anyway.  Come on out here and we’ll discuss my terms.”

“Like hell I am.”

David looked to his partner, and his partner used his free arm to punch Katie in the side.  She cried out as best she could through the duct tape and faltered, but the blonde man held her up by her neck.

“We can do this all night,” David smirked.

I stood up.  My hiding place was off to David’s left, so I walked in a semi-circle until I was directly in David’s line of sight.

“Come closer,” he grinned.

I stepped forward until we were a couple yards apart.

“Look how you’ve changed,” he smirked.  “Your hair looks good.  You should always dye it darker.  You’re so stoic now!  Confident!  Being on the run has changed you!  I guess all we had to do to increase the minimum required effort was go on the run, huh?  Then maybe we could have avoided this whole mess.  Then again, it’s all been so fun.”

“Let’s get this over with,” I growled.

“So hostile,” David commented.  “What’s your first term?”

“He leaves,” I said, pointing to the blonde man.

“Okay,” David shrugged.  Before I could process what was happening, he pulled a handgun from his jacket pocket, and shot the blonde man in the head.  He collapsed, dragging Katie with him.  Katie gave a muffled shriek and untangled herself from his body, dragging herself backwards along the floor.  She backed into the wall and stayed there, eyes wide. 

David looked down at the body before slowly turning his head to me. 

“My turn.”

Jesus Christ.  It finally hit me how in over my head I was.  I might understand David King, but I could never, ever match his sickness.  It occurred that I could die that night, despite David’s rules.

“Show me the data,” he said.  “That’s my first term.  I want to know exactly what you’re going to release so I know it’s worth my only bargaining chip.”

I tried to hide my shaking hands as I pulled my phone out.  I went into my email drafts on a throwaway account where I had saved a copy and emailed it to him.

“I sent it to you,” I said.  David smiled reassuringly.  

Fast as a lizard, he spun around and snatched Katie off the floor.  She screamed as he stood her up and held her in front of him. 

I pulled my Ruger SR45 handgun out of the concealed carry holster I’d worn and tried to get a clear shot.  He was too fast and had caught me by surprise, so she was in front of him before I’d even lined him up in the sight.

“So, you got a gun after all,” he said coolly.  “Didn’t see that part in your posts.  Relax, I’m just making sure I can read in peace.” 

He held the gun to her head with one hand while opening his phone with the other.  My mind raced, trying to figure out the next steps.  David had waltzed into a hostage negotiation that I had arranged myself and took over.  

He took his time reading through the data dump.  His expression changed between surprise and a smirk repeatedly.

“Well now,” he said, putting his phone away and slipping his now free arm around Katie’s neck.  “I had no idea I was so careless.”  He sounded anything but careless.

Katie gasped as he suddenly gripped her neck tighter and pressed the muzzle against her temple.

“Let’s move somewhere… smaller,” he said, looking up at the manager’s box.  “I don’t want you running away when the going gets tough.  You first, Zandsand,” he said, nodding his head toward the stairs to his right.

The door he had entered from had a set of grated stairs off to the right that led up to the manager’s box.  They went up toward the back wall, then turned to the left straight into the side of the manager’s box.  Another set of stairs should have been on the other side, mirroring these, but they had been disassembled and lay in a heap.

I kept my face to David as I walked toward the stairs.  I kept my gun pointed in his direction, and he kept his muzzle against Katie’s head.  Katie was sobbing and watching me.

When I reached the stairs, I slowly backed up them.  David followed once I was halfway up.

At the top of the stairs, the door to the office stood.  To the left, a grated walkway led out over the floor, spreading into catwalks that sprawled the entire place.  

I opened the metal door to the office and backed in.  The only furniture in the room were two heavy, wood tables.  The rest of the office was bare.  A thin slit of a window overlooked the warehouse floor.

David pushed Katie into the room with his arm still around her neck and shut the door behind him.  I followed him with my gun, standing against the opposite wall where the second door leading into the office was.  The office was big enough that we were still a few yards away from one another.

“Now I don’t have to worry about you running off into the dark warehouse.  As fun as hide and seek sounds, I don’t have the time.  

“You know, when I found your posts, I thought I had stumbled across some sort of… therapy story that you were putting up.  But it was so much better.  You really have surprised me.  You’ve grown and changed to try and beat me,” David smiled.

“But you haven’t changed enough. I can see it in your face and your trembling hands.  You are still you, Zander.  You’ve changed your exterior, but inside you have the same motivations, and weaknesses.”

He tightened his grip  on Katie again.

“I know your next term is for me to let Katie go, so I’m going to skip your turn.  I know you would prefer that she remain in my custody rather than getting shot, so I suggest you put down your gun.”

I stood my ground.  I wanted to take a shot, but didn’t want to risk him being faster than me.  I was confident in my aim, but not my speed.

“Put it down,” he said again.  I stayed.

In an instant, the gun had left her temple, fired a shot into the floor, and returned to her head.  She sobbed, and the heat of the barrel on her skin must’ve hurt.

“I’M NOT FUCKING AROUND, ZANDER!” David shouted.  

Slowly, I set the gun on the floor and kicked it in his direction.

“Good choice,” he said calmly.  “Have you realized why you’re here yet?” 

My face answered him.  What did that even mean?  Of course I did!

“You think you’re here to save Katie, but you aren’t.  She’s been gone for a year now, and you’ve only built up memories of her.  The Katie you knew is dead.  But not even that Katie is the reason you’re here right now.  No, you gave up on a happily ever after with Katie long ago.  This isn’t a hero’s quest to save the princess.  This is a revenge assault on the dragon.”

I tightened my jaw.  I refused to admit he was right.  

“This isn’t about saving her.  This is about outsmarting me.  Keeping Katie safe and sound is just a result,” David said,, his smile growing.

“So, in that sense, you and I are the same now.  It’s about outsmarting the other one.  You started out simply living life, then progressed to defending yourself, then to protecting your loved ones, and now you’ve arrived where I wanted you to be all along: trying to ruin me.  It took you a couple years, but you made it.  At least, most of the way.

“Even if Katie isn’t the true reason you’re here, she’s still a weakness.  I’m going to guess that other people in your life are the same way. You still have weaknesses that tie you down.  I learned how to get rid of mine.”

“Like your own mother?” I snipped.

“She was a liability,” he said coldly.  “It wasn’t personal.”

“You’re a sick fuck,” I said.  

The door behind David silently opened.  I’d oiled those hinges for hours, making sure they made absolutely no noise.

“I’m about to get a lot sicker,” he said.  

He’d started to pull the trigger, when he was tackled from behind.  Katie tumbled out of his grasp as he tried to use both arms to catch himself.  His gun went off, but the shot hit the wall.  

Katie rolled away from David’s reach. 

David started to get up, but the assailant was on their feet faster.  David, on his hands and knees, looked up at the attacker.

“Remember me, BITCH?!” Clark jeered, and then punched in a downward arc into the side of David’s head.  

David dropped to the floor, but he was still conscious. He grabbed Clark’s legs and tore him to the ground.

I raced forward and pulled Katie out of the scuffle.  I dragged her out the door before getting her to her feet and cutting the tape on her hands with my pocket knife.  There wasn’t time to get the layers off her head.  She was wide-eyed.

“Run!” I hissed. “Go outside! The cops will be here soon!”  I turned back inside to go help Clark.  Not a romantic reunion, I know, but there was still a psychopath in there.

David and Clark were wrestling on the floor, throwing punches and grappling with one another.  David was bigger and landed a few hard punches.  I looked over my shoulder, making sure Katie was stumbling down the steps. 

I dove in, aiming for my gun that was just beside the scuffle.

David saw me and kicked my legs like a tentacle out of the ocean.  I tripped and knocked the gun into the corner when I fell.  David suddenly shoved Clark off of him, practically tossing him onto one of the tables.  I watched as David jumped up and made for his gun.  

I writhed on the ground and kicked.  My toes barely caught the gun and sent it skittering across the room.

There were two guns in the room, both on opposite sides.  Two of us, and only one of him.  

Clark rolled off the desk and jumped into David as he ran for the gun.  They both slammed into the wall.  I crawled for my gun, which was just out of reach by a couple feet.  There was another crash behind me. 

My fingers wrapped around the gun and I twisted around on the ground, aiming it in their direction.  I had turned just in time to see David fire a shot into Clark.  

There was no hesitation as I squeezed the trigger.  It struck his shoulder.  He whirled to face me.  

I fired again.  

And again. 

And again. 

And again.

Even after he’d stumbled back against the wall and slid down, I kept firing just to be sure.  Just to make sure that the fucker would never get back up again.  

My gun clicked to alert me that I had emptied the clip.  Ten shots, and every one had hit David Fucking King.

I exhaled and dropped the gun, letting my head fall back to the floor.  My heart pounded.  My whole body shook.  But I couldn’t rest yet.

Shakily, I got to my feet and stumbled over to Clark.  He was crumpled against the wall, clutching his left shoulder.  Blood oozed through his fingers.

“Damn, he shot me,” he said, clearly in shock.  That’s when the police sirens could be heard.

“Get out of here,” he said to me.  

“No, I’m going to--”

“I’ll be FINE!  Police will be here any second to help me, just get out!  Get back on the run!  I’ll contact you when it’s safe!” Clark yelled.  “Go!  I’m not letting you get arrested again until they get the facts straight!”  

I rushed toward the door, stuffing the Ruger back in my pants as I moved.  

I paused at the door.

“Thank you,” I said, looking at Clark.

“Go!” He yelled again.

I sprinted down the steps and ran to the door furthest in the back of the building.  I unlocked the chains on the door and pulled it open, ducking into the night.  I had run this path over and over, making sure it was good enough for an escape in case something went wrong.

I went to my previously established hiding place and hunkered down to stay hidden.  I sent a text to the server my script was on and entered the password to cancel the info dump.  There never was a second person, that was a bluff.  There is no reason to release that information to you now since David is dead. I’m sorry, I really appreciate the level of support to ruin David, but there’s no point now. I thought he’d still be alive afterward. The police will get it eventually as evidence, though..

I also tapped out ‘I am alive’ in the Reddit thread to alert everyone that I had survived. Then, I collapsed into sleep.

This morning, I was thinking clearly again and feeling better.  I ate and drank lots to counter the shock.  I have started making plans on where I’ll go next.  It isn’t safe to stay here much longer.

The news hasn’t said anything about the incident yet, but I’m sure the story will break eventually.  I have stayed glued to the radio app on my phone all day today and am even listening right now, hoping for an update on Katie or Clark.

Thank you, Reddit.  You’ve helped me remain positive these past few days and set this trap.  It’s finally done.  I regret so many things about what I did and how I reacted in the past.  I should have fought more forcefully before it came to this.  I was too scared, though, and didn’t really understand David.  But now I do.  Only now it doesn’t matter because he’s gone.

From here, I’ll continue to stay on the run.  I don’t plan to turn myself in until Hernandez says the prosecution is ready to drop all charges.  

Hernandez is trying his hardest back at home to mitigate the evidence against me in all of those charges.  Clark’s testimony about what happened last night should really help reduce the credibility of David’s claims.  Plus, the GoPros we set up around the warehouse won’t hurt.  David’s confession about his mother was a bonus I hadn’t expected.

Originally, we had intended to lock David in the manager’s office for the police to find.  Clark had called the police just before attacking.  Circumstances had changed that plan. 

Some of you may wonder ‘well what if David hadn’t taken you up into the manager’s office?’  We had contingency plans: that wasn’t the only option.

Regardless, all of our plans involved arresting David, not killing him.  It was a last resort option and wasn’t built into any plan.   didn’t know I was prepared to kill until I had my gun aimed at David King.

I don’t think I’ve fully processed the fact that I’ve killed someone… I don’t know how I’m supposed to feel or act or think or… anything.  I feel like I’m acting the wrong way...

Anyway, there’s another part that will help persuade the prosecutor to drop the charges against me.  I lied before when Hernandez came to visit me in jail.  I said he told me he couldn’t talk about Isaac’s death, but he did tell me.  They had found a video file on Isaac’s computer from the day he died.  

He’d been recording himself playing games for YouTube when there was a crash of silverware in the background.  Isaac didn’t hit pause on the recording, and left the room to investigate.  

David came flying back into the room, shoving Isaac into the bookcases.  He slammed the door and was on him in seconds.  The assault lasted only minutes.  David walked out, leaving the door wide open.

The camera watched him come back into the room with my pillow.  He held the pillow over Isaac’s body and hit it repeatedly.  All the dead skin from my pillow fell onto Isaac’s body.  They found those traces on Isaac’s body, but the video proved that I hadn’t killed him.

David had walked out and locked the door behind him.  He’d made a mistake and hadn’t checked what was running on the computer.  All he saw was the game.

Hernandez and I had been in contact while I was first on the run.  I lied about that too. When I had first contacted him, he started crying on the phone, apologizing repeatedly.  He told me that he knew if I stayed in jail, that I would, at the very least, lose a lot of time out of my life while the trial went on, even if David was accused later as more evidence came out.

He had accepted David’s deal and demanded that I be given half of the $15,000 he was paid.  David, as you know, only gave me $2,000, but Hernandez had hoped it would help me lay low and evade capture until he could successfully contest the evidence.  We fully intend to report the bribe to the police.

He told me that after my escape from the car, the police were very suspicious about the circumstances of my escape.  There were too many holes in the story, and Hernandez had been sure to point out every last one repeatedly to his boss.  A lot of you pointed them out too.  Paint from the truck rubbing off, bars separating the front seat from the back seat, gps in the truck marking his whereabouts, and the location of the crash in relation to the time David sounded the alarm, etc.

David had clearly been desperate to get me out of jail.  He risked bribing an official and left a lot of his plan up to chance to get me out.  David just didn’t want to end the game yet.  If I went to jail, it was over.  Yet there were still so many ways he could ruin my life.  

His need for quick action led to mistakes.

Hernandez also told me when he came to visit that Jackson had turned up.  He’d come home a couple days after I was arrested and was brought in for questioning.  He had proof and witnesses that he had been staying with his family for a few days.

When asked about the break in and theft, he told his story.  

David had knocked at the door just as Jackson was finishing packing to go on vacation.  He told Jackson that he was a friend of mine and was helping me move out.  Jackson let him in and finished packing.

He was just walking towards the door with his suitcase when David asked if he would be willing to help carry out the TV.  Jackson agreed and carried it out with David. He then grabbed his suitcase and left, asking David to lock up when he was done.

That’s when he started stealing everything and trashing our house.  That’s also when Isaac would have come out and been killed.  It solved the riddle of why the door had been locked and not broken when Clark found the apartment stripped bare.

There are still some questions that I don’t have answers to.  We haven’t been able to figure out what he did with all the things he stole from us.  We also don’t know who the partner is.  Hernandez should know that in a few days and let me know.

I also don’t know how the keylogger got on my computer, or when the tracking app was installed on my phone, or how David was able to provide my social security number, driver's license number, and all other accurate information to the credit card companies. The same goes for the fraud that was committed against my parents.

I can’t help but wonder if David had been in our house before the break in and done all of that.

As for Clark, his disgraceful exit was a fabrication to throw David off.  It was my idea to make him disappear from my life and take the target off of his back.  It was both to protect him from David’s rage, and so that he could support me in the background.  His mom did come and bail him out, but she was much kinder about the situation and worried like all moms do.

When I messaged Clark to tell him my plan in posting this series, he immediately jumped to help me, and without him I’d still be watching David and waiting for a good moment to strike.

It was his idea to plant the information about hiding his bank information on scraps of paper around town.  It was placed as a joke and a way to tell if he was reading the series. We wanted to see if David would go hunting for them.   He didn’t, but that was probably because he was on the run still.

Clark’s arraignment didn’t go so well.  He’s still being charged with a misdemeanor for graffiting David’s old house.  An expert was called to analyze the photographs and identified them as authentic and  undoctored.  Either David has someone doing one hell of a photoshop job, or he took pictures from angles that cut me out naturally.  We are still trying to figure out how to resolve his problem.

With Katie, I have yet to see her beyond those brief moments while confronting David.  It’s been only a few days for all of you throughout this series, but for all of us, she’s been missing for a year.  I have no idea what David or his partner might have done to her during all that time.  I don’t know when I’ll ever be able to see her again since I’m still on the run until the charges are dropped.  If the charges are dropped, that is.

I’m scared to see her.  I know David did it, but I feel responsible.  I wonder if she blames me.  I wonder if she hates me.  Maybe one day I’ll know..

What David said has shaken me.  I’ve spent a lot of time thinking about it today.  He told me I was there for him and not for Katie.  That I was after the dragon, not the princess.  I’ve realized that he’s right.  I’ve read a few of your responses and agree with you: I didn’t write all that much about Katie during this series.  If it had been about Katie, I would have written more.

The fact that I left her to go back and fight says volumes about why I set this trap.

David was right.  It wasn’t about Katie.  Katie was a result.  It makes me feel guilty and dirty to think about it.  Maybe it would be best if I never saw her again.  She’s not likely to want to see me.

Katie, if you’re ever reading this, if you can ever handle it, I’m sorry.  I’m so sorry.  

Once again, thank you, Reddit.  You have helped so much with your support, encouragement, and your unknowing aid in making this trap for David.  I couldn’t have done this without you.

The last two years have been hell.  But it’s finally over.  

We ruined David Fucking King.

&nbsp;

[Series 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/4ulqeq/i_dared_my_best_friend_to_end_my_life_part_1/)[PART 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/euox36/my_grandfather_spoke_dozens_of_languages_his/)

[PART 3](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/ewabtp/my_grandfather_spoke_dozens_of_languages_his/)

[PART 4: FINAL](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/eydfmc/my_grandfather_spoke_dozens_of_languages_his/)

&#x200B;

There are certain things you just can’t forget. You must’ve seen those clips of old musicians, deep in the grips of Alzheimer’s, who spring to life when they hear an old tune, suddenly able to find the correct keys on the piano even when they can’t even remember their own name.

For my grandfather, it was languages: he might not remember much, might not be able to tell an old friend from a nurse, but if you spoke to him in French or Italian, Mandarin or Arabic, he’d reply fluently without missing a beat.

Even if it was just to ask where he was.

Or who you were.

I don’t know quite how many languages he actually *knew.* It must have been upwards of a dozen, easily. He couldn’t write all too well, but something in his mind meant words and their meanings just came easy to him.

I was trying to record his talent on the day he died. I had no idea it would happen, but I thought it might be a nice way for our family to remember him. I’d learnt a few phrases in about fifteen different languages, and had them written down in a small book – phonetically, so that there was no way I’d make a mistake.

It was the same day Artie decided to show up.

My grandfather’s old best-friend. A man my father only vaguely remembered, but who was mentioned in my grandfather’s journals over and over again – until he stopped writing. Artie was tall, *very* tall, and had to stoop to enter the room, which meant his coat – which was dripping wet – left a thin film of water on the doorframe.

He was soaked to the bone, even the hair under his hat.

My father made a limp joke: “Caught in the rain?”

“Something like that.”

He seemed a little younger than my grandfather, but, that was to be expected. Artie could still walk, and my grandfather had survived on a diet of neat whiskey and cigarettes for his whole life. The two were practically night and day. Artie had this way about him, this neatness in even the most basic movements. The way he moved reminded me of origami: it seemed that in every move he made he was folding more and more of himself- he was constantly folding into the next moment, and the next.

He didn’t say anything to my grandfather, instead gave him space and sat in a chair in the corner, and had a hushed conversation with my father as I started up my recording.

My grandfather was fairly lucid that day, and although he had a lot of questions he was amiable, not *scared*, and I could see him get excited whenever we changed languages. We made our way from English to French, through Europe via Germany and Italy, through Arabic and Mandarin, and I was about to start on the more obscure languages when my grandfather began to cough, a deep, wet cough that started in his stomach and then stuck in his throat.

The machine next to him started making all sorts of strange noises, arrhythmic buzzes and beeps at a frantic pace, and my father stood up and went straight to the bed, holding his hand and speaking to him softly and Artie stood up and walked over, going for my father’s other hand. I didn’t know what to do, I’d never been in a situation like this, and I sat in stunned silence as the nurses entered and tried to calm everyone down, tried to calm *him* down, trying to give him some selection of pills but there was nothing they could do.

My grandfather seemed possessed.

He sat up, wrenching some of the tubes and wires out of the wall, hands and body shaking, and began to speak, facing straight ahead, in a language that was unlike anything I’d ever heard. It sounded like two languages at once, contradicting sounds fighting, different patterns so that words would seem to be spoken partially on an inbreath, it was like his mouth and tongue were spasming *against* eachother.

The words were alien but the tone was clear; something was wrong.

He kept going for a while, clutching my fathers hand, eyes wide, whatever he was speaking getting faster and faster and faster until he seemed to tire himself out.

With a low moan, he lay back, and took his last, rattling breath.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

People say that grief fills your every waking moment, takes up whole weeks and months - years, even.

They’re wrong.

Grief *empties* your life. Empties your life until there’s nothing left but staring down the barrel of another week with *this,* with this weight on your chest and this absence in your life, and every day feels like it stretches on and on and on forever.

Without them.

Which is maybe why I became so obsessed with the recording. I know it’s a little morbid, maybe even verging on insensitive, but I couldn’t get that language out of my head.

My father had called it nonsense, Artie had just shrugged as if to say *no clue,* and from the pain in my father’s eyes I’d decided not to mention it again. He didn’t need this. Not now.

I tried phonetically typing out words from it online, but that didn’t come up with anything. I tried listening to recordings of hundreds of languages on various databases, but none sounded anything like it. There was something about the way the language made the mouth work *against* itself, like you were trying to swallow every word you spoke, that made it sound like no other language I could find.

The more I thought about it, the more I thought about *why* he’d been speaking it. It was like something had shocked him, like he’d seen something and it had all come pouring out, like a burst pipe.

I thought about Artie. He and my grandfather had stopped speaking a long, long time ago – I knew that much. I knew that they’d been thick as thieves, had *been through some shit* as my father tactfully put it one evening.

Artie’d appeared almost out of nowhere, looking to reconnect with my grandfather, and we’d been more than happy to oblige. Thought maybe they could put it all to rest at last.

It was one of my grandfather’s biggest regrets, the way he and Artie parted. Unfortunately, we never got that far, but I wondered if Artie knew something about the language my grandfather was speaking.

I found a contact number for Artie’s family tucked away in an old address book, and made the call.

To my surprise, it went through.

A woman’s voice answered. Sounded around my age; tired.

“Yeah?”

“Hi there. Sorry – I know this is strange but I’m Alan Voynich’s grandson. Max. My grandfather was a friend of your grandfather’s. I was wondering if I could speak to Artie?”

“You're a Voynich?”

She spat out my surname like it was made of dirt. Paused, before continuing.

“Bold of you to call. You of all families should know, you can’t speak to Artie. Not anymore.”

I didn’t understand the hostility. I was confused, Artie had seemed in a good place when we’d seen him. Sure, there’d been something strange about him, but I thought whatever had happened between them was in the past.

“Sorry – I didn’t mean to be rude. Let’s start again: what’s your name?”

She was reluctant, but replied.

“Amy.”

“Amy, look. I met Artie a couple of weeks ago, he was there when my grandfather.. passed. I know there was some history between them, but he seemed to want to fix it. I just want to ask him a couple of questions. For closure.”

There was silence on the other end.

“Just five minutes of his time. I think he’d appreciate it-“

She cut me off.

“What the *fuck* do you think you’re doing? How *dare* you. Is this some sort of joke? A prank? Do you have *any* respect?”

I tried to interject, to explain myself, but she continued.

“I never knew my grandfather, Max. Artie died before I was born.”

A beat, and then:

“Go fuck yourself.”

I didn’t sleep well that night. There was a storm, and I dreamt of a figure in the rain, tall and pale, soaked to the bone, making its way towards me. I dreamt of rivers and canals and wells overflowing with dirty, grey water.

In my half-sleep I could hear the language, the contradictory sounds that it was comprised of, in the sound of the rain against my window, and the gurgling of the pipes in the walls.

When morning came, there was a small puddle at the bottom of my bedroom door, and the doorframe was dripping wet.

Must have had a leak.

I didn't want to think of the alternative.

I didn’t mention any of this to anyone. I didn’t think it would help anything. What would it accomplish? My father was dealing with his own, private grief and the rest of my family were too. Maybe there’d been a mistake. Maybe the man had been Artie’s *son,* or a relative, and we’d misunderstood.

Part of me knew that wasn’t true.

And so I became more obsessed with discovering this language, as each time I remembered the scene I’d recorded it became clearer and clearer in my mind that my grandfather was speaking to Artie, that he was desperately trying to communicate *something,* and that it was so urgent he used his last breaths to do it.

I became obsessed with the recording. And that's to put it mildly. I spend my days in the library, pouring through books on linguistics, on the foundations of language, studying histories of forgotten languages. Maybe I just needed something to fill my time.

Sometimes I felt watched, and I’d think that I could catch phrases or strains of the language in the dripping of taps, or the sound of tires running through puddles.

It was outside the library that I found an answer, though.

Not *the* answer, but an answer nonetheless.

I was chaining cigarettes, sheltering under a huge tree behind the library, listening to the recording out loud. I hadn’t been sleeping well, nightmares and all that, and so I often forgot things. Headphones, for example.

I looked up to see a figure shambling towards me. As it got closer I could recognise a few features; tattered coat, missing teeth, big smile.

Dot.

Everyone knew Dot. He’d spent his life battling a heroin addiction (and losing), and you could find him on any given day wandering the main streets in town looking for a bit of change, or a smoke.

“Spare a smoke, Max?”

I flashed him a small smile, and held out the pack. I was listening to the last ten seconds, trying to work out what the change in tone indicated. Had it been a question? Some bizarre form of syntax? I was so deep in my own head that I almost didn’t hear Dot speak up.

“Why’s a boy like you listenin to Gutter?”

I shook my head. I thought he had this confused for some sort of experimental music.

“It’s not a band or anything Dot, sorry.”

He looked a little offended.

“I know what it is: Gutter. What’s a boy like you listenin to Gutter for?”

My heart leapt. He had a name for it? He knew what this was?

“Dot – what do you mean ‘Gutter’? I’ve been trying to find out what this is for weeks. There’re no records of it.”

He looked at my pack of cigarettes, shrugged. Rolling my eyes, I gave him another, which he stashed behind his ear.

“Every homeless knows Gutter. Every crook too.”

“But there're no records—”

He laughed.

“Wouldn’t be. Not the kind of thing you keep a record *of.* Dirty language.”

The recording was playing quietly on loop, and we could both hear the faint sounds of Gutter coming from my phone speaker. Dot continued.

“See how it sounds like his throats being crushed, just a little? Sounds like he’s got two tongues?”

I nodded.

“Gutter’s two languages in one. Means one thing to some folk, one thing to others.”

“What’s the distinction?”

Dot paused, taking the second cigarette from behind his ear and lighting it, sucking on it for a long time, until I could hear the tip sizzle. The rain was falling harder now, lashing the earth and the brick-walls behind us.

“They say it’s if you kill a man. Something changes up here” he tapped his head “and you can just *hear* it different. Killin changes a man in more ways than one.”

Another long drag.

“It’s used by all the wrong sorts to communicate. Guess you can’t fake killin someone.. Not too popular though, seein as it makes it fairly obvious the reason you’re speakin it in the first place.”

“Which version can you understand?”

Dot held up his hands and turned them over in the dim light: “no blood on these\*.”\*

“Can you understand anything he’s saying? In the recording?”

Dot strained to listen for a while, and then shook his head.

“Doesn’t make much sense in the Gutter I know. Nonsense phrases.”

Then Dot spoke slowly, as if he was translating what he could hear my father saying:

*“The well goes deep and deeper still.*

Shit like that. Nonsense.”

I frowned. This all began to feel dark, like there were histories buried here that I didn’t want to explore, bones I didn’t want to dig up. Warnings I’d missed. But I couldn’t stop now, I was so close, and I knew now that this all *meant* something. My stomach turned.

The rain began to find a strange rhythm; like footsteps.

Footsteps that grew closer with each beat of the wind.

“You should stay away from Gutter, boy. Forget about this.”

Somewhere in the distance a car-alarm started. Dot continued, as if to himself.

“Dirty language.”

He spat.

“You know what they say about Gutter?”

I didn’t.

&#x200B;

“There’re only two occasions in his life a Good Man should speak Gutter:

If he’s bargaining for his life”

Dot turned, looked straight at me.

[“or for his soul.”](https://www.reddit.com/r/max_voynich)Apparently, there was once a city in the north of Sweden called Korona, but somehow we’ve all forgotten about it. I’m a police officer working in Kalix, a municipality close to where the lost city of Korona is supposed to have been. At that place, there are no signs of the city – only a dense forest – but certain details related to my own family makes me certain this place was indeed real. 

The entire world just forgot about it… I can’t imagine how or why, but it’s the only conclusion I’ve been able to reach. For me, this all started when two Romanian blueberry pickers came into my small office to report something they had found deep in the dense forest. They didn’t know enough Swedish or English to explain exactly what it was that they had found, but it was immediately clear to me that it had terrified them completely. From what I understood, it seemed to involve a human corpse. Eventually, after having brought in an interpreter from the town next to mine, it was revealed that they had stumble upon a dead child, no more than ten years old.

They led me and two of my colleagues – followed by an ambulance – to the location where they had found the child. The sun was setting behind a thick mist when we got there. I lit a cigarette while we left the main road and walked into the forest, to where the child was supposed to be. I felt a bit uncomfortable having to deal with a dead child, but I had handled cases like this before – some car accidents – and didn’t feel too affected by it now. It was just another job, or so I thought.

The Romanians stopped when we got close and refused to go any further. There was panic in their eyes, more than I expected even given these extreme circumstances. One of my colleagues stayed with them while the rest of us continued. We soon came upon a huge boulder that had been placed there by the ice sheet that covered Europe during the ice age. My colleague walked around it and a few moments later he came running back, pale as if he had seen the Devil himself. He bent down and puked right in front of me. 

“It…” he said. “It’s on the other side… Holy shit.”

I didn’t ask him any questions, I only proceeded to check it out for myself with the medics following behind me. What we found on the other side of the boulder… It wasn’t natural. Half the child – a blond little girl – was fused with the boulder just as if she had been passing through it as a ghost and then suddenly turned into a human before she had time to exit the rock. Or, as my colleague later remarked, it was as if she had been teleported into the rock. The girls sorrowful, dead gaze into the forest seemed to tell a story of a tragedy unknown to the living. The medics quickly shied away from her eyes in silence, horrified by the fate she must have suffered, but I couldn’t look away. I’ve never been a religious man, but this experience made me doubt everything I’d believed before. 

And I don’t just mean the bizarre way the poor girl had lost her life, half engulfed by the boulder… There was something else about the girl as well. Something that made me feel completely empty inside, just as if a piece of my own soul was ripped out of me leaving an empty hole in my heart that quickly filled up with a sorrow I had never felt before. It was a dreadful feeling, only made worse by the strange fact that a small part of me *recognized* the girl. I couldn’t tell from where… Her face was like the vague memory of a dream recently forgotten.

We collected ourselves and started talking, trying to make sense of the situation without any success, while the medics approached the body. I tried to focus on the hard facts while we investigated the scene. The girl was wearing a pink jacket. In one of the pockets, we found an odd looking flower – it’s colors were exotic and resembled the wings of a beetle – and a yellow library card with a text that puzzled us. “The library of Korona,” it said.

The girl had written her name on the card as well. When I saw it, my world started spinning. “Isabella Lexelius”, it said in the girls childish handwriting. 

“Isn’t that your last name, sir?” my colleague said.

“It… it is…” I didn’t know what to say or think.

“Well, do you know her?”

“I… I don’t know… No… No, I’ve never seen her before in my entire life. It must be a coincidence.”

“That’s a pretty big coincidence, sir.”

I didn’t respond to that. 

“There’s something on the ground as well”, one of the medics said.

On the bloodstained moss beneath the girl, there was a notebook. It must have fallen out of her hand, the one that was hanging limply above the book. I picked it up and opened it. The pages were covered with small text, written with a different handwriting than the girl’s.

“Sir!” one of the medics said. “We will have to bring some tools to cut her down.”

“Yes”, I said absently. 

“There’s one more thing”, the medic said. 

I put the book in a plastic evidence bag. “What?”

“There’s too much blood.” The medic pointed at the ground.

“What do you mean there’s too much blood?” I asked.

“Beneath the boulder, sir”, the medic explained. “It’s impossible for all that blood to come from a child.”

A moment of silence, then I said:

“We will have to come back here with better tools.”

A day later, we successfully removed the upper body of the girl and brought it back to the morgue where it was examined. We also tried to lift the boulder with the help of a crane, but it wouldn’t budge. Instead, we dug a hole under it but we didn’t find any new body parts. All we could do this day was to sample as much of the blood as possible.

During the examination of the body, I read the notebook. It contained the story of the city of Korona. I was convinced it was fiction – a deranged story written by the man I thought must have killed the girl – until a few weeks ago when the forensic lab called me. 

I still have a hard time believing it, but they told me there’s no other way. They had tested the DNA of the girl and compared it to mine because of her last name. It was my idea, since I didn’t want anyone to suspect anything. We didn’t think it would reveal anything, but it did… The ten or so years old girl, Isabella, was my daughter. I was sure it wasn’t possible. Ten years earlier I lived with my ex-wife and I never cheated on her and certainly didn’t have any children with her. We stayed together for five more years, so I would’ve known if she had a baby during that time. And yet, there was nothing wrong with the test. 

Below is a transcript of the notebook. I’ve typed it out here in the hopes that someone will remember the city of Korona or someone who might have lived in it. Please contact me if you have any information. 

This is what was inside the notebook:

My name is Helena Fredriksson. Five years ago I was a different person. I was younger back then, not just in the ordinary sense but in spirit too. There was joy in my life and I had hopes and dreams. That’s all gone now… I don’t have that much time to write this down, but I will try and explain what happened to us – to our entire community – as well as I can. 

The event, as we have come to call it, occurred on July 9, 2013. I was only visiting Korona over the day to take my niece – Isabella – to the grand opening of The Red Grove, the cities new amusement park. It was supposed to be the biggest one in Sweden and Isabella had begged her parents to go to the grand opening, but neither of them had been able to due to work. So they called me and asked me to do it for them. I was their go-to person for when they needed help with Isabella, the only one they trusted. How I wish that hadn’t been the case now, considering what happened. 

We arrived pretty early, a few hours before the opening, so that we wouldn’t need to stay in line the whole day to get inside. The weather was amazing. It had rained earlier in the morning, so we had been a bit worried, but when we got to the city there wasn’t a cloud in sight. 

Isabella couldn’t stop talking about how much fun we would have, and it warmed my heart to see her so happy. It took us a bit longer than expected to get to the amusement park since one of the main streets had been closed off for a military parade. This didn’t bother us that much, it rather increased the feeling of celebration in the air. To avoid the parade, we had to take a bus to the city center, the Freyja square, and from there we had to take the subway to the Yellow Neutral business cluster – the tallest skyscrapers in Sweden. It was possible for us to walk to The Red Grove from there. 

There were people everywhere. It turned out that a lot of them had taken a ferry down the river that I didn’t know about. This meant we had to stand in line after all. Isabella didn’t mind, but I knew she would get hungry soon, and I worried that it would ruin her mood. Luckily, there was a man selling hot dogs from a cart that he was pushing down the line. I bought a hot dog and a soda for Isabella. Her parents didn’t really like when I bought her junk food, but a day like this I thought they would understand. The man was also selling red balloons to the children. Isabella said she wanted one. I tried to tell her that she would have to carry it around all day and that there would be more balloons inside the amusement park, but she wouldn’t listen. Reluctantly, I bought her a balloon as well.

At this point, no one knew that their entire lives were about to change in a matter of minutes. 

Isabella accidentally let go of the balloon. I feared it would make her sad, but it didn’t seem to bother her that much. We looked at the balloon as it rose up into the air and drifted away. Soon, it was but a red dot against the vast blue sky. Then, suddenly, it vanished. 

“Where did it go?” Isabella said.

I couldn’t explain it. It had just disappeared.

“I don’t know”, I said. “Maybe it popped?”

But something – an uneasy feeling I couldn’t rationalize – made me doubt that. Then, only a few minutes later, strong winds came from every direction. It carried a smell with it that reminded me of something rotten.

“Ew”, Isabella said as her long white hair was blowing in the wind. “What’s that smell?”

I held her hand harder. “I don’t know,” I said.

People looked around, confused, and their joyful voices became concerned. Something was happening, but no one knew what it was. Sirens echoed in the distance, seemingly coming from the business cluster. 

“Oh my god,” a woman said and pointed towards the skyscrapers. “The top of the building is gone!”

It wasn’t that easy to see, but she was right. The top of the tallest building was gone as if it had been cut off with a knife. Isabella was too short to see it, but she picked up that something wasn’t right on everyone's faces and she became worried herself. 

“I think we need to get away from here,” I said, acting completely on instinct. “I don’t think it’s safe.”

Isabella teared up. “But the opening, aren’t we…”

“We will come back later sweetheart,” I said as I walked away from the crowd with her. One of the ferries were just about to leave. We quickly stepped aboard. A few others joined us, but most of the people stayed behind in the hopes that everything would be sorted out. Isabella cried, but she wasn’t mad. As the ferry slowly drove away from the riverside promenade a commotion of some kind erupted among the crowd back on land. I couldn’t see what was going on, but suddenly everyone screamed in terror and tried to run towards the water. They were clearly escaping from something, but I couldn’t see what it was. All I saw was people stepping on each other while they tried to jump into the river and swim away. It was a horrible sight, and I’m glad Isabella wasn’t tall enough to see over the railing. 

Next, the sirens from the emergency alert system began blasting its eerie sound of imminent catastrophe. Everyone asked questions no one had any answers to. Most people I heard thought we were under attack, either by terrorists or the Russians.

I picked up my phone to call my sister, but there was no signal. I tried with Isabella's phone as well without any luck. I soon discovered that no one had any signal. At the sides of the river that passed through the city, people were looking out of their windows trying to get a glimpse of what was going on but the only thing they could see that was out of the ordinary was the cut off building in the Yellow Neutral business cluster.

“Look”, Isabella said and pointed at the sky. “I’ve never seen such a big bird before!”

An enormous bird-like creature soared high above us. It was pitch black. Although it was impossible to say for sure, it seemed to be just as confused about seeing us as we were seeing it. It circled the city center a few times and then flew away again. The sight of the giant bird, or whatever it truly was, turned our anxious confusion into terror. We still didn’t know what had happened, but now we knew it didn’t have anything to do with terrorists or some foreign power. This was something else, something impossible to believe and yet at the same time impossible to deny.

The ferry let us off a bit further down the river, close to Freyja square. People seemed to be in a state of panic, although no one knew what was wrong. Some were packing their cars to escape the city, others were running somewhere – perhaps to their loved ones – but most people clustered around police officers, city workers or military personnel from the parade to try and get some information. But they only got the same answer over and over again, yelled at them so that it could be heard over the sirens from the emergency alert system: that nothing was known and that they needed to return to their homes and listen to the radio for more information. 

“How are we suppose to listen to the radio when the power is out?!” The voice came from an old woman. “Look around, there’s no power!”

She was right.

“Go home and close your windows and wait for the power to come back,” a policeman said. “We don’t know what is going on, but the safest thing to do is to follow the procedure…”

He was interrupted by something happening a few meters away. The first person who had tried to leave the city – a man on a loud motorcycle – had come back. I was carrying Isabella, comforting her at the same time as I tried to hear what the man on the bike was trying to tell everyone. I pushed through to get closer to him. He walked to the center of the square and climbed up on the foot of the statue of Freyja. Few people believed him, but everyone that had seen the creature in the sky had no doubt he was telling the truth however impossible it seemed. 

“There’s no way out!” the man yelled. “The main road cuts of at the edge of the city and… There’s only jungle. I can’t explain it. I’m sorry. But it’s true. We are surrounded by a dense, thick, jungle and there’s no way around it.”

“Then it’s true,” a policeman whispered to himself next to me. “For the love of God, it was all true.”

I asked him what he meant. First, he didn’t want to acknowledge my question, but when he saw my confusion and tears in my niece's innocent eyes he turned to me and said quietly:

“Before we lost contact with the helicopter that was surveilling the parade, the pilot said something that simply didn’t make sense. He… He was crashing. Something had cut off his rotor blades. And he said that it all had changed somehow… The view had changed. Before he hit the ground he yelled that he had seen a jungle to the west and an ocean to the east.”

More and more reports came in and even though it was impossible to tell rumors from facts they were all telling the same story: the entire world around the city had been replaced in an instance. The city was the same, but the sky above it wasn’t. Eventually, the screaming sirens went silent, the cars stopped beeping their horns and the cacophony of voices died out. An uncanny silence fell over the city. The feeling was beyond unreal.

I didn’t know what any of this meant. I tried to explain it to my niece, but she was only five years old and she couldn’t understand. She wanted to go home to her parents and I didn’t know what to tell her. She was tired and needed rest, so I went to a hostel nearby and paid for a room. Soon, the economy of the city would collapse but for the first few days in this new unknown world, people still accepted money as payment.

What followed was five years of unending trials and hardships, a continuous battle for survival with no hope for help or rescue. It started during the first night. The sun, identical to our own yet new and strange, sat due north instead of west and was replaced by unrecognizable stars covering the entire sky. As I looked up at them from the small window in our room, I didn’t feel awe, but rather I felt completely lost. The strangest feeling during all these years must have been the paradoxical sensation of familiarity on the streets mixed with the awareness of total displacement. I think this was partly why people kept close to the city center, to drown themselves in the illusion of being home even though they knew, deep down, that they couldn’t escape their fate as stranded in the unknown. 

Then, as I leaned out the window, I heard the sounds. People screaming, gunshots, cars driving madly through the streets without anywhere to go and the occasional odd howling that made my blood run cold. I never saw anything of what happened that night, but it changed the population – more than two million people – forever. 

I closed the window and hid behind the bed with Isabella. She wanted to cry for her mother, but I kept my hand over her trembling mouth. 

The next night was calmer, probably because no one dared venture outside. During the days, I soon realized, the threat didn’t come from the unknown jungle outside of the city but from the people within it. It was impossible to tell how much crimes were committed, but given what I saw with my own eyes – looting, robberies, and even murders – I figured the rate of crime must have gone up by a lot. However, it wasn’t total anarchy. The police and the few military units that had been in town for the parade kept some vital order to the community. Since ordinary people didn’t have guns, the police and the military wasn’t threatened by the average citizen. 

A leader stepped forward – the man on the motorcycle – and after a few weeks, everyone seemed to cooperate peacefully. The food that was left in the stores were mostly distributed fairly and everyone that could work seemed to do it without hesitation, even I.

The scientists that had been working at the university at the time of the event couldn’t figure out what had happened, but with the help of hundreds of citizens, they managed to build a small nuclear power plant that could return electricity to the city. I mostly helped out with that project. I didn’t know anything about nuclear physics, but I did what little I could. It was amazing what we were capable of as a people and in all my dreadfulness a feeling of pride grew in my chest. Although, our time in this world wasn’t simple. Far from it. 

Aside from my personal problem with keeping Isabella healthy and safe – which I succeeded with although she never felt safe – there were three major problems that kept growing larger for every week. 

The first one was the food and water situation. Some people had managed to grow wheat and potatoes in parks and on soccer fields, but it wasn’t enough. We were running out of food and water. It did rain from time to time, but very few people felt safe drinking the rainwater. To battle this problem – and to find solutions to some other problems as well – expeditions were sent out to explore the jungle. These typically ended the same way, that is with no one coming back. Only once or twice did someone manage to return to the city, but they weren’t themselves anymore. It was as if something in the jungle had captured their souls and let their bodies walk back unscratched. 

The second problem was nature. It seemed to have spared us the first couple of months, but soon after we got the electricity back it turned on us. It took a while before I saw it with my own eyes, but – seemingly at random – mysterious creatures entered the city. Sometimes they just walked right through it, never to return again. A policewoman – one of the new recruits – told me that she had followed a naked blue child as it solemnly walked into the city and then back out of it again. 

At other times indescribable monsters wreaked havoc on the streets, killing as many people as they could before returning to wherever they came from. 

At one point – and this I actually saw for myself – an enormous centipede, pure white with hundreds of red eyes, suddenly appeared from a manhole. It quickly climbed up against a building – as if it knew exactly what it was doing – and entered one of the windows on the top floor. Next came the screams from the people inside the building. A few escaped, but everyone else inside were ripped to shreds. Only after about five minutes did the centipede exit the building from the entrance, it’s white segmented body stained with blood, and returned down the manhole. 

These attacks, as they were called, aroused fear and panic in all of us. Although it didn’t happen that often, it happened often enough for everyone to be on edge all the time. 

The third problem also didn’t become noticeable until later. It was a problem of health. There was no pattern to who was affected or not, but some people – probably no more than 1% – got sick. It started out like a fever and slowly progressed with nightmarish mutations randomly hitting the body. Most of these mutations made the victims handicapped and disfigured, but sometimes – very rarely – the victims developed properties that were seemingly beneficial to them. The most extreme case of this that I saw was a young girl who grew a third eye in the middle of her forehead. The iris of the new eye glittered with amazing colors and the girl claimed that she could use the eye to see other peoples emotions. 

At the beginning of the health crisis, the sick people were treated badly, just as if they had been monsters from the jungle. This treatment only got worse when it was revealed that the creatures from outside never attacked the sick. At one point, a mob gathered at Freyja square, set on chasing the sick people out of the city. Luckily, this was stopped by the military. 

In the end, however, the sick people were sent into the jungle. Not to be away with them, though, but to make use of their immunity to the nature of this world. This turned into a huge success that eventually solved the food and water problem. They could venture out and explore the surrounding area and return with edible fruits, vegetables, and small mammal-like animals that they hunted. 

This was a turning point for us. And then luck stroke again. All attempts at fishing had failed so far, but all of a sudden there were fish everywhere in the river. We soon learned that there were different periods for when the fish was out to sea or close to land. However, as soon as they came close to land mysterious purple thunderstorms that lasted weeks tormented the city. And yet, we survived. Many people didn’t, of course, but life was possible. In the end, we prevailed. 

During the five years that followed there weren’t that many catastrophes and our focus on survival kept most of our thoughts of home away. Even Isabella thought less and less of her parents as she grew older. Over time, most people got used to the bizarre situation they had found themselves in back in July 2013. Many people did commit suicide, yes, but *most* people choose to live on in this unknown land. 

Two events, however, changed things. First, it was what happened to a planned expedition at sea. Hundreds of people, mostly men, decided to venture out into the ocean with one of the luxury cruisers that had been moored next to the city. This was going to be a great adventure and, perhaps, a way to find some answers to where we had ended up. It inspired all of us. Thousands of people – Isabella and I included – had gathered to watch as the huge boat slowly sailed out. It all felt similar to that day five years earlier when we had waited for the amusement park to open. We all stared at the horizon as the boat – named *Birdo de Espero* – turned into a small dot against the setting sun. We imagined the amazing adventures they would be on and looked forward to their return. But then something that must have been larger than anything we had seen so far came out of the water and swallowed *Birdo de Espero* whole. 

Some people screamed and others cried. This was a hard blow to the city. Just knowing that a being like that – a being able to eat an entire luxury cruiser in one bite – could exist deprived many people their hopes of a future.

The next event was different. It was a miracle, to say the least. It happened only a month after the destruction of *Birdo de Espero*. A military guard, a young man who had only been fifteen at the time of our disappearance from Earth, discovered that when he stood at a certain place at Freyja square he could tune into to a specific radio station from our old world. The station's name was Synthwave Mix and dedicated most of its broadcasting to that kind of music. Hope returned immediately, but this time the hope was different from the one we had spent five years building up within ourselves. This was the hope of seeing our loved ones again. The hope to return home. The people at the university investigated the area to try and determine where the radio signals were coming from. They didn’t have much success but soon realized that they emanated from the ground beneath Freyja square. 

While the area was investigated by the scientists, ordinary people showed up en masse. They all had radios of different kinds with them, like children carrying stuffed animals to feel safe, hoping to tune in to Synthwave Mix and get a taste of their lost home. Of course, the area where the radio station could be heard was too small and the police had to chase everyone away to give the scientists the room they needed. A few days later, though, the scientists placed a set of large speakers at the foot of the statue of Freyja and connected them to the receiver they were using to listen in on the radio station. 

Day and night the relaxed, somewhat melancholic, synthetic music played non-stop to the entire city. People congregated around the statue. They even defied the dangers of the night. This became our cities new tradition. Ending the day by going to the statue and sitting down around it, as if in prayer, became our pilgrimage. It wasn’t exactly the music that drew people to the square, but rather it’s origin. Still, the electronic melodies soon turned into a symbol of all of our hopes and desires. From time to time, people got up and danced – sometimes while crying from a bittersweet joy difficult to explain. Although, the thing that made us all go silent and become totally focused was when the hosts said something. Usually, they only spoke about the music they were broadcasting – completely unaware that an entire city full of people were listening to them almost religiously – but on rare occasions, they talked about the world outside. At those times it felt like our hearts collectively stopped in anticipation. Would they say something about us, about their efforts to figure out where we all had gone and how they would bring us back? But there was never any news about us, just as if they had already forgotten about us or never known about us at all. The tragic fate of the city of Korona never came up. Yet, we never lost fate.

It took a long time – and now I’m getting closer to the present day – but eventually, the scientists decided that it would be worthwhile digging a large hole right where the radio waves seemed to sip out of the ground. This was no easy task and neither was it safe. The work took weeks. Again we all helped. No one really knew what exactly we were looking for, we only knew that it was *something*.

When we reached the bottom, where the rock was too hard to dig through, a mountain of dirt covered the entire square. Our efforts hadn’t been in vain, we discovered. Right beneath the place where the radio waves had been picked up, there was a small hole in the bedrock. People were asked to back away from it while the scientists investigated it. First, they tried to measure how deep it was. This took some time since it was hard to find a long enough rope. In the end, it was estimated to be about 700 meters deep. Next, some equipment was sent down tied to the end of the rope, and to everyone's surprise everything that was sent down was swallowed by the hole. Of course, no one knew where it went but we all thought the same thing. That, somehow, it had returned home. It was a reasonable assumption given that the only thing coming out of the hole – the radio waves – came from Earth. We all rejoiced in this discovery. More experiments were done and although some questions remained unanswered the consensus – even among the scientists – was that the hole really was a portal back to our own world. 

There were two large problems that needed to be solved though. The first was the safety. Every time something tied to the rope disappeared at the bottom of the hole, the rope was cut off just like the skyscraper five years earlier. This meant that it was possible that whoever entered the hole would be cut off as well. However, this problem was solved pretty soon. By tying a camera to the rope, connected to a screen above ground, it was discovered that the rope was only cut off when pulled back. As long as it wasn’t pulled back, the screen still received signals from the camera. The camera never recorded anything other than darkness on what was assumed to be the other side, but since it continued to work until the rope was pulled back this didn’t seem to be such a big problem. After all, some technical issues were expected under the circumstances. 

The second problem was that the hole was too small for anyone to fit into. Many attempts were made to widen the hole, but the bedrock seemed to be made out of a stronger material than any of our machines could tear into. This was extremely frustrating. It made us feel like we had reached the finish line only to discover that we were unable to cross it. In the end, one of the scientists said she wanted to send her ten-year-old son down the hole. He was small enough to fit into it. This was widely debated for quite some time before it was approved. The mother argued that the city of Korona was no place for her son and that all the evidence suggested the hole was the only way home.

The boy was brave. He knew he would probably never see his poor mother again but still went through with it. He was given a walkie-talkie and after a tear-filled goodbye to his mother, he was sent down the 700 meters deep, pitch black hole. He was instructed to radio in after he reached the other side, confirming he was safe. After the rope was pulled back, the mother waited and waited for her son to report. However, he never did. For weeks, the mother sat at the edge of the hole – under merciless heat and under pouring rain – calling her son over and over again with her walkie-talkie. No one knew what, if anything, had gone wrong. Since no other radio waves had been picked up other than Synthwave Mix, it was possible that other radio waves simply couldn’t enter into our world for some reason. Still, the authority deemed the hole too unsafe for anyone else to enter. 

This didn’t change peoples minds though. The hole represented the only true hope we had felt in years. And given all the horrible things in our world that could destroy us at any moment as easily as it is for us to blow out a candle, the small risk of going through the hole seemed to be more than acceptable. The hole was guarded by the police, but most of the police shared the cities collective opinion that the hole was the only way out… not for any of the adults, but for our children. 

And now I’m sitting here, in the room I payed for five years ago, writing this down. During the last few weeks, many parents have been sending their children down the hole at night. This world is truly no place for them. Although they could survive, they deserve better. Hence, like many others, I’ve decided to send Isabella home. When I told her about it, she looked at me with a happiness in her eyes I hadn’t seen since we were transported to this dreadful, godforsaken world. 

I’ve been writing this all day now. It’s my testimony to what happened to Korona. I will give this notebook to Isabella. I’m sure she will be able to give it to her father. Somehow, I know it in my heart that she will find her way home to her parents. Soon it will be dark and I will bring Isabella to Freyja square one last time.

I’m sorry it took so long,

Helana  


\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

[YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCXSrQ5Vhwc99kD8js7Ud5tw)The Suicide Room. That's what they called room 733 - as if I didn't have enough to worry about on my first day as a freshman. 

We had assigned to dorm room 734 which, it turns out, wasn’t one of the nice add-on rooms in the south hall. No, we found ourselves in the older wing of the building on the 7th floor. I wasn’t too bummed out, though; at least they’d honored my request to room with my best friend.

Lydia and I spent most of the morning moving ourselves in. By the time our Resident Advisor came by I was taping up posters and Lydia was reading.

"Hi girls, I'm Beth!" chirped the bubbly blonde girl as she bounded into our room. "I'll be your RA this year." 

"Hi," I nodded at her.

"Wow, you girls really work fast,” she said taking in our made beds and hung up clothes.

Beth picked up a drawing of Cthulhu that Lydia had done over the summer. She turned it sideways, studying it. 

"Is this the kraken from Pirates of the Caribbean?" 

Lydia glared at her over the top of her book.

"So anyway,” the RA continued, “I know our hall isn't as new as the south hall but trust me, there's a lot of history here. This building is almost 60 years old."

"Yes, I can see that." I said looking around. "The rooms are pretty small."

"Well, people were smaller in the 50s." Beth shrugged.

"Really." Lydia said flatly.

"Yep, really." Beth pursed her lips and just continued to stand there, while the room filled with awkward silence.

"So," I said, "the corner room next to us - 733, is it? It looks a lot bigger than our room. Is anyone assigned to that room or could we maybe-"

"Oh, you don't want that room.” Beth interrupted. "There were a couple suicides in there. A hanging and a jumper if I remember right. They’re not assigning anyone to that room.  Anyway, I'd just like to remind you that this is an all girls floor and guys are not allowed up here after 11." 

Before we could reply to her Beth clapped her hands and with a quick "well, nice meeting you" she skipped out of the room.

Lydia dropped her book on the bed and stared out into the hall. "I hate her."

"Did you hear that bomb she fucking dropped?"

"I'm going to call her Dumbshit Beth."

"Lydia, seriously. Suicides?"

"Oh, Becca, relax. Every college campus has a few suicides."

"Yeah, but in the same room?"

Lydia sighed. "Really, who cares? It's not *our* room."

"Yeah, I guess." I turned to study the little window in our room. "Can you imagine climbing out of that tiny window and jumping? You'd be alive for at least five seconds before you hit the ground."

"Oh, fuck, Becca, can you not?" Lydia glanced at the window and visibly shuddered. "You know I fucking hate heights and just talking about that shit is raising my blood pressure."

"We could always move into the suicide room," I teased her, "That one has a window on each wall."

"Fuck you."

"Okay, okay. But seriously, think about it. It would take a lot of commitment to squeeze out of that tiny window."

"Yeah, well, remember, people were apparently smaller back then." Lydia mumbled as she pushed her bed further away from the window. 

 
***

Since Lydia was an outgoing and friendly person, we made friends at lightning speed. There were a lot of parties in those first few weeks, at one of which Lydia inevitably met a guy. I'd known the girl since we were in diapers so I fully anticipated her having a boyfriend by the end of September. His name was Mike and he wasn't anything special; just your standard frat pledge douche canoe. 

After about a month on campus the novelty of college started wearing off. Lydia and I found our stride and we spent more weekends studying than drinking. Midterms were coming up in a couple weeks and I was determined to maintain a 4.0 GPA throughout my freshman year. 


One night in early October I was woken up by a loud, grinding sound. I sat up in bed and strained to hear it again. Lydia was also wide awake and listening.

*SLAM*

*What the fuck?* She mouthed to me.

It wasn't unusual for there to be noise in the hallways since other people came in at all hours of the night. But this sound had definitely come from next door - the corner room. 

*GRIND* 

"Is that-"

"Yeah," Lydia whispered. "That's the window next door."

At Lydia's insistence, we kept our window closed at all times. However, there was no mistaking the sound of the window in room 733 being opened and closed again at regular intervals.

*SLAM* 

"Who's in there?"

Lydia shrugged.

"Is someone fucking with us? Is this like initiation?" 

Lydia raised her eyebrow at me. "Initiation to what?"

"I don't know. College? Maybe they're hazing the freshman?"

*GRIND* (it opened)

"Who is hazing freshman?"

I shrugged.

*SLAM* (it shut)

"Becca, I love you, but that was fucking stupid."

I threw a pillow at her.  "Well, whoever it is, go tell them to knock it the fuck off."

"Me?! I'm not risking being thrown out a window." 

*GRIND*

"Well, I'm not doing it!"

"I'm an art major. You're a political science major. YOU go lay down the law."

"Fuck that." 

"Then call Dumbshit Beth. Isn't this the kind of nonsense she should deal with?"

*SLAM*

"I’m not calling her. Don't you put that evil on me"

"Fine," Lydia whispered loudly, "then we'll just have to ignore it."

"I have class at 7:30!" I whispered.

*GRIND*

"Then do something!"

"Ugh!" I got out of bed and stomped to the door, threw it open dramatically and went down the hall to pound on the door to room 733 which simply said 'Supply Room'.

"People are trying to sleep, please fucking stop." I said when there was no answer.

*SLAM*

"Dude, seriously..." I sighed.

I stepped back from the door and immediately noticed problem.  Room 733 was padlocked shut from the outside. I hurried back to my room.

"What happened?" Lydia asked.

"I'm not going anywhere near that fucking room, again. It's locked from the outside; I don't know how anybody could get in there."

"So, you’re saying it's a spooky ghost?" She laughed.

"No, I’m saying there is creepy shit going on inside a room colloquially called ‘the Suicide Room’.”

Lydia scoffed and rolled over to go back to sleep. "You should have been a drama major."

We didn’t hear the window next door again that night but the next morning you could clearly see from outside that both windows in the corner room were now wide open. 

***

I watched the windows on room 733 for an entire week but they remained open. Occasionally at night I thought I could hear a noise next door liked marbles dropping and rolling across the floor. Since it never woke Lydia up, I didn’t bother to say anything. 

One afternoon I was alone in the dorm editing notes on my laptop. I had my headphones in but the music wasn’t loud enough to cover the noise of someone knocking on the door. 

"Come in," I said without looking up from the screen.

A moment went by and then heard I heard the knocking again. I jerked my earbuds out and slammed the laptop closed.

I turned around, "Come-"

What the fuck? The door to the hallway was wide open. I'd left it open on purpose since Ian (a junior I was dating) was supposed to be stopping by. I heard the knocking again from behind me and literally jumped out of my chair.

It had come from the other side of the room – the closet door. It was the closet that shared a wall with room 733. 

"Lydia, you're not fucking funny."

Nothing.

"Lydia, I swear to god, I will punch you in your face."

Silence. I walked over to the closet door and grasped the handle.

"Lydia, you’re a fucking-"

"A fucking what?"

Her voice came from the doorway – behind me. I let go of the doorknob and stumbled back, wide-eyed. Lydia threw her stuff on the bed and turned to me, crossing her arms.

"I’m a fucking what?"

“I...thought you were hiding in the closet." I said, lamely.

"What? Why?"

"Because someone was knocking on the door."

"Jesus, Becca." Lydia rubbed her forehead and walked over to the closet, throwing open the door. There was nothing there but clothes and boxes. She made a swipe of her arm as if to say: ‘what now?’

"I swear-"

"Becca, there's no one here."

"I know what I heard."

We glared at each other until our little stand off was interrupted by the timely arrival of Ian. 

He immediately sensed the tension in the room. "Hi, ladies... What’s new?"

I gave my roommate a hostile look. "There’s strange shit is going on in that room next door. But that’s not new."

'Which room? 735? Or the empty one?"

"The *empty* one." Lydia emphasized. 

“733. Yeah, I'm not surprised. That's the suicide room."

"Right, we heard about the deaths." I sat down on my bed. 

"Yeah, it’s pretty fucked up. Three suicides all in one dorm room."

"Three?" Lydia raised her eyebrow. "We were told there were two."

"Well there were a couple people in the 70s and then some guy about ten years ago. He jumped out the window.”

Lydia and I both shuddered. Although she was much worse, we were both terrified of heights. A falling death was about the worst thing I could think of.

"I will admit that three suicides in the same dorm room is fucking disturbing.” Lydia said in an apologetic tone.

"Yeah, I heard there's something in that room." Ian said.

"Like what?" 

"No one knows, but every year someone has a new theory, usually right around Halloween something gets published in the campus paper. Whatever is in there, though, it ain't friendly."

"So, has anyone ever killed themselves in the neighboring rooms? Like this one?"

"Nah, just 733. Honestly, I was surprised when I heard they were opening the north hall this year."

"They told us we were the biggest incoming freshman class in twenty years." I said absentmindedly. 

"Yeah, I heard that, too. You know you could request a room change." Ian sat down on the bed next to me and I leaned against his shoulder.

"Yeah, but they wouldn't keep us together." Lydia cut in. "Becca and I have been best friends for 15 years. We can't room with other people."

"So should we just keep living here, next to Satan?" I glanced at the closet door again.

Lydia shrugged. "At least we'll have some stories to tell after graduation."

"These aren't the kind of stories I want to tell."

 ***

A few days later Lydia began to believe my closet story. I woke up in the middle of the night to the sound of someone whispering. I looked over at Lydia, who was already staring at me with wide eyes. She slowly brought a finger to her lips.

I listened intently, trying to hear what the voice was saying and where it was coming from but I couldn't understand even one word. I got out of my bed and tiptoed over to Lydia's. The whispering was definitely louder over there, but then she shared a wall with room 733. I listened harder.

*...never...taken...mouths...of fools...*

*What the hell?* Lydia leaned over and put her ear up to the wall. The whispers suddenly stopped and I leaned closer. Suddenly there was a loud bang from the other side. Lydia immediately recoiled and clutched her ear in pain. 

Someone was in there. Suddenly more angry than scared I again threw open our door and stomped over to the supposedly empty supply room.  I banged on the door loudly not caring who else I woke up at this point. 

"Are you fucking kidding me?!” I yelled at the door. “This shit isn't funny anymore. Come out of that fucking room, you asshole."

Silence. And then the doorknob started to turn.

I don't know what I'd expected to happen but it wasn't that. I backed up so far from the door that I ran into the opposite wall. When the handle had turned all the way down, something started to push from the other side. The door groaned loudly but the locks held. 

I held my breath until the pressure on the door subsided and the handle slowly returned to its normal position.

I noticed Lydia peaking her head out of our room. She held up her hands as if to say *what happened?*

"Someone thinks they're funny." I answered her out loud.  She shook her head and disappeared back into our room. 

I knelt down on the floor and brought my head down to the carpet, peering under the door crack. It was the first time I had seen into the corner room.

 Room 733 was definitely a supply closet. There were chairs stacked along one wall and bed frames along the other. A few rotting mattresses were piled under one of the windows and a thick layer of dust covered everything in the room. The windows were absolutely huge, which was something you couldn’t really tell by looking up at the building. There were open as always and I could definitely see how someone could easily climb through them to the outside ledge. 

The room didn't look like it had been disturbed in a couple of decades which sent a shudder wracking through my body.

The moonlight, which had been providing enough light to see into the room, suddenly vanished and I saw only pitch black inside. I blinked rapidly trying to adjust my night vision. I squeezed my eyes shut and when I opened them, a large yellow eye was looking back at me, only a few inches away from my face on the other side of the door.

I screamed and woke up half the dorm.  

***

There was no denying that things were escalating. The next morning Lydia and I put in dorm change requests with Resident Services and hoped for the best. In the meantime, we agreed to never be alone in our dorm room at night. Either we both spent the night at home or neither of us did. We started spending most nights with our respective boyfriends.

I told Ian everything that had happened and he suggested I maybe talk to the campus Paranormal Society. I hesitantly made an appointment and Lydia and I met with a small, cleanly dressed kid named Craig and four of his "colleagues” the following Tuesday.

We told them everything we could remember, every incident, no matter how small.  Craig and the four other members of the Paranormal Society sat quietly and took notes for half an hour. It wasn’t until we finished that anyone spoke.

"Is that all?" Craig asked.

"Yes..." I said slowly.

"Would you mind waiting out in the hall for a few minutes so that I may confer with my colleagues?"

"Sure," Lydia smiled indulgently and stood up. "Whatever you need."

The door had barely shut behind us when Lydia snorted and rolled her eyes. "Let's go."

"Go where?" I asked.

"Are you serious?"

"Lydia, come on, we need help, I am *freaking* out. We haven't stayed one night in our dorm since Thursday so this isn't something we can just brush off."

"Okay.” She threw her hands up. “Let's hear what they have to say and then we can go over to Resident Services and check on our move requests."

We loitered out in the hallway for another 15 minutes before Craig came out and asked up to come back and take a seat.

With all the pomp and circumstance of a meeting of parliament, Craig cleared his throat and made his diagnosis. 

"What you’re dealing with, ladies, is a very angry ghost." 

"Is that your professional opinion, Craig?" Lydia said. I shot her a look.

"Y-yes,” he stuttered. “A vengeful spirit-“

“A spirit?” I asked. I very much doubted that that’s what we were dealing with.

“Yes,” answered one of the not-Craigs. “That’s ghost to the layperson.”

“Jesus Christ,” Lydia groaned and rubbed her temples.

 Mistaking Lydia’s frustration with despair, Craig rushed right into his speech.

“Don’t be afraid, ladies, we’re going to take care of you.  It’s true that spirits can be quite a headache if you don’t know how to exorcize them which is why it’s good you came to us.  Suicides almost always result in angry ghosts, they need revenge.”

"Revenge on whom?" I asked.

"On other students. Perhaps this particular spirit was bullied into taking his own life and now seeks to torment others.”

“Ah, listen-“

"We can take care of this for you right away, all we ask is a small donation to the society,” Craig continued. “We honestly didn’t realize that room was having this much activity. It's really very exciting."

"Great, well, thank you for your time," Lydia said as she grabbed my hand and pulled me out of my chair. 

“Do you want to set something up for this weekend?” Craig asked.

“Tell you what, we’ll call you.”

Lydia hurried me out of the room wearing a weary look and we didn’t speak again until we were almost to the Admin building.  

“That was a waste of time.” She said.

“Look, I’m not disagreeing with you, but-”

“Becca, tell me you didn’t honestly buy into that?” 

“So you don’t think it’s a...a…” I was having trouble even saying the word, it sounded so ridiculous. “…ghost?”

“Well, I don’t fucking know, but neither do they. That guy had no idea what the fuck he was talking about.”

I pulled my hood lower over my eyes as we stepped into line at the Resident Services desk.

“Let me put it this way.” Lydia continued. “They’re playing Ghostbusters and we’re* living* the fucking Exorcist.” 

"Fine,” I sighed. “Then what do you want to do? Just keep sleeping at Mike and Ian's until we get reassigned?”

“I just want this to end.” Lydia crossed her arms and stared straight ahead.  We all wanted this to end. Even if living next to that fucking room wasn’t scary it was sure as hell distracting.

“Alright, well, I mean we're probably safe during daylight hours so as long as we don’t spend nights there we should be okay. Our room is only ghost adjacent after all, and our new assignments will come through soon." I checked my watch. “Fuck it’s almost 2.”

"Shit, really? I gotta go. Mike got accepted to Sigma Chi and he's getting initiated today."

"Oh yeah, I forgot he rushed."

The girl at the desk waved us forward. I hadn’t even realized we’d reached the front of the line.

“Let me know what they say,” Lydia said as she ran out the door.

The girl at the desk eyed me suspiciously as I approached. 

“Hi, I’m-“

“You’re the girl trying to move out of 734 in Reilly, aren’t you?”

She’d caught me off guard. “Yeah, one of them. How’d you know?”

“Sorry, I overheard you. I also saw your file cross my desk a few days ago and I gotta ask: why are you looking to transfer rooms, exactly?”

I was tired. I was beaten down. I didn’t have the energy to think of a lie.

“Because shit is going on in the empty room next door and it’s really freaking us out.  Noises, whispers, knocking, the other night I saw someone...”

“You saw someone?”

“Yeah.”

“In room 733?”

“Yeah. I looked under the door. There was definitely someone in there.”

The girl narrowed her eyes at me for a moment and then nodded for no particular reason.

“Well, your rooms aren’t ready yet but I’ve pushed them through as a priority. For right now you’re stuck, though. There just isn’t anywhere else to put you.”

I sighed. I’d figured as much.

“I’m Alice,” she continued, “and, look, I’ve actually done a lot of research on the Reilly suicides and I think I can help you. Or at the very least offer some insight.”

“Really?” I asked, hesitantly. 

“Absolutely.  I’m in Taylor Hall, room 310. I’ll be back to my dorm by 4 today."

"Thanks. We just came from the Paranormal Society on campus. “

“Ugh, say no more,” Alice rolled her eyes. 

“Yeah, so…I’ll definitely see you at 4.”

“Great,” Alice said, and smiled.

 ***

I was early to Taylor, but then so was she. I told our story for the second time that day and Alice wasn’t afraid to interrupt with questions, though her queries didn’t betray her thoughts.

When I was finished she leaned back in her chair and sighed deeply.

"I can’t believe it,” she shook her head. “I’d always heard rumors but I honestly doubted any of it was true.”

“I can assure you – everything I’ve told you is absolutely true.”

“And how is it now? When you’re there?”

“We aren’t ever there at night but during the day we’ve heard scratching on the wall, really quiet whispering and sometimes we still hear the window opening and closing. In broad fucking daylight. However every time I look up from the street the windows to 733 are open.”

Alice nodded. “Well, for the record I don’t think you’re in any danger. As much as it sucks, you guys are simply a casualty. You just need to stay out of room 733.”

I snorted. “Are you kidding? I would never go in there.”

"I believe that you believe that. But this thing, whatever it is, it's tricky. Manipulative. A *liar*. And it's smarter than you."

"I'll try not to be offended by that."

"You shouldn't be."

“What do you think it is?”

“Something very old and very evil.”

I regarded her skeptically and then let my eyes wander around the room. I hadn’t really noticed the décor before but to say Alice had an interest in the occult was an understatement.

"I can't see any situation where I would be compelled to enter that room."

"I know. But you have to be prepared that there may come a time when you have to make a *decision* about entering that room. Because what you’re dealing with? It’s already killed five people.”

"Five?! I thought it was three!"

"Yeah, well, not everyone is inclined to do the level of research that I do. Let’s see, there was Ellen Burnham in 1961 – she jumped out the window. She was the very first. And then Tad Collinsworth in 1968 - he jumped, too. Marissa Grigg in 1975, she hung herself. Erin Murphy in 1979 - she jumped. And then Erik Dousten in 1992 - he hung himself."

"Five suicides. How could the university still let people live in there?”

"They don’t, apparently. That’s why it’s a supply room.”

“And back then?”

“Well, every few years, once everyone who would remember had graduated, the room would be reassigned. This was before the internet, you know, and the incoming freshman were clueless. But after that last one - Erik Dousten - they closed the entire north hall of the 7th floor and built more rooms onto the south hall."

"So, what does it want?"

Alice shrugged. "Chaos. Death. Souls. Who knows? No one even knows what it *is*."

"Okay, so what *do* we know?"

"We know that it's somehow bound to that room though it seems to have minimal influence just outside of it. We know that everyone who ever died was alone at the time. And we know that it's a trickster. That's what we know."

It wasn’t enough. “Why do you think they do it?” I asked quietly.

“The victims?”

I nodded.

“All I know is what’s rumored to be in the evidence files. All the suicides were found with pictures or writings that were considered ‘unspeakable’ at the time.  They contained horrible, evil things that would make you physically sick to read or see, they say.”

“And these people, they drew them? They wrote that stuff?”

“Yep. Whatever is in that room drove them mad.”

“That’s fucking terrifying.”

“Have you guys considered getting somebody to bless the room?"

"Jesus."

"Well you'll have a hard time getting him but perhaps some other sort of holy person."

"No, I mean, Jesus, you're talking about an exorcism."

Alice shrugged. "Maybe. The rumor in the 70s was that this all started with a Ouija board game gone wrong in 1961."

“Really? That shit’s made by Hasbro.”

"Not in the 60s it wasn’t. Anyway, it's just a rumor. The only person on campus who would know is Tom Moen in Admin. I've tried to talk to him before but he refuses to see me."

"Did he go here in 1961?"

"Yes. And he was staying in Reilly."

"We need to talk to him. I need to know what the fuck is happening or I won’t be able to live the rest of my life as a well adjusted person."

"I suppose we can try to chase him down on campus."

“Can we talk to him tomorrow?"

"We can try.”

***

Mr. Moen wouldn't see us that day or the next. We tried to catch him on his lunch hour and then again while he was leaving work but he got around us every time. It was soon clear that the old man was actively avoiding us.

Lydia and I had seen little of each other since we’d continued to sleep in other dorms. I went back to our room twice a day - once in the morning and once in the afternoon. Usually the other room was silent but that didn’t make me feel better. I could always sense something on the other side of the wall, somehow watching me. It felt like the calm before the storm.

The Thursday before Halloween I came back to the dorm to shower in the evening, much later than usual.  I‘d seen Lydia that afternoon and she’d informed me that she had enough clothes stored at Mike’s to last until graduation  so I knew I’d be there alone. 

I showered down the hall in the safety of the bathrooms and then walked back to my room to change. I was supposed to meet Ian in half an hour to head out to a party and I wanted to get out of here as quick as possible.  

Since the silence was unnerving me, I threw my iPod on the docking station and turned up AC/DC.

I got dressed and then stood in front of the mirror to dry my hair. I flipped my head over and blow dried upside down to try and give my hair some volume. When I flipped my head back up and shut off the blow-dryer I immediately noticed the silence in the room. But that wasn’t all I noticed.

I wasn’t in my dorm anymore. Behind me was reflected the dusty bedframes and large open windows of room 733. I spun around in a panic to find that I was actually standing in my own room. I looked back at the mirror to see that 733 still reflected there. A slight movement behind me was all it took to make me run. 

I grabbed my purse and phone and I fled from my room slamming the door behind me. On the elevator ride down I called Alice.

"I can't do it anymore," I said when she picked up. "I can’t go back in that room, again. I can’t ever go back.”

“What happened?”

I told her.

"Jesus. What do you want to do?" She asked.

"I need to talk to someone who knows what the fuck is going on. Is Tom Moen the only person we know was here in 1961?"

"The only one I know of. Maybe we can get him on his way in tomorrow morning? We'll just corner him and refuse to move until he tells us something. He comes in at 6:30 according to the schedule I have. Do you want to meet me outside the Starbucks in the Atrium?"

"Fuck yeah I do. I have a class at 7:30 but I'll blow it off."

“Okay. See you then."

I wasn’t usually much for parties but I was glad I was going to one that night. As soon as we got there I asked Ian to get me a drink. Since I wasn’t usually much of a drinker he gave me a raised eyebrow. I gave him a brief synopsis of what had happened earlier, hoping he wouldn’t think I was crazy. 

Ian made me a scotch and coke. It was the first of many.

Around midnight I went to have a cigarette and checked my phone. I had a voicemail from Lydia left at 11:04pm.

*"Hey Becca, listen I just, ugh, I just had a huge fucking fight with Mike. He, well, I guess his frat decided that for Halloween this year all the new brothers have to spend the night in the Suicide Room. In our dorm.  I just, I can't fucking take it. He knows what's been going on with us and he still agreed to do this. He’s now trying to convince me that Sigma Chi is behind all of the stuff going on in room 733 because they’ve been trying to drum up buzz for their Halloween deal. I can't-"*

I hit end and threw my phone in my bag. No wonder Lydia was pissed. This was not good. Not good at all. 

I found Ian inside and asked him to take me home. I was suddenly very stressed, very tired and very drunk. 

When the alarm went off at 6am, it took everything I had to pull myself out of bed. I got dressed in the clothes I'd worn the night before and shuffled my way across campus to the Atrium. 

Alice was already there with a black coffee in hand.

"I figured you'd need this," she laughed.

"How'd you know?" 

"Your texts."

"I texted you last night?"

"Yeah, at about 1. You told me about Sigma Chi.”

"Oh, god, yeah." I pushed my sunglasses higher up my nose and pulled my hood lower over my eyes. 

"Those guys are idiots. Remember how I told you that it's crafty? Well what if the point of messing with you was to make 733 provocative, you know, to seduce people into going inside. No one has been in that room for years, can you imagine how hungry that thing is?”

"Do you think they're really at risk?" I asked as I sat down on the steps to the Admin building.

"Yeah. In fact the *only* thing they have going for them is that all those suicide victims were alone at the time of their deaths."

"So, it'll be less powerful with all of them there?"

"Theoretically. We would know a lot more if we knew what it was. And we can't know what it is without knowing how it got here. And that is why we need Moen." 

"What time is he supposed to get here?"

"Actually, twenty minutes ago," Alice said, grimly.

It was another half an hour before we resigned ourselves to the fact that Mr. Moen had snuck around us as usual. We went to the front office hoping to beg again for an appointment with him anyway.

The woman at the Admin desk regarded us coldly.

“Tom isn't coming in today. Or any other day for that matter. He quit yesterday. Looks like you won’t be harassing him anymore."

"We weren't harassing him,” I said. “We just desperately needed to talk to him."

“We still do.” Added Alice.

"Well you won’t get any of his personal information from me," she said snidely and walked away.

"What the fuck do we do now?" I asked Alice.

"Without Tom Moen there's nothing left to do."

"Alice, fuck, I can't go back into that room. 

"Well, then I guess it’s good your transfers came through."

"They did?!"

"Yep. I got the notice when I checked my work email this morning. You're going to Morton and Lydia is going to Tinsley."

"Oh thank god."

"I thought you'd be happy about that. I also convinced my boss not to assign anyone else to room 734.”

"Thank fuck."

“The only thing is you won’t be able to move until Monday."

"I can last through the weekend, especially now that the end is in sight. I have to tell Lydia."

I opened my phone to pull up Lydia's number but my attention was caught by the red ‘1’ badge over the voicemail logo. I hit play. It was the rest of the message from last night. 

*"-even look at his dumb fucking face anymore so I'm going to head home. Don't worry about me, I'll be okay. I’m drunk enough to sleep through any bullshit from next door. I'm just so fucking pissed off right now. I would honestly rather deal with Dumbshit Beth than Michael-My-Parents-Must-Be-Siblings-Because- I'm-That-Fucking-Retarded-Benson. Let’s hang out tomorrow. Love ya!"*

The message ended. 

"Goddamn it." 

Alice gave me a questioning look.

"Lydia spent the night in our dorm."

Alice cringed. 

"She's safe though, right?"

"As long as she doesn't go into 733."

"She wont.” I thought of the always open large windows of the corner room. If nothing else the mere thought of those would keep Lydia the hell out of that room.

"Good. Well, since we have nothing else to do, do you want to go look for theology books in the library? It's pretty much the only thing open right now. "

“Sure," I shrugged.  I didn't have another class until 10.

The little old lady who sat behind the library's checkout desk must have been 1,000 years old. Ms. Stapley's eyes were small and watery and her skin looked like it was melting off of her skull. Still, she was nice and knowledgeable and she sent us in the right direction for books on demonology, though she gave us a curious look as she did.

There wasn’t much. We read everything we could but it either wasn’t relevant or wasn’t in English. We returned to her desk 30 minutes later.

"Ah, do you have anything on the occult?"

"The occult? Ah..." Her voice trailed off. "Yes, I do. Over there to the left of the reference section.”

"Ok thanks. Sorry, I‘m too hung-over to use the Dewey decimal system," I said. 

"I don't think she likes the look of us," Alice whispered as we walked away.

"Our look or our subject matter?"

"Probably neither."

Within the hour we were back up at her desk having struck out again. We could tell she was getting annoyed as her eyes narrowed suspiciously at us as we approached.

"Ah, sorry, do you know where we could find something on séances or Ouija boards or-"

"Now listen, girls.” Ms. Stapley stood up from her desk and looked over her glasses at us. “I really hope this is for class."

"It is," I said.

"It's not," Alice answered simultaneously. "It's personal research.”

"Research? What kind of research?"

"Look, we're not going to mess with a Ouija board or anything…" I said. 

"Good," Ms. Stapley smoothed her pleated pants and sat back down. "Because I can't have that sort of thing going on here again."

"*Again?*" Alice latched on.

The older woman suddenly looked very uncomfortable and started fidgeting with a stack of books on her desk.

“We may have something on séances in-“ 

"Ms. Stapley, we’re researching what happened in Reilly in 1961.” Alice interrupted.

“And also what’s been happening there ever since.”

"Well, it's no secret, is it? A student committed suicide in that room. Dreadful but not unheard of on a university campus.”

"Five students." I corrected her.

"But you know that, right?” Alice was suddenly talking very fast. “Because you sound like you’re well versed in this story. Please, tell us how this started and we might be able to end it."

"End it?" Ms. Stapley's voice became quieter but more concentrated. "Don’t be so arrogant, young lady. You can't end it. People have always died in that room and they always will. There is no end to it so you’d best stay far away from it."

"But maybe if we knew how this all started -"

"It started just as you think it did. But everyone that was involved is either very old or very dead by now. Just stay away from that room. Concentrate on your studies."

I leaned over her desk. "Well, I'd love to but they assigned my friend and me to the room next door. Maybe you can forget about all the suicides but we can’t. It wont fucking let us."

"Young lady, I never forget." Ms. Stapely voice was even quieter now. "My friend Ellen was the very first to be killed in that room. She was my very best friend and not a night goes by that I don't imagine her wiggling out of that tiny window, standing upon the cold ledge in her bare feet and jumping off the 7th floor of that building."

Alice sighed.  “I’m really sorry. I didn’t know.”

"Yes, well these are old wounds, my dear. Now girls, I suggest you request a room reassignment immediately. No one should be living on the seventh floor of that building.  And that’s all I’m going to tell you about it. “

Alice sighed but resigned herself to a nod. We wouldn’t learn anything more here. Still, it was quite a breakthrough - at least we had *some* information now.

Alice walked away and I made to follow her but my feet wouldn’t move. Something was bothering me - a small yet poignant word had been buried in Ms. Stapley's story; a word that suddenly seemed very important.

"Eh, Ms. Stapley,” I asked the tired, old woman at the desk, “Why did you refer to the windows in 733 tiny? Because I’ve seen those windows and they’re huge, like 5 feet tall.”

"Dear, you're thinking of the corner room, that’s the supply closet. Room 733 is next door to that."

"No-no," I stuttered, "that's room 734."

"Yes, well, it is *now*. When they built the additional rooms on to the south hall they moved all the room numbers down.”

*Oh my god.* I suddenly felt very hot and very dizzy.

"That sneaky fucker," Alice whispered next to me, her skin paling.

"Lydia." 

We took off across the campus at a dead run, witnessed only by the few bleary-eyed students on their way to morning classes. When Reilly finally came into view I stumbled on the pavement as my blood turned to ice. From our vantage point we could clearly see the windows of the corner room were closed – the first and only time I had ever seen that way.  And the window to my room was open. 

We ran into the lobby, pushing past several latte-sipping, ugg boot-wearing freshman who had just gotten off the elevator. I hit 7 and watched the doors close more slowly than they ever had before. I leaned against the wall, trying to steady my breathing.

"Alice, how the fuck did this happen?"

"I don't know. I don’t fucking know.”

"She's been in there all night, Alice. In our room. Alone.”

Alice shook her head but had nothing to say.

When the doors finally opened on floor 7, we saw a quiet, deserted hallway. I ran toward my room with Alice right behind me. Rounding the corner, I threw open my door hoping it wasn’t locked.  And it wasn’t.

Lydia looked back at me. And for one breathless moment, cruel glimmer of hope crossed over her tear streaked face.

But it was too late. The next second, she leaned forward so slightly, and she was gone.

She screamed the entire way down.

Alice ran to the ledge where Lydia had just been while I stood motionless. She stuck her head out the window and looked down just as a different kind of screaming started from the bottom floor. Alice closed her hand over her mouth and pulled her head back into the room as tears of shock ran down her ghost- white face. 

The screaming from outside got louder as more people saw what remained of my best friend on the cold pavement. I leaned back against the dresser and slumped to the floor. A falling death. Lydia never wanted a falling death. 

I absentmindedly picked up one of the pictures that were strewn all over the floor. It was a picture of Lydia's mother. She was dead. I picked up another picture. It was Lydia’s baby sister. She was dead, too.  There were dozens of pictures just like it all over the floor - Lydia has been busy last night. As for the things depicted in them, I cannot tell you. Lydia was a talented artist and I only saw a few before I got sick on the floor next to me. 

Alice was standing in the doorway yelling something down the hall. I don't know what she was saying because all I could hear was a high pitched whine in the room. Suddenly a piece of paper slid out from under the crack in the closet door and glided across the floor toward me. I picked it up and studied it for a moment. 

This was drawn by Lydia too, but it wasn’t like the others. It was a picture of the closet from my exact vantage point. In the drawing the door was cracked and there was something looking back from the darkness.

I put the paper down and studied the closet. The door was cracked open just like the picture. I squinted my eyes and tried to see inside. Just as I started to distinguish the defined lines of a long face looking back at me, Alice pulled me to my feet.

"We need to get out of here," I thought I heard her say.

I never went back into that room. My parents moved my things and I spent the rest of the semester in an apartment off campus. I transferred to an out of state school for my spring semester and finished my degree there.

Every night I dream of Lydia pulling herself through the tiny window, shimmying out onto the cold ledge, standing up and knowing there’s nothing between her body and the terrifying abyss in front of her.  I watch her look down seven stories to the black pavement below and realize, though not accept, her terrible fate. I see the blind horror cross her familiar features. I hear her wildly pounding heart, desperately trying to race through every beat of the life she should have lived, and knowing it has only mere seconds. 

I watch her look back at me. And I watch her fall. 

It's been 9 years since that night. And every fall semester for 9 years I’ve called Resident Services to see which dorms are open for new student assignments. Reilly is always open. The seventh floor is closed. 

This year life and work got in the way and I called much later than usual. I was put on hold immediately.  

"Resident Services." A man finally answered. "Were you the one asking about open rooms in Reilly?”

“Yes, that’s me.”

“We're entirely filled up and there’s a waiting list for Reilly. But, as it happens, you actually have great timing. I make no promises but we may be able to get you in. We just got approval this morning.”

“Approval for what?” I said slowly

 “We’re opening up the seventh floor.” 

[C.W.](https://www.facebook.com/ck.walker00)





 

























Ten years ago, I pulled my wife’s scorched, lifeless body out of a Florida swimming pool. 

We had only been married for three days. You read that right. Three days.

I wish the story didn’t start there, but it does.

Avery Jones was my soulmate—she was funny, spunky, and cute as hell. I was so deeply, ridiculously in love with her and for good reason. She was way out of my league, but somehow, she liked me enough to marry me. 

After six months of dating and another six months of engagement, we got married in a humble chapel in the Wasatch Mountains just outside of Salt Lake City. The next day, we flew out for a ten-day honeymoon at a beachfront resort in Fort Lauderdale—a wedding gift from my parents. 

On our second day there, while laying out on the beach, gnarly clouds blew in, accompanied by the heaviest rain I had ever seen. We laughed at our luck, packed up quickly, and ran with the rest of the beach-and-pool-goers towards the hotel. 

“Come this way,” Avery said, pulling me down a narrow stone path through the landscape to a secluded cave installation under a bridge. 

Laughing hysterically with the help of our rain-diluted Mai Tais, we shed our dripping wet clothes and towels and sat down on the pool chairs in the cave. 

“You know we could swim right here,” Avery said, pointing to the portion of the pool covered by the faux rock. 

I pretended to think it was a bad idea, then tackled her into the water. We splashed and wrestled around for a few minutes by ourselves, the heavy rain clapping outside the cave. 

After a few minutes, I hopped out and grabbed a couple dry towels from a nearby chair. I kicked my feet up and sat back, sipping my drink. 

Avery began an interpretive, synchronized swimming routine in her bright blue bikini. She whipped her auburn hair back and forth and swung her hands above her head with effortless grace. Even though she was joking, I was mesmerized. She was mine. I was hers. It was surreal.

But then I got a feeling. A horrible feeling. One that said disaster was imminent.

I didn’t say anything to Avery though. Since I prided myself on being rigidly pragmatic, giving credence to *feelings*on only our third day of marriage seemed like a bad idea. 

Whether it was a premonition or not, lightning struck the pool with a deafening crack.

A deadly shockwave surged through the pool, killing Avery instantly and shooting me back against the rock wall. 

Once my hearing and sight returned, I saw Avery floating face down in the pool, twenty feet away from the cave. I yelled for help and jumped in. Hotel staff ran over and together we got her out of the pool. Medical staff arrived shortly thereafter and then an ambulance. She was pronounced dead on site. The next day, we flew home, one of us seated in coach, the other in a body bag stashed below deck. 

I fell into a funk after the funeral and never recovered. 

I was convinced Avery was my soulmate, so when she died, the world fell out of working order. Nothing made sense anymore. I never dated again nor had any interest in women. Or people, for that matter. I took a job in Texas, bought a townhome, and quickly got into a routine. I talked to my parents occasionally but only returned home maybe three times over the last ten years.

Not a day goes by that I don’t think about her. Hell, not even an hour.

As our tenth anniversary approached, the data analytics firm I worked for was bought by another company and I was let go. Though I was initially pissed, my tune shifted once the generous severance check came in the mail. The night the check came, I drank a lot and stumbled through Avery and my wedding album. Sometime around one in the morning, I made a decision. I decided that a decade of mourning was long enough. I decided that the next ten years of my life weren’t going to be steeped in self-pity. I would make something of myself. I’d read books again, I’d make videos again, I’d make friends, I’d pick up the guitar.

The next night, with a drink in hand and money in the bank, I sat down at my desk and developed a plan with a vague goal of getting out of the country for a little bit. Somewhere around two in the morning, I fell into the rabbit hole called the Flat Earth Theory. I spent the next three hours reading and watching YouTube videos. For some reason, it all got funnier and funnier as the night went on. I didn’t accomplish much that night, but by the next night, I had a solid plan.

Over the next couple months, I sold my townhome, bought a camera, and booked an around-the-world trip in five flights. My objective was to document my travels and prove, once and for all, that the world was round.

For the three weeks before my trip began, I moved back to Salt Lake City with my parents, who were surprisingly supportive of the endeavor.

In my first video, I explained the rules: I would travel east until I made it back home. I would have a compass on me at all times. I would be awake and alert at all times of travel. Anyone who was staunch in their belief that the world is flat would likely think I’m faking the whole thing, but that wasn’t really the point of the trip. I was trying to become a new man, remember.

The day before I left, I was feeling nervous and oddly existential—more so than normal. This was big. Traveling around the world by myself. I never dreamed I could have done something like this, especially since Avery died. Part of me was proud of myself, the other part of me was questioning what the hell I was doing. Whatever it was, I decided to leave something behind to commemorate my existence.

I stayed up late scrolling through thousands of pictures, and ultimately choosing four for print: Avery and me on our wedding day, my cousin and me on skateboards, my parents and me last Christmas, and a horribly awkward picture of me standing by myself outside my Texas townhome. 

I rolled the pictures up tight, stuffed them in a dry Guinness bottle, then took the bottle and a shovel up the mountain behind my parent’s house. About a quarter mile up the hill, I found a nice clearing amongst the scrub oak and dug a hole two feet deep. With my headlamp, I could see Avery’s eyes peering at me through the thick brown bottle. I cried for a good five minutes then tossed it into the hole. I covered it the best I could and returned home to get a couple hours of shut eye before flying out.

My dad drove me to the airport the next morning.

**—**

I flew from Salt Lake to New York, New York to Amsterdam, Amsterdam to Shanghai, Shanghai to Los Angeles, then Los Angeles to Salt Lake. I’m intentionally not getting into too much detail about the trip itself, because that’s not really the point of me writing this. Okay, okay, I’ll indulge a little bit.

How long did the trip take? A little over a month. I spent about a week in each place and three days in LA.

Did I have fun? Hell yes. I had the time of my life. I realized that being away from the drudgery of my routine allowed some of my old self to reemerge, my pre-lightning-strike days. I made friends, I was funny, I was charming. It was a little weird honestly.

Was it good for me? Other than what I’m about to tell you, yes, it was fantastic. I truly feel like a changed man. 

Did I gain a following? I actually did. I mean, I didn’t go viral or anything, but as of this writing, I have about 50,000 subscribers. Most think the Flat Earth Theory is BS, but some are believers. I don’t know if any of them will ever read this. 

How do you feel about that lame time capsule now? I know you probably didn’t have this question specifically, but this is important to me. The longer the trip went on, the more embarrassed I felt about the time capsule I left in the ground behind my parent’s house. The life I conveyed in that bottle was tinged with regret, loss, sorrow. Particularly my apathetic face standing in front of my stupid townhome or with my parents on Christmas. I decided, on my trip, that I wouldn’t replace any of the pictures in the time capsule, but I would add some—change the ending of my story, if you will. Okay, enough of that.

So… 

Is the world round? 

That’s where things get complicated. I successfully stayed awake during all hours of travel, which was very difficult. Especially that Amsterdam to Shanghai leg. Good god. But I can confidently say that I traveled east the whole time and successfully made it back to Salt Lake, which would rule out the whole flat earth thing, but I can’t confidently say the Earth is round either.

Here's what happened.

When I got home, both the front, back, and side doors were locked. I tried the garage keypad, but it didn’t work. When I texted my mom, it failed to go through. Then I tried my dad. Same thing. 

I brushed it off, telling myself that a month is a long time—my parents could have switched cell carriers and could have changed the garage code.

With no way into the house and nothing to do, I decided to make the planned modifications to my time capsule right then, even though it was dark out. I trekked up the mountain with a shovel from the back porch and found the spot twenty minutes later. I dug cautiously and successfully extracted the bottle. I saw Avery’s eyes again peering at me through the brown bottle, this time a little foggy from sitting underground for a month.

As I pulled the rolled-up pictures out, I decided that merely adding new pictures wasn’t going to solve my problems. I needed a ritual, a way to symbolize my rebirth. I thought about ripping up the old pictures or burning them. I thought about collecting everything I still owned of Avery’s and throwing it into a bonfire. Perhaps I wouldn’t be able to move on until I could erase Avery—the personification of my old, deceased self—from my life. Like I said before, I was a new man.

Then I saw something at my feet.

With the flashlight on my phone, I saw that I had dropped one of the old photos.

It was the picture of me and my parents at dinner last Christmas at the Grand America Hotel. Only in this picture, there was a fourth person. A beautiful woman about my age with fair skin and long auburn hair. It was Avery. 

I was confused at first. Perhaps I had put a different picture in the bottle than I had thought. God knows Avery and I had gone to plenty of dinners with my parents when she was alive. But I wouldn’t have done that. I already had a picture of Avery and me on our wedding day. That was enough. I remember distinctly thinking one picture of Avery was enough.

Then I looked closer at myself in that picture. It was definitely from last Christmas. It was 33-year-old me, not 23-year-old me. I had a beard last Christmas, a feat I could not have managed when I was 23. Since I printed the pictures only a month before, I pulled up the original on my phone with numb, shaky fingers, and held them side by side. It *was* the same picture. 

I had before me two distinct realities—one in which Avery was alive and one in which Avery was dead. Everything else was the same. 

*How the hell is this possible,* I thought.

The picture of our wedding day was the same. So was the picture of my cousin and me skateboarding. The picture of me standing in front of my Texas townhome was different though. Instead of a townhome, it was a small red house, apparently still in Texas. And, of course, Avery was standing next to me wearing a green plaid button-up shirt.

Avery would have pursued her degree in Nursing had she lived, I’m sure. The dual income would have allowed us to buy a house instead of a townhome, I figured. But still, what the fuck is happening?

My knees grew weak and I sat down, looking back and forth between the two pictures with Avery now in them. She truly was stunning, more beautiful than I remembered.

I stumbled into a new reality. I don’t know how or when, but here I am, in a world where Avery lives. I’m sure that isn’t the only difference, but it’s the only one I’m aware of as of this writing. 

If I truly am in a new reality, what happened to the old one? Am I missing? Did I get duplicated? Did that old reality disappear? 

I laid on my back in the crunchy snow and closed my eyes. *Where do I go from here?*

A pair of headlights flashed through the Aspen trees and I sat up abruptly. A car was pulling up the driveway. I shuffled my way down the snowy banks close to the house. I remained perched there for about five minutes before the kitchen lights clicked on and I saw four people emerge.

Two of them were my parents—looking the exact same as they did in the other reality. 

Then in walked Avery. 

Then, in a moment even more unsettling than seeing Avery alive, I saw myself enter the room. 

My heart was pounding.

Other-me was wearing the same outfit I’m wearing today, even sporting the same scruff. The only difference was the little bit of gray hair above his ears.

I slid further down the hill to get a closer look. For a moment—a long moment—I forgot about my replica and watched Avery. She was gorgeous in person, more gorgeous than in pictures. She had always been that way. 

This is what my life would look like if I hadn’t been such a coward, I thought, feeling a tear trickle down my cheek.

The four of them talked and laughed excitedly, eventually shedding their coats and moving to the front living room. I climbed down the rock wall and ran around to the front of the house, hiding behind a group of pine trees near the front stairs. My dad left for a couple minutes and returned with a bottle of wine and four glasses. 

I fell deeper into a daze watching them—mostly Avery. They had a great time chatting for at least a couple hours while I sat like a fool between the pines, my toes and hands freezing. She was so effortlessly charismatic, so charming. The way she talked with her eyes, the way her teeth flashed when she smiled, the way she leaned in when she was engaged. Everything about her was perfect. What I wouldn’t do to steal this man’s reality…

I watched other-me and Avery say their goodbyes and exit through the kitchen. Their car doors slammed shut and I realized that I was going to lose them. In my reality, I was living at home while I did my around-the-world trip. Where would I have lived if I was still married to Avery? We had always talked about returning to the Salt Lake area eventually. Maybe they did it.

As they rolled down the driveway in their 2019 Honda Accord (nice choice), I ran to the side of the house and found an old bike from my childhood rusted against the wall. Both tires were flat, and the front brakes didn’t work, but since my parents lived way up in the mountains, wherever other-me and Avery were going was downhill. 

Even though I went as fast as I could, they were long gone. Obviously. My twenty-five-year-old junkyard bike didn’t stand a chance. But I kept going, rolling past the church, the junior high, then through the Oak Hills neighborhood all the while wracking my brain: If Avery and I were still married, where would we have lived?

It wasn’t a fair question to ask myself. After all, we had known each other for a little over a year and had only been married three days when she died. In this other reality, other-me and Avery had been married ten years. That’s a lot of time to know someone. People change, opinions change, circumstances change. I can’t read other-me’s mind, so all I could do was hope for a miracle.

As I was about to turn the corner onto Orchard Drive, I saw a pair of taillights in a driveway off a side street—Fair Oaks Drive. Of course, I thought. Avery and I talked about renovating an old home on Fair Oaks one day. But man, that was one conversation when we were engaged. Impressive that they (we?) pulled it off.

My vision was blurry from biking almost a mile downhill in freezing temperature, but as I got closer to the house, I recognized the car to be theirs. I snuck around the back of the house where I had a view of the living room and kitchen. I smiled looking at the renovated—well, mostly renovated—home. Pictures of Avery and other-me lined the walls. There was even an old stand up piano in the corner. Just like the one Avery had always talked about. I found a little slice of heaven. This is everything my life would have been had I acted on that inner voice to pull Avery out of the water ten years ago. Instead, I’m a depressed bum living with my parents.

They made their way into the kitchen and took off their coats. Other-me started on the dishes and Avery sat on the couch, eyes glued to her phone. I figured they were exhausted. It was midnight after all.

After a minute, Avery stood up and walked down the hall. I ran to the other side of the house to try and get a view of her, but as I turned the corner, an outdoor security light came on and I ducked down in some bushes. Other-me put the dishes down and walked to the back window to inspect. Then I heard a crash from inside—where Avery was. Other-me jerked around then stopped in his tracks.

*Go help her*, I thought. *You cowardly bastard.*

I returned to my original post in time to see Avery stomping down the hallway and into the kitchen. She was red hot furious. She walked right up to other-me with a piece of paper in her hand. I couldn’t hear exactly what she said, but she screamed something and threw the paper at his face. Other-me put his hands up as a weak defense. 

*What did you do to Avery this time?* 

As other-me tried to explain away whatever was on that paper, Avery grew more furious. She paced to the kitchen and barked something else then picked up a glass other-me had been in the middle of washing and threw it across the room, shattering on impact. Who the hell is this woman?

Other-me continued to speak calmly in defense, but there was no slowing Avery down. She grabbed a picture off the wall and threw it hard on the ground, the wooden frame crunching. Other-me backed away slowly, moving to the other side of the kitchen island.

Then Avery pounced. 

She ran at him with unrestrained vengeance and shoved him hard against the kitchen cabinets. He held his hands out again, pleading for her to calm down. She grabbed a plate from the sink and swung it at him, but he moved out of the way and it shattered violently against the cabinets behind him. This only made her madder. She shoved him again, then clawed at his face. Other-me got tangled in his feet and stumbled against the fridge. She slapped him hard against the side of the head and he yelped in disbelief.

Again, he begged for her to stop, but she didn’t. She hit him three more times in the face while he slumped to the ground. After the third hit, one of his eyes was already swollen shut and blood was streaming down his face.

Avery walked to the other side of the kitchen island and I breathed an audible sigh of relief. 

Avery, the girl of my dreams. The girl that made all my friends jealous. The girl I had on a pedestal for the last decade. A monster.

I know that we tend to forget peoples’ negative attributes after they’ve passed, but there was not a violent bone in Avery’s body when I knew her. Not even an aggressive one. She was sweet, kind, loving. Not like this. Not at all.

*What happened to her?*

As I watched the other bruised and bloodied version of myself weep on the kitchen floor, my world crumbled. 

All this time I had hated myself for not listening to that voice, for not pulling her out of the pool and saving her life. If only I had done that, we could have gone on to create a beautiful life together—finish school, build careers, buy a house, get a dog. We’d do it laughing and playing the whole time, like two kids in love. I’d be complete forever. But with that one lapse in judgment, Avery died along with the entire vision for my perfect future.

But no.

That’s not how life would have been. *This* is how life would have been, with me crying on the kitchen floor with blood running down my face and shattered dishes all around me. 

Is it possible that *my* reality—the one I came from—was the better life? 

There was another crash and a scream from the bedroom. 

Avery round two.

She stomped back into the kitchen and other-me stumbled to his feet. Again, he tried to calmly plead, but again, she wasn’t having it. She yelled at him for another minute then threw a coffee mug at him, shattering against his shoulder. He backed away from her, moving to the backdoor close to where I was hiding. I ducked down further.

The door burst open and other-me went sprawling past me, tripping and falling into the snow.

Avery stopped in the doorway and scoffed. “You think you’re better off without me, don’t you? That’s what all this is about,” she said.

“Avery, please. Think about what you’re doing. Look what you’ve done to me just now. We cannot keep living like this. I cannot keep living like this. I’ve put up with it for far too long,” other-me said and stood up.

Avery began sobbing quietly, her arms folded tight.

Other-me took a step toward her. 

*Don’t get any closer to that thing,* I thought.

“You’re right. You’re so right,” Avery said, tears running down her cheeks. “God, I’m so horrible to you. You don’t deserve this. You deserve someone better. Far better. Someone who will love you no matter what. No matter—"

Other-me stayed composed while she cried.

“Will you ever forgive me?” she said.

There was a minute of silence. I tried to steady my breathing despite feeling like I was going to explode.

Other-me swallowed hard and widened his stance. “No. Avery, this is it. I’m doing this. It doesn’t mean we’re over; it just means—it just means I need some time. Away.” He turned his back to her and walked to the front of the house where the car was parked.

Avery huffed and slammed the back door, returning to the kitchen. I peered my head up and saw her going to the knives next to the stove.

I thought about intervening but didn’t know how. 

She carried a knife to the front door. I ran around the side of the house, past the security light to the front.

Other-me had just turned on the car and was starting to back out of the driveway when Avery appeared with the knife. 

“STOP!” she screamed at him, trying to block his path. 

Other-me continued backing out, his eyes growing wide when he saw the massive knife in her hand.

“STOP THIS FUCKING CAR RIGHT NOW!” she screamed and tried stabbing one of his tires, but its rotation kicked the knife of her hand. She quickly picked it up off the driveway.

He pulled into the street and sped away, leaving Avery standing in the driveway in her pajama shorts with a giant knife dangling by her side. When the headlights were gone, she dropped the knife and began crying again.

My first instinct was to comfort her, an instinct that I quickly overruled. I only watched her in pure bewilderment. 

Never should have left fucking Texas.

After a few minutes, she returned inside and I could hear her cleaning up the mess.

That’s when something dawned on me. I made a time capsule because I was about to do something big—something life-changing. For me, I was about to embark on an around-the-world trip. But why would other-me make a time capsule? Was he also planning something big?

Before I could follow that train any further, I realized that the paper that set Avery off a few minutes before was now sitting in the middle of the driveway. I stood up carefully, making sure I was out of sight and grabbed it. With my phone as a flashlight, I read the paper:

SLC to JFK - 12/28

JFK to AMS – 1/4

AMS to PVG – 1/12

PVG to LAX – 1/19

LAX to SLC – 1/23

I let the crumpled paper fall to the ground. He was planning the same trip I just came from. 

Which meant he was going to experience what I just experienced. Probably. 

If he makes it around the world and returns to Salt Lake, he would be stepping into a new reality. If anyone deserves a new reality, it’s that guy, so I didn’t try to stop him.

Lightning struck a tree nearby, knocking me to the ground, and killing the power to the rest of Fair Oaks. It began to rain.

I walked to Orchard Drive and followed it to Dee’s—the only 24-hour diner on this side of town. I’m writing this on a borrowed laptop in a booth that Avery and I had occupied many times when we were younger.

I don’t know what happened to the reality I came from—if I’m now missing or dead or what. I don’t know what will happen to other-me if and when he makes his trip around the world. I don’t know if there are other other-me’s planning around-the-world trips too—thereby disrupting who knows how many more realities. How many other realities are there, infinite? 

Frankly, I don’t even know what will happen to this post once I publish it. I assume it will be trapped in this reality forever, but who knows how this works. Just a few hours earlier I smugly thought I had figured out the answer to the embarrassingly juvenile question: *Is the world round?*

My cab just got here, so this is the end of the line for me. There are plenty of unanswered questions here, questions I hope I’ll eventually find answers to. All I know now is that I don’t like the reality I came from and I don’t like the reality I’m in now, so there’s only one way to go. See you in New York, [other-me.](https://www.derekwalker.me/about)Hi everyone. 

I’ve got the day off work and I wanted to start it by posting up the next log. I also want to thank you all for your responses so far. 

A few people have linked me to sites that Rob J. Guthard may have operated on. Someone even offered to look for the mirror shop in Phoenix and try to retrace the route to Rob’s neighbourhood. I’m going to spend the day making a few international calls, and sending emails out but if you guys have any other ideas about how I could pursue this I’d really appreciate them.

In all honesty, I’m going to need all the help I can get. This whole ordeal has proven pretty categorically that I am no Alice Sharma.

Speaking of which, I’m going to let her take it from here.

Thanks again.

[Part 1](https://redd.it/7asz8x)

[Part 3](https://redd.it/7cf4h8)

[Part 4](https://redd.it/7dmuvp)

[Part 5](https://redd.it/7fdu9c)

[Part 6](https://redd.it/7h9jzb)

[Part 7](https://redd.it/7jabqd)

[Part 8](https://redd.it/7loh1l)

[Part 9](https://redd.it/7q3x6e)

[Part 10](https://redd.it/7uyiss)

*****

The Left/Right Game [DRAFT 1] 08/02/2017

The next turn comes immediately after the tunnel. 

We’d been in the dimly lit passage for almost two minutes, but at the pace Rob likes to travel it’s hard to figure out how far we’ve actually gone. When we descended into the underpass we were just nearing the outskirts of Phoenix. Scrutinising the rear view mirror as we leave, it’s fair to say we aren’t that much further out. Everything else; the temperature, the time of day, the weather, all seems exactly like it had been before we ventured into the tunnel. I’m not sure what I was expecting of course, but it certainly doesn’t feel like we’re anywhere new.

The tunnel itself had been similarly underwhelming, especially considering the importance Rob seemed to place on it. In fact the only thing of true interest since we passed through was something Rob said once we hit the halfway mark. As the tunnel’s mouth loomed towards us, Rob picked up the CB Radio transceiver, and issued a casual warning to the convoy. The message itself was straightforward, his choice of words however was… curious.

I decided to ask him about it.

**AS:** Rob, just a second ago, when you told us the next turn was coming up. Why did you use the word “trap”?

**ROB:** Hmm?

**AS:** I have it in my notes. You said, “Folks we’re coming to the end soon, first little trap’s coming up. Our next turn is sharp left as we leave. Look out for it.” Is there a reason you used the word “trap”?

**ROB:** Just one of those things. Fella who wrote all the original logs, he liked to think the road would try and trick you into making a wrong turn. Small roads off large highways, roads obscured from view, sharp turns like this one.

**AS:** He thought the road was trying to deceive him?

**ROB:** Yeah pretty much. I gotta say I agree with the guy.

By this point, we’ve taken the offending corner and the next right a little further on. I can’t help but feel that Rob is reading a great deal into what is, essentially, an abrupt turn in an ordinary road. The level of conspiracy he’s able to place behind such a simple thing, going as far as to ascribe some mischievous quality to the asphalt itself… it’s hard to take seriously. 

In fact, I’m starting to wonder less about whether Rob can convince me this game is real, and more about whether I’d ever be able to convince him that it isn’t. Perhaps this story will be less about where a magic roadway goes after a few zigzagging turns, and more about where the human mind can go if it invests too heavily in an idea. To his credit Rob has noted my cynicism, he even seems to welcome it, but if our current surroundings are supposed to convince me, then he’s going to find me more cynical than he anticipated.

Rob keeps his hands on the wheel and his eyes on the road. Any attempt at an interview receives a pleasant but curt response. He’s not being evasive, his attention is just elsewhere. Before I know it, half an hour has gone by without Rob speaking a word. It seems like a large part of the Left/Right Game involves driving in complete silence. Once again, I’m not sure what I expected, but it’s certainly not been an earth shattering start.

At least it gives me time to type up my notes.

**ROB:** Ferryman to all cars. We stop here.

An uneventful hour and a half has passed since we left the tunnel. I didn’t notice Rob pick up the receiver, but before I know it the Wrangler has pulled up at the side of the road, leaving a large space behind us for the rest of the convoy to park up. The buildings are getting few and far between now, it won’t be long until we were in the desert proper. With this in mind, I assume Rob is simply stopping to let everyone drink up. 

I probably shouldn’t assume when it comes to Rob Guthard.

Though this is definitely a rest stop, Rob also has some important words for the crew. He gathers us round in a rough semicircle, talking while we eat our provisions.

**ROB:** Now, I mentioned in the emails that, at certain points on this trip, you’d need to do some things just because I say so. This is one of those times. Ya’ll understand?

**EVE:** Uh yeah I… I guess... we get to know what it is right?

**APOLLO:** This is when he tells us to give him our money right Rob? Ahah

**ACE:** Yeah I’d rather know what’s going on.

**ROB:** And I don't intend on keeping anything from you. I just want to be clear, that across this next stretch you need to follow my orders to the letter.

**ACE:** Yeah we get it, just tell us already.

Rob takes a few moments, perhaps to lend gravity to his point, perhaps to swallow some barbed words intended for the increasingly impatient Ace. When he does speak, it’s in a measured and serious tone. He’s clearly adamant that we take his words onboard.

**ROB:** For about half an hour, the next 13 turns, we’ll be going one by one. We travel in order of formation. Me and Bristol will go first, then I’ll radio the next car to follow. When you reach the jeep, you park up behind me. Then we keep going as normal, now…

Rob takes a deep breath in. When he starts up again, his speech is even more pointed than before.

**ROB:** … there’s a hitchhiker on the road, a well dressed man with a case. You pick him up, you take him where he needs to go. You do NOT under ANY circumstances, talk to the man. To be safe, don’t look at him. Don’t take anything he offers you. Don’t open the door for him or wave goodbye when he leaves. You do not acknowledge him, in any way. You want my advice, don’t say a word till you get to the stopping point.

**LILITH:** Why do we have to go one by one?

**ROB:”” Guy who wrote all the logs says he don’t like choosing cars. I don’t know what that means, but I’m lucky I never had to find out.

**ACE:** Why don't we just *not* pick him up?

**ROB:** That isn’t an option.

**ACE:** Well, I mean, yes it is. I don’t see why we...

**ROB:** Goddamn it, you’ll pick him up, whether you want to or not!

The group is silent. This is the first time Rob’s raised his voice. In the ensuing stillness, Ace looks like he’d be more than happy to turn his car around and retrace the route back to Phoenix, leaving Rob in the dust with a few choice words. I can sympathise with him a little, Rob’s been treating him as an annoyance, a tag along who didn't do the homework, but at the end of the day, Ace is doing nothing to fix things. Also Rob is essentially right, he didn't do the homework.

**BONNIE:** Well OK I suppose we should get back on the road then… if everyone’s ready.

Deciding he has nothing more to say to us, Rob marches over to the Wrangler. Bonnie, Clyde, Apollo and Eve sit on the floor sharing snacks. Ace loses himself in his phone and Bluejay, still maintaining a noticeable distance from the group, takes to her car with a copy of US weekly.

**LILITH:** Bristol, can we talk?

I turn around to see Lilith, holding her cell phone with the screen facing me.

**AS:** Yeah sure what’s up?

**LILITH:** Have you tried to make any calls since we came through the tunnel?

**AS:** No not yet, why?

**LILITH:** Could you try?

I pull out my own cell and dial in to the office. The line’s busy, which isn’t exactly uncommon. Lilith watches intently, waiting for a reaction.

**AS:** I’m not getting through.

**LILITH:** They were busy?

**AS:** … Yeah. Why?

**LILITH:** Everyone is. We have signal, we can make calls, but everyone on the other end is busy.

**AS:** Don't you think it could just be coincidence?

**LILITH:** I really mean everyone, Bristol. While Eve’s been driving, I’ve been calling; my camera’s automated support line, 911…

**AS:** You dialed 911?

**LILITH:** For science, yeah. All of them are busy. I even called this guy at my dorm who has a serious thing for me and, trust me, he is not fucking busy. This is weird right? It’s like we’ve crossed a threshold and the world's suddenly… doing something else. You know?

In all honesty, I’m not sure I do know. I don’t want to say it, but it still seems like a massive stretch. Luckily Rob saves me from commenting when he calls me over to the car, clearly eager to get back on the road. I tell Lilith we’ll look into her discovery on the other side and she nods in agreement, retreating to her friend and immediately stealing a handful of apple slices.

I climb into the Wrangler and wave goodbye to the convoy. We slowly roll back onto the road and set off on our way. Watching the rest of the group disappear into the background, I feel noticeably more isolated despite Rob’s presence, or perhaps because of it, I’m not exactly sure.

The hitchhiker shows up about ten turns later.

Just like Rob said, the man is incredibly well dressed, in a well fitting brown suit with a dark green tie, even from a distance I can see his shoes are expertly shined, as is the varnished wooden case resting on the floor beside them. He stands on the side of the road and raises his hand gingerly, wearing a look of hopeful anticipation.

**AS:** Who is he?

**ROB:** The hitchhiker.

**AS:** Is that really all you’re going to say?

**ROB:** It’s all I can say. You understand the rules here?

**AS:** Don’t talk to him.

**ROB:** I’d say don’t talk at all. Not until we stop. When we stop, we’re safe.

Rob veers slowly over to the side of the road. The hitchhiker smiles appreciatively, grasping his hands together and shaking them in thanks. Picking up his case he strolls over to the Wrangler whilst unbuttoning his blazer.

**AS:** See you on the other side.

The back door opens, and the hitchhiker pulls himself into the storage area. Finding no seating, he settles himself cheerfully on some of the softer luggage just behind me.

**HITCHHIKER:** Not much in the way of seating back here huh!

I have to admit, I do feel a subtle urge to respond. Even after the stern warnings I’ve received, to ignore the man seems almost instinctively rude. I was raised British after all.

**HITCHHIKER:** So where are you all from? I’m travelling in from Oakwell.

I glance at him in the rear view. He meets my gaze and smiles. I flick my attention back to the road, counting the white lines. The stranger persists in trying to start a conversation.

Ten minutes go by. The silence grows palpable, broken intermittently by yet another cheerful attempt at conversation. Topics include what nice weather we’re having, our professions, our hobbies. In response, I busy myself with pointless but occupying tasks. I find myself playing games in my head, thinking of common phrases and making them into clunky anagrams. It seems to work and, after a short while, I start to habituate to the man’s small talk. I almost don’t notice that he’s there.

Maybe that’s what allows him to catch me out.

**HITCHHIKER:** You’re just a fucking disappointment aren’t you.

The statement comes out of the blue. It’s sharp, venomous, completely divorced from the idle questioning I’d been tuning out. I’m daydreaming when I hear it, and before I can register what I’m doing, I’m turning to face him. My lips are already parting as I go, a reflexive thought, reflexively vocalised.

“What?”

I almost say it out loud. The word is on the edge of my tongue, a single note my vocal chords were all but ready to play. Only the sudden, vice like grip of Rob’s hand on my forearm anchors me in the moment. I stare at the Hitchhiker, my mouth still open. He’s different now. All of the warmth, all of the pleasantry, it’s drained from his face like running makeup. His smile is malevolent, calculating and finally, it feels honest.

**HITCHHIKER:** You want to know things? I can tell you.

Rob keeps his eyes focussed on the road, but his grip on my arm tightens.

**HITCHHIKER:** I can tell you everything you want to know. Even the things you never knew about yourself. Even the thoughts you didn’t know you were thinking… those little critters, all the way at the back.

We stare at each other a moment longer, before I turn round and back to the road. I don’t count the white lines any more. Now I’m focussed intently on anything our passenger has to say. For the next ten minutes, ignoring him is going have my full attention.

He only tries a few more times, reverting back to more innocent questioning. Nothing takes. Five minutes later he indicates to a seemingly random point at the side of the road and Rob drops him off. The man thanks us, climbs neatly out, puts down his case and waves as we depart. When we disappear around the next corner, he still hasn’t stopped.

Surprisingly, the silence caused by the Hitchhiker's presence isn’t nearly as intense as the one left in his wake. I decide to break the tension. Somewhat ungracefully.

**AS:** To be fair, we ARE having nice weather.

**ROB:** Don’t talk. 

**AS:** … Are you mad at me? I’m sorry he got to me I wasn’t expecting-

**ROB** You did fine. We don’t talk till we stop.

I go back to my notes, making a point to write down my current feelings. For the record, “Embarrassed but relieved.” Once I put the words down on paper however, I feel something else. Confusion, mixed with concern. Because, at the end of the day, what was I relieved about? That I didn’t talk to a strange man who had tried to talk to me? Was anything really at stake?

The more I think about it, the more I realise that the entire episode with this “mysterious hitchhiker” reduces the Left/Right Game to two possible states. It’s either real, or it’s an elaborate hoax, perpetrated by Rob J. Guthard. The crazy woman, the tunnel, the malicious left turn, all of those could be explained as rationalisations, but the hitchhiker was far too elaborate, far too difficult to predict. If he was an actor, then Rob is nothing more than an impressive fraud. If he was genuine? Then I’m not entirely sure where that leaves us.

Something in the corner of my eye pulls me from my thoughts. A transient, peripheral object that almost completely passes me by before I turn in a weak attempt to catch it. I only get a few seconds to look before it’s gone from my field of view. I face forward once more, sit back in my chair, and let Rob carry us ever further down the road.

It’s not too long before we finally pull over.

**ROB:** You did good, I’m sorry for grabbin you. I just didn’t want you to do something you’d regret.

**AS:** No it’s fine. I was going to. Do you know what happens if you talk to him?

**ROB:** Not sure. Came close myself once, a few years back. The way he looks at you when he thinks he’s got you? I don’t think I wanna know.

**AS:** Rob, I saw something a few minutes ago. I don’t know if you’ve noticed it.

**ROB:** ‘Fraid I had my eyes forward most of the time.

**AS:** There was a car on the side of the road. It had crashed off the bank. Have you seen that before?

**ROB:** I ain’t never seen that. But random stuff sometimes shows up here and there.

**AS:** Have people other than you run the Left/Right Game?

**ROB:** No one I know of. Whoever it was they’d probably just rather crash than face that damn hitchhiker again.

**AS:** He’s there on the way back too?!

**ROB:** If you’re unlucky.

**AS:** Well, something to look forward to.

Rob picks up the CB radio and messages for Apollo to set off, repeating his warnings concerning the hitchhiker. I feel like everyone’s going to get a similar speech before they embark. Ace will probably get it twice.

Half an hour later, Apollo shows up. Though he laughs about he ordeal, he’s clearly a little shaken.

**APOLLO:** Guy should call himself an Uber. You can’t shut those guys up. Ahaha. Do you guys have Uber in England?

**AS:** Yeah.

**APOLLO:** Then you know what I mean right?

Bonnie and Clyde arrive quicker than Apollo. They pull up at the back, Clyde helps Bonnie out of the car and they proceed stretch their legs.

Once Apollo joins them it’s clear that everyone has a different story to tell. The hitchhiker offered Clyde travel sweets, pleasantly but firmly insisting he take one. Apollo almost got talking about his music tastes, after the hitchhiker asked to play something on the radio. That particular story does leave me curious about whether we still get NPR on this road.

Rob customarily greets Bonnie and Clyde, then walks off to signal Eve & Lilith. He’s still sitting in the Jeep when I meet him at the door.

**AS:** Hey what’re you up to?

**ROB:** Just waitin’ by the phone. The girls are on their way. You need anything?

**AS:** Um… maybe. I uh, I think Apollo’s been affected by the whole hitchhiker thing a bit more than he’s letting on.

**ROB:** He seems just fine to me.

**AS:** I’m not so sure. He’s only smiling when people are nearby. Could you talk to him?

**ROB:** Well, I ain’t much comfort, I got four ex wives to tell me that. Think it might be better coming from you?

**AS:** I think this is a… man to man conversation. I might just get a brave face.

Rob doesn’t look comfortable, but he acquiesces, climbing out of the car.

**ROB:** Last “man to man” conversation I had, my son didn’t talk to me for three months.

I watch him wander over to Apollo, who is standing by his range rover, staring into his phone. Rob puts a calming hand on the man’s shoulder. From a distance, it’s actually a sweet moment. I start to feel bad for lying to him.

I carefully open the driver’s side door and climb into the Wrangler, assuming I have around twenty seconds before Rob comes back. Picking up the CB Radio reciever, I stare at a list of presets, labeled one through nine. I don’t know which button I press to talk to Eve and Lilith, and I certainly don’t have time to call everyone up.

Rob handed us all a transceiver before we left. It’s what he’s been making the All Car Bulletins with. Preset One puts him in touch with a transceiver in each car, I’ve seen that in practice enough times. The rest of the presets must access the transceivers individually and, if Rob is the man I think he is, he gave our radios out in order of position. If that’s the case then either Rob or I could be Preset 2. Apollo would be next, then Bonnie and Clyde. Without knowing where Rob has placed himself in the queue, the only option which would guarantee me getting through to Lilith and Eve would be Preset 7. I think that makes sense.

With no time to check my work, I press the button and snatch up the receiver.

**AS:** This is Bristol to Lilith & Eve. Are you guys there?

The receiver crackles quietly. I look in the wing mirror and see Rob making awkward small talk with Apollo. Perhaps his four ex wives were on to something.

**Lilith:** Lilith to Bristol. How is it on the other side? We haven’t seen a hitchhiker. Oh by the way, I just phoned Eve and it went through, could I have your number to test...

**AS:** Sorry Lilith, I’m phoning about something else..

**Lilith:** Why? What’s going on over there?

Apollo’s nodding to Rob, I can imagine him making assurances that he’s perfectly fine. I really don’t have long at all.

**AS:** I have a mission for you but you have to keep it secret.

**LILITH:** Sounds awesome what’s up?

**AS:** Once you’re past the hitchhiker, there’s a crashed car on the road, on the passenger side. Whilst you’re going past it, would you mind getting some footage?

**LILITH:** What sort of footage?

**AS:** Just zoom in and get as much detail as possible. You don’t need to stop, just… anything will be useful.

Rob’s starting to walk back to the car. I shift into the passenger seat, still holding the receiver.

**LILITH:** Is there anything specific you-

**AS:** Talk to me later not now. Thank you. Bye.

I slam the receiver into its holster a moment before Rob opens the door. He shrugs at me.

**ROB:** He seem’s fine, unless there’s something he ain’t telling me.

*****

The rest of the day is fairly uneventful. Lilith and Eve pull in, beaming about their experience with the Hitchhiker and bragging about what the dashcam footage would mean for their channel. Lilith ends her story by insisting that nothing else happened for the rest of her journey, whilst directing a highly intentional look in my direction. I look away and make a mental note to catch up with her when less people are around.

Bluejay seems the least phased by the her run in with the hitchhiker. We do manage to get a few words out of her, though perhaps “a few” is an exaggeration. 

**BLUEJAY:** I’m tired.

After which she goes to sit down on her own.

When Ace pulls up to the side of the road, he almost falls out of his car. His legs are weak, his face gaunt, his breaths quick and shallow. I try and get him to talk about it on tape but he shrugs me off, eager to hear about where we’re going rather than talk about where we’ve been.

We travel for a while longer, now at around 486 turns, and nearing our first night on the road. Rob signals our stopping point, a quiet clearing at the top of a hill. Rob clears a sleeping area in the back of the Wrangler, leaving a line of luggage as a barrier between us. I appreciate the thought, but don’t really know how to tell him. In the end, I just say…

**AS:** Thanks for making room.

Apollo attempts to keep everyone from going to bed, issuing vague statements about “making a fire”, but people quickly shuffle off to their cars. The early start, and the subsequent events of the day, have taken their toll. I watch Lilith and Eve break away from the group and head to bed. I suppose I’ll have to talk to them tomorrow morning, when Rob isn’t around.

I still feel a bit bad for lying to him, and for pulling Lilith and Eve into what could be a blatant act of dumb paranoia. Rob seems like a good man, a reasonable man, as flawed as any of us but, fundamentally decent. But he fact remains, that when I talked to him about the crashed car, he clearly said:

**ROB VO:** No one I know of. Whoever it was they’d probably just rather crash than face that damn hitchhiker again.

I want to trust Rob. I want to believe him when he says he didn’t see the car, that he’d never seen a car on that stretch of road. But for a man of so few words, he might have said too much.

If he truly never saw the car, how did he know the direction it was facing?

I make all my notes concerning this subject on paper and in shorthand, which I’m hoping, in Rob’s long and varied life, he hasn’t inexplicably learned to read. Long after Rob’s gone to bed, I stay in the passenger seat typing up my thoughts on the day.

**CHUCK:** That was “Sister Moon” by Leslie Estrada, another song to calm you folks down as we head into the evening. It’s Chuck Greenwald and I’m with you till the witching hour.

I decided to put the radio on in the end. I was curious, and I also wanted the company. I turned the volume way down so the noise wouldn’t reach Rob, and searched around for something to have in the background. There aren’t many stations to choose from out here. The clearest one is Radio Jubilation, the local station for a nearby town. The current dj, Chuck Greenwald, has been playing soulful folk music for an hour.

**CHUCK:** It’s been a busy week in Jubilation as we welcome in our new School Principal, a very impressive guy who’s bringing some new and interesting proposals to our community. It’s got a few people talking about funding for the arts, if you got a view we’d love to hear it.

I finish typing up my less clandestine notes, and just then realise how tired I am. Wanting to sleep, but not yet prepared to move the single yard between me and the air mattress, I lie back in my seat, listening to Mr Greenwald address his beloved town.

**CHUCK:** We’ll we’re going to go back to your requests very soon and I can tell you we’ve got some goodies on the way. For now though, let’s take ourselves to the new box.

**CHUCK:** They’re going to hurt now.

Immediately, at the volume of a whisper, Radio Jubilation begins to broadcast a cacophony of bone rending screams. The noise shreds the air, what sounds like hundreds of people, each contributing their own voice to a collective symphony of pain and torment.

I instinctively move my body away from the radio, suddenly upright and wide awake. The cries are ceaseless, agonising, punctuated only by half stifled, tear choked pleas for whatever is happening to stop.

A moment later it does, or at the very least, the screaming cuts out as the soft tones of Chuck Greenwald take over.

I look from the radio, over to the sleeping figure of Rob J. Guthard. I can’t help but stare at him as a single thought runs through my head.

I hope this man’s a fraud, I hope he’s playing me. Because if he isn’t, then there’s something very wrong with this road.

**CHUCK:** Hope you folks enjoyed that, we’re going to be bringing you much much more. This is Chuck Greenwald telling you you're always welcome in Jubilation.

**CHUCK:** Stay with us.Hi Guys,

Firstly, I want to apologise for not being at my laptop for the past few days. I had to attend a wedding in Scotland for one of my uni friends. They booked it in mid-week and, between you and me, I don’t think it’s going to last which means not only have I neglected you guys, but I’ve also wasted money on a rental suit and a John Lewis tea set.

As always thank you for your help in my ongoing attempt to find Alice. I’m now in full contact with the radio show she was working for, and they’ll be sending over Rob’s submission to the show as soon as they can. I’ve also looked up every town named Jubilation and have contacted residents from each of them. None of them have the particular junction mentioned in the previous log, “Sycamore Row” and “Acer Street”. I even combed google maps to make sure. I’m not sure what town Alice passed through last February but it doesn’t seem to exist on public record.

The guy who promised to retrace the route from the mirror shop came through, and has sent me a few possible addresses for Rob. He also mentioned looking into the game itself more. I’m not sure what he means by that but I want to be clear, please don’t play this game on my behalf. I don’t want that on my conscience.

Ok, without further ado, here’s the following log.

Thanks again.

[Part 1](https://redd.it/7asz8x)

[Part 2](https://redd.it/7bkk41)

[Part 3](https://redd.it/7cf4h8)

[Part 5](https://redd.it/7fdu9c)

[Part 6](https://redd.it/7h9jzb)

[Part 7](https://redd.it/7jabqd)

[Part 8](https://redd.it/7loh1l)

[Part 9](https://redd.it/7q3x6e)

[Part 10](https://redd.it/7uyiss)

*****

The Left/Right Game [DRAFT 1] 10/02/2017

(Possible Opening) 
(I want to address you, the listener, for a moment, with an advance notice concerning the following episode. I’m sure it’s not been lost on you that every installment of the series so far has played host to some strange, unexplainable occurrence, and spanned a great many miles of travel. It goes without saying this has been by design. I’ve been summarising the countless hours of uneventful meandering and taking extra care to document the strange phenomena we’ve encountered along the way. I wanted the story to be fast moving, to have a real feel of progress with every chapter. 

If that sense of exploratory intrigue is why you’re listening to this show, I completely understand. I’m certain it’s a primary draw for almost all of you; the twists, the turns, the mysterious, strange encounters along an impossible road. 

But if that is the case, I feel it’s my duty to inform you that, apart from a few notable exceptions, there will be almost no ground covered in this segment, and the monsters we encounter will be all too human; stress, divisiveness, discomfort and, as one might imagine, grief.

If you want to read the synopsis of this episode on the website and wait for the next part, then you’ll be all caught up and I’m sure we’ll be back on our way, heading once more into the great unknown. But I feel it’s important to give the aftermath of Ace’s capture its own episode, in part due to the significance of the revelations that are unearthed in its wake, but also as a gesture of deference to the man we lost.

This is the story of our second night on the road.)

As we make the left turn, the horrifying space behind us is quickly replaced by a quiet emptiness ahead. The Wrangler crawls, defeated, toward the waiting convoy. The remaining four cars are parked haphazardly, taking up more than half the road. Rob drifts to the far end of the tarmac, looking to overtake and resume formation. Both of his hands rest on the steering wheel, his eyes fixed on some distant point in space. It’s not hard to imagine that behind the focus and the quiet control, there’s a man in turmoil, a man who can’t bring himself to say anything, in fear of saying too much.

**AS:** This is Bristol to all cars. We’re heading back on the road.  Get yourselves in formation and make way for those around you. We’ve got a while to drive before we stop for the night. 

**LILITH:** Bristol where’s Ro… Ferryman?

**AS:** Ferryman’s here.

**APOLLO:** Where’s Ace?

**AS:** Ace is… Ace didn’t make it across.

**APOLLO:** Uhh what?

**LILITH:** What the fuck? Bristol where is he?

It would be simple to describe what had taken place, or at least summarise the barest facts; what happened to Ace, where he is now, why he isn’t coming back. But for some reason, I can’t utter a word about what's transpired. Something about the event itself makes it impossible to retell, as if the requisite phrases have been locked behind glass.

**AS:** We need to get to the stopping point. It isn’t safe to stay here.

Shortly after we’d turned the corner out of Sycamore Row, Rob implied that the rest of the days’ drive would be uneventful. Had he waited just a few minutes longer, he would have been entirely correct. We’re on the road for another four hours, both of us quietly attending to our own preoccupations as the forest gradually thins out. The landscape gives way to rolling cornfields, that stretch out beyond the horizon on both sides.

Nothing notable happens, which is ironic, as I find myself typing up a lot more notes than I need.

With the sun descends through an orange sky as we pull into a clearing, beside a wild grove of apple trees. Rob turns off the ignition and the two of us sit in silence. Rob’s need to concentrate on driving had been a good excuse to stay quiet, a good excuse to not face each other. Now the wheels aren’t turning however, and the true reason for our mutual reticence is all too clear. 

**AS:** Do you think he’s dead?

**ROB:** I don’t know.

Rob’s response isn’t reassuring, and I’m oddly grateful for that. There are no comforting words he can give me, and any attempt would have seemed horrifically insincere, a mockery of the situation’s onerous gravity. Anyway, given the circumstances of Ace’s capture, I’m not even sure which answer I want to hear.

Lilith appears at my window, rapping her knuckles against the glass with an aggressive impatience. I’d expect nothing less about now. Everyone in the convoy has been made to follow a unilateral order, my order, without explanation. They’ve been travelling for hours accompanied by the glaring absence of another human being. Looking in the wing mirror, I glimpse the rest of the convoy, standing by their cars, watching the Wrangler expectantly.

Rob’s hands still haven’t left the wheel.

With a sharp intake of breath, I push the door open and step out onto the grass. The ground is soft below me as I walk over to the group. There’s recently been rain. I begin to address the rough semicircle, it almost feels like one of Rob’s briefings.

**EVE:** What’s happening Bristol?

**APOLLO:** Did Ace turn back?

I meet Apollo’s eye. For the briefest of moments, I consider telling them all exactly that. Maybe it would save them from the slow, heavy ache that’s currently weighing down my chest. Maybe it would just save me from a difficult conversation. Either way, I know I can't lie to them. They deserve the truth, however unpleasant.

**AS:** No he didn’t turn back; they crippled his car.

**LILITH:** The tow truck? Did he get out?

The answer doesn't come easily. I’m being pressed to say the words aloud and, in doing so, to fully acknowledge what happened. It feels like I’m being driven to a funeral, like I’m being verbally marched towards an open casket.

**EVE:** What happened to him?... Bristol…

**ROB:** He’s dead, Eve.

I hadn’t heard Rob step out of the car when he reaches the group. It’s hard to hide my relief as he takes over proceedings, addressing the group matter-of-factly. Now it really *is* like one of his briefings.

**ROB:** Two guys in the tow truck coming outta Jubilation. They got him. They took him back with them to the town. Way they were treatin’ him he won’t last long.

**BONNIE:** Oh goodness…

**EVE:** What? Rob what’re they going to do to him?

**ROB:** I can’t tell you. Nothing like this ever happened before.

**LILITH:** Well we need to go back.

**ROB:** That ain’t gonna happen.

**LILITH:** We’re not going to fucking abandon him.

**AS:** Lilith…

**LILITH:** We’re going back!

**ROB:** No we’re not.

**APOLLO:** Me and Rob can go. You know the place right Rob?

**ROB:** The kid’s dead Apollo.

**LILITH:** But he was alive when you last saw him?

**ROB** That’s right.

**LILITH:** So what point did you decide he was dead?

**ROB:** When I saw him being carried away with a fucking tow hook sticking out his mouth! Goddamn it.

Rob shouldn’t have said that. I understand his reasons of course; he wants to convey an important truth, that nothing can be done, or could have been done, to save Ace. His ghastly choice of words does the job, but it also sends a ripple of disturbance through the crowd, planting in everyone’s minds the gruesome image I’ve been trying all day to uproot.

Bonnie covers her mouth in shock and sorrow. Eve turns noticeably pale, and even Lilith, who is intent on leading the questioning, is taken aback.

**LILITH:** Did… did you see this Bristol?

I nod solemnly. The group bristles at my affirmation. 

**AS:** I saw enough. I had to close my eyes when it happened, Rob tried to save him until…

Before I can finish my statement, my words are cut off by something truly unexpected. In spontaneous response to my words, a harsh outburst of mocking, sarcastic laughter rings out from within the convoy. One by one, we turn towards its source, until we all find ourselves staring at Bluejay. Her unapologetic chuckling fills the silent night air.

**AS:** Is something funny, Bluejay?

Bluejay tries to speak through her, all too slowly, waning laughter.

**BLUEJAY:** It’s just… you call yourself a journalist… Hah you closed your eyes, my god… there it is! There it is.

**AS:** I’m sorry?

**BLUEJAY:** Do you close your eyes for magic tricks too?

**EVE:** What the fuck Bluejay?

**APOLLO:** Come on, this isn’t the time.

**BLUEJAY:** Oh the time is well fucking overdue. Seriously are you all morons? The Left/Right Game is a hoax. It’s fake! Rob Guthard’s played you all like fucking children! Ace is fine, he’s probably an actor! Like the hitchhiker was an actor and those towns people too. I mean, come on.

The group is taken aback by Bluejay’s incredulous tirade. She’s clearly been holding her tongue since day one; our reaction to Ace’s capture representing just one step too far.

**AS:** I saw Rob shoot one of those townspeople with a hunting rifle. I saw the wound. It was real.

**BLUEJAY:** It was a blood filled squib. The rifle was probably loaded with blanks. You can buy both from any good theatrical retailer. Seriously what the fuck is wrong with you people?

**LILITH:** Ok firstly, I don’t like your fucking tone. Secondly, have you noticed that we’ve been the only cars on the road for almost two days? And what about Jubilation? Are you suggesting Rob hired out a whole town? That would be fucking impossible.

**BLUEJAY:** Oh yeah sure, THAT’S impossible, but it’s totally believable that we’re driving on a magic road. Maybe this is the highest budget scam I’ve ever seen but that’s all it is, a scam. And Al Jazeera here is giving him all the publicity he wants. I mean these people are sheep but you, you’re a fucking sycophant.

My mother used to tell me that you can’t strike a person from the high road. Staring down the barrel of Bluejay’s darkly self-satisfied grin, I’m more than tempted to make the descent.

**AS:** Ok Bluejay fair enough. I’m not going to pretend to know what’s going on here, for all I know you could be right. But why would Rob spend the production budget of a Hollywood film to trick a radio journalist and two vloggers. Trust me, our website does not get enough traffic for-

**BLUEJAY:** Oh don’t be so self-important. It’s not YOU he’s trying to fool.

Bluejay turns to Rob, fixing him a glare of pure, unadulterated triumph.

**BLUEJAY:** Admit it Rob. Admit that this is all a fucking farce. Admit that you knew who I was before I even got out of my car.

Rob’s face looks like it’s been carved from granite. The group looks to him for an answer, but he delivers his response directly to Bluejay, his eyes locked with hers.

**ROB:** It’s true… … I know who you are Denise.

The atmosphere changes, and for a moment, the night erupts into a foray of whispers. Rob’s answer clearly means something to everyone but me.

**EVE:** Denise?

**LILITH:** Denise Carver?

**APOLLO:** No. You serious?

**AS:** Sorry, who’s Denise Carver?

**LILITH:** She’s the biggest killjoy in the hobby.

**BLUEJAY:** Oh fuck you, you fucking air-head. 

**ROB:** Denise here is a member of the Skeptics and Rationalist Institute of America. She likes to get herself invited on ghost hunting expeditions under a false name so she can debunk them publicly. You may've gathered she don’t believe in the supernatural.

**BLUEJAY:** Actually I do believe in the supernatural. I *believe* that it’s a billion dollar industry built on selling comfortable lies to the gullible, and it thrives on shitty journalists and attention whore bloggers who are willing to spread whatever shit they think will get them clicks.

**AS:** That’s why you took so long getting around the pine tree. Even when the truck was coming for Ace. You didn’t think any of it was real.

**BLUEJAY:** Uhh… did you?

As condescending as her delivery may be, her words spark a sudden realisation. It’s true, that with an unspeakably high budget and a few deft stooges, you could probably replicate most of what we’d seen on the road. Yet, without realising it, I’ve found myself agreeing with Rob’s version of events, personally defending the Left/Right Game’s validity against its decriers. I’d set off on this journey much like Bluejay, as a staunch, confident skeptic, but somewhere between the tunnel and this moment, I’d become a believer.

Bluejay notes my lack of protest, and turns back to Rob.

**BLUEJAY:** I’m flattered you went to all this trouble. I didn’t know my work was so offensive to you. 

**ROB:** I admire your work Denise. Always have. That’s why I brought you along.

**BLUEJAY:** That is bullshit. Tell your friend Ace he can’t act for shit.

Bluejay pulls a pack of Marlboros out of her coat, lighting up immediately, and goes to sit on the hood of her nearby car. Her demeanour clearly signals that her part in the conversation is over, though her words leave a bitter aftertaste for everyone involved. To sympathise, it must be exhausting, spending two days with people whose opinions are diametrically opposed to your own, having to listen in silence while they corroborate their own seemingly preposterous views. Having said that however, I’m incredibly glad she’s stopped talking. It reminds me of a time when we got on much better.

The next question comes from Eve, her voice quivering.

**EVE:** Can… can we die here Rob?

The quiet force of her words turn everyone’s heads back towards Rob. It’s clear that others have been thinking the same thing, and they’re looking to Rob for an answer.

**ROB:** It’s possible. The road ain’t ever killed no one before. Not so long as everyone followed the rules.

**LILITH:**  But you said in your emails it was dangerous.  

**ROB:** That’s right.

**LILITH:** But you didn’t feel like telling us that we could die out here? 

Rob turns to Lilith, clearly offended by her accusation.

**ROB:** In the 1920’s Jon Ebenrow killed 36 people and violated their bodies. In one of your videos, you guys went to his home in Virginia looking for the man’s ghost. Bonnie & Clyde once spent $500 to stay at the Iowa Murder House, a place that’s supposed to possess its victims and force’em to kill each other. 

**ROB:** If you all honestly believed in what you were chasing, you should be accepting death as an outcome every time you step out. We are looking for evidence of another world. What we’re doing here has the scientific significance of the moon landings, the cultural significance of Columbus reaching the Americas and a whole lot of people died doing both. If you accepted the risk chasing down the ghost of a two-bit serial killer, you should be willing to accept the risk for this.

Lilith looks like she’s been scolded by a parent. There’s a fire in her eyes as she observes Rob, meeting his criticism with scorn.

**LILITH:** Oh so it’s Ace’s fault? He should have “accepted the risk”?

**ROB:** He did accept the risk. Ace made his decisions. He saw the dangers of the road first hand and he kept on goin'. I told you this place could be dangerous, and maybe you didn’t take that seriously. But you are NOT gonna treat me like I lured any of you here under false pretenses.

We stand for a few moments in the uncomfortable void left by Rob’s words. No one’s quite sure where to look.

**APOLLO:**  Well what do we do now Rob? Do we turn around?

**ROB:** I ain’t gonna make that decision for you. If you want to split off and head back, I suggest you wait till mornin’ and stagger your leavin’ times by an hour or so. I ain’t never seen nothin’ like what happened back there before, but this is the most people I ever played the game with. Maybe that’s doin’ somethin’.

**AS:** What do you mean by that?

**ROB:** Well it’s the only thing that’s changed. Truth is, this ain’t our world, by all rights we shouldn’t be here. Even when it's one car the road always tries to discourage you. Maybe it’s like bacteria in a vein. One or two might slip by unnoticed but once it hits a certain point it’s like a uh…

**AS:** Like an immune response. You think the road’s pushing back on foreign objects?

**ROB:** And the bigger the group-

**AS:** The more violent the response…

It makes sense, until Bluejay laughs once more. Hearing her reaction, I reassess what I'm saying and I can’t help but feel a little foolish at the idea.

**ROB:**  Maybe. It’s just a theory... I don’t know.

Rob collects himself, regaining his composure.

**ROB:** Either way, you all have the morning to decide if you want to keep on the road. Bristol, if you want to go home, you gotta find someone to take you. I ain’t ready to head back yet.

He turns away from the group and marches to the Wrangler. I don’t see him again for the rest of the evening, and I have no intention of bothering him. Eve and Lilith immediately crowd around me, asking if I’m alright and taking it in turns to disparage Rob’s actions. I can’t bring myself to join in. All I can bring myself to say is…

**AS:** Can I charge my phone in your car?

The group has very little to say for the rest of the night. A deep solemnity hangs in the air, dampening any semblance of good cheer like wet leaves on a dwindling fire. No one offers any conversation, Apollo’s reservoir of quips has run dry. Everyone’s wondering where they’ll be going from here, pondering the sort of person they are in circumstances such as this. Do they press on towards danger, or back towards safe and familiar ground. It’s a question they’ll have to figure out for themselves, ideally before sunrise.

I already have questions of my own.

About an hour after Rob’s departure, bidding fair well to the rest of the group, I walk over to Lilith and Eve’s car. My bag is resting on the front seat, a black wire leading inside from the charging port. I’ve decided not to tell the pair that I’ve been charging the detonator for a military grade explosive less than ten metres away from them. Perhaps it will come out during broadcast. If you’re listening to this, sorry girls.

I pick up my bag and, checking that no one’s looking, make a beeline for the apple grove. I march through the small wood, the air growing still, the sounds of the convoy quickly fading behind me. In the late evening darkness, with the moon shrouded by legion of crooked trees, I’m puzzled that I’m not more afraid. I’ve seen what happens on this road and, as I pass through the grove and into the neighbouring field, intentionally isolating myself from the rest of the group, I'm quite aware that help won’t be coming for me. Even so, as the corn rises up in every direction around me, I find myself almost incapable of fear. The day's events have drained me of emotion, and I'm now with everything else pulled away, I’m left with only one driving directive; an overpowering urge to figure this road out, regardless of what that entails.

Judging the distance I’ve traveled to be acceptably out of range from the convoy, I take the block of C4 out of my bag and place it on the ground. Gritting my teeth, my body cringing with self-inflicted dread, I press the power button on the Nokia and wait for something to happen. My worries of instant disintegration are allayed slightly as the grainy image of two outstretched hands comes into view, swiftly replaced by a menu screen.

I work fast, the words on the brown paper package constantly reminding me of what I’m putting at risk with every passing second.

Firstly, I type my number own number into the phone, assuming, or at least hoping, that the mechanism isn’t activated by outgoing calls. A few seconds later my cell phone rings, giving me the Nokia’s number. Checking the call logs, I find a second, different number, which seems to have made a call to the phone three times in quick succession. If I were a betting woman, which I sometimes am, I’d suggest that this number belongs to whoever built the bomb, the calls representing an attempt to test the trigger prior to its implementation. If I’m right, then this should be the personal number of whoever was driving that crashed car. 

My third discovery, is a little bit more puzzling. No texts have been sent from this phone, however there is one solitary message residing in the phone’s inbox. It’s from a third, separate number, and it reads thus:

“Please don't do this Rob.”

I stare at those four words, the new information grating uncomfortably against my already preconceived theories. If this text is to be believed, and my previous deductions are at all accurate, then that means Rob Guthard was driving the car. That the C4 in the trunk had belonged to him. All this time I thought Rob may have been responsible for something terrible, but what if he was run off the road himself? If that is the case, it leads to an entirely new question… who was responsible for his crash?

As I begin to think it over, the air explodes around me. 

I’m jolted out of my examination by a powerful, echoing voice which reverberates the very air. The corn is thrown into a frenzy as the noise echoes from every direction, as if spoken by the air itself.

**VOICE:** I’ve watched you questioning.

Without a second’s hesitation, I turn off the Nokia and throw the block into my bag. I jump to my feet and scan the cornfield for whoever spoke the words, backing away towards the convoy. Suddenly, realising how far I am from my friends, I break into a run, my boots pounding the dirt as I flee back to the woods.

Less than a minute later I burst out through the trees, my bag swinging with the weight of the block. Everyone’s in their cars, seemingly fast asleep. I’m starting to think they’re onto something. With no one to talk to, and a long day ahead of me, I suppose there’s no further recourse but to catch my breath, write up my immediate thoughts and then, finally, get some much needed rest.

I feel a dull pressure behind my eyes as I step towards the Wrangler. Quietly opening the back door next to my sleeping area, I carefully hide the block under my luggage. Then, silently closing the door again, I wander around to the passenger side, where my notes are waiting to be typed.

I reach out and grab the handle, gripping it tightly. I don’t open the door. In fact, after a moment staring through the glass, I let go.

The pressure behind my eyes gives way, and before I know it I’ve slid down to the damp ground, my back against the cool, hard metal of the door. A whine catches in my throat as ugly tears stream down my cheeks. My breath shudders as I inhale, and my attempt to breathe out plays to the world as a quiet, declining sob. The tears take me by surprise but I don’t wipe them away. In a bittersweet way, they’re welcome, necessary even. They carry with them a familiar sense of heartrending release. By the time they’ve run dry, I feel like I might just be able to move on from the events of the day.  The sounds in my head are just a little quieter now I’ve paid them their due.

**BONNIE:** Are you ok honey?

I’m picking myself up when I see Bonnie walking carefully over to the Wrangler. I brush myself off, a little embarrassed at being caught.

**AS:** I didn’t know you were awake.

**BONNIE:** I’m a light sleeper, and Martin… Clyde snores. Do you need someone to talk to?

**AS:** I think I just need to sleep. Thanks Bonnie.

**BONNIE:** My name’s Linda, if you’re wondering.

**AS:** … Alice.

**BONNIE:** That’s a beautiful name. Well Alice, I know I don’t talk much, but I know how to listen… if you ever want me to.

For the first time since the pine fell, I find myself smiling. It’s a weak smile, but a smile nonetheless.

**AS:** Thank you Linda. I might take you up on that. Have a good night.

BONNIE:** Have a good night. 

Bonnie starts to walk back to the car, before pausing and turning round. One last piece of comfort to offer.

**BONNIE:** And remember, everything will all be alright once we get to Wintery Bay.

I frown a little, unsure what Bonnie means. She smiles back blankly, then resumes the path back to her car. She’s mentioned that place before, upon leaving Jubilation, in what seemed like a moment of idle reminiscence. How she mentioned it just now doesn’t seem like reminiscence at all.

After everything that’s gone on, all the suspicion I’ve been directing at Rob, all my worry for Ace. Is something the matter with Bonnie? 

Perhaps I’m misunderstanding, perhaps Bonnie misspoke, but all the same, the brief comfort her words afforded me has already faded away, leaving a familiar feeling of confusion and paranoia in its place.

I let myself into the passenger side, type up a few pressing notes and then climb through onto the air mattress. Sleep doesn’t come easily. I close my eyes and try to convince myself that tomorrow will be better than this harrowing day. Yet every time I make that particular argument, a voice in my head responds:

“That may depend on which way you turn.”So, by this point everyone is no doubt well aware of the Area 51 memes and all the hubbub surrounding them. Apparently over one million people are set to storm the perimeter on September 20th of this year.

Should be interesting, but let’s be honest for a second, I doubt it will happen. And even if it did, even if by some ridiculous miracle they managed to overwhelm the most powerful military on earth and infiltrate a top-secret base, I don’t think they would be exactly thrilled with the results.

I’ll just come right out and say it I guess; Area 51 is a red herring. It’s a distraction and it pretty much always has been. Nothing out there but sand, reclusive scientists and some crusty-ass lake at this point.

I mean think about it, if Area 51 is one of the most top-secret and covert blacksite’s in the world, then why does everyone know about it? How secret can a secret be if everyone knows the secret? For god’s sake, even Obama acknowledged its existence awhile back. That’s the whole point of it, they want you distracted, so you don’t look for the others.

But why take my word for it? Who am I anyways? Just some pleb on the internet that decided to cash in on a trend for some clout and perhaps a bit of that sweet, sweet karma, right? Well yes… but actually no.

That may be who I am now, but I was once a person of particular interest to the United States government. Most people knew me as Mr. Blue. Not my real name, but it is easier to pronounce.

I used to be a pilot. Did that for many years and loved every second of it. I tell ya, there’s nothing quite like soaring through the skies and breaking the sound barrier for the first time. You might crap your pants a little, but it’s all just part of the experience really.

Now unfortunately, the type of work I did was above top-secret and for all of our safeties I cannot go into any further detail on what I actually did, or who I actually worked for. One day, I was out on a calssified reconnaissance mission in a certain area where I should not have been. I’ll apologize here for the vague details of certain things, but you gotta understand, the things I’m about to tell you are beyond top secret. They would kill me ten times over for uttering a word of it, so here’s to hoping that doesn’t happen.

Anyways, the mission was going as planned, when suddenly my instruments started going berserk on my dash. Air pressure inside the cabin just plummeted and the speed and fuel consumption gages looked like they were playing ping-pong with each other. Everything began to rattle like crazy, and my alarms erupted into a symphony of irritation. 

Next thing I know, I see this bright light soar past me at an ungodly speed. The shockwave it produced was so violent that it shredded the hull of my craft. In a split-second, I went from casually flying along, to suddenly regaining consciousness as I plummeted headfirst towards the ground at terminal velocity. 

I managed to pull my chute before I splattered, but as I touched down, I almost wished I hadn’t. There I was met by an awaiting entourage of at least two-dozen men in winter camo suits and masks. They all pointed their weapons at me and screamed in a language which I recognized as English. 

I tried my best to calm them down and appear unthreatening, but that didn’t stop them from wrenching me into a pair of handcuffs and hauling me into one of their APC’s. They began to drive away, and the real severity of the situation hit me.

I was not going to be saved. The people I worked for had never said it, but it was always well known that if ever you were captured, than you were pretty much on your own.  

With that in mind, I had no real incentive to keep my mouth shut once they started interrogating me. It may seem cowardly, but I was not about to be brutally tortured for a former ally which would never come to bail me out. Yeah, the government says they don’t torture people, but trust me, when they REALLY want to know something, there’s no tactic too extreme. And they really wanted to know something.

So, I told them. About who I worked for, what my mission was, where I grew up, all that jazz. It was all fabricated, but they took the bait regardless thanks to their severe distrust of the Russians at the time. They were actually pretty cool after that. I mean they wouldn’t let me leave their custody, but that was better than being dead. Or at least it was at first.

They transported me away from my initial interrogation place, into a secure facility somewhere nearby. I was blindfolded the whole time, but from the rumbling of multiple vehicles, sounds of doors sliding open multiple times, and the distinct feeling of my stomach dropping, I could tell they had taken me somewhere deep underground. 

Soon after that, I stepped off the elevator and they removed my blindfold. Their leader was a guy with a stern face. Thick grey beard, and eyes that looked etched from concrete. He wore a black suit, with some symbol upon his heart pocket that I didn’t recognize. He stepped in front of everyone and outstretched his arms while staring me in the eye. 

“Welcome to your new home.” An ever so slight grin slithered onto his face as he said it. I glanced down the dismal grey hallways, which seemed to stretch out further than I could see in multiple directions. They lead me down the hall on the right, past dozens of locked corridors and rooms before ushering me into a cell. My handcuffs were removed soon after, and the door slid shut behind me. The same man that had welcomed me to the facility then approached the window and pushed the intercom button.

“We appreciate your cooperation Mr. Blue. I don’t believe there is any reason why our time spent together has to be unfriendly. I apologize for all of this, but you must realize that this is a necessary precaution we must take. I hope you understand.” I took a moment, then nodded back to him.

“Wonderful, we will have dinner sent to you soon. If you require anything then please notify one of the guards outside of your quarters.” And with that, he and his little entourage turned and strolled down the hallway. That was my very first night in the facility I eventually came to know as F.E.Z.

I don’t think it’s the official name, but I heard several personnel at the base refer to it by that acronym over the years. I still don’t know exactly what it stands for. Forbidden Enclosed Ziggurat? Forsaken Evil Zoo? Forced Ejaculation Zeal? Fabulous Elf Zombies? 

The best I could really come up with was Fortified Experimental Zone. It makes the most sense too, all things considered. At first it wasn’t actually too bad. The staff was nice, they cooked great food, and there was plenty to see around the base. Although every once in a while, I would hear the screams just barely echoing through the vents. 

They interviewed me probably one hundred more times after that, and were especially interested in the craft which I was piloting. The craft in question was one of our own top-secret technologies, but unfortunately it had been blown to smithereens by whatever that light was, so I couldn’t tell them much about it. 

It took years of incarceration there, but eventually the staff came to trust me almost as much as they did their own comrades. We would laugh and joke with one another, and soon enough we became what some might even consider to be friends. 

I became especially close with one of the scientists there named Kevin. Kevin was a smart guy; comical too, and explained quite a lot of things to me. He and I would spend hours talking on countless occasions. He was my only real glimpse into what was happening in the outside world. He’d bring in books and movies for us to enjoy together. He kept me updated on everything, and over the next thirty years we developed a close friendship that I will always treasure. 

I must’ve displayed some kind of intellectual potential, because they eventually started asking for my input on various curiosities stationed throughout the base. They only did it because I had sworn them complete loyalty and would never be allowed to leave the base anyways, but for me, it was just nice to feel included.

The base itself was absolutely colossal. They always blindfolded me during transport to any location, but one time I caught a glimpse of the buttons in the elevator. There had to have been at least fifty of them on that panel.

I remember the first time they showed me one of the lockdown blocks. There were guards posted at every cell, and I heard some very strange noises emanating around me as we traversed the halls. I thought for sure they were about to show me some horrendous beast from the depths of hell, and prepared myself accordingly as the howls of unseen things echoed throughout the halls. 

The lead scientist; Dr. Rozsival, rolled back a two-way mirror curtain and my heart froze from anticipation. In the cell before us, there was nothing more than a human girl in a grey jumpsuit. She was young, maybe five-years old or so, but there seemed to be nothing out of the ordinary about her. 

I looked to Dr. Rozsival, and he flexed his cranial muscles before pressing a button. I heard the sound of gas seep into the room. A few tense seconds passed, when the girl suddenly shrieked like a banshee. Her head tilted back and I saw jagged, needle-like teeth emerge from her mouth. Her jet-black eyes then lurched towards us, and she lunged at the window.

She struck it hard, and fell back to the ground, snarling and hissing like some ravenous jackal. Dr. Rozsival then pressed the button again, cutting the gas and posing a question. 

“You ever seen anything like her Mr. Blue?” All I could do was shake my head slowly as I watched the young demon-child stalk about on the other side of the glass. 

“They found her in the woods outside of Whitehorse with a freshly disemboweled man. She was eating him, and appeared unaffected by the subzero temperatures.” I suddenly felt like vomiting, but I said nothing, only stared back at the unusually gruesome little girl. What the hell was she?

Unfortunately, I never was told anything else about her, and I doubt the personnel knew much more anyways. They came to show me a lot of very strange things over the years. A giant brownish-orange haired primate that walked upright and seemed to respond to facial movements. A humanoid shaped being that was only detectable via infrared equipment. A golden chest that would instantly kill anything that touched it. A ten-foot-tall creature wrapped in vines that emitted bouts of radiation and blended into environments with perfect camouflage. A monstrous fish at least eighty feet in length frozen in nitrogen. Various abhorrent creatures that I’m guessing were the results of relentless genetic tampering. 

I had never seen anything like it. All of the monstrosities housed there, and the secrets buried in their possession. They also asked for my advice on a certain paradoxical phenomenon that had plagued them as well. 

They told me that for decades there had been hundreds of unsolved cases of human disappearances that seemed to defy all explanation. Young children would be found on cliff edges that they could not have possibly reached, while old and frail people would be discovered dozens of miles away from where they had last been seen only a few hours later. Most of them would never be found at all though. 

I could almost see the fear dripping from their eyes as they relayed case after case of the recorded incidents, and it was clear - although not said, that they had no idea what the cause was. Unfortunately, neither did I, as it was the first I’d ever heard of the bizarre phenomenon. I told them honestly that I didn’t believe my former allies were responsible, but I don’t know if that made them feel better or worse.

Throughout all of my years there I had always found one thing peculiar. After all the weird and terrifying things they showed to me, there was never any mention of extra-terrestrials. That’s what everyone thinks these blacksite facilities house after all, but nevertheless they made no mention of it. That made me smile a bit when I thought about it, because they had no idea how close they were. 

The closest thing they had, was this weird tentacle creature with a ringed set of teeth in it’s mouth. It looked almost like an eel, but possessed four iridescent green eyes in a ring around it’s head. It didn’t live in the water either, but instead slithered around on the ground in a very swift and very unsettling motion. They said it’s DNA resembled nothing like anything they had ever found on earth before, hence the reason they believed – but were not certain of it’s otherworldly origins.

Kevin and I got to talking back in his quarters one night, as the rest of the crew retired for the evening. He shared with me a bit of his brandy, and we were content to just chat as friends late into the night. 

He told me a lot about himself that he had never mentioned before. He showed me pictures of his wife, and his son that had been taken from him. Kevin admitted his son had died in a car crash a couple years back, while his wife passed two years later of cancer. It broke my heart to hear that, and I felt sorrow for my dear friend of some thirty years.  

Kevin was in his early fifties, but you’d never know it with the enthusiasm in his voice. It was during that conversation, Kevin ended up mentioning something I found particularly interesting. He told that he believed that if an alien species existed, and were advanced enough to traverse the galactic canopy and reach Earth, then they would obviously be quite intelligent. 

He said he didn’t believe in any of the Hollywood depictions of doomsday aliens hellbent on destroying humanity. He thought they’d be a lot more subtle then that. 

“Think about it, you find something intelligent which represents almost no threat to you, and the first thing you do is try to kill it?” Kevin asked skeptically, as I considered his words for myself.

“That’d just be a waste, and no species that fancies themselves as advanced beings would do something so brash… at least I hope they wouldn’t.” He chuckled slightly and shot me a knowing look mixed with a unique intrigue that almost glistened in his grey eyes.

 “Even if they thought we were destroying our own planet or something, why would they care? There are trillions of other planets in the milky way alone, they could pick any of them if they wanted natural resources.” I chuckled to myself, almost sensing where the conversation was headed.

“It’s not the planets we… they’re after.” I replied. Kevin snapped, and pointed his finger at me as his face lit up.

“Exactly. They’d want to study us. Learn how we operate, how we organize and how we live.” Kevin’s hand motions turned eccentric, and I saw his access badge jostle around his neck. He took another sip of brandy and continued. 

“They’d probably learn more about us then we even know about ourselves. I mean, granted they have to be more intelligent. They could learn up close, understand how human’s work. They’d have no need for bloodshed when they could simply inconspicuously integrate into human culture. They have no doubt mastered the art of altering their biology to disguise themselves as humans. I mean, that’s nothing when compared with the tech they used to get here, y’know?”

He paused from his enthused monologue and wiped the steam off his glasses. I just sat back, content to let him continue, as I found it fascinating that he could know so much.

“Aliens… they’re not warlords. They’re poets, architects, authors, musicians. Beings that wish to create. It is the ultimate calling for an entity so powerful.” Kevin took a deep breath, and reveled in his own explanation. His speech had turned a bit slurred, and I could see his eyes floating lazily in their sockets. He then met my eyes in a look that he had never given to me before. It was a look that seemed to shed all sense of formality, and pose a question which he had long since suspected the answer to. 

“You’re not really from Russia, are you?” The sudden accusation caught me off guard, and I felt my stomach drop like a lead weight. I didn’t say anything, and Kevin just scoffed.

“You had everyone fooled. And I mean, I was too for the longest time. You had had a suitable backstory, authentic sounding accent… all the alibis you gave us checked out.” He paused and clasped his hands in front of him.

“You look so authentic too, but there was one thing you missed. One thing that you just can’t fake.” He looked me deep in the eyes and fell silent. He didn’t have to say it, for I already knew what he meant. The eyes are impossible to truly fake.

“That night your… craft was shot down. What were you doing here?” Kevin and I maintained a prolonged eye lock before I finally responded. 

“Reconnaissance.” For the first time in decades I dropped the Russian accent, as it was clear there was no longer any reason to lie to my dear friend.

“And what did you see?” Kevin stared into the very depths of my soul as he asked, and I spoke the truth.

“Beauty, poetry… creators, much like us.” Kevin just stared at me for the longest time, as if he were weighing my soul in his mind. I wondered what he planned to do since he had found out, but I didn’t ask.

Kevin eventually smiled, and rose to make his way to the cell door. He reached into his coat pocket, and withdrew a black-steel pistol with a long snout. I slowly met his gaze, and he chuckled.

“Mr. Blue, do you wish to go home?” I nodded after pausing to think for a moment. Kevin looked over his weapon, and primed it for use.

“I hope your allies can forgive us.” Without another word, he flashed his security badge and the locks on the door gave way. He motioned for me to rise and follow, and so I did.

Kevin glanced back and forth down the hallway, but due to the late hour, there was no one around. He and I sprinted down the corridor and onwards to one of the security booths. He flashed his badge as I hid just out of sight. He entered the room, and I heard the noise of a brief scuffle before two bright flashes ended it. 

Kevin reemerged with wild eyes, and beckoned me to follow. He and I dashed down the hallway and reached the massive mainshaft elevator soon after. For the first time I entered without a blindfold, and Kevin punched the button to the top floor and the security code required to power it.

“Security system will be down for a good half-hour, but automated distress beacons have already been activated. That gives us about eight minutes.” Kevin dropped the clip from his pistol and popped in a fresh one. I saw spackles of blood on his glasses and cheek, and a frenzied look in his eye.

“Here take this.” He reached out his hand, and held something which I had not seen in decades. The old radio from my craft. I took it, and he and I met eyes as the elevator door opened.

It was back to running after that, but a few minutes of it and we had reached an underground parking facility. Kevin quickly unlocked a nearby vehicle, and the two of us hopped in as he fired it up. The engine roared to life, and Kevin accelerated through the lot. A moment later and we exited the underground facility, and I saw my first vision of the night sky in over four decades. 

There were men stationed at the perimeter gates that attempted to stop us, but Kevin didn’t flinch. He crashed right through the wire fence on the perimeter, causing multiple lights to activate in our wake. I heard a siren blaring behind us, and the silhouettes of people dashing throughout the snow.

“There’s a suit in the back, put it on.” I did as he requested without question, and fit the snug polyester garment over my body. It covered every square inch from foot to the nape of my neck, and felt incredibly comfortable. 

“There’s a dial on your right side. You can use it to mask your body heat. They’re gonna be after you.” He tossed a map into my lap and continued barking instructions. 

“You can contact your friends with that radio, right?” His eyes flashed to me as he slid onto the main road and away from the compound. 

“Yes.” Kevin nodded.

“Make your way north, they won’t be expecting that. There’s a river up there about thirty miles away through the forest. Once you find it, head east until you find a small town. Ask the guy at the post office for Mr. White. He’s a friend of mine who’s agreed to help you. He’ll take it from there.” I tried to digest the flow of information as best as I could and remain confident. It had all just happened so suddenly. 

“I stashed you some MRE’s in the bag. Should last you a good couple of weeks.” Kevin then swerved around a corner and reoriented us onto a new dark road. In the sudden influx of adrenaline, a sudden though occurred to me.

“What happens to you?” Kevin didn’t seem to want to acknowledge the question.

“Forget about that, just get back to your people.” Behind us a flurry of lights suddenly ascended into the night sky. The whirring sound of rotary blades then pierced the tranquil canopy of the blustery night. 

“Shit… I had hoped I could get you a bit farther than this.” He suddenly slammed on the brakes. My head lurched forward and the car spun back and forth along the icy road. 

“Take this too.” He handed his long-barrel pistol over, and I hesitantly took it. He and I then met eyes for one final time.

“This is where we say goodbye Mr. Blue.” 

“Why? Why are you doing this for me?” Kevin sighed, and I saw a certain sorrow swirl into his ironclad pupils. He stayed silent a moment, and only when the sounds of approaching engines grew louder was he spurred to reply.

“You don’t belong here. You don’t belong in a cage. I don’t know where you come from, but I want you to see the ones you love again.” His eyes began to water, and he jostled his neck before looking me in the eye one final time.

“I hope you don’t think of us as captors… or kidnappers. I hope you see us as you see yourself. I hope… I just hope you can understand.” A single tear then rolled down his cheek. I put my hand on his shoulder.

“I always have, and I always will. Thank you, Kevin.” I then held out my hand and he grabbed it tight as we shared one final moment, before I ventured into the blizzard. 

The journey from then on was long and arduous, with me spending weeks trudging through snow, and frozen forests. Hounds, men and machines pursued me for days, but somehow, I was able to elude their efforts. 

The terrain was brutal, unrelenting, but eventually I managed to find the river which Kevin had mentioned. By that point, all of my pursuers had long since gone silent. I followed the river, and found the town, and soon after the man known as Mr. White. He was a kind man, and gladly invited me into his house to avoid the agents. It is there that I have been ever since, awaiting my ally’s arrival. 

They were stunned to hear from me again, but not as stunned as I was to find out the radio was still functional. They weren’t entirely sure whether they could even trust me anymore, but I didn’t leave them much of a choice when I threatened to go public and expose them to the world. They finally agreed, but admitted, it would be months before they could reach me.

I expected as much, and thankfully Mr. White allowed me to stay with him and await their eventual arrival. I found out soon after that my dear friend Kevin; to whom I owe my freedom and life, had been found deceased. The authorities ruled it a suicide; gunshot wound to the back of the head, but obviously I have my doubts about that. 

It truly broke me to learn of my one true friend’s demise, but I knew it was what he expected. I like to think that is why he chose to do it, and furthermore it is the reason I am here posting this now. Kevin’s legacy deserves to live on, and this is the only way I know how to do it.

And with that, we have come full circle to this message you are reading right now. To address the original topic: Area 51 is indeed a reuse. Kevin held a lot of power in his previous role, and he told me all about the operation. The real prize is the FEZ, my former prison, somewhere in eastern Alaska, buried beneath the snow with all sorts of abhorrent things in it’s clutches. If you’re going to storm anywhere, that should be the place. Just remember to pack a coat.

Kevin was a smart man, brilliant even. If you’ve managed to make it this far, then I’d like to think you are someone like him. Brave, curious and with an almost innate sense of wonder that cannot be satiated.  

It is my hope that Kevin’s ideas will live on through you. My allies would never approve of this message, but I know now that they are wrong. Truth is something that all sentient beings should be allowed to perceive, despite how unpleasant it may be to hear it. 

It was Kevin’s belief that the beings he knows as aliens are already here. That instead of murdering humans as is often portrayed in stories, they would blend in. Take keen interest in human culture, society and art. Write books, poetry and music in hopes of connecting to something truly extraordinary. Something that reminds them of themselves. 

If Kevin is right, then maybe one day, you’ll even stumble upon such a story for yourself. Maybe you’ll think it nothing more than a work of fiction to entertain you for a while. Maybe the author of said theoretical story would seem like nothing more than your run-of-the-mill internet user. He probably wouldn’t just come right out and say it, because that would be entirely too corny. He would probably just leave you the pieces, and hope that you could understand the truth for yourself. 

Maybe you truly are like Kevin, drawn to mystery and prepared to entertain the fantastic. Maybe you’ll just dismiss the implications of the words before you because you don’t dare believe something so outlandish, because in the end truth is not the problem, belief is. Maybe someone will understand who- or more importantly *what* I really am. Maybe it will be you. 

Either way, I’ve been away for a very long time. It is time for me to go home. Thank you, Kevin. I will always uphold our agreement.They gave me a million bucks to keep my trap shut, and I did, for fifteen years. But last night I was making the rounds, and I saw the professor again. 

I had a heart attack three years back, and I tell you, when I saw him standing there in front of room 204, I felt another one coming on. He turned and smiled and it was like he hadn’t aged a day in fifteen years. “Hey there, chief,” he said, and that was it. I dropped my clipboard on the ground and high-tailed it out of there, never looking back.

What I’m about to tell you is liable to make me sound crazier than a three-horned goat. But I promise you, there’s crazier things out there.

The cops don’t believe me. The official story is that the professor and those students died 15 years ago. Room 204 just up and exploded, they said. Damndest thing. And there’s some truth there. That room did explode. But it wasn’t an accident. We knew exactly what we were doing. Or we thought we did.

\*

They call me an “assistant supervisor of maintenance,” but really I’m a janitor and always have been. (You might wonder why I’m still at it after getting that million bucks. That dough is for Junior, so he doesn’t have to go through the same shit that I did.) 

The night this happened, I was assigned to the Astrophysics Center, a bit northwest of the main Harvard campus. Until that night, this was always my favorite beat. I mean, God help you if you wound up at one of the biology labs. Those goddamn dead, cut open animals all over the place used to give me nightmares. And really, thinking back, I’d take those nightmares of mutilated and scattered organs any night over the stuff that has haunted me ever since.

Anyway, I was there mopping the hallway on the second floor of the lab building when the door to room 204 opened up and this guy popped his head out. “Hey, you.”

I looked around, to make sure he was talking to me. “Yes? Can I help you sir?” I thought he was going to bitch about the room being a mess or something.

“How’d you like to make a thousand bucks, chief? An hour’s work at most. Easy money. Does that sound good to you?”

It sure did. Things were tight at home, as they always were. A thousand would knock off some of those long overdue bills. But I was also on a tight schedule. They didn’t give you much breathing room. Don’t want you standing around thinking about it all, I guess. “That sounds great, sir,” I said, “but I got to stick to my beat.”

The man laughed. “We’re about to make history, chief,” he said, “and you’re worried about emptying the bathroom trash? Come on, don’t sweat it, you won’t get in trouble. I promise. I’m a professor here. I’ll vouch for you.”

The guy *did* look like a professor, with carefully combed gray hair and big old glasses on his face. I shrugged, leaned my mop against the wall and said, “Sure. What do I have to do?”

“That’s fantastic! Come on in, chief! Come on in!”

I followed him into the room. One look, and I should have just turned around then and there and told him to keep his damn money. But I didn’t.

As soon as I stepped in, I felt the little hairs all over my body stand up. I don’t mean I was scared. I mean like there was an electrical charge in that room, and I had a guess about where it was coming from. There in the center of the room, on a round table, was a large glass globe, crackling with electricity. Like what you see if you go into a kid’s science museum. Like they somehow created a lightning storm in a glass ball. This one was sort of vibrating around on its stand and buzzing. And the lightning inside was *black*. I could feel the electricity coming from it, from across the room.

There were four kids there – students, I guessed – sitting in a row of chairs along one wall. More than sitting, they were strapped into those chairs, with metal things over their heads like those big bowl things you see at a hair salon. They all had their eyes closed.

“Uh…” I said. “What’s going on here? Those kids okay?”

“They’re quite fine,” said the professor. “As to what is going on, as I said, we are about to make history. We are going to open the first wormhole.”

“Wormhole?” I said. “Like in the movies?”

The professor laughed. “I suppose so, chief,” he said. “Now listen. We had a last minute cancellation, but that’s okay because it’s an easy job. We’re going to be kicking things off here shortly, and once they are properly kicked off, the wormhole will open. I will enter. If I am not back in thirty minutes, you are to pull that lever there, and this will close the wormhole.”

I looked to where he was pointing, at a big red lever attached to a giant, whirring machine that was hooked up to the metal bowls over the student’s heads. “But uh, won’t you be trapped on the other side of the wormhole?” I asked. Not that I had the slightest idea about what the hell was going on.

“Just so, chief,” said the professor. “We’ve got this down to two possibilities. One, the wormhole opens up to what we’re calling ‘the second Universe.’ The best way that I can explain this possibility is that there is a different reality that exists on the other side of this one… the other side of an invisible wall. The wormhole will provide a door in that wall.”

“And the other possibility?”

“That the wormhole will open to a place that man was not meant to go. Thirty minutes will give me enough time to get in, and out, if the first possibility is true.”

“And if it’s the second?”

“Then you’ll close the hole with that lever, and my students will destroy my work.”

This was all way above my pay grade, and my head was spinning. Why only two possibilities? How the hell did they come up with those two? And if this real, why the hell would the professor take a coin-toss chance of getting stuck in the “place that man was not meant to go”? I mean, those were just starter questions, among the swarm that was buzzing around my head.

“I see that you have some reservations,” said the professor. “I assure you that your only job is to pull that lever after thirty minutes. That’s it, chief. We’ll take care of the rest. And anything that happens isn’t on you. The documentation is quite in order.” He tapped a folder that was sitting on the circular table. “And here, I’ll write you a check now, before we proceed.”

As he wrote out the check, I wondered if it would still be valid if he got swallowed up by the wormhole. I actually had that thought, as crazy as it sounds. It was still all so weird and abstract to me at that point.

“Here,” he said, handing over the check. “Let’s do it, chief. As soon as I enter that hole, give me *exactly* thirty minutes. *On the dot*. That’s all you have to do.”

I took the check, mumbled a “thanks,” and watched as he walked over to the machine. He pulled the lever. There was a loud crackling sound, and I watched in unease as one by one, the students’ eyes shot open. There were no pupils there, like their eyes were rolled back in their sockets.

“Hey now,” I said, taking a step towards the machine.

“They are quite fine,” said the professor. “I assure you.”

Their jaws started to move like they were grinding their teeth.

The professor took a jar of neon blue liquid from a shelf on the wall. He unscrewed the lid and poured the stuff over the electric globe on the round table. The thing started going crazy, and then the globe shattered completely, bits of glass flying through the air as shoots of black lightning zapped out into the room. I ducked down.

I had had enough by then, and was ready to get the hell out of there. Then it happened. A fucking black hole appeared in the middle of the room, sucking in the bolts of electricity. It grew larger and larger, until it took up half the room. All I could hear was this rushing sound, like the world’s largest vacuum cleaner running at full throttle.

“Remember, chief!” shouted the professor, with a wild look on his face. “Thirty minutes exactly!” Then he stepped into the thing and was gone.

\*

At first my mind was a mess, staring at that whooshing back hole, that seemed hungry to suck everything in. I looked at the kids hooked up to the machine, their eyes rolled back – white holes, I guess they looked like – their jaws grinding away like crazy. It was too much to make sense of. 

I looked down at my watch. 15 minutes and 31 seconds had gone by since the professor got swallowed up by the worm hole. My heart was pounding and I kept pacing back and forth, back and forth, trying to work out what the hell was going on. Then I started to zero in on it. I was getting pranked.

Not a prank like we used to do as kids, setting dogshit on somebody’s front steps and all that idiocy. I mean a prank like the sophisticated college folk do, where they tell you something’s going on but the whole point is to just observe your reaction. A psychological experiment. *Probably cameras in here watching me right now. See what I do.*

12 minutes to go.

I saw a trickle of blood come down from one of the kids’ nose. I leaned down to look at him closely. He was shaking a little bit, all over. *If I throw that lever, this will all probably stop*. 

Maybe that was the test. I had to decide between trapping the professor in the black hole and saving the kids hooked up to the machines. None of it was real of course, but they didn’t know that I knew that.

But then, screaming in the back of my mind was that voice: *what if it* is *real?*

10 minutes to go.

The professor had promised me that the kids were alright. Another one started bleeding from the nose.

If it wasn’t real, it was a hell of a trick. Where did the professor go, if not through that black hole? I thought about touching it, but whenever I got close, I was filled with total terror. It sure *seemed* real. Like it really took you some place far, far away from here.

I walked over to the table and picked up the folder that was there. Just like the professor had said, the first page was instructions to shut down the machine and destroy it if he didn’t return within 30 minutes. I flipped that page over, and the next one had a photograph of one of the students. I read what it said. It was a consent form. “I, Jackson Stewart, acknowledge the possibility of my imminent death if I participate in this experiment. I am prepared to give my life to science.” I flipped that page, and there were three more just like it.

Now, I’m no lawyer, but there was no way in hell that this experiment was legal, if it was real, even with those consent forms. So it probably wasn’t real.

And if it was? Then the professor lied to me. He had said that the kids were fine. This folder was telling me something else.

2 minutes to go.

I took a deep breath and paced the room, watching each second tick by. My mind was telling me that none of it was real, but my gut was screaming in horror. I just looked at my watch. It would be over soon enough, one way or the other.

30 seconds.

I walked over to the machine and put my hand on the lever. *Goddammit, why is he cutting it so close?* I watched the seconds tick by, and I didn’t know if I could do it. I didn’t know if I could risk trapping the professor wherever the hell he had gone off to.

5 seconds. My hand was shaking. 4 seconds. Sweat was pouring down my face, dripping into my eyes. 3 seconds. One of the students started to moan. The one that I saw was named Jackson in the folder. 2 seconds. *Oh God oh God oh God.* 1 second. Jackson started to shake. 0 seconds. *Shit.*

I tensed my muscles to pull the lever. One look at Jackson and I knew I had to pull it. He was violently jerking around now.

“WAIT!”

I snapped my neck around to see the professor’s head sticking out of the black hole.

“Wait dammit!”

Then his shoulders were through. I turned back to Jackson. Blood was pouring out of his eyes.

“I’m almost through!”

A second kid started to shake.

“One more second!”

I looked to see that the professor was through. He was back in the room. “Do it!” he shouted.

Two things happened after that, at the exact same time. I heard a wet popping sound, and I watched as the wormhole disappeared, as though it was never there. But I had never pulled the lever.

I slowly turned to look at Jackson. His head was gone. Judging by the bits of brain and splatters of blood on the bowl thing above his neck, his head had just *exploded.* 

The whirring of the machine gradually died down, and then it was silent. The three kids who were still alive stopped shaking, and closed their eyes.

“A tragedy,” said the professor, pointing at Jackson, with the exploded head. “But not for nothing. I’ve been there. I’ve seen it! Chief, I’ve seen it!”

I hunched over and puked. It was weird, but my first thought was: *what a mess I’ll have to clean up later.* I don’t know. I guess my mind had sort of shut down and I was going on autopilot. I was the janitor. I cleaned up messes. That was all I knew.

Then it hit me, the reality of what had happened. “You sonofabitch!” I yelled. “You told me those kids would be okay!”

The professor put this sickening smug grin on his face. “He would have been, chief, had you pulled the lever at the 30 minute mark as instructed.”

“You told me to wait!”

“Did I?”

“Yes you fucker! I’m calling the police!” I had a walkie clipped to my belt. It wouldn’t get me the police, but it would get campus security. I reached for it and had it in my hand when I heard a groan behind me. I turned to see that it was one of the kids. They were waking up.

I went over to unstrap them from the chairs. The first kid’s eyes blinked open, and when she saw the professor, she started screaming.

“It’s okay,” I said, “shh, it’s okay, it’s all over.”

She kept screaming, then the second kid woke up. He looked right at me with wide, terrified eyes. “Get us out of here!” he shouted.

“I’m working on it, kid,” I said, fumbling at the straps. They were on tight.

The third kid woke up. “It’s here,” she said. “It made it through.”

“Everything’s okay now,” I said. “Your friend didn’t make it, I’m afraid, but it’s over. I’ll make sure the professor pays for what he did to you and your friends.”

The first kid was still screaming at the top of her lungs.

“Get us out of here!” shouted the second kid again.

The third kid looked me dead in the eyes and, in a totally calm voice, said, “That’s not the professor.”

“What? Of course it is,” I said. What I saw when I turned to look at the professor will haunt me forever.

The professor’s mouth was twisting around at odd angles, like something was moving the lower half of his jaw randomly, or like he was trying to get a hair out of his mouth that kept jumping around. The veins on his neck bulged, then sunk back down, then bulged again, so that they were thick as ropes. His wrists were rotating in ways they weren’t supposed to rotate, as his arms flailed around wildly.

I had the first kid, the screaming one, free. She jumped out of the chair and ran to the door. But her legs were wobbly, and she tripped over herself in the middle of the room. I went to work on the second kid, whipping my head around every second to look at the professor. It looked like there was something crawling around under his skin. Something big.

“Get us out of here!” the second kid shouted yet again. The first kid was still on the ground, screaming. I worked away furiously on the straps.

“If you believe in God,” said the third kid, with an eerie calm, “then pray.”

I took a glance at the professor, and that’s when the first bone burst out of his chest, through his suit. I call it a bone, but it was pure black, and dripping with green slime.

“As for me,” said the third kid. “I do not believe that there is a God. Not after what I have seen.”

The second kid was free and made a run for it. I scooted over to the third kid, but watched as the professor reached out an arm and grabbed the second kid by the top of his head. The professor gave one quick twist and let go. I heard a terrible *snap* and the kid slumped to the ground, dead. 

Three more black bones came out of the professor’s chest, dripping. He laughed and bent down to the first kid, who was still screaming, as bones began to poke out of his back, like a fucking Stegosaurus from Hell. 

“What is that thing?!” I asked, as I fumbled at the straps of the last kid.

“It does not belong here,” said the kid.

“No shit,” I said, getting one strap free. “But what *is* it?”

“It comes from a terrible place. A place where there is nothing save pain. Endless pain, incomprehensible to our minds.”

“Great,” I muttered, as I noticed with a sinking heart that the screams from the girl behind me had stopped. Then I heard a wet *crunch*. I couldn’t help it. I looked to see the professor tearing into that poor girl’s throat with long black fangs, dripping in green slime. 

I turned back to the kid, almost done with the straps. Just a few more seconds. “What’s your name, anyway, kid?”

“Claire.”

“Claire,” I said, my mind trying to stay focused. “When I get you out of these straps, I want you to pick up this chair and throw it at that thing, okay? I’ll do the same thing, okay? *Then* we make a run for it. Do you understand? Can you do that?”

“I understand,” said Claire. “I do hope it works.”

I did hope it would work, too. “We have to make it work, Claire,” I said, yanking off the last strap. “Come on.”

We stood up together and I reached over to pick up a chair. I hurled it at the professor with all of my strength, and it shattered against his boned back. I heard a terrible shriek then, and watched as Claire’s chair followed behind.

I grabbed Claire’s arm with one hand and reached for my pocketknife with the other. The only way out of that room meant passing by the professor. We started running as I pulled the knife out and flicked it up. The professor stood, still shrieking, as the green slime mixed with the red blood from the kid’s throat and dripped down his chin.

I took a wild stab at the professor’s neck, and connected. I kept running with Claire, leaving the knife stuck in the professor’s neck, and made it to the door. I had my hand around the knob when I felt Claire pulling away from me. I looked back, helpless, as I saw the professor reach long black claws into her gut. I threw the door open and left her there.

Good God, I left her there.

\*

I made it outside the lab building somehow. I don’t remember how. My mind just sort of shut down as I ran like hell I guess. I did have the presence to go around and lock all of the doors from the outside. Then I got on the radio to campus security.

“You guys need to get the police over to the Astrophysics Center fucking ASAP. There was a fucking massacre in there.”

The front door started to rattle, and I heard the godawful shriek again.

“Repeat,” said a voice over the walkie.

“Look,” I said. “Call up Lawrence Summers, *right now*.” That was the president of Harvard at the time, and I had seen his signature on the papers in that folder with all of the consent forms. “Tell him that the wormhole experiment has gone *way the fuck South.*”

The rattling at the door stopped. I only prayed that that thing didn’t figure out it could just break a window and crawl out that way.

“This is the janitor, right?” said a different voice on the other end of the walkie. “Is this a joke? The ‘wormhole experiment’? Have you been drinking?”

“Call Lawrence Summers. If you don’t, I promise you that you’ll never be able to live with yourself. Do it *now*.”

There was a horrible pause. I heard the professor trying the side door now, shrieking once again.

“10-4.”

\*

A fleet of black SUVs pulled up two minutes later. A team of heavily armed men jumped out and ran past me, breaking though windows and jumping inside. I heard a stream of gunfire. And screams. So many screams, and the professor’s horrible shrieks. After a while, it was quiet, and a second team of men jumped through the broken windows. I didn’t hear any more gunfire.

I felt a hand on my shoulder and whipped around. A man was standing there. I don’t remember a single thing about what he looked like. But I remember our conversation.

“Tell me what happened,” he said.

I told him the full story, the same one that I’ve told you.

“We are prepared to give you a lot of money to sign a NDA.”

“NDA?”

“Non-disclosure agreement. It means that you can never tell *anybody* about what happened here tonight.”

“How much?”

“A million dollars.”

“And a promotion.”

The man paused. “You mean… you still want to work… work *here*… after tonight?”

“Somebody’s gotta clean up the shit,” I said.

“Fine, of course.”

“And one more thing.”

“And what’s that?” asked the man.

“I want to know that this will never happen again. I want you to blow all of that shit up, and burn all of the notes.”

“Of course.”

“And I want to watch.”

“Of course,” said the man.

\*

And so I thought it was over. But it’s not. Last night, I saw the professor again. He looked me right in the eyes, flashed that smug grin, and said: “Hey there, chief.” That’s when I ran the hell out of there.

The police don’t believe me. I’ve sent a dozen e-mails to Lawrence Summers’ assistants. I’ve called every number that I’ve found listed for him. I haven’t heard anything back. I don’t know who else to turn to.

I’m afraid the professor is going to open the wormhole again. And I’m afraid this time, he might bring his friends back with him.I hate it here.

Granted, I deserve it.

I'm currently locked down behind massive, concrete walls and solid steel doors in a maximum-security penitentiary. I was locked up what feels like a lifetime ago now. I earned it, I did. Every second I rot here is justice, but that doesn't change the fact that I hate it.

It is cold here. I have a single concrete cot and toilet. My clothes itch and are too thin to keep any chills out. The walls are a grey with a sickly green tint due to the dull, swamp-like tile that sends a grossly colored glow into the room reflecting the buzzing florescent light above me. The door is thick and unmoving. They paint it the same shade of sickly green as the floor. I assume it is lead based to save on cost. (Maybe, if I lick it enough times, maybe I can kill enough brain cells to forget I’m here.) I have no roommate, as many don’t who are perceived as “extreme risks.” Thankfully I can still have time outside and shower without being entirely supervised. More than I can say for many in here.

My only commodity is my toilet paper and my journal. I earned the journal through much work and good behavior. The pencil I write with is dull and has no eraser; like that a golfer would use to keep scorecards. I am allowed 4 hours per day with it: between breakfast and lunch. I receive the journal and pencil with my meal and return it in kind. If the pencil has any pieces missing or there are any extensive tears in the pages then I will lose it for the following day. So I comply. I comply so I may have some mild comfort in this concrete cage in which I slowly die.

Again, I definitely earned it, but that doesn't change the fact that prison is hell.

I earned my place here because I killed people.

I killed many people.

I killed 20 people to be exact.

This is the first time I’ve actually written it.

I beat the Cannibal’s number, which for some reason gave me a sense of accomplishment. However, what gave me more satisfaction was the evenness of the number.
Twenty.

Two, ZERO.

20

20

2 0

2-0

2....0

20

Even and smooth.

My Compulsion made it this way. 21 would have made getting arrested a living hell. 15 would’ve been ok, but 20 was much cleaner. Increments of five. Always increments of five. Sometimes during a shopping trip I would grab a stick of gum so as to have 20 or 10 or 30 items even. However, in the case of the killings it was much more intense.

The problem was the itch I felt in between. It was a gnawing pain in my mind from 1-4 and 6-9. The itch was not as bad during 5’s but 10’s were the best. However, that number will eventually attract attention. That number is partially what got me caught, but I had to “scratch the itch” so to speak. It made me empathize with vampires in the old horror stories- the sensation of aching thirst that cannot be quenched. It is nightmarish.

The same remained true for my age: 40. I finished at 40, which made me content. I hated not having an even age. I could force down the bad feelings my age ended in 5s or even numbers but I always had bad years with 1s, 3s, 7,s and 9s.

I digress. I understand it is abnormal behavior, but it’s a compulsion. I have it manageable so that most would never notice in a day to day routine.

I have to reminisce on these pages because I have no way of going back. It started many years ago, and the urge only grew from there.

The first time I killed was interesting. I should have felt the need to immediately kill again, as I did in later years, but I didn’t. They say mental illness worsens with age. I guess that’s what kept me from acting again so soon, but I’m not sure.

The first time I killed was pretty lackluster. . I was walking home from school through the woods where very few kids were bold enough to cross. While walking, I stumbled upon a man. He was clearly injured and even at the age of 12 I knew he had little time left. He sat, holding his side, panting in labored breaths. He didn’t see me yet. From my vantage point I could see a long, white bone jutting from his leg, which tells me the pain from what his ribs were doing was worse than that of a broken leg. That, or he was just in shock.

Far above this section of woods was a road, and from what I could see a vehicle burst through railing. The wrecked vehicle, a ‘69 Chevy C20 truck, lay decimated some 40 feet below the roadway in the brush and rocks. I remember this truck, because I wound up purchasing one many, many years later in a secret nostalgia for myself. Either way, the driver had pulled himself from the wreckage and crawled in agony upwards of 50 feet to the nearest tree, where his strength was slowly failing him.

I remember seeing a large shard of metal which had been ripped from the side of the truck and picking it up. I walked slowly to the man who reached pitifully towards me for help. I slowly shoved the sharp edge of the metal into the man’s throat and watched as blood began to spurt from the wound and his mouth. He gargled like a drowning sow on his own blood, and after a time he ceased all movement, forever.

It was a rush of which I cannot explain. The excitement of ending a human life is next to none. I was content for a fleeting moment. I stared at the body for some time before taking a bloody shred of his pant leg that was hanging by a thread. I just wanted to have a keepsake.

That was my first kill. I was never caught, nor even suspected. Growing up in the mountains of the south allowed much privacy, and it allowed me to get away with murder. As time grew, so did the feeling of power and accomplishment. I felt like God.

No one even knew I was the way I was. I would never be a suspect, because I knew to hide.

I hid well, because I knew how to hide. From the time I was a boy I knew how to blend in. Sometimes it was a challenge because of my appearance, but I learned a simple skill: how to hide in plain sight.

I was able to work hard in the background. I made good grades and maintained very few close friendships throughout school, so no one would discover anything about me. However, I made sure everyone had a nice thing to say about me, carrying groceries, helping kids with studying, always using manners. I graduated in the upper ranks of my class and soon attended the local college. After I earned a degree in business, I worked hard where I could and raised enough money to buy my own Rig. I worked by riding the highways as a trucker for years and eventually bought 2 more rigs. By 35 I was a respectable business owner in my old town with a dispatch and a few drivers. I obviously still drove, even as the owner, because it kept me close to my only real passion.

I hid well in plain sight because white people love a nigger. In a town of 90% white and 10% “other” I learned to blend despite being a minority. Learn to talk like them, learn to walk like them and you can manipulate them into whatever you want.

I hate them. Not white people; all people.

My mother died shortly after I graduated high school from heart failure, and I felt liberated, for I held her opinion highly. Her opinions often kept me in line and respectable. When she died, I was free to pursue my own interests. My father, while a good man in his own right, never held much weight in my actions, so I walked the path I chose for myself despite what his feelings may be.

Either way, I dwindled for some time after the first murder. The urge slowly grew. By high school I kept my eyes peeled for another opportunity to snuff out a life. Finally, that day came.

The second time I murdered was equally uninspiring. I found myself at a graduation party and the whole senior class was drinking heavily. All except me that is.
We were at the home of a wealthier student who had maintained a spotless record through both junior high and high school and wanted to go out in a way where she could get out of her preverbal box.

I learned two things that evening. The first, that a well mannered, well educated young lady was no different than anyone else in regards to having a darker side. She wanted to be remembered for a party. Not her good grades, not her generous deeds, not her modest manner of dress, but a party. Everyone has a dark side in some way. This was the first thing I learned. The second was that if everyone is drunk and dancing on the roof, you could bump a certain young lady discreetly enough to send her three stories down into the concrete and make it look like an accident.
She landed with a smack that can only be replicated in my dreams. This was the first time I was aroused by a killing. I’m not sure why. She was in a two-piece (which I assume her parents knew nothing about) and her skin was pale, and smooth. Her deep brown hair flowed past her shoulders and the look of utter confusion and terror in the face of innocence was priceless. Blood pooled from her head and seeped into her nearby swimming pool. I fancied her you could say, but only because she represented something that does not exist. Human innocence.
When her skull cracked hard against the pavement, I was instantly excited. I had to sneak away to handle it, and steal a memento from the girl’s room. Meanwhile, the remaining partygoers descended into madness trying to repair a situation that was far beyond broken. The chaos I caused that night again resurfaced my deep sense of accomplishment that only comes from death.

This was the second time I killed. 18 years of age.
By the time I hit my stride I stood at 6”2’ at 260lbs. I had always enjoyed lifting weights and working towards my overall health. A fat predator is a bad predator. I maintained this level of fitness for most of my adult life. I had to in order to pursue my passion.

Of course, things would have a way of catching up with me. I was incarcerated with an unfortunate mountain of evidence. I wouldn’t say I covered every base perfectly to ensure not getting caught, but I felt like I was careful enough. I guess not in hindsight.

I remember the day I was arrested. I had turned 40 the month prior and was on the road delivering a shipment of plywood. I was behind the wheel of my rig in rural Alabama. I was taking a back road because I enjoy the scenery, and when you’re the boss you can set your own schedule. At this point, I had killed 19 people and the itch was present. I would have to rub the back of my neck when I thought about it. It needed to be scratched. I needed to take care of it.

That’s when I saw her.

Miles from any structure or any living person was a broken down, baby blue Volkswagen Beetle. The emergency lights were flashing and a woman was looking into her engine compartment. The height of my Truck allowed my to scan both her car, and the area surrounding us. It was tall, uncut grass and trees, covered in utter blackness due to the overcast night. There was no one for miles and miles. We could be alone together. I pulled in behind her, with my low lights so as not to scare her.

When I stepped out of the truck I addressed her.

“Pardon me ma’am,” I said calmly. I know how to disarm. I have worked on my speaking voice for years in order to betray their security into my hands, “Are you alright?”
She stepped out from behind her hood and I saw her in better light.

She was a young, Hispanic woman. Her clothes were tattered, but I think that was intentional. She had silky, dark hair to her shoulders and black librarian glasses. She was pretty, which was a bonus for me. Consider it like a dinner. You’re going to get your meal, but when it includes dessert then it is all the better. I also knew she could complete this cycle. She could be the 20th and I could rest. Best yet, she was petite, so there would be little fight.

“I think the engine is shot,” She said in a desperation that these dark woods certainly played well into. She just wanted to get out of danger... little did she know.

“I can give you a ride, I own this company so I can make the time,” I didn’t want to sound presumptuous, but I knew by making myself a manager it would remove the “creepy truck driver” mentality.

“I don’t know...”

“I promise,” I edged, in my best “Zip-a-Dee-Doo-Dah” voice, “I’ll take you straight into town and we can find you a phone. My wife would kill me if I let a young lady stay stranded in the woods.”

I wasn’t married, but that is another way of disarming her. A spouse always makes a man less dangerous, or again, as she thought.

“Ok,” She said, with her fear betraying her skepticism, “Thank you.”

“I’ll get the door for you.”

As she walked to the passenger side I held the door open for her. As she took her first step up I grabbed her ankle and pulled her straight down with as much force as I could manage.

Her jaw connected with the studded metal stairs full force. I know some teeth were broken by the crunch that emanated from her skull. She fell limp to the dirt as I lifted her onto my shoulder. She didn’t stir long enough for me to grab a large socket wrench from my rig. I could feel the warm blood from her mouth pouring down my shoulder.

I carried her into the tall grass, just out of sight. We made love then. I had made love before to some, but this was special. She was the 20th. She would complete the need. Halfway through she began to wake and struggle. From there I had to act. I took the socket wrench and began to hit her. She struggled to scream due to her shattered jaw. I hit her in her pretty face, over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over, and over and over.

When I had finished on all fronts I took her wallet from her jeans off beside us. Hannah, I believe her name was. I took her glasses as the fell off when her face collided with my truck and avoided the wrath of the socket wrench. They had her name engraved inside the temple.

I drove. Leaving the scene entirely. I had to re-enter the highway some time later and saw lights in my mirror.
I had been stopped before. Once even with a body in the back, so I was not worried.

The officer walked to the side and called me out.
“You Williams (my last name)?” He asked with an unreadable demeanor.

“Yes sir,” I answered coolly, holding my id and paperwork for the truck and delivery.

He then spoke into his radio.

“Yeah, we found him.”

“Officer what’s this ab-“ I was cut short.

“Sir, please turn around and place your hands behind your back.”

“Why?” I demanded, I was not about to be cuffed and restrained for no good reason.

He then turned me violently to my truck and slapped cuffs around my wrists. From there He sat me on the pavement and called for backup.

When other officers arrived one finally noticed the blood on my back. They then found the glasses. They then found the poorly wiped down socket wrench. They then received word of a brutal mutilation several towns over.

They had stopped me initially because one of my drivers was caught with a brick of marijuana and they wanted to stop all trucks from my dispatch to make sure we were legitimate. It would be funny if it weren’t so infuriating.
I was brought down on a technicality.

My run lasted from 12 to 40. I was undetected for that entire time. I changed my MO. I killed strangers only. I was so careful. A technicality was the only thing that could have done this.

My simple home was turned about until they found my treasure box (a shoebox of souvenirs and news clippings). From there it was easy to put me at every single murder. Every homeless person stabbed to death in cities. Every transient prostitute with their heads missing. Every unsupervised child in crowded streets. I was linked to them all.

Now, one may ask, “Why would you be so stupid as to keep mementoes?”

To that I would say I had to. It was my passion and the only thing that gave me meaning. I had to keep something around. They were the only memories I could have of those times.


Like I first wrote, I deserve to be in prison, but I don’t regret in the slightest what I’ve done.

The trial was grueling and irritating. Since I killed across state lines there was arguments as to where to have my trial, but it became a federal issue, which only meant more bureaucracy. My lawyer explained many of the killings would be circumstantial at best, but just as many have my now connected DNA to the scene and are going to be nearly impossible to deny. I decided to throw in the towel. The media was out for blood, the public was out for blood, and the jury was out for blood. I had my fill, so now it was time to pay the favor forward. There was no way to avoid a life sentence so I may as well come clean and get regale the tales of my exploits to a room of terrified jurors and family members burning with hatred.

Despite the difficulties of finding some evidence of murders, I was still convicted for 18 of the 20. However, I was punished for them all regardless.

The day of sentencing I stood still and stoic before the judge. I could feel the eyes of all those present attempting to sear me, but failing.

The Judge looked down at me and rambled on about my cruelties and resentment for man. The entire time he droned I stood with the thought that the death penalty was illegal in this state. It was utterly satisfying to know the uproarious crowds calling for my head when the law wouldn’t allow it. I snapped out of it when he got to the sentence.

“Seeing as how the death penalty is illegal in this state, I can only do the most with that in light. I hereby sentence you to one thousand and one life sentences.”

He was being melodramatic.  Not in history had there been such an absurd sentence.  What's worse, The number was uneven. Meaning the rest of my life I would have to say one thousand and ONE when discussing my sentence.  He knew this.

My demeanor slightly shaken, I asked the Judge, “Why 1000 and one?”

The courtroom was silent. The families, friends and jury looked at me with contempt, but that didn’t matter then, even less now.

The Judge leaned over his podium. He smiled with a smugness that still boils my blood and he calmly replied...
“To torment you.”

That’s how I got where I am now. I don’t interact with the other inmates or the guards. I just mind my business as best I can. I don’t like to think about my sentence because it makes me itch. Similar to when you haven’t paid a certain bill, but don’t have the funds. It’s a wincing, mental discomfort.

I write the rest of this in a testament to what happened yesterday in hopes it reaches someone on the outside.
My day started normally. A loud bell rang and I stood to my feet. From there, my door opened and I walked to the shower facility. I tried to find myself at the end of the line so as to get the most time out of my cell. I also like my privacy. The inmates here are insufferable. They are uneducated criminals who would have no life outside of these walls. My fellow black inmates gave me hell for being “crazy” since African American serial killers are considered such an abnormality. The other races tended to stay to themselves, minus a few Aryan brotherhood members casting the occasional slur my direction.
I entered the shower as normal, but I felt an innate sense of dread that I don’t know how to describe. I just felt... unpleasant. I felt watched and alone at the same time. I felt completely hopeless and near despair. I quickly finished my shower and left the facility. The halls were quiet and the stationary guard was not at his post in front of my cell. I was alone in this hallway.

Suddenly, I felt a large hand grip my shoulder and order me forward. The next thing I knew I was being escorted to the Warden’s office. I was somewhat stunned, but complied.

I walked the tight enclosed halls until I reached the last room on the right. Inside was totally dark apart from a dim lamp illuminating a desk. The hand shoved me in and slammed the door behind me.

I saw the silhouette of Warden and he beckoned me to sit.
I sat across from him in uncomfortable silence. He didn’t move and neither did I. I would force him to make the first move.

After what felt like an eternity he spoke up.

“Let’s go over your file.” His voice carried, a mild southern accent sprinkled in.

I did not respond. He gave no indication as to why, so I would bide my time.

From here I will paraphrase what was said, as my memory can’t perfectly recreate the entire conversation.

“Count 1. Confessed. Not convicted. Man falls off cliff and you assist him in passing. You were 12 so it wasn’t included in your final file, but it warrants mentioning.

Count 2. Confessed. Convicted. You confessed to shoving a young woman off a roof and then robbing her home of a trophy. You were 18

Count 3. Confessed Convicted. Homeless man near your college, you stabbed him and cut out a tooth. You were 20

Count 4. Confessed. Not Convicted. You claim to have shot a prostitute in Texas. The souvenir you took could not link you to the crime and she had no family. You were 24. Not convicted, but you know what you did.

Counts 5 through 9. Confessed. Convicted on all counts. You killed five lot lizards before changing your MO. That was smart. They were all strangled and you kept a lock of hair. Left them on the highway.

Count 10. Confessed. Convicted. You took a lost 12-year-old and drowned him. You kept his retainer. You were doing well in life by this point, but murder still called. Didn’t it?

Count 11. Confessed. Convicted. Ah, this one was special wasn’t she? That Gas station employee who you stalked for a while? Followed her home and broke in. Took your time and did it right. She broke your perfect streak and you were going to make her pay right? Kept her locket as a token of your affection.

Count 12. Confessed. Convicted. You took a young man to your from a local club in Missouri. Strangled him the moment the door was closed. Chopped him up and kept his teeth.

Counts 13 through 17. Confessed. Convicted on all counts. The Hitchhiker phase. Here it seems you just wanted to close the gap. You got sloppy. Left a lot of evidence behind. I guess because they were vagrants it wouldn’t have mattered.

Count 18. Confessed. Convicted. You killed a Housewife in Florida. You were on vacation at them time. You spotted her and just had to do something. Waiting until her husband left and had yourself a time. Another rape and strangling. You took her bloodsoaked necklace.

Count 19. Confessed. Convicted. You saw a jogger one morning and followed in your truck. When you knew their routine you waited in the bushes until he passed. You killed him with a hammer and took one of his shoes.

Count 20. Confessed. Convicted. The one that brought you down. You couldn’t resist her. You were too careless. Too excited. Now you’re here. You took her glasses and bashing her head in and assaulting her.”

He took a deep breathe and his outline sat back.

“Do you know you know what they call you?” He asked me incredulously.

I was livid. He completely bastardized my work. I had done so much and he swept over it like an obituary column. I glared at him in the dark before answering, “The Scavenger Hunt Killer?”

I hated that name. They donned me the Scavenger Hunt Killer because my murders spanned so far and I collected odd, disconnected items. Again, my works and efforts were reduced to a joke. It still makes me sick.
The warden spoke up again, “Are you sorry?”

I sat for a moment before responding, “Would it matter?”
He chuckled in a deep throaty laugh. “No,” He said settling in, “I guess it wouldn’t.”

He continued, “I don’t get it really. You’re a highly intelligent, healthy and well spoken man, why on earth would you throw that away?”

I sat in angry silence. I refused to give this man the satisfaction of an answer.

“Do you believe in God?” The Warden asked, his tone now changed.

I chewed my tongue before responding, “No.”

“Pity,” he responded lackadaisically, as if my response didn’t really matter, “That would make what I’m about to tell you much better.”

I waited for him to continue.

“Your sentence is being commuted.”

I raised an eyebrow in disbelief, “really?”

“Yes,” He sat, still shadowed, but I knew he was smirking.

“What does that have to do with God?”

I know I should have had much more important questions to ask in that moment, but I was curious. I assumed he meant I should be thankful.

“Well,” he said, his voice trailing, “That would make this next part easier. You passed away this morning, son.”
Before I could respond, his hand tossed a few photos in front of me.

It was me. I lay covered in blood on the shower floor. I had been stabbed from the looks of it.

“Yeah,” The Warden, or who I thought was the warden spoke up, “some Aryan fellow wanted to prove his might by stabbing a serial killer to death in the shower. Didn’t work though, since he was caught and will most likely be in solitary until it does irreparable damage. If that’s some comfort.”

I stared at him. I stared at the photographs.

I simple could not accept it.

“This is absurd,” I felt insulted and the prospect.

“I know it seems odd, but hear me out,” He sat upright, ready to make his case, “Do you know what the Universalists are?”

“No”

“Well,” He continued without missing a beat. “Basically it states that everyone gets into heaven. Even if you aren’t necessarily in their denomination.”

“This is heaven?” I was ready to laugh. This was a joke.

“No, see that’s the bad news,” He continued, “Catholics, Muslims, some Buddhists, see they believe in a temporal plane so they’re also sort of right. See everyone does eventually move on, but before anyone can move on, they must resolve all their earthly obligations... and judgments."

Before I could remark, he caught his breath and explained further.

“You died this morning. You served ONE of your 1001 life sentences. Welcome to number 2."

I stood up, “This isn’t funny. I’m leaving.”

I couldn't move. I was frozen in place. Unable to use my body.  My eyes felt like they were being pried towards the seat.

“Please,” I heard The Warden, though his voice was now much deeper, sinking my gut, “sit.”
I returned to my seat with a sensation that was new to me: fear.

“Now,” he continued, his voice returning to normal, “You are *not* dead.  You just started another sentence.  Everything will be back to normal when you leave. When I dismiss you, you will leave here and return to your bunk, do you understand?”

I nodded. Still stunned by what I then knew as truth.  His voice.  The unexplained dread I felt that morning.

I walked out of the Warden’s office that day, feeling a hopelessness I have never known. The prison was the same, but it wasn’t. It was lonelier. Darker.

That feels like forever ago. I learned since then.

First, “Lifetime” does not mean from the age you are incarcerated. I expected a 40-year “life” sentence. But after speaking with a few other inmates serving like myself, who I see sometimes sparingly, I learned that it varies somewhere from 80 to 120 years. It varies, but it is always at least 80. 

I guess the guards don't notice after a certain point.  Also, I assume they don't register that we never seem to leave.  Inexplicable, but that's what's happening.

Second, each go around... changes you.  The prisoners don't notice you.  The others like you have fewer words.  The guards seemed always outside of the line of sight, even when they would interact. They were like fleeting shadows. 

I am cracking mentally.  I will walk into the showers and see someone shaving, even speak with him at length. However, when I turn a corner or close a stall door, he’ll be gone when I return. 

Next, I learned that suicide doesn’t work. I learned the same way every inmate in here like me does. I slit my wrists and they just ached for a week. I swallowed bleach and had a miserable stomachache, but no death. I hung myself where I choked and flailed, fully conscious, for 8 straight hours until a guard found me while bringing my breakfast the following morning. 

I learned that being murdered decreases time, but murdering adds it, so no one on life row attempts murder here.

Finally, escaping isn't an option.  We have runners sometimes.  Men, who just finished their first sentence.  The guy just snapped.  I guess he pulled maybe 60 years before dying in his sleep.  He just panicked and ran.  The snipers didn't even turn.  He grabbed the fence and immediately fell to the ground.  From there he shook violently.  He died right there of a heart attack.

I saw him a week later.  3rd life sentence.  Half crippled.  I guess we get punished if we try to leave. I don't know if its permanent.  He was a wreck upon returning.  It reminded me of the cats in my neighborhood as a boy. The first time you hurt it, the animal twitches and becomes neurotic, but given enough time, it accepts its fate.  The man now spends his days staring silently behind dead eyes at whatever light source is around.

To some this is limbo. Where we remain trapped in the prison in which we were condemned until our body, and soul, have finished their sentences.  To others this is some kind of purgatory. Where we are groomed for eternity in paradise.  Either way, we are forced to remain, forced to live until we pay our dues.  Never truly dying.

I don't even know if time is the same now, but if you're reading this I managed to successfully get these pages out.  

I have handful of plans, which I cannot record. I cannot risk ant future attempts should this fail.

I’m leaving this journal for anyone who is a criminal or wants to become one. I have between 80,000 too= 100,000 years left. I do not feel remorse, but I do wish I knew then what I know now. This is simply a warning.


100,000 years on a concrete slab. A hard, unforgiving surface.

100,000 years with one hour a day in a dying earthscape I barely recognize. 

100,000 years of sickly green floors and cold steel doors that move for nothing.

100,000 years of mopping floors, or scrubbing toilets 

100,000 years of being monitored by beings I cannot fully comprehend as their burning horror erupts in the back of my mind.

1001 life sentences.

1000 to go.

Only one small thing gives me comfort.

With 1000 life sentences at least it’s a nice a clean number.

I hope I don’t die too soon and ruin this nice, even lifetime...

...because the next one will be hell.Things were fucked from the beginning. A woman named Carol dials 911 and claims that somebody’s inside her house. We go investigate, searching the place inch by inch but find nothing. 

Usually, this could be easily explained away. The mind of an older person living alone eventually starts deteriorating. The onset of dementia and other mental issues start to take a toll on their lives. Quite sad, really. However, this woman is only 24. In other words, the probability of this all being inside her head is extremely unlikely. She also seemed to be terribly distraught by this whole situation. Why would she be acting? 

We leave her place and tell her to contact us if she sees anything again. I mean, we couldn’t really do anything at that point. We were somewhat surprised when we got another call from her the very next day. We drive down there and search the house again. We find nothing… again. Problem is... the house seems different this time. Almost as if there were some subtle detail that made it a separate place from the one we were in yesterday. My partner – Beck, says that he noticed it as well, but doesn’t quite understand what’s wrong. 

We decide not to say anything about this as we tell Carol that we came up with nothing. However, she tells us to stay. “I recorded him” She says. 

She takes out her phone and tells us to watch the video that she’s pulled up. It was footage of her in the house. She’s running around, breathing frantic. And then we see him. A large figure, covered head to toe in what appears to be a black bodysuit. He lumbers towards the camera as Carol screams and ducks into a room, locking it from the inside. There’s a few bangs on the door before we can hear footsteps walking away. 

We don’t know how to react to this footage, but we try anyways. We come to the conclusion that the man must have left once Carol got behind the door. However, the front door was locked when we came, and Carol told us that she hadn’t left the room. Did he also have the keys to her house? That would explain a lot, but it also made this situation a lot worse.

We decide to keep an eye on her house for the night. We’re discrete, parking about a block down the road in an unmarked car. We’re both fully awake, ready to go as soon as we see some sketchy shit.

At around 2AM, we see somebody walking across the road, towards her house. However, it isn’t the man. It’s Carol herself.  Beck and I must have had the same look on our faces. *What the fuck?* 

We get out of the car and make our way over there, knocking hard on the front door. However, nobody answers. We can see lights flicking on and off intermittently, but we’re not sure what that’s supposed to mean. Was she trying to tell us to leave?

We get a call from dispatch a few moments later. They’re telling us that Carol has called 911 again, saying that there are now multiple people in her house. They ask if we need backup. We say yes. 

Without another moment of hesitation, we force the door open and barge in. The living room lights still flicker on and off, but we see the light switch and nobody is touching it. We call out for Carol, but nobody responds. In fact, the place is dead quiet. I can see the neighboring houses starting to turn on their lights from the commotion. We rush up the stairs and start sweeping each room. *But there’s nothing*. Once again, we search the place inch by inch, *but nothing is in here*, not even Carol, who we clearly saw enter a few moments earlier. 

As I pace around in petrified confusion, Beck speaks up: “There’s rooms here that shouldn’t be.” 

“What the hell are you talking about?” I ask in response. 

“I’ve been counting” he says. “There were 9 total the last time we came. There are 10 now. You didn’t notice it?” 

I force myself to think hard. Subconsciously, I knew that something was off, but couldn’t pinpoint exactly what. However, I eventually realize. 

“The basement. There was only door down there last time.” 

Beck nods. “Two now.”

I don’t know what to think. I look at my surroundings and try to make an assessment, but there’s really none that can be made. 

We hear a knock on the door about 10 seconds later. It sounds agitated. We look out the living room windows, but aren’t met with the red and blue police lights. We’re hesitant to answer, of course. I decide to take a step forwards, but Beck pulls me back. 

He looks at me and shakes his head, whispering: “We left the door open, remember?” 

He was right. My radio starts crackling. Another call from dispatch. They’re telling us that we need to leave the house immediately. That Carol called again, saying we were going to die, in a deathly monotone voice. The knocking has stopped, but we can hear footsteps in the basement. Something is in here with us. 

We’ve decided that this was enough. We needed to get the fuck out of here. As we start descending the steps, we hear a voice coming from the kitchen. Carol comes out, blocking our path to the door. She looks detached, with blank, beady eyes staring right at us. 

“Did you find him?” She asks, without any semblance of emotion in her voice. “I think he might be in the basement. Why don’t you go check?” 

Beck and I are frozen in shock. She just keeps looking at us, gesturing towards the basement door every now and then. The footsteps down there sound like they’re running in circles now. We ignore her request, abruptly brushing past her and bolting out of the front door. 

The backup still isn’t here, so we decide to just get into our car. However… we see somebody down the street peering through our driver-side window. He’s large, dressed in what appears to be a black full-body suit. He looks away from the window and directly at us. It’s hard to tell from this far, but the suit doesn’t seem to have any eye-holes. 

Beck speaks up: “Sir, please step back from the vehicle.” His voice cracks in the middle of the sentence. He’s terrified. 

As soon as Beck stops talking, the figure starts *running* towards us. It’s fast. *Too* fast. In the time that it takes for us to pull up our guns, we’ve realized that it’s actually moved past us, into the house. We waste no more time, running into the car, locking the doors and waiting until backup arrives. 

When it finally does, we’re extensively questioned while what appears to be a *SWAT* team searches the house. However, it isn’t the police chief asking us. Instead, it’s some guy in a suit that we’ve never seen before. He asks us things like “How many doors were there in the house?” and “What did Carol look like, exactly?” and “Did we ever see a man with one eye wandering around?” We answer inconclusively to pretty much all of them. We have no idea what the hell’s going on. 

At one point, we see SWAT members carrying multiple stretchers outside and loading them into their truck. Not an ambulance mind you, but their own truck. Eventually, the man who was questioning us tells us to go home, and to report to our station as usual. He tells us not to worry about what we’ve seen here. 

I don’t know how he expects us to do that. 

We drive back to the station in complete silence. As we park, Beck finally lets out a sigh. 

“Jack is fucking crazy, dude.” 

I look at him in confusion. “What are you talking about? Who the hell is Jack?” 

He reciprocates an equally confused stare at me. “What the hell are *you* talking about? The dude who owns the house.” 

“What? It was a lady named Carol. How’d you forget already?” 

We hold each other’s chaotic gaze for what feels like a minute... but we say nothing further. We both silently exit the vehicle and start heading our separate ways home. We both know that something's terribly wrong with the other. 

I try not to think about it too much as my head hits the pillow. I manage to drift off to sleep about three hours later, only to be woken up immediately by the telephone. Barely coherent, I answer it:

“We need you. A woman dialed 911. Says that somebody’s in her house.”

My heart sinks slightly. It sinks completely when he tells me the address. It’s Carol’s. 

I hang up the phone and slump into the bed. I just want this nightmare to end. 




Right now, I'm in my apartment on the third floor, and I can't go outside. I'm lucky that I've just bought my groceries yesterday. I don't know who could've done that, but at this time, I know a few other things.    
    
I know that it was someone from the tenants since the seams on the door indicate that they were welded shut from the inside. I know that one of my neighbor's friends from the next entrance confirmed that their door was welded shut as well, which tells me that they are still in here with us. I know that we don't know who it is - nobody has taken the blame so far.    
   
And I know that there's a dead body outside.    
      
But don't let me get ahead of myself. I'll explain everything in a minute. I live in a small and VERY old apartment complex on the far outskirts of a small town. Honestly, calling it an apartment complex is a stretch - it's only five stories high, no elevator, and it was built out of concrete panels all the way back in the 60s. It has no attic, so people who live on the last floor have to constantly worry about rain ruining their ceiling, extremely sound conducive for their thickness walls so you never feel home alone and a basement which connects to a sewer system - which smells horribly in spring.    
    
In Russia, these kinds of buildings are called ["Khruschyovka"](https://imgur.com/a/Fiu9b9N) - named after Khruschev, obviously. I get the appeal of a low-cost easy-to-construct building, but I think there's not a single soul in the entire country who'd miss them. In 50 years they should've demolished them and replaced them with something better, something newer. At this point, the buildings are a health hazard. Usually, only the old people live there, since it was the house they received long ago and never moved out. Young people like me rarely moved into Khruschyovkas, which was why my neighbors were mostly old people. And let me tell you, old people in Russia are really mean.      
     
But I can't complain. I got this apartment from my late grandma, so at a young age, I at least have my own place. Plus the view from my balcony on the third floor is great - it overlooks the forest, which technically is the border of our town, so no ugly buildings in sight. Just a boundless nature, which, as I was told, stretches for thousands of kilometers in that direction. An entire ocean of dark wood that curves beyond the horizon.    
    
In a way, I live on a beach. Pretty sweet if you don't account for the things that sometimes wash ashore.    
     
At first, I was kind of bewildered. I went down the stairs to the first floor, yawning and stretching and hoping for a weekend to come faster, and I saw a crowd of people, all in their coats, with their bags in their hands. The air was hot and damp from their collective breathing, and the air was quaking from their shouting. I couldn't make out what were they saying, because they are all talking at the same time, but I could get the general mood. Some of them were confused, but mostly they were outraged.    
    
I didn't understand what was going on at first. It was eight in the morning when everyone was either hurrying to their jobs or god knows where the pensioners go so early. But then I made it to the front of the crowd, and my eyebrows shot up.    
    
In front of me, a couple of men in their forties were trying their hardest to push the door open…only they couldn't. The entire frame of the iron door was welded shut: I could see the metallic seam running along the frame.     
    
"Push harder, I have a doctor's appointment in an hour!" - one of the old women shouted at them.    
    
"It's no use" - one of the men stood back and wiped the sweat from his forehead. "The seam had already cooled down. Nothing short of a circular saw will open this door now".    
    
"Are locked in here?!" - one of the women asked in a tone that was bordering on hysterical. "I can't stay here, I need to get to work!"          
     
"Everybody needs to get to work!" - the man snapped back at her. "But the door is locked. What else do you want me to do?"    
    
"So what, we're going to stay here locked because of some kid's prank?" - she squealed at a frequency I thought was impossible for a human voice to produce.    
    
"I doubt that it was a prank" - the man said. "I've worked as a welder for seventeen years, so I can tell you for sure: the door was welded shut from the inside".   
     
There was a pause of silence as everyone considered the meaning of his words. Somebody locked themselves in with the rest of the tenants? But why?    
    
"Who the hell would do something like that?" - I asked aloud no one in particular.   
    
"Some maniac, for sure" - the old woman grunted. She gave me a mean eye, and then tugged my sleeve: "Say, what apartment are you from? I don't recall seeing you here. Is that you who's done that?" - she pointed at the door. "You and your good-for-nothing friends, huh? Probably hoping to butcher us all and take our money, huh?" - she was getting louder with each sentence, and I suddenly found myself at the center of attention of a really mean and annoyed crowd.   
     
I had to defuse the situation fast, or else I wouldn't be able to reach my apartment in one piece.    
    
"I'm Tamara Vasilyevna's grandson" - I explained, feeling angry that my words - the God-honest truth - sounded like an excuse In that context. "I've lived here for the past year. And I just came down from my apartment".   
   
"Leave him be, you old hag" - one of the men from the back of the crowd interfered. "I've seen this lad here many times, he's good people. Helped me with my bags more than once".    
    
The woman was obviously humiliated by such a development and gave me a death glare, but thankfully, she didn't say anything else.     
    
A doorbell buzzed behind me: someone from the crowd was trying to reach the neighbors that lived on the first floor.        
    
"Open up!" - I heard a man's voice shouting, followed by the thuds of his fists knocking on the door. "The door's stuck, and I need to go to work!"    
    
"How are they going to help you?" - someone from the crowd asked.    
    
"I'll crawl out through their window, that's how!" - the man replied.    
    
"Don't be ridiculous, all of the windows on the first floor are grated" - somebody else shouted, but the man didn't listen. It seemed that more people joined him as I could hear numerous fists banging on the door.    
    
"Hello? Can you help me with the door? I can't seem to open it!" - we suddenly heard a voice coming from outside - from beneath the welded door.   
    
Somebody was caught outside when the door was welded shut - I can't find any explanation as to why they were trying to enter our building at such an early hour. Perhaps they were out for groceries. Or they decided to take a morning jog. Or perhaps it was a postman. Doesn't matter now.     
    
The people started talking all at the same time, trying to explain their situation to the man, or to ask him to call for help, or to demand him to explain himself, but he never had a chance to answer their questions.    
    
"Oh my God, what the hell is it?!" - he screamed in terror. The door shook as he started pulling on the door handle, hoping to pry the door open.    
   
The crowd fell silent: the terror in the man's voice was so genuine that no one had any doubts that he indeed saw something horrifying.    
   
"Let me in! Please!" - he screamed again, desperately hoping to muster the strength to open the door.   
   
We couldn't see, of course, what scared him so much - but we could hear it. The heavy snarling, the clanking teeth of a huge maw, the claws scratching against the ground. Getting louder with each second.     
    
The concern for his fate swept over us at the same time: it was probably what our ancestors felt when they watched one of their own being chased by a lion.   
    
"Run! Run while you still can!" - the crowd shouted, but it was already too late.   
    
There was a loud thud and the door shook: the unknown creature rammed straight into man, pressing him to the door with its massive frame. I could hear it growling as it was tearing into him, trying to get a better hold of him, but I couldn't recognize the animal. The door trembled again and again, as the creature was throwing the man against it, hoping to get him to stop resisting. He screamed until the creature finally got to his throat. Someone gasped in terror.   
    
"Help him, someone!" - somebody from the back of the crowd shouted. Nobody moved: there was nothing we could do. The iron door that protected us from the creature outside was also separating us from the man. He was so close to us, and yet he was dying alone.     
    
There was another strike at the door, and the crowd stepped back. The creature was testing the metal, it could hear us inside, but the door stood still. Whoever welded it shut did a good job. After that, it fell silent. We didn't know whether it left or was standing right behind the door, biding its time. We couldn't check either way.    
    
It was at that moment that we heard them. The sirens. Old and rusty, they were coming back to life after decades of sleep to fulfill their purpose - to warn people of an incoming catastrophe. The years of slumber did not do them any good - they started out sounding low, but with each second, as their mechanical voice chords were stretching and warming up, they were getting louder and higher, until the familiar sound that everyone had hoped to never hear was drowning out everything else.
    
The sirens were getting louder, but in the pauses between its pulses, I could hear that the noise of the town outside was getting quieter. After a few minutes, the commotion outside was gone as everyone evacuated. We were left alone - probably the only people in the entire district.   
    
Alone. Stranded. With something dangerous roaming beneath our windows.    
    
I can hear howl and scream in the distance - its voice sounds almost human. But I now know the difference - you could tell it clearly when its howl was followed by a human scream.    
    
Now, you might think that there was panic among the tenants, but you would be wrong. A distinctive feature of Russian people is that they, more than anyone else in the world, don't give a fuck. I say this with absolute certainty. Once they learned that the police told them to stay put they just calmed down. I can sort of see their reasoning: "why panic when you're protected by the walls? Can't you stay at home for a few days? The police told us that it's dangerous outside, so why would you go there? I've lived through the nineties, you wet-eared mutt, you think this is going to scare me?"    
    
So while everyone was displeased, they decided to stay put. And well, if they don't want to go then I don't have much choice either. I'd rather stay in our fort with the majority of people, even if they aren't the most pleasant company, then risk going out. Besides, it's not like there's any immediate threat to my life.   
    
Right?   
***
[Part 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/dy5240/this_morning_the_doors_to_our_apartment_complex/)    
[S.](https://www.reddit.com/r/Scandalist/comments/4n4iu6/authors_message_welcome_new_readers/)Sorry I’ve not been in touch guys. It’s been a busy month. However, I’m pleased to announce that, as of yesterday night, I’ve finally touched down in Phoenix, Arizona.

I’m posting this log from my first American hotel room, which offers a gorgeous view of both the state hospital and a local prison. Auspicious times.

Drop me a line if you’re in the city or if you have any information at all.
 
[Part 1](https://redd.it/7asz8x)
 
[Part 2](https://redd.it/7bkk41)
 
[Part 3](https://redd.it/7cf4h8)
 
[Part 4](https://redd.it/7dmuvp)
 
[Part 5](https://redd.it/7fdu9c)
 
[Part 6](https://redd.it/7h9jzb)
 
[Part 7](https://redd.it/7jabqd)
 
[Part 8](https://redd.it/7loh1l)

[Part 10](https://redd.it/7uyiss)
 
*****

The Left/Right Game [DRAFT 1] 15/02/2017

As the darkness closes in, I find myself dragged deeper and deeper into the depths of my own subconscious, until I sink through the back of my mind into an indescribable place. A featureless, directionless, timeless void that exists at the weakest point of life. 

I can feel myself drifting away, surrendered to an almost imperceptible tide, carried slowly but inexorably from the world.

The rest of the night unfolds in fleeting snapshots.

I briefly feel my body lift up from the ground, gravity pulling at my limbs as I’m conveyed through the forest.

An unknowable stretch of time later, I feel a distinct burning sensation to my right. In the world I currently inhabit, only an echo of the pain reaches me, but I can tell that it was once substantial. Unable to divine its purpose, I let the sensation fade away, before descending once more into the placid darkness.

When my eyes finally work themselves open, the sun is beginning to rise. Without an ounce of strength left in my body, all I can do is peer through my eyelashes, taking in the vague scene before me.

I’m in the back of the Wrangler, propped up against a soft pillar of luggage. There's somebody kneeling beside me, tugging at my right shoulder. When I try to address them, I discover that my voice has withered to a spectral whisper, so frail that it hardly exists at all.

**AS:** … Rob…

Hearing my voice, the figure shuffles round and kneels before me, staring into my eyes as they slowly regain their focus.

**ROB:** You just lay back Miss Sharma, I just finished patchin’ you up but I gotta make sure it’s good work.

**AS:** Wh… what happened to you?

**ROB:** Denise had me at gunpoint, had to act like I was all but dead. When she into the forest, I got free, took the med kit into the trees, fixed myself up a little. I was comin’ to help when I heard this awful noise. Went to check it out... that’s when I found you.

**AS:**... Is the engine running?

**ROB:** Wanted to warm up the place for you. You were in shock, and since the battery don’t run down anymore I thought-

**AS:** No I mean… how? The key, it got-

**ROB:** You think I’d risk gettin’ out this far with only one copy of my car key?

Rob seems almost insulted, and thinking back to everything I’ve learned about him over the course of this trip, I can see why he might be. Even in my weakened state I can’t help but laugh; though it admittedly comes out as stilted wheezing, diffusing quietly into the air.

**AS:** No that’s… that’s actually very “you”. I think Bluejay would’ve appreciated that information last night.

**ROB:** Yeah well, she didn’t ask.

**AS:** … I’m glad you made it Rob. 

**ROB:** Glad you made it too. They build’em tough down in London.

I rest my head back against the luggage.

**AS:** I’m from Bristol.

**ROB:** Of course… yeah of course that’s… sorry…

Rob tries to recover his smile, but it slips quickly from his grasp. In its absence, his features cringe into sudden, uncontrollable sadness.

**ROB:** Miss Sharma I’m sorry! I’m so sorry!

Rob Guthard’s weathered face bursts into a heaving mess of tears. He repeats those two words as he lumbers towards me, throwing his arms around my waist and resting his head on my left shoulder. My hand feels like lead as I raise it up and brush it against his hair, holding him against me.

As the man continues to sob, I let my head roll slowly to the right, observing the damage to my arm. Last night, lost in the muddled throes of shock, the harm had been unquantifiable, the details drowned out by the encompassing haze of severe blood loss and a blaring, primal alarm which had forced me to move without questioning why. Now that I’m on the other side, bathed in the quiet warmth of the Wrangler, I’m able to fully assess the extent of my injury. 

Everything below my right elbow is gone.

It feels almost like a dream. My upper arm is practically unblemished, save for a few dark bruises from last night’s fall, yet it descends an impossibly short distance before ending in a blunt, surreal stump. The wound itself is hidden from view, swaddled in fresh white bandages.

I can’t seem to figure out how I should feel and, consequently, I don’t seem to feel anything.

**AS:** It’s ok Rob. It’s ok.

**ROB:** I never… I never meant for any of this to-

**AS:** I know… I know.

Rob pulls back, his eyes still watering.

**ROB:** I’ll take you home, ok? I’ll find somewhere to turn around and we’ll get you home.

I can tell Rob’s offer is genuine, and to be honest I’m a little surprised. I still remember our verbal agreement, forged at the mouth of the tunnel;  that he would not be turning his car around until he reached the road’s end. I never expected he’d be the one to renege on the deal.

I’m aware this could be my best chance to leave it all behind; to flee from the horrors of the road, before they take even more of me. I know the way back. I know that it leads to safety, to family, to blessed normality. However, as an insidious voice in the back of my mind quietly notes, it doesn’t lead to answers.

**AS:**... I’m still game if you are.

Rob sends me a heartbroken smile, which I would return if I had the strength. In that moment, a sombre understanding develops between us. An understanding that after everything we’ve seen, everything that’s happened, we’re both still choosing the secrets of the road. The decision reveals something about us, exposing a driving force behind our actions that negates our concern for survival, and overshadows the imagined protests of our loved ones.

It’s a decision only two broken people would make.

Rob spends the morning packing up the Wrangler, giving me time to rest. The fact that he’s walking around at all is remarkable, let alone conducting his usual routine at his usual pace. As I begin to feel life crawl slowly back into my veins, I wonder whether the strange force that has sustained us both, as well as the Wrangler’s fuel tank, could also have a mild restorative effect. The notion should bring me comfort; instead it makes me feel like a lobster in a tank.

A few hours later, Rob carries me out of the car, letting me rest in the doorframe. In front of me lie three mounds of dirt, raised slightly from the surrounding earth. Two are headed by crosses, formed from knotted sticks bound tightly together. The grave on the far left lies bare, bereft of any religious affiliation.

**AS:** Is that… Bluejay’s? Without the cross?

**ROB:** Didn’t think she’d want one.

**AS:** She wouldn’t have done that for you, you know.

**ROB:** Good thing I ain’t her then. I buried what I can, but that was some state she was in. Did the child kill her?

Rob goes to throw a foldable spade into the back of the car. For a brief moment, I consider letting his statement go unanswered.

**AS:** No, it didn’t… I did.

Rob immediately marches back round, his brow furrowed in confusion.

**AS:** I hid a C4 charge in my satchel. When she took the bag I… well…

I gesture to the bare grave. Rob looks as if he’s seeing me for the first time.

**ROB:** Where did you-

**AS:** From your son’s car.

I watch as my quiet assertion strikes Rob’s ears, as its meaning burrows through his consciousness, its implications contorting his features into a look of shame and damning revelation. 

I can tell from his reaction that I’ve got it right.

We haven’t had a chance to speak since I learned his son’s name. That piece of information formed the crucial thread, stringing together the strange and seemingly incongruent discoveries I’d encountered on the road. Earlier in the week I may have been worried to confront him with this information, but things are different now. We’ve come too far, we’ve been through too much and, if he’s truly ferrying me somewhere with malicious intent, I’m powerless to stop him anyway.

I raise a weak hand towards him; a quiet request for assistance.

**AS:** I think it’s time we had a second interview.

Following a tense and guilty silence, Rob simply nods and helps me into the passenger seat.

*****

**ROB:** It wasn’t military. It was commercial.

The Wrangler continues to crawl through the forest. I’ve stayed quiet for almost half an hour, letting Rob formulate a response in his own words, and in his own time.

**AS:** Commercial?

**ROB:** Yeah, explosive charges for controlled demolition. Bobby was in the business, had his own firm.

**AS:** You must’ve been proud.

**ROB:** Yeah… yeah he built that place up from nothin’. Tourin’ his office was one of the best days of my life.

**AS:** So… how did he end up out here?

Rob grows quiet, reluctantly accepting that he’ll have to start from the beginning.

**ROB:** … Bobby was a smart kid… smarter than I ever was. He coulda run the farm at 15 but, country life didn’t take. Instead he moved away to Phoenix, picked up a college degree, got himself a steady career.

**AS:** A steady career? That’s pretty rebellious for a Guthard.

**ROB:** Hah… well we were pretty different people… didn’t always get along. I was still a courier in those days, always jettin’ off somewhere new. ‘Course I went to Japan, stayed there a while. Then…

**AS:** Aokigahara.

**ROB:** That’s right. Changed everythin’. Came home after five years with a new hobby. Bobby didn’t care for the stories but... his ma had died sudden while I was away; we both wanted to start over, be in each other’s lives more so... he came with me to the Pacific North West, trackin’ down Sasquatch. Creature didn’t show, but Bobby had a good time campin’ so he kept joinin’ me. Before long he was doin’ the research himself, organisin’ trips, pickin’ up rumours of strange stuff all across the country.

**AS:** Sounds like a nice time for you both.

**ROB:** It was.

**AS:**  So… was it Bobby who discovered the Left/Right Game?

**ROB:** … He called me up one day, outta the blue. This was about three years ago. Said he’d found a set of rules; said we should try out. To be honest, I thought our trippin’ days were over; I was back in Alabama and he was startin’ up a family of his own, but suddenly he’s tellin’ me to meet him in Phoenix so, of course I went along.

**AS:** And this time, you both realised it was real.

**ROB:** Bobby knew as soon as we reached the tunnel. He passed that way every day, knew it wasn’t supposed to be there but… there it was. He said that was the most amazing thing he ever saw. We charted it over the next year, whenever we could get the time together, but we moved slow, mapped the place out, turned back on the regular. It took us a while before we got the courage to stay on the road overnight, both of us were terrified the tunnel would disappear or somethin’.

I can tell Rob is replaying the events in his head. The reminiscence almost makes him smile.

**ROB:** Bobby’s wife was a real doll. Used to work in his office. Kindest girl I ever met, funny too. There was a decade between’em but you could tell they were good for each other. He shared everything with her, including the road. In fact, once Bobby got a little more secure with the rules, they started to map it together…explorin’ their own little world.

After a brief pause, Rob’s expression sinks slightly; the reminiscence is growing darker.

**ROB:** Few months go by, I’m hearin’ from Bobby a little less but, I expected that. Then one evenin’ I get a call from the hospital, tellin’ me my boy had walked into some ER in Phoenix.

**AS:** Was he ok?

**ROB:** No. He was in a bad way. Leg all busted up, delirious, askin’ for Marjorie. They found her bag in his car but... she was nowhere to be found.

**AS:** Bobby lost her on the road.

**ROB:** Yeah, that’s right.

**AS:** On our second night here, after we lost Ace, you told me the road had never hurt anyone before.

**ROB:** Well, that wasn’t a lie at least. It wasn’t the road that got’em.

**AS:** … What do you mean?

**ROB:** They made it to the forest. None of us had got that far before but… this time they pushed a little further than usual.

**AS:** Do you know why?

**ROB:** They were gonna have a kid. Marjorie was almost due… wasn’t travellin’ so well. I think they knew they wouldn’t be hittin’ the road for a while. It was like a uh… like a last hurrah I guess.

**AS:** But only Bobby came back?

**ROB:** They explored the woods till nightfall. When Bobby said they had to turn back… Marjorie didn’t want to. He never told me why, never told me what happened. By the end of that trip, Marjorie was still out there and he was in a hospital bed.

Rob takes a moment to collect himself, to put the facts in order. The trees are starting to grow thin, sunlight bursting through the widening gaps in the canopy. It looks like we’re nearing the forest’s end.

**ROB:** Bobby took a month or so to recover. Boy was desperate to get his wife back, and of course he’d become a suspect in her disappearance. Needless to say the first thing he did was head onto the road to find Marjorie.

**AS:** But he didn’t.

**ROB:** Nope… No he found her. Just uh… a little sooner than he thought.

I take a moment to process Rob’s implication. Suddenly I feel a stone drop in my stomach.

**AS:** She was on the 34th turn.

Rob nods solemnly.

**ROB:** Wasn’t the woman he knew of course. Stood there all day, just mumblin’ about the road. Didn’t even recognise him. I remember he called me up right after he first saw her there, his heart breakin’. He tried almost every day from then on, always stoppin’ at that turn. He’d yell, he’d plead, he’d bring pictures and gifts but… she never responded. Don’t know if it was really her but, whatever was on that corner, it belonged to the road.

**ROB:** Bobby lost somethin’ of himself on that corner. After a while, his fascination with the game turned sour, turned to hate. He thought the road was somethin’ evil, that it had no place linking into our world.

**ROB:** I was checkin’ up on him at that point, every few days or so. One weekend he said he was doin’ better, even said he’d been in to work. I thought maybe things were turnin’ round but... then he went quiet; didn’t pick up his phone for three days. I had my place in Phoenix by that point, and a spare key to his house. That’s where I found the note; tellin’ me he’d gone back through. One last bid to find his wife… and if he couldn’t bring her back well-

**AS:** He was going to destroy the tunnel.

**ROB:** Cut the road off from the world. I played the game in Phoenix, Chicago, a few different places, but that one tunnel is what links you to the road. I looked around his garage, found the box for a phone, lot of electronics all over the place… pretty clear what he’d done. So I jump in my car.

We pass out of the forest, onto a long narrow road. In the distance, I can see our route winding up a towering wall of sandstone, disappearing into a set of rolling mountains.

**ROB:** He passed me on his way back, just before I hit Jubilation. Thunderin’ down the road at full speed, drivin’ like crazy. That’s when I knew he hadn’t found her… that he was goin’ to take out the tunnel, end the game once and for all.

**AS:** But he never got that far.

**ROB:** I tried to talk to him. Called his cell, tried the radio frequencies, there was a number on the sim card documentation that he had, god help me I even messaged him on that one. In the end it was just me and him, racin’ back to Phoenix. He was faster than me but I was drivin’ better. After few bad corners I caught up...

**AS:** You ran him off the road.

Rob stares out at the faraway ridges, his hands grasping the steering wheel.

**ROB:** Cell service don’t work through the tunnel. He knew that. He was either goin’ to blow it up on this side… or while he was in there.

**AS:** So you were trying to save him or save yourself?

**ROB:** Neither. I was tryin’ to save the road... Say what you want about this place Miss Sharma, but it’s a doorway out of everythin’ we ever known. It’s the road out of… out of reality. It may be the most significant frontier we ever cross and that’s… part of me knew, that was too important for one man to take away.

For the second time today, Rob battles back tears, and for the second time, he fails. They roll silently down his cheek as he continues on.

**ROB:** He was more injured than I thought. He’d hurt himself bad before he reached me, that’s why he was headed to the tunnel so quick. He wanted to destroy it while he still could.

**ROB:** The road had taken almost everythin’ from him, and then I took the rest… I denied him his hope, took away his chance to leave the world on his own terms. In the end he didn’t even seem angry… he just asked after Marjorie. Asked me why she did it, why she left. I laid him to rest there, visited the place often but… I never had a good answer for him. That’s when I started preppin’ the next run.

**AS:** So you posted his logs online, and pretended to discover them.

**ROB:** Thought people would ask less questions that way.

**AS:** And where did we all fit in to this? Why did you bring us here with you?

**ROB:** I guess… I thought it was time the world knew. Didn’t want all this to end up an old man’s secret. Honest to God, if I knew the road was gonna… I swear I never woulda brought you here.

Rob’s features tighten, all his shame and guilt rising to the fore. I can’t say it isn’t deserved. Despite his intentions, despite his penitence, the man had blinded himself to clear dangers, hurt those closest to him and, on a road where secrets had killed so many, he’d kept the most significant one of all.

Well, perhaps not the most significant.

**AS:** You didn’t bring us here Rob.

Rob turns to me, confused.

**AS:** I met someone in the forest last night, a figure, just like the one you saw in Japan, “looked like static you see on a TV screen” … I think it was you Rob. I think I saw you and I think that… all those years ago…

In my current state, the mechanics of the event, and their stunning implications, lie beyond my explanatory capacity. In the end, I just raise my lost right arm, and wait for Rob to make the connection.

A moment later the car screeches to a halt.

Rob stares straight ahead, his knuckles white against the steering wheel. I’m aware that beneath his stone-set features, every square inch of grey matter is fighting to process the fresh revelation. If it’s true that, in those quiet woods, I somehow reached across the decades to a young Rob Guthard, then it changes everything. The twisting narratives that led us to this point, Rob’s burgeoning obsession, his son’s tragic fate, they all took root in that single moment. More than a decade prior to my own birth, I’d placed us on the path which would lead me to his door. 

As chaotic as the road often seems, that moment in the forest hints at something deeper, something intentional.

Rob steps out of the car for a while, before wordlessly climbing back in and firing up the Wrangler. From that point on we continue as two silent passengers, lost in thought, disappearing into the sandstone mountains.

We travel across the thin mountain road for the next two hours, a wall of crooked rock hemming us in. When we pass onto the other side, and the outcrop falls away, the landscape below us has changed completely, and we’re treated to a strange and breath-taking sight.

The Wrangler is traversing the cliffs above a vast, flat desert; a tundra of vibrant orange stretching as far as the eye can see. I can just make out the road, cutting a meandering path through the sand far below us. At the centre of this otherwise featureless expanse, a collection of monolithic structures, towering columns of glass and metal, rise from the ground, connected by a web of long perpendicular streets.

**AS:** There’s a city… there’s a city on the road.

Rob keeps his eyes forward. Despite the epic majesty of the cityscape below us. I can tell that his mind is elsewhere, that he’s still digesting the contents of our interview. In the end, I think it best to leave him alone with his thoughts.

We stay on the mountain for another twenty minutes, before finally winding down to the desert floor. The space ahead of us is two-tone; the sharp saffron of the desert and the deep blue sky, separated by a thin, even horizon. The only objects that cross this perfect boundary, are the hulking grey towers of the city, rising from the sand, and bursting through into the heavens.

We snake along the desert road, the city looming ever larger as we make our tentative approach toward the border. There’s an eerie contrast to the threshold as we cross it; the cupreous glow of the sand switches to grey, the scorching heat instantly cools, and perhaps most notably, what little sound there was is negated entirely. As we delve down an empty, perfectly maintained throughway, I realise that I can’t hear anything at all except for the Wrangler’s steady rumblings.

**AS:** It’s quiet.

**ROB:** That’s fine by me.

**AS:** Who do you think built this place?

**ROB:** I don’t know. Maybe whatever brought us here. Could be that no one built it… maybe it just is.

I wonder if he’s right. It’s hard to think such a place would exist for any practical purpose. The city looks off somehow, as if it was built from conjecture, by an architect who had only heard of cities through poorly translated rumour. All the broad features are present, skyscrapers, lampposts, window cleaning platforms, but nothing deeper. It’s an empty shell. An ornament in the middle of the desert.

As we turn down the next few roads, I stare up at the monolithic structures, each one standing at least a hundred stories tall. My eyes track back down the countless strata of dark windows, as I contemplate what it might be like to live in such a place.

When I reach the ground floor, I’m presented with my answer.

There’s a young man standing at the ground floor window, his hand resting against the glass. He’s wearing a dark grey suit, and a look of almost mesmeric shock. His mouth open, his hands shaking, his unblinking eyes staring past us as the Wrangler rolls by.

My eyes quickly track back up the skyscraper’s glass facade, scrutinising each row of windows in turn. I’d naively hoped the buildings would be empty, that this place would be nothing more than a colossal ghost town. Now that I know otherwise, each pane of glass feels like a dark pool of water; still on the surface, but with sinister potential lurking within its depths.

A few seconds later, more of them arrive. There aren’t many at first; just a few scattered figures stepping up to their windows, pressing themselves against to the glass. However, like a light sprinkling of rain that erupts into a downpour, the frequency of their arrival quickly doubles, then triples, until not a single space lies unoccupied. The Wrangler shrinks, subject to the scrutiny of countless individuals, on every floor, in every window, all of them clad in the same monochromatic formalwear and staring down at us like the emissaries of a grand tribunal. As the Wrangler passes by, they continue to stare straight ahead, though it’s clear they’re aware of our presence.

**AS:** Rob. Rob there’s-

**ROB:** I see’em.

Rob puts his foot down, shedding the weight of a thousand pairs of eyes as he leaves the building behind. As the final column of windows slips by us, I glance back, hoping to see them return to the depths of the building. Instead, in those last few moments, I witness their collective demeanour fracture into a desperate frenzy, their mouths opening in a silent scream as they slam their fists against the glass.

Turning back around, I stare into the buildings that currently flank our vehicle. The figures have already arrived at the windows, and their calm is already fading.

**AS:** Rob, we need to go faster.

**ROB:** I’m on it.

The Wrangler growls with renewed ferocity as Rob plants his foot onto the gas. We lurch towards the next corner, accelerating down the road as Rob scans for any hidden turns. I achingly shift in my seat, keeping an eye on the scene developing in our wake.

Shards of broken window begin to rain onto the asphalt. Watching the shattered pieces tumble through the air, it’s apparent that the quiet in this city isn’t simply due to a lack of activity. The torrent of splintered glass is completely silent, even as it crashes against the impervious ground.

Nothing in this city makes a noise. Nothing except us. 

The thunderous engine of the Wrangler has never sounded so loud.

Looking up, I witness hundreds of hands gripping the shattered window frames, unable to turn myself away as thousands of polished black shoes step over the threshold. The figures stream out from every floor, forming an incomprehensible deluge of humanity.

The first wave strikes the ground, with more and more landing against them; a heap of tangled figures struggling to separate themselves. Much like the residents of Jubilation, and everyone else we’ve encountered on the road, they appear impervious to the fatal harm such an act should impart. Those that landed on their feet hardly even stop, turning towards us, and sprinting after the Wrangler. It doesn’t take long for the rest of the writhing mass to resolve itself, its constituent individuals joining the frantic stampede, their chaotic charge and desperate screams bereft of any perceivable sound.

Even in the midst of the frenzied pursuit, as a foreboding shower of glass falls from every building we pass, the world outside remains silent; the chaos made even more incomprehensible framed against the ungodly stillness in which it takes place.

Rob screeches around the corner, drifting onto a long and open street. The roadway ahead is flanked by skyscrapers disappearing to a narrow vanishing point. As we race down this next stretch of road towards a large intersection, the ever growing mob bursts onto the street behind us, taking the corner with supreme coordination and continuing tirelessly in our direction.

A split second later, I’m struck by an abrupt and pervasive idea. It feels unlike any thought I’ve ever had before, less of a notion, and more a prescient hybrid of intuition and de ja vu, as if the course of action we must take is obvious to me, despite my not knowing why.

I force my voice above a grating whisper.

**AS:** Rob. We need to drop something behind us… something loud.

**ROB:** What’re you thinkin’?

**AS:** I uh… you just have to trust me ok? We still have most of the plastic explosive could you-

**ROB:** Nah, if you took out the blasting cap I ain’t got time to make a new one. 

Rob’s glances into the rear view, then back to the road. I can almost hear the gears turning in his head.

**ROB:** But that the only explosive on-board. Think you can drive?

**AS:** I guess we can find out.

The car thunders across the tarmac as I clumsily grasp the wheel, shifting myself over and working my foot onto the accelerator. Rob lifts himself away and climbs past me into the back of the Wrangler. In my weak state, every shuddering motion makes my bones rattle. With each subsequent gearshift, I’m forced to take my remaining hand off the wheel and reach across to the stick. The effort is precarious and awkward, my aching limbs puppeteered by will power and adrenaline, every passing second a battle to maintain control.

The windows up ahead are starting to fracture. The noise of the Wrangler is carrying, and the entire city is starting to pre-empt our arrival. Behind me, I can hear the ripping of duct tape, the tearing of fabric and the clattering of falling luggage. I’m not sure what’s taking place behind me. I just have to trust that Rob has a plan.

I hear the back door swing open just before we reach the intersection, a metallic scraping along the Wrangler’s floor, and a pained grunt from Rob as he throws something onto the road behind us.

Reaching the crossroads, I slide my hand along the wheel and twist it sharply to the right. As the car lurches round, and onto the next road, I feel my heart sink dramatically. We’ve been overtaken. The windows ahead of us are shattered, the front doors lay broken on the street, and the building’s desperate inhabitants are rushing towards us, blocking off our only means of escape.

I slam my foot onto the break, and the Wrangler shudders to a halt, the engine stalling and cutting out. The streets are now spilling over, an overwhelming swarm converging on our position from four directions. I look back to Rob, and he meets my gaze, his eyes brimming with dismayed finality.

An explosion shudders through the air behind us. I look out the back window to see a shattered jerry can, one of Rob’s now superfluous fuel reserves, its dark green shell violently compromised, its contents spilled out across the road and cast alight. Now that the engine isn’t running, the echo of the blast and roar of the primal, balletic flame fills the afternoon air.

The trajectory of the maddened crowd changes instantaneously, the silent Wrangler has fallen from their collective attention, as they refocus onto the smouldering flames. Those up ahead continue to rush past us, streaming around the Wrangler as they scramble to the spilled pool of gasoline, digging their hands into the blaze, grasping hopelessly at the fire.

Delicately, careful not to make a single shred of noise, I climb out of the driver’s seat, joining Rob in the back of the Wrangler.

He addresses me in a confused whisper.

**ROB:** Why don’t they care about us? What are they doing?

**AS:** … It’s the sound. They want it for themselves.

I don’t how I’m so sure, but I know that it’s the case. The jerry can creaks and screams as the city dwellers tear it into smaller and smaller pieces, frantically examining every jagged scrap. With each passing second, as the fire dies down, the crowd grows increasingly distressed, as if a precious commodity is slipping through their fingers.

**AS:** They don’t understand it. They’ll pull it apart trying to figure it out and they’ll never get any closer… and then it’ll be quiet again.

**ROB:** Where you gettin’ this from?

**AS:** I don’t know, just a uh… just a feeling.

**ROB:** Well... pretty sure they woulda pulled us apart too. I’d say we’re pretty lucky.

**AS:** Hah, yeah… pretty lucky.

As the last of the gasoline is eaten up, and the fire dies away, the city dwellers remain in the streets. Devoid of their momentary sense of purpose, their prize vanishing into the ether, the crowd’s desperation fades into a hushed despondency. I watch them as they pass by, countless faces wracked with sorrow, their aimless shuffling forming a lonesome sea, a grayscale ocean that spans the desolate city.

The Wrangler is now adrift in the centre of that ocean. It’s clear that any attempt to start the engine would bring the entire city down on us, reigniting their futile hope, causing them to tear through the car, and anything inside it.

For the foreseeable future, we’re completely stranded.

**ROB:** Don’t worry about it, ok?

**AS:** I don’t think they’re going to leave Rob.

**ROB:** They’ll leave.

**AS:** Ok… and what then? They’ll still be everywhere.

**ROB:** Hey, we’re a smart pair. We’ll think of somethin’.

In the eerie, pervasive calm that surrounds us, I sit myself down next to Rob and lean back against the wall, with nothing else to do but wait for our situation to change. After watching the figures outside for over an hour, the only thing that’s different is a strange needling sensation that feels like it’s emanating from now absent forearm.

**AS:** My uh… my arm hurts… how’s that possible-

**ROB:** Don’t worry that’s uh… it’s called Phantom Limb. You got some sensation right? Like you still got somethin’ there? A lotta people get that after amputations. Here…

Rob reaches into his medical kit and retracts a blue jar of tablets. Twisting off the cap, he shakes two pills free.

**ROB:** You’re gonna need these for the pain.

I stare at the tablets for a moment, before collecting them from his open palm. He passes me his canteen and I swallow them down in two weak gulps.

**AS:** You have a lot of experience with amputations?

**ROB:** … More than you’d think.

My brow furrows. Though I’d meant my remark as a passing jibe, Rob’s response rings with a strange sincerity. It takes me a moment to realise why that is.

**AS:** I forgot... you were drafted. You never talked about it.

**ROB:** Been thinkin’ about it a lot though. Bunch of strangers brought together under false pretences, told that we were servin’ a grand purpose by some old liar. Guess it’s interestin’ how time repeats itself. Now that I think about it, he drove a Jeep too.

**AS:** Rob… I told you, you didn’t bring us here-

**ROB:** That don’t change nuthin’. Don’t change what I did… to you, to Bobby, to any of ‘em. Maybe you were there in the forest but I was the one who started this, the one who kept askin’ what was at the end of the road.

**AS:** What do you think is at the end Rob?

**ROB:** Startin to think that ain’t for me to know. I been movin’ from place to place so long, seen everyone else settle down. Far as I can see, the end of the road is just wherever you decide to stop.

I rest my head on Rob’s shoulder. He gently places his arm around me. It isn’t long before medication starts to take effect, quietly overtaking my already weakened constitution. The pain subsides, dulled along with the rest of my senses. The sun is still streaming through the windshield as my eyes begin to drift shut. 

I watch the figures pass the window, my eyelids getting weaker.

**AS:** I don’t want this to be the end Rob.

**ROB:** I know Miss Sharma, I know.

The last thing I see before I fall into a dreamless artificial sleep, is Rob Guthard’s hand reaching for the rifle.

*****

When my eyes work themselves open, the sun is beginning to set.

I’ve been moved. As my vision adjusts, it becomes clear that I’m still in the Wrangler. My head resting against a pile of fresh clothes, a soft travel blanket laid across me.

I glance around to find that Rob’s nowhere to be seen.

Momentarily forgetting the situation outside the car, I attempt to call out for him. The syllable catches in my throat as a shambling figure passes by the window, wringing its hands in despair and casting a long shadow through the car. 

With a renewed sense of caution, I slide the blanket to one side, and slowly make my way to the up front.

The cabin is similarly empty, except for a single scrap of paper, torn from my notebook. It lies on the driver’s seat, a small object hidden within the fold. When I open it, I find my headphones and five neatly written words:

“Channel One To All Cars”

My hand starts to shake as I rest the note on the dashboard, slowly climbing through and placing myself gently into the driver’s seat. My heart in my throat, I insert the headphones into the jack of the CB radio, take a single, quivering breath in, and press the first button.

**AS:** Rob?

**ROB:** I’m uh… I’m sorry Miss Sharma.

**AS:** Rob, where are you?

**ROB:** Down the road a little. Got myself to one of the rooftops. I know I always hated cities but, once you’re above it, the view’s really somethin’.

**AS:** Come back Rob. Come back... please.

**ROB:** I wish I could. I do. But we both know those things ain’t leavin. And you need the car to get where ever you gotta go so… best I can do is make some ruckus, draw’em outta your way.

I rest my head against the steering wheel, bracing myself against the weight of his words.

**AS:** I can’t do this without you.

**ROB:** I don’t think that’s true Miss Sharma. I think whatever’s on this road… it wants you to make it all the way. All I was meant to do was bring you this far. Now you don’t have to listen to it, you can turn around and head home… but either way only one of us is drivin’ outta here. So I guess the only question left is... which way d’you wanna go?

**AS:** Well… are you ahead of me or behind me?

**ROB:** I can be anywhere. It’s your choice Miss Sharma.

In the wake of Rob’s words, in the shadow of the decision, I’m cast into silence; not because the choice is hard, but because I’m ashamed that it’s so easy. It was made the moment I first stepped into the Wrangler, and renewed in every perplexing moment since. The need to know, to comprehend, to uncover the truth has been with me all my life, but I never knew its roots ran so deep, that it would endure so ardently when everything else, everyone else, had been stripped away.

I stare into the rear view mirror, seeing myself for the very first time, and I have to admit I’m scared.

**AS:** Stay where you are Rob.

**ROB:** Hah… ok Miss Sharma… you ready?

**AS:** … Yeah. I’m ready.

**ROB:** Alright then… suppose it’s about time this thing did some good.

The shot explodes through the radio, before a faint booming echo reaches me on the quiet city air.

Its effect on the city dwellers is immediate. Their collective melancholy shatters in an instant, replaced by a renewed fixation. Before I know it, the disparate crowd unites once more into a stampeding horde, rushing past the windows of the Wrangler and back down the road towards the source of the noise.

**ROB:** They on their way?

As the last of the city dwellers disappear behind me, I run my hand across the steering wheel, and down to the ignition.

**AS:** Yeah… yeah they’re on their way.

**ROB:** Ok then... what’re you waitin’ for?
 
With a fateful twist of the key, the Wrangler roars back to life. The wheels kick against the asphalt, transporting me through the streets of the city. As I barrel away from the intersection, I see a small contingent of pursuers rushing around the corner behind me.

Rob fires the rifle again, maintaining the attention of the majority. The stragglers fall away in my rear view mirror, losing ground against the Wrangler. 

I take the first left, then the next possible right, then another left, a few minutes later I eventually find myself on the last stretch of road, leading me back into the vast and empty desert.

**ROB:** So, you gonna make it?

**AS:** Yeah, I’m gonna make it.

**ROB:** Good. That’s good. Miss Sharma, if uh… if you find Marjorie, if you get a chance to let me know… well it’s more than I deserve but-. 

**AS:** Of course… of course I will.

**ROB:** I appreciate that. Ok, they’re gonna be here soon so… I’m gonna go radio silent for a while. If I call, you’ll know I made it out. If I don’t call… you just assume I made it out, ok?

**AS:** Please tell me you’re going to be alright, Rob. 

**ROB:** … It’s been a real honour drivin’ with you Miss Sharma.

The sound of a final shot reverberates through the radio, its echo drowned out by the roaring engine of the Wrangler. The world shifts around me as I burst out of the city, and back onto the desert road.

The way ahead is laden with immense possibility, yet as I disappear into the vastness of the desert, I can only think of what I’ve left behind. Rob J Guthard had his flaws, marked by loss, driven by obsession, his good intentions often paving the way to tragedy and heartbreak. 

As the tears begin to roll down my cheeks, I decide to remember him differently; as a valued friend, a good man and, above all else, a great story.

No matter how you tell it. It’s odd that I was dreaming about my daughter the moment before I opened my eyes and saw her peering at me beside my night stand. In the inky darkness of my bedroom I could just make out her six year old outline: her hands threaded together at her waist, fulfilling her dubious mien when disturbing someone of authority, chubby cheeks that always pulled her lips into a smirk, that curly blonde hair she got from her mother who was delicately snoring beside me. I was groggy and no sunlight had penetrated the windows yet so I knew it was the middle of the night. 


“Lucy?”


“Daddy, there’s a man in the baby’s room.”


Such sinister words from the sweetest voice. 


In a flash, I ripped the covers from my body, waking my wife in the process, then raced down the hallway, past the pictures hung on the wall, and into the bedroom on the end. With a simple flick of a switch, I was exposed to my two-month-old son’s room: the mint colored walls, the boxes of gifted diapers from the baby shower, a basket of plush animals, a tub of pacifiers and wipes. But behind the crib where my son, Noah, was sleeping was something appalling.


An intruder crawling through the window.


The intruder craned his neck when the light blasted on and alerted him of my presence. It was then when I noticed the knife. The man was large, with greasy long hair and an unkempt beard. He smelled of body odor and that sour, putrid smell of vaporized drugs. I leapt into action before he could achieve a sturdy footing or leverage the knife to his advantage. I skirted the crib where my son still slept and removed a heavy bookend from the bookcase, then, as unsupported baby books tumbled off the shelf, I bludgeoned the intruder in the arms as he flailed and teetered on the window sill. After the intruder took several missed swipes with the knife, my aim became focused on his head. After my weapon made contact with his skull a few times he withdrew into the backyard, lumbering awkwardly around our flower bed before hobbling over our fence and disappearing into the dark street. 


I picked up Noah, who thankfully, was still sleeping and oblivious, and held him firmly against my chest.


“What’s going on? Why is the window open?” I heard my wife ask behind me as she came into Noah’s room.


“Call 911, now. We just had an intruder.”


“What?” She laughed.


“Now,” I demanded, loud enough to vocally project my fear but unintentionally lifted Noah from slumber.


She phoned the police as I flipped on every light switch in the house, especially the exterior ones, and cruised through the rooms with Noah on my hip, doing my best to calm him. It took two laps through the living room but eventually he was calm enough for my wife and I to talk after her phone call.


“Will you tell me what happened?” She asked.


“Yeah. Sorry I yelled earlier. I was just emotional, ya know?”


“It’s okay. What happened?”


“Somebody was trying to break into the house through Noah’s room. I forgot to lock the window after we painted his room. Remember, we opened it for ventilation? I’m so sorry honey. Something could of-”


“Stop it,” my wife demanded. “Noah’s okay. You’re okay. I’m okay. Everyone is fine.”


“You’re right.”


“Police are on their way. They’ll find the guy.”


“He won’t be hard to pick out of a lineup. Some drug-addled thief looking for a score.”


“What made you wake up? Was Noah crying?”


I paused for a moment to consider an answer then looked at my curious-eyed son. “Yeah, Noah’s crying woke me.”


“I feel terrible. I slept right through his crying fit.”


“Don’t worry. Everything turned out for the best. How about some coffee, hun?”


She went to the kitchen and I heard the coffee pot being washed. I took Noah to the hallway and propped his body up on my side so he was eye level with the photographs that lined the hallway. I showed my son a picture of a six year old girl with blonde curls that flanked a grin between chubby cheeks.


“That’s Lucy, Noah. She’s your big sister.”


Noah, with tiny, stumpy fingers, reached out and planted a palm on the frame.


“I always knew she would be a great sister. She died before you were born, Noah, and your mother and I miss her everyday. But it’s good to know she’s still looking out for her little brother. ”"You fucking creep!" she screamed.

I just sat there, staring at the glass of water in front of me. I was used to this type of thing by now. Things always ended up like this anyway.

"Ugh, you know how freaking long it will take me to get back home?"

Yes.

"Not even gonna say anything? You play it all nice and smooth with that fake picture of yours, saying you're going to meet up with me here and now you don't even have the balls to speak up? You pathetic loser!"

She even grinned for a moment as she threw the insult at me.

Another customer of the small dinner got up. He was an older man. His attire screamed blue-collar.

"Now, now, young lady, what's going on here?"

"That freak over there pretended to be someone else! He called me all the way out here on a date and, god! How'd I be so stupid?"

His eyes wandered from her to me. They weren't compassionate anymore, no, now they showed nothing but contempt.

"Well young man, you've got some explaining to do!"

I still stared at the glass of water. My throat felt like it was clenched shut.

"Hey, I'm talking to you!" he yelled at me.

By now, the whole place stared at the awkward scene with me right in the center.

"I didn't," I started but broke up.

"Too embarrassed to even speak, eh?"

Once more, I couldn't find the words.

"Yes, sorry mom, it's gonna be at least another hour. No, I'm fine, just some weirdo. No, I didn't see Anna today. What? No, it's alright, I'll just take the train. Yes, I'm on my way."

I listened to each of her words and smiled. At least an hour, good, I thought.

"Now what are you smiling about, boy?"

The blue-collar man still didn't let off. Finally, I pushed myself past him, and awkwardly made my way to the door.

"What was that all about?" I heard a young woman whisper to her friend.

"Guess he catfished her or something?"

"Ewww, that's so creepy!"

I didn't listen to their words. They didn't know a damned thing!

'Why did you hurt mommy?'

'What? The hell are you talking about pipsqueak?'

'I saw it, you hit her, and she was crying.'

'How the hell would you see something like that?'

I didn't even see his slap coming. He stared down at me, his eyes furious.

'Linda, did you tell the boy?'

'N-no, of course not, why'd I ever-'

'Ugh, shut up, bitch!'

I still lay on the floor, my face hot with pain. I listened as dad got up and made his way to the kitchen.

I jerked away in my seat. The old lady opposite me looked over before she mumbled something to herself.

Why'd I remembered something like that now, dammit? Now where am I, I wondered? As I stared outside and read the name of the station, I sighed. It would still be another half hour before I'd be home. I checked the time on my phone again and saw that it was already eleven in the evening. Shit, and I got an early shift tomorrow.

Work was hard that day. I'd barely gotten five hours of sleep, and it was the busiest time of the year. I slumped through the warehouse, sorting shelves and repackaging products with my eyes only half-open.

"Hey, yeah you! There's some trash over here with your name on it!" one of my older coworkers called out to me.

Laughter from a few of my other colleagues erupted.

I sighed, and without making eye contact, I stumbled to where he was pointing. It really sucked to be the new guy on the job. As I was busy cleaning up the mess that he'd most likely caused by him, I heard them talk behind my back.

"The hell's wrong with him? Does he ever say a word?" one of them asked in a hushed voice.

"Dunno, think he's mentally challenged or something," another voice chimed in.

"Just leave the boy be," a third one added.

"Why are you so concerned about him?"

"Just don't want him to snap and shot the place up."

"Hah, as if that pussy'd be ever able to pull something like that!"

Laughter erupted again. You know, I can hear every single word you're saying, I thought. Shit, who am I kidding, I bet they knew, too.

After six more hours, my shift finally ended. The bus ride from work took me about half an hour. Day after day, I spent it glued to the screen of my phone.

I opened up the first of the many dating apps I'd installed. I swiped through the countless girls one by one, staring at their pictures. Long hair, short hair, happy smile, confident smile, group of girls, on and on it went.

It took me about five minutes to find one. She was pretty, long blond hair and had a shy, somewhat playful smile.

In a moment I opened the chat window and threw her one of the many one-liners I knew by heart now.

I was already home when she finally replied. The new picture I'd chosen worked wonders. For half an hour, we were joined in mindless chit-chat before I finally asked her if she had plans for the evening.

She was a bit reluctant to answer. It was always the same. I sent her a few more of my rehearsed lines, boosting her confidence, soft-soaping her and pushing more lies down her throat. She was an easy one, it took me no more than a few minutes to get her to agree to the date. I fell back on my bed as relief flooded my face.

I checked the phone once more. It was still a few hours before I'd got to go. Guess I'll set the alarm and take a nap. Wasn't like I had to dress up or prepare for the date.

Mom was crying in the other room while dad's fist came down on my face once more. Again and again, until he stopped after half a dozen times, panting.

'That should teach you to not spout those damned lies anymore!' he screamed at me.

'But I saw it again,' I mumbled in a low voice.

'What was that you little shit?'

I curled up into a ball and said nothing.

'Thought so.'

Mom was still crying.

I woke up. Why were my dreams always about him? Goddamnit!

On my way to the bus, I thought about dad.

Dad hadn't always been an asshole. When I was a little kid, he'd genuinely been the best. Then he started to drink. When I found out he was beating mom, I became a target as well.

For years the abuse went on until I learned to be smart enough to keep quiet. No, talking about it wasn't helping anyone.

When I became a teenager, and after mom's death, dad and I became close again. It was by necessity if anything. As a teenager, I couldn't just move out.

Age hadn't been kind to him, neither had the booze. On the old pictures, he was quite good looking, hell even handsome.

Now, pushing forty, he looked much older. His head was pale, his skin pudgy and grey and his stomach had developed into a bulging beer belly. Whatever he wore, it seemed to always tear at the fabric, trying to free itself.

"See her over there? Now that's my type of woman, alright," he said to me, pointing at someone ahead of me.

I stared at the young blond ahead of us. Small frame, a bit too timid and awkward. As I watched her, I saw the bruises on her arms, saw her shift slightly with her feet. I could even see the blue bruises on her hips. Exactly like mom, I thought. Always ending up in an abusive relationship, always another drunk bastard beating her.

"Well hello there young lady, need any help with those bags?" dad approached her and reached out a slimy hand.

The woman stared at him, and I saw her face contort by a mixture of surprise and disgust.

"No, I'm fine," she mumbled in a low voice.

"Now come on, don't be like that, babe, why don't you just let me help you with those, hm?"

He asked, trying to take one of the bags from her. As he did, I saw him put his slimy hand on her back.

"It's alright, I'm-"

"Now, now, modesty won't do you any good," he continued, and I saw his hand move downward.

"Dad!" I called out to him, putting my hand on his shoulder. "It's late, let's go home, I'm starving."

In a moment, the lady tore her bag free from him and hurried down the road as far as she could.

"Damnit, what the hell are you doing, idiot!?"

Another slap in the face.

"Man, I was so close to getting some," he cursed.

He was always this way. Not wasting any chance, trying to get his way with women. His behavior rude, lecherous and at times downright violent.

I didn't cry when they buried him in an early grave a few years later.

Once I entered the bus, I had another half-hour ahead of me. I sent my newest date another message. I didn't like emoticons, hell, I detested them, yet I made sure to sprinkle my messages with them. Somehow, people seemed to enjoy them.

That day I'd chosen a small bar. I'd told her it was a secret tip, but all I cared about was the distance.

The moment I arrived, I chose a seat by the window. I always arrived early, to keep watch and see if they actually came. Bus after bus arrived and finally a bouncy, beaming blond exited. She looked around for a moment before she typed something on her phone. Only a second later mine vibrated.

"I'm here, you already there?'

'Yeah, window seat, back row!'

I saw her enter, saw her look around. The place was half empty. Her eyes noticed me. At first, she looked away, but then her eyes focused on me again.

'I don't see you.'

'Yes, you do.'

I lifted my face and gave her an awkward smile before I looked away again.

It wasn't long before I heard the click-clack sound of her heels as she approached me. When I looked up again, the smile on her face had vanished.

"Who are you?"

"I'm Damien," I mumbled.

"What the hell? No, that can't be! Your picture, I mean," she toyed around with her phone, and after a short while, she held it to my face. "That's not you, is it?"

I said nothing. Instead, I kept my head low. The few other guests were already staring at me.

"Hey! Say something! Is this a freaking joke?"

The rest of the evening played out like the last one. As I stumbled out of the bar, I looked at her picture once more and smiled. In my mind, I saw her sitting on the bus, fuming, hurrying home and falling asleep, still angry about the whole thing. I smiled again.

Work was slow the next day, allowing me to steal away every once in a while. For a few minutes at a time, I scanned profiles.

I noticed her instantly. Short brown hair, cheeky smile, tank top.

We hit things off well enough, but she was a tough one. She was cheeky alright, calling out my lines and bluffs one after another.

Still, the picture I used did the trick, and she finally agreed to meet up with me.

The rest of the shift passed quietly. A few of my coworkers noticed my happy expression, which prompted a few more insults. I couldn't care less.

Once I arrived at the small restaurant I'd chosen, I decided on a window seat once again. The waiter came again and again, and by the third time, he started to get pushy. In a low voice, I ordered a drink.

I scanned the street, but there was still nothing. I opened my phone and sent her yet another quick message.

'Hey, where are you?'

'Sorry Romeo, went out with a few friends today.'

I stared at my phone with a deep frown. Shit, she wasn't coming, was she? I cursed to myself.

'Where are you going?' I asked her.

'Timbers! It's great, why don't you come by later?'

I opened Google Maps in a moment. Timbers, a bar in the freaking center of town.

"Are you ready to order yet," the waiter asked in a strained voice, "sir?"

"Fuck," I cursed once more. It was going to be one of 'those' nights.

"Sir, if you don't plan on ordering anything, then-"

Without even looking at him, I got up and left. Once I stood in the open street, I opened the app once more, staring at her picture.

I was antsy when I entered the bus again. I couldn't let it end like that. This was NOT how things were supposed to go!

It took the bus almost half an hour before it made it to the city center. The whole time I was nervous, shifting in my seat. Every once in a while, I stared at her picture, taking in as much as I could about her.

Before the bus had even rumbled to a stop, I was at the door, hitting the stop button.

Now where the hell is it?

I hurried down the street into the direction Google Maps told me, but there were too many damned clubs and bars around.

Then I saw it. The bright neon sign of the small bar named Timbers was only a hundred meters ahead of me.

I was in a minute later. The bouncer eyed me for a moment before he shrugged. My eyes wandered over the guests. Shit, it was way too damn late already. Would she even still be here? To make things worse, the place was packed! I shuffled through the guests and earned a few angry stares from people, but I went on.

Finally, my eyes grew wide. Short brown hair, cheeky smile, and a tank top like the one in the picture. When I saw the guy sitting next to her, his arm around her shoulder, I frowned.

I pushed my way back to the bar and ordered myself the cheapest cocktail they had. Then I made my way back towards them. I watched him as he whispered in her ear. I saw how he rubbed her upper arm and inched in closer. She giggled, yet when he tried to kiss her, she turned away and whispered something in his ear. She was cheeky. The guy however grinned, and when I saw that, rage exploded in my mind.

That smile, that damned smile. That's when I knew.

I stumbled forward, shakily and nervous, yet I didn't take my eyes off the guy. I'd almost reached them when I ran straight into a buff, tall guy.

"Hey, watch out where you're going!" he yelled at me and pushed me aside.

I stumbled forward and crashed right into the guy sitting next to the short-haired girl.

My hand collided with his face, and I spilled my drink all over his cloth.

Both of them screamed up in surprise. In a moment she retreated to the bench's end to not be drenched by the rest of the drink.

I pushed myself upwards and mumbled an excuse. Before I'd so much as finished it, the guy's fist hit me square in the face. There was an explosion of pain, and I could taste blood in my mouth.

"The fuck are you doing you goddamn freak!"

Once more he hit me in the face, then a third time. When I went down, he didn't leave off, kicking me again and again as he screamed obscenities at me.

"I'm going to fucking kill you, you piece of shit!"

I grinned up at him. He tried to kick me one more time, but right at that moment one of the bouncers tackled the guy.

Another guest was there, kneeling by my side.

"Hey, are you alright? You want me to call an ambulance?"

I shook my head, and then, with a tremendous effort, I tried to get up. Then heavy hands heaved me upwards, and I found myself face to face with the buff guy from before.

"Shit, man, sorry about that," he said clearly embarrassed about shoving me.

"Didn't know that guy was a freaking psycho!" he said and pointed at the guy taken away by security.

Soon after the barkeeper approached me, asking if he wanted me to call the police. I nodded.

It didn't take them long to arrive, and with the help of the buff guy and the bouncers, we gave them a detailed description of the man.

"You need us to take you to a hospital, sir?" one of the officers offered.

I shook my head. "No," I mumbled, "I'll be fine."

Once they were gone, I thanked the security and buff guy. He grinned at me.

"Tell you what, if you'd ruined my date, I might have kicked your ass too."

I gave him a weak smile. "Yeah, guess she was." I looked around for a moment.

"She's gone, booked it the instant that guy went all out on you! Looked mighty scared."

I nodded, thanked the guy once more, and left the bar behind.

On my way home, I took out my phone once more to look at her picture yet again. For the first time the whole evening, I was able to relax.

I could see her sitting in a taxi on her way home before she went to bed.

Gone were the images of her bloodied and beaten body. Gone was that guys grinning face as he stood above her.

The premonition had changed.

Even though it hurt like hell, I smiled.

She was saved.

[x](https://rehnwriter.com/)

[X](https://www.reddit.com/r/RehnWriter) 
I slowly opened my eyes. My head was swimming and a dull pain surrounded my throat. I was thirsty. That was the first thing I noticed. I licked my dry lips as my surroundings faded into focus. My body ached and I realized it was because I was tightly bound to a metal chair in the middle of an empty room. The barren concrete walls were stained and dirty, the floor beneath my bare feet was cold and slightly wet. 
     
A single bulb lit the room, dangling from the ceiling by a string. It cast moving shadows and I blinked back darkness. An open door stood before me, but I couldn't see anything but the wall of a hallway. 
     
I tried to clear my head, tried to remember how I got here. I squeezed my eyes shut and forced myself not to panic. I slowed my breathing and focused my thoughts, desperately trying to summon some recollection of why I was here. 
     
I couldn't remember anything. 
     
I opened my eyes and exhaled, my parched throat throbbing. I could hear sound echoing off the hallway walls outside the door. Screaming, clanging, howling, all very distant but that did nothing to help calm my nerves. 
    
“Hello?!” I cried, the word tearing at my vocal cords. I felt my chest hitch in pain but I cleared my throat and yelled again.
      
“Is anyone there!? Hello!?”
       
The dark hallway remained silent except for the constant echoes. I shut my mouth and tried to wriggle free of my bindings, but the rope was knotted impossibly tight. I fought back against my imagination as it flooded my mind with horrific scenarios of what awaited me. If I could only remember!
       
Suddenly, footsteps erupted from outside the door, a rapid patter of small feet. My hopes rose and I trained my attention on the door, praying it was help. 
       
A young boy ran into the room, dressed in a red onsey, complete with padded feet. Stretched over his face was a plastic Devil mask. The eye holes revealed massive blue eyes that greeted me curiously. Taken back, I opened my mouth to speak but that's when I noticed something was off. His eyes were huge, impossibly round and bulging from their sockets. It sent a shiver of unease down my spine, but I shook it off. This child might be able to free me. 
       
“Hey!” I hissed, urgently, “Hey kid, can you get me out of here?!” 
       
The boy took a step closer, cocking his head, but remaining silent. 
       
I rattled my bound arms against the chair, “Cut me free, please, I shouldn't be here, this is some kind of mistake!”
       
The boy eyed me behind his strange mask and stopped directly in front of me. He leaned in close and whispered, his voice like wet silk, “You did a bad thing...”
        
Confused, I shook my head, “No! No this is a mistake! I didn't do anything!”
        
The boy's enormous blue eyes suddenly filled with sadness, “Oh, you did a really, really bad thing...”
        
I shook my head again, violently, “No! I'm sorry! I don't remember, just please get me out of this chair!”
       
Suddenly, before either of us could speak again, a man came charging into the room. He was overweight and dressed in overalls, his grizzled face twisted in seething anger. He was holding a sawed off shotgun in his arms. 
       
“I didn't do anything!” I cried as he advanced on us, my voice cracking, “I'm not supposed to be here!”
       
The big man ignored me and instead grabbed the kid and shoved him hard against the wall. The boy grunted as his back struck the concrete and his eyes rose to meet the grizzled man's. 
        
Wordlessly, the man raised his shotgun, placed it against the boy's forehead, and blew his head off. Chunks of gore splattered the wall as shock slugged me in the stomach like an iron fist. My ears rang and time seemed to slow as I watched in horror as the headless body crumpled to the ground.  
        
My breath rushed back into my lungs and time seemed to readjust. 
        
“Jesus fucking CHRIST!” I screamed, straining against the ropes, my eyes bulging in horrific shock, “WHAT THE FUCK!?”
         
The man ignored my screams as he bent down and picked up the boy. He slung the ruined corpse over his shoulder and walked out the doorway. 
         
Suddenly, the hallway erupted with malicious laughter, a chorus of voices all howling in glee. I shut my eyes, the noise deafening, as absolute terror filled my every pore. 
          
After a few moments, the laughter faded and I cautiously opened my eyes, unable to believe what I had just witnessed. 
          
“Hello.”
           
I jumped as I realized there was another man standing before me. He was dressed in a simple, white button down shirt and jeans. His brown hair was cut short and he appeared to be in his early thirties. His green eyes were dull and lifeless, his full lips pulled down at the corners. 
           
“What is going on!? Where am I!?” I cried, new fear pooling in my stomach like hot blood. 
            
The man crossed his arms, “So you're the new one huh?” He shook his head, “You people disgust me.”
            
Questions bubbled on my lips but he waved them off with a sharp chop of his hand, slicing the air and demanding my silence.
           
He ran his tongue over his teeth, sneering, “You look like you've already seen some of the horrors this place holds huh? Yes, I can tell by the look in your eyes. You're terrified. You've seen something haven't you? It doesn't seem all that bad now does it, looking back? You've been here five minutes and already you're shitting your pants.”
            
“Where am I?” I gasped, unable to hold back any longer, “What do you people want?”
            
The man crossed his arms behind his back, “I bet you want to get out of here don't you? I bet you'd like to go back to your home, your family, everything.”
            
“Please,” I interrupted, “Whatever I did to you...I'm sorry, I really am, but I don't remember!” 
            
The man rolled his eyes, “You didn't do anything to me. You did it to yourself. You really don't remember anything?”
             
I shook my head and felt tears brimming in my eyes, liquid fear. 
             
The man looked at me with contempt, “You waited until your wife left for work and then you went out to the woodshed and hung yourself. You're dead.”
             
The recent memory rose in my mind like a monster from a bog. My eyes went wide. As much as I wanted to deny it...he was right. I had killed myself. The incident tore through my brain like a bullet train and left me reeling. 
             
“I'm Danny, by the way,” the man said, ignoring the shocked look on my face, “And I'm number two here. I run the orientation process. I want to make this quick because I'm tired of repeating this fucking thing to you pathetic Suicidals. You get one question before I begin.”
              
He stared down at me and I scrambled to organize my thoughts into something cohesive. This was all horrifying. Why had I killed myself? I fought against the fog and panic and the mists of confusion slowly began to lift. I had just lost my job. Yes...that was the start. I squeezed my eyes shut and forced more of the memory to emerge. I had lost my job and I was about to lose the house. My wife...Tess...she found out and was going to leave me. I didn't have any way out, didn't have any options. Getting fired had come out of the blue and I didn't have much in savings. I was broke, soon to be homeless, and my wife hated me for it. There was something else...yes...that's right. She had been cheating on me. I had seen texts on her phone while she slept one night and confirmed my suspicions. My life had degraded to shit and I had run out of options. Humiliated and ashamed, I had decided death was my only option. 
      
“Hey, fucker, do you have a question or not?” Danny said, snapping his fingers in front of my face. 
      
I was sucked back into reality and I asked the only question that mattered.
      
“Is this Hell?”
       
Danny snorted, “That's always what you people ask.” He began to pace back and forth in front of me, “No. This is not Hell. It's not Heaven either. This is the Black Farm. And no, I didn't name it that. This is where God sends the souls who have ended their own life. Suicidals. You see, he doesn't really know what to do with you...and neither does the Devil. There are genuinely good people who kill themselves. Seems cruel to banish them to Hell for all eternity for a moment of weakness right? Personally, I think God and the Devil were just tired of arguing about it. And so, they send them here, to the Black Farm.”
       
“Did...did God create this place?” I asked, growing more and more confused. 
       
Danny spit on the floor, chuckling, “Sure, at some point. But he lost control of it when he put The Pig in charge.”
        
“What's The Pig?” I asked, unsure I wanted to know the answer.
         
Danny held up a hand, annoyed, “Can I fucking finish? God created this place, eons ago, put The Pig in charge, and then forgot about it for a while. Well, when his back was turned, The Pig decided to use his new powers to try and create his own little world. This mess you see around you is the fractured remains of that experiment. The Black Farm use to be a lot nicer, but The Pig wanted things to be different. He wanted to create his own vision. These people you see, these monsters? They are The Pig's attempts at creating functioning life. Instead of mirroring God's Earth, these mutated horrible creations are full of sin and hatred. They run rampant here, unabashed. This place is chaos. The Black Farm is a circus of freaks and monsters. And it's your eternity.”
       
Fear boiled in my gut like thick oil. No. No this couldn't be my end. I didn't believe in stuff like this. This wasn't real! I would wake up soon and realize I was just having a nightmare! That had to be it!
      
Danny stood before me and lightly slapped my face, “Hey, hey! Don't go into hysterics on me. I haven't finished yet.”
      
I raised my teary eyes to meet his.
      
Danny smiled, “You can always Feed the Pig.”
      
My breath pushed from my lungs like burning steam, “W-what does that mean?”
      
Danny spread his hands, still smiling, “It's as simple as that. Feed the Pig. If you do so, there's a chance he'll send you back to your life.”
      
“A-and w-what happens if it doesn't?” I bumbled.
      
“You get sent to Hell. So flip a coin if you have one. Stay here with us or Feed the Pig. If you choose to stay, I'll let you go...I'll let you go out there,” he said, pointing towards the door, “But let me assure you...what awaits you at the end of the hallway...well...let's just say Hell isn't that much worse.”
        
I swallowed hard, trying my best to digest everything. Why wouldn't I try Feeding the Pig? Whatever that meant. If there was even a sliver of hope, I would take it. An eternity in this place, the Black Farm, be sent to Hell, or...or Feed the Pig? I would do anything for a chance to go back. This nightmare made my problems seem nothing in comparison. 
        
Danny raised a hand before I could speak, “I'll let you think on it a while. I'll be back later.”
        
“I want to Feed the Pig!” I cried, not wanting to spend another second in this awful room. I could hear a woman screaming down the hallway, her cries rising as something meaty pounded into her. My breath came in sharp pulls and my throat burned. Danny noticed the noise and grinned.
         
“Sounds pretty bad huh?” He said softly as the woman's voice creaked with agony. Something was still slamming into her, the sound of beaten flesh igniting my imagination with horrors. 
         
“Please,” I gasped, breathless, “Just...just let me Feed the Pig. I don't want to stay here any longer.”
         
Danny turned away from me, “I'll be back later. Enjoy your time alone. Really think about your situation. Weigh your options. And remember...you put yourself here.”
         
And with that he was gone, leaving me in the dim room. 
         
Tears streamed down my face. 
         
The woman didn't stop screaming for hours. 

---

        
At some point, I fell into a semi-sleep. The darkness in the room seemed to press in on me and my eyes fluttered shut. My body ached and my throat was a halo of fire. Thirst raked at my windpipe like sharp glass. My lips felt like crumpled paper. My head thundered like a drum. The room swam in and out of focus and my mind drifted towards the horrific sounds that never ended. 
        
I was lost in a haze, unaware that something was sliding into the room until I felt a sharp prick on my big toe. I jolted out of my daze as my bare foot ignited with pain. I screamed and tried to move, but my bindings held me tight. 
        
The room rushed back into focus and I blinked in agony as I felt blood trickle between my toes. I looked down for the source of pain and I felt a scream claw up my throat. 
         
Staring up at me was an armless man. He slithered on the floor like a worm, his bald head scabbed and filthy. His legs were wrapped together in barbed wire, forcing him to wriggle his body to move. His eye were lidless and wide, two bloodshot white orbs that stared up at me with hungry intensity. His teeth had been removed and replaced with long screws which jutted from his bleeding gums like a broken rock formation. 
          
Around his neck was a chain leash, which I followed across the floor to the open door. The end of the leash was held by a tall, naked man. His body was hairless and flabby, covered in similar scabs like his pet. A dirty bag was pulled over his head that hid his features except for a single red eye that peeked out at me from a crude cut in the cloth.
          
He stared at me and groped his engorged penis, his breath heavy and labored. As the armless man wriggled towards me again, his master started to masturbate. I screamed as the screw filled mouth bit at me again and my cries seemed to stimulate the naked man even more. 
         
“Get off of me! Stop it!” I screamed, horrified. I tried to kick at the man, doing my best to avoid his sharp metal teeth. I brought my heel down on his head and he screamed as his face bounced off the floor. 
          
A moan of pleasure escaped the bagged man's mouth and I turned away as a mist of black sprayed out onto the floor. There was a rattle of chains and I turned back to see the two of them leaving, the armless man dragged by his neck out the door. I looked at where the bagged man had ejaculated and saw a puddle of dead ants. I vomited onto myself, thick chunky curtains of bile and slime. 
          
“GET ME OUT OF HERE!” I screamed, strands of puke running down my chin, “I DON'T BELONG HERE!”
       
I listened to the two men retreat down the hallway, the clank of chains accompanied by the sound of flesh being dragged across the concrete. I screamed again, but I knew no one was going to help me. I spit a wad of phlegm and bile onto the floor, ridding my mouth of its sourness. I forced myself to calm down. It wasn’t easy.
      
After some time, I heard someone else approaching. I had been in a miserable lull, my mind a blank canvas of dark despair, but the noise roused me from my trance like state. The muscles in my arms burned from being restrained for so long and I shifted them desperately, trying my best to prepare myself for whatever horror was about to walk through the door.
      
Footsteps drew closer and then a woman walked into the room. She stopped at the doorway and looked at me. One of her eyes was missing, a dark cavernous hole in her skull. Her hair was ratty and wild, a brown tangle like a forgotten nest. Her skin was pale and filthy and she was dressed in rags. I couldn’t tell how old she was, but there was maturity in her one good eye.
     
“Still thinking?” She asked, her voice course and brittle.
     
“What?”
      
She took a step closer, “Are you still deciding whether you’re going to Feed the Pig or not?”
     
I looked at her cautiously, “Yeah…I am. Who are you? What do you want?”
     
“I was once where you are now,” She said, “trying to decide my fate. I couldn’t believe that this was what happened…what happened after we die. It wasn’t what I was taught…religion didn’t warn me about this place.”
     
I tested my bindings again before asking, “You killed yourself too? You’re a person like me? You’re not one of those…those creations?”
     
She snorted, “Breaks my heart you have to ask, though,” she touched the hole where her eye should have been, “Though I can understand your caution. Yeah, I’m a Suicidal. I’ve been here a long, long time. But that was my choice. I decided to chance it here.”
     
I motioned with my head towards the door, “What’s out there? What is all this?”
     
She exhaled heavily and leaned against the wall, “I can’t even begin to describe this place. It’s like nothing you’ve ever seen. You walk down that hallway and go out…into it…and…” she swallowed,    “You’d have to see it to understand.”
     
“How bad is it? Why are all these mutated people hurting and killing each other?” I asked.
     
She let her head loll back against the wall, “It would take years for you to fully understand this place. Years you don’t have. Right now you have to make a decision. Stay or Feed the Pig. They tell me Hell is worse than here, but it can’t be by much. Monsters and Suicidals roam the Black Farm…killing, raping, brutalizing…and then you wake up and wonder how long you can survive before something else kills you. It’s an endless cycle.”
     
“So why did you stay?” I pressed, “Why didn’t you Feed the Pig? I don’t even know what that means, but I would do anything for a chance to go back. I can’t stay here, I…I just can’t!”
     
She smiled sadly at me, “Why? Why did I choose this? It’s simple really. I’m a coward. I was a coward when I was alive and I’m a coward in death. When it came down to it, when the moment presented itself, I chose to stay here. I didn’t know what awaited me outside. It boiled down to a simple choice fueled by my own fear.”
     
“What is The Pig? What does it do to you?” I pressed.
     
She suddenly turned to go, “I’m afraid that’s for you to find out. But let me warn you. Think hard before you make a decision. Sometimes suffering through your fear is better than suffering for eternity. Be brave.”
     
“What do I do!?” I yelled, shaking in my chair as she walked out the door.
     
She paused and took one last look over her shoulder. Her eyes darted around and she dropped her voice to a whisper, “Feed the Pig.”
     
And with that she was gone.
     
I sat in silence once again. My mind was spinning, desperately turning over my options. I still couldn’t fully understand the situation I was in. It was too much, too overwhelming. The other side of death wasn’t supposed to be like this. I didn’t know what I had expected, but it wasn’t this nightmare.    Questions crashed over my mind like cold waves onto a sinking ship. How was I supposed to make a choice when I didn’t even know what my actions entailed?
     
This place, the Black Farm…I couldn’t stay here. But what if I went to Hell? What if I didn’t get sent back? I would be out of the fire and into the frying pan. My existence would forever be damned to unending misery. Here though…here there were people like me. Suicidals. It wasn’t all monsters and mutilated murderers. Maybe I could hole up somewhere with them, try to scrape together a passable existence. Surely that would be better than getting sent to Hell!
     
No. No this wasn’t going to be how I spent my eternity. I refused to let it be. If there was even the slightest sliver of hope, I would take it. I didn’t want to wonder what could have been. I didn’t want to be tormented by doubt. I would Feed the Pig and accept whatever fate chose for me. When I boiled it down, that was the only option left.
     
I would Feed the Pig.
     
“Hey! Hello!? Danny!” I yelled, rattling in my chair. “I’ve made my decision! Danny!”
     
After a couple seconds, I heard footsteps echo down the hall towards me.
     
Danny walked through the doorway, an annoyed look on his face.
     
“I’ve made my choice,” I said, “I’m going to Feed the Pig.”
     
“Sounds like you’ve really thought a lot about it since I left you,” Danny said sarcastically.
     
I licked my lips, “You’d do the same thing if you were in my place.”
     
Danny walked behind me, “I was in your place once. And I chose differently.” My eyes widened and then Danny wrapped my entire head with a strip of thin cloth, blinding me. I sucked in as much air as I could, but each lungful felt empty.
      
I felt Danny cut me free from the chair and my body sighed as my stiff muscles were released. I rolled my shoulders as my hands were released and I moaned with relief. I dug my fingers into my back and I stretched, my bones creaking.
     
“Keep your blindfold on and follow me,” Danny said, pulling me up.
      
My legs shook as I put weight on them, my thighs trembling after their long cemented position. I groped blindly in front of me and found Danny’s shoulder. I rested my hand on it as he walked us out of the room.
     
As were entered the hallway, I could suddenly hear sound I hadn’t before. The clank of metal, a long fleshy tearing noise, something vomiting…these sounds sprang to life in my ears, painting the darkness before my eyes with imaginary scenes of horror. I gripped Danny’s shoulder tighter, stumbling behind him, my heart thundering.
     
I heard something trailing behind us, but Danny didn’t seem to notice. Or if he did, he didn’t care.    Flesh slapped the concrete mere inches behind me and I suddenly felt hot breath on my neck and the click of a wet tongue against gums. My breathing became even more labored as fear choked me.
     
“Go’in ta feed da piggy are ya?” Something whispered in my ear. I felt something press against the back of my head and I tried not to think about what it might be. It was wet and slimy and I heard the thing chuckle.
     
“Ee’s a ‘ungry piggy, you make shor’ ee gets iz meal now,” the thing whispered again, its voice low and unlike anything I had ever heard before. It was like a series of grunts and moans jumbled together to form broken words.
     
To my relief, I heard the thing retreat back to wherever it had come from and I continued to follow Danny. He remained silent as we walked and I could feel shifts in the air. The thick heat gave way to a cooler, almost pleasant temperature, but then it kept decreasing and soon I was shivering violently against the cold. I couldn’t see anything but I felt a breeze on my face, like we were outside. I didn’t hear Danny open any doors, but nothing about this place was natural. It was like reality blurred and bled into itself, like reels of film melting together.
     
Teeth chattering, I was suddenly blasted with intense heat and I gasped. My feet tripped over themselves as the terrain changed and I was suddenly walking on what felt like warm iron. My ears were filled with the sound of blazing furnaces and the clash of working machinery. I couldn’t see it, but     I felt like there was a vast open expanse overhead. I smelled ash and tasted dirt on my tongue, sweat already forming along my spine. 
     
Suddenly, I crashed into Danny as he came to a halt. I backed up a few paces, quickly, and muttered my apologies. I could hear movement in front of us, a rustle of chains and an odd clicking sound on the metal floor. Something else too...something...snorting.
      
And then the room filled with a deafening sound of an immense pig squealing. I covered my ears, head splitting at the high pitched wail. I grit my teeth as the noise echoed off the metal and faded into a series of snorts and grunts. 
      
It sounded absolutely enormous. 
      
“I've brought another one,” Danny announced, a slight tinge of respect lining his voice. “He wants to Feed the Pig.”
       
I waited, expecting to hear some answer, the cloth around my eyes sealing my sight to darkness. I realized my knees were shaking and my back was coated in sweat. I was terrified. 
       
“If that is what you wish,” Danny said and I felt him bow under my hand. Apparently some unseen conversation had just happened and Danny took my wrist and pushed me forward. 
        
“Approach The Pig,” he instructed. 
        
My whole body trembled and my knees locked into place. Robbed from sight, I raised my hands, trying to get my bearings, the heat and ash filling my head with nausea. I felt like I was going to throw up, my stomach rolling like a dead sea. I didn't know where I was or what horror lay before me. I felt lost and tiny, a fresh splash of tears dripping from my eyes and soaking into the cloth around my face. 
        
“P-please,” I begged, “Let me see what's happening.”
         
Danny was suddenly behind me, pushing me forward. He guided my hands towards something as we stepped together in unison. Even with the cloth around my face, I could see a giant mass of towering darkness before me. It was a spot of black on an already darkened canvas. 
          
As we walked forward, I was suddenly assaulted by a horrendous smell and I gagged, turning away. Danny's grip tightened and forced me to continue. I could sense something just in front of me, a living shifting mass of flesh. The smell increased to a wretched level and I gagged again. Then hot air was being blown on my face, a blast of heat that came in repeated short bursts. 
          
I vomited into my cloth, the source of the smell stemming from the hot air. I choked as the bile gushed over the fabric, soaking it and momentarily cutting off my oxygen. Danny slapped my hands away and I took a few seconds to steady my breathing again. I was opening crying now, fear and misery collapsing my willpower. 
          
The wet cloth stunk as I sucked in soggy breaths. My own stomach acid coated my skin and I begged for all of this to be over. 
          
And then something squealed directly in front of me. 
          
I felt my bladder go. I was standing before The Pig. 
          
It was the source of darkness in my obscured vision; a fat, titanic creature that filled my senses with every breath it blew into my face. 
          
Danny raised my hands and suddenly I was touching The Pig's snout. I recoiled immediately, but Danny forced my hands back. Its fur was stiff and brittle and as my shaking hands explored up its nose, the size of the animal became clear to me. 
          
It was gigantic and had weight over a ton. Its flesh wiggled under my sweating hands and it opened its mouth slightly. My fingers curled around teeth the size of kitchen knives and I realized its mouth was absolutely cavernous. 
          
The Pig squealed again and I heard its hooves clack against the ground. It sounded like thunder rolling across an open field in the middle of summer. 
           
“Take this blindfold off, please,” I begged, my legs turning to jelly. 
           
Danny had taken a few steps back and I heard reverence in his voice, “You don't want to do that.”
           
I jumped as The Pig nudged me with its nose, the wet circle of flesh squishing against the length of my face. I shuddered away, raising my hands and omitting a cry of fear. 
           
“Feed the Pig,” Danny instructed, his voice like cold steel now. “You made your choice. Now live with it. It's the only chance you have of going back. Or maybe The Pig won't like how you taste and send you to Hell. Only one way to find out.”
            
My eyes widened behind the vomit soaked cloth, “Won't...like...how I taste?!”
            
“Climb into its mouth.”
            
My bladder let go again and I felt warm piss run down my leg, “N-no...no you can't mean...”
            
Danny's voice hardened, “Climb into its mouth and don't stop crawling forward until its done with you.”
            
“P-please,” I begged, turning towards Danny's voice, reaching out blindly, “Please there has to be some other way...don't make me do this!” I was a mess of snot and tears, my words bumbling from my mouth like a toddler. 
             
Danny stepped forward and spun me back to face The Pig, “DO IT! You made your choice! It will all be over soon! This is your only CHANCE!”
             
I could feel The Pig breathing onto my face, its snout mere inches from mine. The smell and heat it omitted made me want to vomit again but I held it back. This was insane, this wasn't happening. My mind spun and twisted in chaos and fear. There had to be some other way. I couldn't do this, I COULD NOT do this!
              
Suddenly I remembered the words of the woman: Sometimes suffering through your fear is better than suffering for eternity. Be brave.
               
This was my only chance to get back to the world of the living. I had made such a terrible mistake in killing myself. If I could go back and change my life, I wouldn't have to spend eternity here. I could change my ways, ensure a spot somewhere else. Somewhere away from The Pig. But what if it decided to send me to Hell? How much more suffering could I endure? 
               
I had to take the chance. 
               
“Please, God,” I whispered, taking a step forward, “If you can hear me...please...have mercy on me.”
                
My shaking hands reached out for The Pig and I grasped its thick fur. I felt it slowly lower its head and open its mouth. It was waiting for me, its thick, hot breath stinking in my nostrils. This was it. No turning back now.
                
I slowly gripped its teeth and pulled myself forward into its jaws. Its head was at a downward angle and so I immediately fell onto my stomach at a forty-five degree angle. Its wet tongue squished under me and I was shaking so hard I could barely breath. Tears soaked my blindfold and my heart crunched against my ribs. 
                
I slowly reached forward and found another tooth to grab onto. Gritting my teeth, I pulled my body inward past my knees. The Pig raised its head and I was suddenly completely horizontal on its tongue. 
                
Saliva and mucus dripped around me and the heat was so intense I almost blacked out. My knees clacked against its front teeth as I pulled myself even deeper. Its inner cheeks pressed in around me, squeezing my body like a soaking fleshy coffin. 
                
Crying, terrified, I reached ahead of me and found more teeth. I pulled myself deeper into its mouth and I felt my feet slide past its lips. My whole body was coated in slime and I openly wept, grasping in the darkness for another tooth.
                 
And that's when The Pig started to chew on me. 
                 
I screamed in crushing agony as my body was compressed between its massive teeth. I heard my legs snap instantly and felt wet bone pop from my skin. I shook violently as my body spasmed in shock, a mangled twist of blood and pain. 
                 
Its tongue shifted me in its mouth and I felt it bite down on my shoulder. My eyes bulged in their sockets as I howled, a hot pillar crunching down on my collar bone. I threw up violently, unable to control myself, the pain overwhelming. 
              
Keep crawling. 
              
Screaming, bloodshot eyes rolling wildly, I reached forward with my good arm, wetly searching for another tooth. I grit my teeth, blood squirting between them, as my fingers wrapped around something solid. 
               
The Pig bit down again, its tongue twisting my body so its molars could snap down on my knees. The pain brought darkness, but my howling screams forced my eyes to remain open. 
               
“JESUS MAKE IT STOP!” I bellowed, my trembling hand still gripping the tooth ahead of me, “PLEASE MAKE IT FUCKING STOP!” 
                 
I ground my teeth together so hard they cracked, screaming as I slowly pulled my body deeper into the mouth. 
                
Something was changing, the tights walls of its throat squeezed my head and I realized I was almost through. 
                  
“COME ON YOU MOTHERFUCKER! COME ON!” I begged, vocal cords cracking. I reached ahead of me and grabbed onto a thick wad of flesh. My head felt like it was splitting and The Pig bit down on me again. 
                   
I gasped, blood exploding from my mouth in a great gush of red. 
                   
It had pierced through my stomach, obliterating my insides like bloated noodles. Darkness rushed in on me and I was in too much shock to even scream. 
                   
With the last of my strength, right as the blackness took me, I pulled myself forward one last time and felt myself slide down its throat. 

---
          
Darkness. Falling...screaming. I was screaming. Heat. Heat so intense I thought I would melt. Clanging. Something was hammering on a metal. Colors and images flew past me so quickly I could only make out their shape. Blood poured into my eyes. 

         
         
I felt like I would keep falling forever. 

---
         
Suddenly, my eyes snapped open and I was falling, my breath rushing back into my lungs in a great wave of purity. My face bounced off wood floor and I cried out as I felt my nose break. I tasted blood and saw stars. 
         
I had stopped falling. 
         
There was a ring of burning fire around my throat and I felt impossibly thirsty. 
         
I was lying on the floor. 
         
I slowly opened my eyes again and the darkness began to fade like morning mist under a hot sun. Colors blended together and shapes came into focus. 
         
I was in my woodshed. 
         
I reached up around my throat and grasped at the source of heat. It was the rope I had hung myself with, but now it was severed, releasing me from the grip of death. 
         
Relief rolled over me in overwhelming waves of thanks. I curled up on the floor and sobbed, tears dripping from my eyes onto the dirty floor. My body shook, unbroken, as I wept, wet horse cries rising from my quivering lips.
          
I had been spared. I was alive again.
          
From my spot on the floor, I turned my eyes upward, my voice cracking, “Thank you God. Oh thank you.” I fell into another fit of uncontrollable sobbing, “I promise I won't waste my life again. I promise I'll make things right, I'll fix everything.”
         
I don't know how long it was before I got up. Time seemed to stretch for eternity. My mind refused to rebuild, the horrors of what I had just witnessed crushing me. 
         
But I knew I would do everything I could to make the most out of my life. I was going to live every day to the fullest. I would devote myself to helping others in dark times. I would reach out to as many Suicidals as I could and try to save them from awaited on the other side. 
         
I didn't want anyone else to have to witness the horrors of suicide.
         
I didn't want anyone else to have to Feed the Pig. 
         
---

[XTX](https://www.facebook.com/Elias-Witherow-831476890331162/?ref=aymt_homepage_panel)I’ve lived in this town named Tattletoe since the moment I was born. When everything smelled like nutmeg. It’s quite a beautiful place. Everyone that lives here is being gifted with anything they could ever wish for. Each family has a big house with enough rooms so that generations can live together if they wish to. They receive a car, although that one is quite unnecessary if you ask me. No one ever leaves anyway and the town is small enough that a bike would be more than enough.

If you want to take a stroll down the town center you can easily do so on foot. You can watch all the little shops and restaurants. Each and every place is an individual masterpiece run by important members of the community. There is a flower shop growing the most peculiar plants with the brightest colors. There is a store making boots that will make you want to start dancing and never stop. There is a jewelry store with diamonds you have never seen before.

However, the most important place, the one that makes our town what it is, is Mrs. Holly’s wonderful bakery. Mrs. Holly is an old woman with rosy cheeks and purple dresses. She likes to sing as she bakes the most delicious pastries, bread, and biscuits. Stepping foot into that wonderful bakery will never want to make you leave again. Unfortunately, we are not allowed to buy any of the things produced, not from the bakery or any of the other *special* shops, the goods are made for export.

There is something particularly interesting taking place in the peculiar place we call Tattletoe. You see every time a child is brought to life in our small little hospital, the town smells of nutmeg, when someone dies it smells of cinnamon. That’s because as soon as the news reaches the lovely Mrs. Holly, she will start baking a batch of pastry making sure everyone in town can smell that we gained or lost a member. This is something we have all grown accustomed to and we wouldn’t want it any other way. The smell of a town can tell you a lot about its history you see. Paris smells like butter, Berlin smells like iron, and Napels smells like basil. Well, I have never been to any of those places myself so I couldn’t tell you for sure but this is how my grandfather would describe them. He liked explaining the world with his nose. My grandfather was the most remarkable person I knew and one of the very few people who were allowed to leave the town from time to time. He was an exporter.

I still remember the day he was taken away. The cinnamon never smelled sweeter.

Tattletoe is a special place. The people who have the honor of living here are never short of anything they could wish for. But of course, this life of ease and peace comes with a price. If you live here, you need to stick to our rules. They are not many and it's not that difficult to oblige. You just need to be willing enough.

For example, if you want to live in Tattletoe you need to work. When a child reaches a certain age it is assigned to a new job. As I said we have many special shops. I know, it sounds a little strange. The town committee always says that everything needed is provided for us, if we ever wanted more it meant we were greedy and not worthy of living in this little paradise.

I never understood much about our ideals. You work all your life but are not allowed to buy anything? It felt strange to me but my parents taught me from an early age that I needed to follow the rules.

Now that I am old enough to work I was assigned to my first job. I assumed I would have to work in the toothpaste factory together with mum and dad. The toothpaste that makes your teeth go all black and achy but instead I got a much better job. One that every child in town could only dream of.

I would be working in Mrs. Holly’s bakery.

&#x200B;

\---

“Deborah, oh please. Come in, come in!” Mrs. Holly greeted me with a warm smile.

It was so early in the morning the sky was still black, but I knew better than to be late on my first day of work.

“Morning Mrs. Holly and thank you so much for hiring me. I was a little afraid of what other job I might get.”

She gave me a sympathetic smile and waved me inside. She handed me my very own apron as we walked to the back of the bakery.

“I usually work alone but I heard a rumor that they wanted to assign you to be a shoe tester and I really wouldn’t have wanted your feet to fall off.”

I furrowed my brow.

“Why would my feet fall off?”

“Oh. honey the committee heard about some city somewhere in the states where the people are apparently dancing even when they shouldn’t. Now they want to punish them so produce increased. They need testers to see if the new shoes work accordingly”

“Right,” I mumbled. All the products were created so someone somewhere could be punished. Don’t ask me why; the committee seems to have very clear ideas on how the world should look like.

“You know your grandfather was a good friend of mine. I always had a sweet spot for you, my dear. Your parents were smart only to have one child, some people here-”

She stopped talking and smiled at me as if she had almost said something she shouldn’t.

“Anyway, I was just starting to make a batch of snickerdoodles, why don’t you help me with that?”

“Who died?” I blurted out.

“You know the Drottles, right? Well, their oldest son fell in love with Jenny Jenkins. Apparently, he tried getting her a ring. Poor fool. He knew what would happen if they found out.”

\--

The longer I worked at Mrs. Holly’s bakery, the more I started understanding what was actually taking place in our town. The factories and shops were creating something awful. Everyone that was old enough knew about it but they chose to ignore it. Even if they all had different reasons. Life here was really perfect, you never had to fear for anything as long as you worked and didn’t take any of the products from the forbidden shops. There were enough stores giving out legal things for free. The house, the car, the food, the drinks, the entertainment, and everything else you could imagine. Anything that was given to the people for free was a way to make them live happily and not start asking questions.

As there was another rule. Never ask questions.

“What did my grandpa do?”

I know I wasn’t allowed to ask. Mrs. Holly could hit me, hurt me, make them burn me but somehow I couldn’t keep myself from blurting out those words. I kept asking myself this question each time I smelled cinnamon. Besides Mrs. Holly and I had grown closer. I felt like I could trust her.

When I said those words, her eyes opened wide with terror.

“Child, are you insane? Don’t you know that-”

“I’m not supposed to ask questions. I know. But you know the other day they took Timmy, my neighbor. He was such a kind and sweet person. They assigned him to the crematory and he said no. So they threw him in.”

I don’t know what befell me. Maybe it was the fact that I was getting older or maybe the bakery made me feel dumb and brave. Timmy wasn’t the only one they took. Just the one that hurt me the most. He was a kind boy.

Mrs. Holly sighed.

“Your grandfather didn’t do his job. He was supposed to travel and sell but instead, he destroyed the products. He still got the money in different ways but the committee found out that he was tricking them. This is all I will say and don’t ever ask or question anything again.”

She got the wooden rolling pin from the desk, I saw the pain in her eyes as she held it up and hit my arm with all her strength. They probably heard what I asked and they’d know if she didn’t do it properly. I knew she didn’t want to hurt me but it was my own fault for asking questions. The broken hand was worth the information she gave me. Besides my punishment could have been much worse.

I thought I understood Tattletoe but simple answers can never answer complicated questions. I understand that now. For a long time, I thought it was the smell. The nutmeg would make you happy, the cinnamon would teach you to fear. Except I spent every day in the bakery surrounded by the smells and only now I’m starting to become skeptical. I’m starting to doubt and to understand. And nutmeg doesn't make anyone happy. Too much of it can even become poisonous.

There was a time where I was afraid of Mrs. Holly and the smell of cinnamon. To me it meant death. Now I understand that Mrs. Holly isn’t trying to scare everyone by alarming them with the smell, she is trying to cover up the smell of burning corpses. I don’t even want to imagine how many snickerdoodles she had to bake after they burned all her children and husband when they tried to leave the [town.](https://www.reddit.com/r/Likeeyedid/)

[What happens when the town smells like nutmeg.](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/gh7ew0/when_the_town_smells_like_nutmeg_you_better_take/)Here are two facts you should probably know:

Fact the first: When a human being is driven into a corner, you should never underestimate the levels of stupid and dangerous they will resort to in order to escape.

Fact the second: If a deal seems too good to be true, it is.

Normally, I wouldn't be the kind of guy you should be taking advice from. If I wrote an autobiography, it'd be called "Jesus Wept." But in this very specific instance, I have some valuable experience. It started, as most tragic stories tend to, with a series of short-sighted mistakes.

About a decade or so back, I was a few years out of college and trying to build a life for myself. I was single, educated, and driven - all the qualities someone needs to succeed in life. Well, not the "single" part, but you get the idea. I had prospects, some real potential - but, like Oscar Wilde once said, I can resist anything except temptation.

Yeah. I was an English major.

I didn't get hooked on meth or porn or anything like that. No, my vice was the thrill of chance. Gambling was the greatest rush I'd ever experienced - just giving up control, letting the gods of probability and randomness decide your fate. I got hooked, kept going to those damn casinos night after night. Looking back, I was naive, I was foolish. It'd take an idiot, blinded by a lust for sensation, to not realise another crucial fact: the house always - I repeat, always - wins.

To make a long, painful story short, at the tender age of 24 the local pit bosses had taken me for all I was worth and then some. As a result, I was indebted to some unsavoury characters who were not all that keen on giving me some leeway on the money I owed them. I managed to pull together just shy of a hundred dollars in a week doing odd jobs, but that was a fraction of a fraction of what I was in for.

At the time, it seemed like a better idea to just piss away what money I had at a local bar rather than carrying on my sad little exercise in futility. So that's exactly what I did, and by virtue of a few gallons of the cheapest spirits you can possibly imagine, I can't remember a great deal of what happened after that.

Next thing I know, I'm waking up in a puddle behind the bar, having been turfed out for making an ass of myself. The electric buzz of the neon signs above my head felt like I was taking a power drill to the frontal lobe, while the cold, filthy water below my face helped to sober me up a smidgen. Just enough to make me aware.

It was right then, in my lowest possible moment, that I met him.

"Hey there, buddy," He said, his voice pleasantly cheerful and melodic, "You look like you need a helping hand. Thankfully, I've got two."

There was a gentle tug on both of my shoulders, pulling me upright. He leaned me against a wall; I could finally take a better look at him.

To begin with, I wondered if I was hallucinating. He seemed so strange, so out of place. 

My Good Samaritan was about six and a half feet tall, but he was built like a pack of uncooked spaghetti. A long, lean, string bean of a man. That being said, the black-and-white pinstripe suit he was wearing still somehow managed to be form-fitting, like it was just painted directly onto a featureless body. Above his collar - fastened to the top button and held in place by a large and ugly bow-tie - sat a pale, grinning head with black hair parted in the middle.

Truth be told, my initial thought after properly taking in the sight of him was as follows: holy shit, I died in that puddle, and this is death himself come to collect my pathetic soul. Sadly, that was not the case, I was, in fact, still alive.

"There we are, pal, that's a lot better, isn't it?" He said, kneeling down on his long, rail-thin legs to look me in the eye, "We'll have you feeling like a million bucks in no time. Never fear!"

While back then I just assumed that it was my drunken mind playing tricks on me, I remember his eyes seeming strangely...yellowish. They had a kind of jaundiced sheen to them, like sclera and iris just melted together into a single, formless mass. Eyes like goddamn egg yolks.

"It's always such a shame to catch folks in a pickle, such a shame," He said, largely to himself, I think, "Whatever happened to helping people out, you know? It's a good feeling."

"Who are you?" I managed to choke out.

The kind stranger smiled and turned his sulphuric eyes towards me.

"You're asking the wrong person there, amigo, I'd tell you if I knew. Honest!" He replied with a laugh, "What's your name, though?"

"Nate," I said, wondering if I was about to vomit or not, "Nate Wilson."

"Oh my god, that's such an awesome name!" The stranger said, as the sudden explosion of interest on his face told me that he wasn't faking his misplaced enthusiasm, "Nate Wilson. It has a ring to it, don't you think? God, what a great name. You're a lucky guy, Nate. Lucky to have such a great name."

"Uhh, thanks, I guess."

There was a long, awkward silence after that. I sure as hell didn't know what to say, and the stranger seemed more than content to just stand there and stare at me, grinning like a freak. It felt like it was my responsibility to break that irritating silence.

"Look, I really appreciate you helping me, buddy..." I began.

"Wait, you consider us buddies?" He asked. His tone was, at that stage, ambiguous.

"I mean, you saved me from breathing alley-water, so I guess so, yeah."

This might seem hard to believe, because I definitely didn't believe it at the time, but the stranger literally jumped up into the air and whooped loudly. A grown man, behind a dive bar, doing that. It was like something out of a strange dream that your one boring friend always wants to tell you about.

"This is fantastic!" He said, grinning ear to ear like he'd just won the fucking lottery, "It's so wonderful to make new friends!"

He extended a spindly arm towards me, his hand open and his spidery fingers outstretched.

"Put her there, friendo." He said.

And because that night wasn't weird enough already, you better believe I did. 

"That's what I'm talking about," He said with another childish cackle, pulling me to my feet with disarming levels of strength, "Through the power of friendship, anything is possible."

Sure, he may have spoken like his only experience with the outside world was watching Saturday morning cartoons, but he seemed innocent enough. A benign weirdo, just trying to help people along his way. Though I must admit, the fact he was reluctant to tell me his name was somewhat of a red flag for me.

"Now, I'm going to be completely honest with you, Nate," He began, his amber gaze turned downwards in what might have been embarrassment, "There was a reason I followed you out here. It wasn't just a stroke of good luck."

My heart immediately sank. I knew he was too good to be true - this was when he stabbed me, cut me up, wore my skin as a suit and turned the rest of me into a makeshift lasagna. Nobody was ever that happy at that hour of the night if they had all their psychological ducks in a row.

"Well, if you're being honest," I said, swaying on my feet, still too drunk to defend myself, "Would that reason happen to be my murder?"

He seemed shocked at first, then began to laugh.

"Do you think a murderer would be this friendly?" He asked.

"Molestation, then?"

"Jesus, no way, Nate. You're a good-looking guy, don't get me wrong, but you're not really my type."

"Then what does a guy like you have to do with a guy like me?" I asked, the needle on my internal emotive scale creeping from 'curious' to 'irritated.'

"Well..."

He paused again, as though searching for the proper words. He was looking at everything but me.

"The bar," He finally said, "How much of what happened in there do you remember?"

"Somewhere in the margin of nothing, I think." I said, now leaning against the wall for support.

"You were talking to the bartender. Loudly," He said, bouncing up and down on the balls of his feet, "I wasn't eavesdropping, not at all, I just happened to overhear. You were talking about some kind of...money troubles."

I'd almost forgotten about them myself, but the second he said it, all the memories came barreling into me like some nauseating tidal wave. I'd ranted and raved, screamed at the top of my lungs. Debt. Debt. Debt. I got belligerent when I felt they weren't showing me enough sympathy, and when I got belligerent, I was rightly thrown out on my inebriated ass.

"Oh, don't worry about those," I said, my cheeks reddening with shame, "That's not your problem. I'll deal with it."

"But Nate, you didn't sound like you could deal with it."

"What the hell is it to you?" I snapped back.

The stranger stopped talking, and began reaching into his jacket. I got a sudden flash of paranoia that he worked for one of the casinos, and he was going to put a bullet between my eyes.

"You're my best friend, Nate," He said, "And friends are meant to help each other out of sticky situations, aren't they?"

He produced a stack of bills from a pocket inside his suit, and passed it over to me.

"Will this be enough?" He asked.

It was at this point that I was most open to the idea of this all being some crazy dream. With the ferocity of a madman, I quickly counted the money this total stranger, calling me his best friend, had handed to me.

Twenty-fucking-grand. It could bail me out, and then some.

"Holy shit," I said, though I can't remember if it was out loud or in my head, "I...I can't possibly accept this."

"Please do," He said with another ear-to-ear grin, "You need it an awful lot more than I do."

A sober me might have been too proud to indulge him, but - funnily enough - drunk me had a far more realistic take on my level of desperation. I was a desperate, desperate man, trapped in a corner.

Fact the first: When a human being is driven into a corner, you should never underestimate the levels of stupid and dangerous they will resort to in order to escape.

"But why?" Was the only question I could summon.

He smiled and shrugged.

"Because I like you," He said, "And I like helping people."

"But you've only just met me."

"So what? A friend is a friend is a friend. Why overthink it?"

I collapsed back against the wall, holding the stranger's twenty grand. It was a way out of my dire situation.

"I'll pay you back. Every penny, with fucking interest, I swear to god." I said.

The stranger laughed.

"No need. I've got no shortage of money. Just take it and bail yourself out, okay? Then promise me you'll stop gambling."

There were big, swollen tears running down my burning cheeks. The stranger's kindness was baffling, but it was the most beautiful thing I'd ever experienced. He was a true Saint in flesh and blood.

"I'll never gamble another penny." I said.

Without another word, I lunged forward and hugged him. A long, warm, tight embrace. By the end, I could feel his emaciated limbs wrapped across my back.

"Thank you so much." I whispered, my tears dripping onto the shoulder of his suit.

"What are friends for, right?"

When I finally prized myself off of him, I just couldn't stop laughing - it was nerves, probably. The stranger watched me, a kind of eccentric joy burning in his big, yellow eyes. He seemed to like just observing.

"Oh, one more thing," He said, reaching into his jacket again, "A little something I wrote up in the bar, just to help you out."

He passed me a piece of paper, folded into the size of a pamphlet. I didn't even think to check it at the time, I just shoved it into the pocket of my filthy coat and carried on thanking him. I needed that money, lord knows I did, but I couldn't just take it without giving something in return.

"There must be something you want, man," I pleaded, palms open in deference to his generosity, "Anything. I owe you my life, man, you just name your price. I can't thank you enough."

The stranger grinned and stroked his narrow chin in contemplation.

"Now that's an irresistible offer," He said, almost jokingly, "You drive a hard bargain, Mr. Wilson. Leave it with me, okay? I'm sure I'll think of something."

He began walking away after that, whistling - of all things - "Sunshine, Lollipops and Rainbows" as he did so.

Now I was laughing again. Half out of giddiness, half in acknowledgement of the sheer strangeness of the events transpiring around me. Right then, as I sat outside a shitty bar, covered in dirty water, my own tears, and more than a little puke, I was the luckiest human being on the planet,

"What do you give to the man who has everything?" I said aloud.

The stranger looked over his shoulder at me one more time, his odd eyes meeting mine. 

"Almost everything, Nate," He corrected, "Almost everything."

***

And just like that, the stranger was gone. Almost funny, isn't it? How someone like that can have such a profound impact on your life, then just up and disappear just as quickly. Like a comet, just trailing past. You only catch its light for a brief instant, then it's dark again.

Using the stranger's money, I paid off my gambling debts in full, and still had a little left over. I swore to stick to my promise, for my own sake and his. In the ten years that've passed since that day, I haven't gambled a cent.

Once I was all square with the house, I finally took a moment to check the piece of paper that he'd left me with. At first I only sort of skimmed it, and it didn't make a great deal of sense to me: just a list of dates from 2007 to 2017, each accompanied by a sentence fragment. It was only when I sat down and took a long, hard look at what those fragments actually were that I realised the stranger couldn't possibly have been human.

No, he was so much more than that.

It was a list of instructions, specific down to the days, minutes, hours, and seconds. Where to be and what to do in order to maximise success at that given moment. He'd left stock tips for companies that didn't exist, but would come into existence exactly when he'd predicted they would. He'd left exact instructions on which house to buy, and how to get it at the best price. Clothes to wear, jobs to take, friends to make.

Fifth of October, 2009. Go to Starbucks in town. Meet Jessie O'Brien. 3:51:17 PM.

Two years later, Jessie O'Brien became Jessie Wilson. The stranger had even engineered me meeting the love of my goddamn life, precise to the exact second we'd first make eye contact.

I invested in the right stocks and pulled out of the wrong ones, avoiding company deaths and market crashes like some financial Houdini. My capital skyrocketed and my personal wealth just grew greater and greater.

Eighth of June, 2011. Buy House 10 Aspen Way. Don't Rent. 6:14:43 PM.

And so I did. Jessie and I moved into that big, gorgeous house once our honeymoon was over. We were wealthy, healthy, and deeply in love - but something was missing, something the stranger had accounted for, too.

Seventeenth of August, 2012. Conceive child with Jessie. 8:31:19 PM.

Our little girl is called April. The stranger picked it, not me. She's four now, and I love her with all my heart.

The stranger, a man who I'd known for less than an hour, had steered the entire course of my life in the best possible direction, out of nothing more than the kindness of his heart. He'd saved me, he'd saved all of us. Even though it'd been ten years since that day and I was drunk out of my mind at the time, I remember every detail vividly. 

That's why, as I was walking down the street this morning - my arms full of grocery bags - when I heard someone singing "Sunshine, Lollipops and Rainbows" a few feet behind me, I recognised the voice instantly.

"Sunshine, lollipops, and rainbows, everything that's wonderful is what I feel when we're together!" His melodic voice sang, his tone screaming joviality, "Brighter than a lucky penny, when you're near the rain just disappears, dear, and I feel so fine!"

Without a moment's hesitation, I turned to face him. It looked like that strange, strange man hadn't aged a day in an entire decade. He even wore that same pinstriped suit that he had on the first night I met him.

"Just to know that you are mine." He finished the verse with a smile, and threw open his arms.

"Jesus Christ," I said, my face cracking into a smile impossible to hide, "It's actually you."

"The one and only, baby," He said with a laugh and a grandiose hand gesture, "How's Jessie, by the way?"

I opened my mouth to answer, but he raised a hand, as though to politely silence me.

"I'm sorry to drop in after - gosh, has it really been ten years? Jeez Louise, time really does tend to get away from me," He said, "Anyway, the reason I'm here is because I finally figured out what I wanted from you."

"Beg your pardon?"

"Ten years ago, you said you owed me something, anything," He replied, though I almost heard it back in my own voice as he said it, "I couldn't decide at the time, but I think I know now."

"Oh, of course! That's wonderful to hear, man," I said, my heart filled with a sudden trepidation, "So, uh, what is it you want?"

The stranger gave that same ear-to-ear grin that he was wearing back behind the dive bar in 2007.

"Well, I've thought about it for a long time, amigo, and I've finally made my decision," He said, "I know what I want from you, Nate."

He paused to take a step closer to me. His eyes were just as golden in the daylight.

"I want your name, Nate."

I almost laughed to begin with, but I soon realised he wasn't joking. He was deadly serious.

"My name?"

"Yes, Nate, I've always loved your name, it's so wonderful," He said, wringing his hands with glee, "See, I've never had a name myself, and it's always left me feeling a little left out, you know? I've wanted a name for so long, and I decided just recently that the name I want is yours. I think it'll fit me just right."

This man had given me my entire life. He saved me from getting killed by casino sharks back in '07, and every wonderful success I'd had since I owed entirely to his decade-long itinerary. With all this in mind, who was I to turn him down this last batshit crazy request?

If he wanted to go around calling himself Nate Wilson too, what right did I have to stop him?

"Sure thing, buddy." I said with a smile.

He leaned forward and embraced me, almost crushing the groceries against my chest.

"You have no idea how happy you've made me."

"It's the least I can do after all you've done for me." I replied.

The stranger - or rather, Nate Wilson - extended another spidery hand towards me.

"Let's shake on it." He said, his voice elated.

And I did.

We went our separate ways after that. I walked home, and he ran off into the city, singing and cackling with mirth. It brought me some peace of mind to know that my debt to him was finally repaid, and that some simple token gesture was all that I needed to do it.

***

When I arrived back at 10 Aspen Way, I saw April playing around with her toy lawnmower in the front yard. I smiled and called to her, but she didn't respond. She was too wrapped up in her fictitious duties. 

I made my way inside with the groceries. Jessie was in the kitchen, cutting up carrots. Sunshine, Lollipops and Rainbows blasted out of the radio. Today just kept getting weirder and weirder.

"Hey, babe," I called to her, putting the groceries on the kitchen table, "You'll never guess who I ran into this morning."

Jessie didn't respond. She just carried on chopping, and hummed to the tune.

"Babe? Everything okay?" I asked.

Still no response. At this point, I was beginning to get a little...worried.

With a peculiar heaviness to my every movement, I walked over to Jessie, and placed a tentative hand on her shoulder. 

It just went straight through. Straight though her goddamn body - like she was a hologram, or I was. I recoiled with a short, sharp yelp, and fell against the kitchen table. Again, no response from Jessie.

What the hell had happened?

"Honey, I'm home!" I heard a familiar voice call from the hallway outside.

Jessie suddenly perked up, turning her head towards the noise.

"Hi, sweetie," She said, "You were a while out there. I was beginning to get worried."

The stranger walked into the kitchen, a smile stretched across his waxen face.

"Sorry about that, honey-bunny," He said, "I met an old friend in town. We had a little catch-up."

As he said that last part, he threw me a sickening wink with one of his piss-yellow peepers.

"Huh," Jessie said, "Anyone I know?"

She leaned forward and gave the stranger a kiss. The kind of kiss she always gave me.

"Nah," The stranger said with a chuckle, "I don't think you've ever met him."

I felt like my mind was going to implode. Nothing going on was making any kind of goddamn sense. The whole world had gone crazy.

April called from outside, something about the grass.

"You mind taking over the carrots for a sec, babe?" Jessie said to the stranger, "I better go check on April."

"No problem, honey." He said, taking the knife from her hand and giving her another kiss.

Jessie left the room, leaving just me and the stranger, all alone. I quietly fumed, and he chopped carrots.

"What the fuck is going on?" I finally asked him, when I'd gained the modicum of composure required to do so, "What have you done, you crazy fucking weirdo?"

He carried on chopping the carrots. His eyes never left the chopping board.

"My name is Nate, stranger," He said, "I'd really appreciate it if you called me by it."

In my state of fury, I tried to grab him by the shoulder and turn him to face me. I could actually touch him, but he wouldn't budge. It was like trying to move a mountain.

"That's my name. This is my house. And that's my wife," I said to him, rage and confusion rendering my voice a crackly mess, "I want you out of here and out my life."

The stranger chuckled.

"See, that's where you're wrong, slick. All that changed hands," He said, "This is Nate Wilson's house. Jessie is Nate Wilson's wife, and this is Nate Wilson's life. And, by the terms of our recent deal, I'm Nate Wilson. And you, good buddy? You're nobody."

"I won't accept that." I yelled, slamming my hand down onto the kitchen countertop.

Without another word, Nate Wilson rammed the knife through my hand. There was no pain, no blood. It just phased through, as though I no longer even existed.

"Word to the wise, stranger, reality marches on regardless of whether you accept it," He said, as I pulled my hand away from the knife, "Everything you have, everything you've tricked yourself into believing you earned, you got from my instructions. You never owned this life, stranger, you just rented it from me, piece by piece. Now, it's mine, and there's not a thing you can do about it."

He stuck the knife into the chopping board and turned around to me.

"Except, of course, leave, and let me, my wife, and my daughter get on with our lives. Do you understand, stranger?"

I stood in crushing silence for a minute or two.

"But can I see them again?"

"Sure you can, you can see them any time you like, but only I can see you. Just like, up until around an hour ago, only you could see me. It doesn't feel good, does it? Being nobody. Being nameless."

The gravity of it all was finally closing in. I fell onto my ass and began to cry.

"God, I was so fucking stupid," I said, "How did I fall for all this?"

Nate Wilson shrugged and ate a piece of carrot.

"Don't blame yourself, buddy," He said, "I was waiting for centuries before I found someone who I could interact with. It isn't your fault you happened to be that person, or that you had such an awesome name at the time."

"My name..."

"You were only going to waste it, friendo. If I wasn't there that night, a heavy would have broken your legs the next day, you'd have gotten into painkillers, and OD'd a few months later. Nate Wilson becomes gravestone fodder. What a waste that would have been, huh?"

"But what do I do now?"

"What I did, stranger," Nate Wilson said, eating another piece of carrot with undue relish, "Ask around, find someone you can talk to. Might be this afternoon, who knows? Sure, could be a week, month, year, decade, century, but I'm an eternal optimist."

"A century?" I said, trying to ebb the stream of tears flowing out of me, "I can't wait that long."

"You'd be surprised, pal. Patience is something you'll learn, being nameless. When you finally do manage to wrangle yourself a name, you'll appreciate it a little more this time. You'll make something of yourself."

Fact the second: If a deal seems too good to be true, it is.

"So is that it?" I asked, "Is that all you have for me?"

Nate Wilson nodded.

"I'm afraid so, good buddy," He said, "But you seem like a nice enough guy. I'm sure you'll figure something out. You can always depend on the kindness of strangers, don't you know."

As the man who had just stolen my entire existence carried on hacking up vegetables, I left the room, walking out of the kitchen, through the hallway, then out of the house entirely. I stole one last look at Jessie and April, my - no, his - family, playing on the lawn, totally carefree. All smiles. They'd never even know that I was gone.

Perhaps it was better that way, no heartache.

I whispered a goodbye that they'd never hear, and closed my eyes in a pointless attempt to shut off the tears I knew would be coming either way. I set off into the city after that, walking alone, in search of something - hell, anything - to call myself.

And that was that. The story of my un-naming. Perhaps Nate was right, perhaps it was his life all along. Maybe he'll live it better, live it kinder. He might be a better father, a better husband, a better Nate.

I don't feel so attached to that name anymore.

But, if you know all this now, that means one good thing: you can read what I'm writing. If you can read my words, perhaps you can hear them? And if you can hear them, perhaps you can reply.

If so, I hope to hear from you soon. We have a lot to talk about, you and I, a lot to discuss. I think I can do some great things for you, dear reader, dear friend. I'll help you out of any bind you need, and I'll barely ask for anything in return.

Barely anything at all...

***
[X](http://henrygalleywriter.tumblr.com)
My grandfather isn’t the kind of man who is particularly communicative.  Actually, he barely bothers to speak at all unless it’s a grunt of satisfaction aimed at a piece of pork chop or a prod to turn the TV channel back to golf. My mother says he’s just selective with his words: I prefer to call him what he is—a *dick*.  

He’s always been this way. Even when I was an adorable little toddler teetering my way around his living room, he barely acknowledged me. He would just sit in his plush armchair and read the paper, ignoring my squeals of delight as I practiced my dance recital in front of him. 

“Pappy, Pappy, *look*!” I would squawk in his direction. He would just shift his newspaper higher in his lap to hide me from view. 

It was always grandma who offered me any sort of grandparent-related comfort. She doted on me throughout my childhood; pinching my cheeks, baking me cookies, cooing at every sound or accomplishment I made. So when she passed away last spring, I was heartbroken. Apparently, so was my grandfather. 

That’s when my mother cooked up the idea for a “granddaughter-grandfather bonding extravaganza.” She shipped me off to live with him for two weeks during summer vacation while she took a honeymoon with her new husband. Even though I am 15 and purely capable of staying alone for two weeks, my mother just couldn’t resist the opportunity to kick-start the grandfatherly affection that should have taken place the day I popped out of the womb. 

“You’ll have fun, honey,” she said earnestly as she practically kicked me out of the moving car. 

“He doesn’t even talk!” I yelled in frustration. 

“Yes he does,” my mother rolled her eyes. “You just have to *listen*.”

The first week and a half ticked by pretty much like I expected. We ignored each other in gruff silence and ate our meals separately: him in front of the TV and me in the guest bedroom. It wasn’t until the last night of my visit that I got up in the middle of the night to piss only to find a light shining from his bedroom.  Curious, I peeked out from around the corner. My grandfather was sitting in his armchair, a glass of scotch in his hand and eyes puffy from tears. His gaze was trained toward the air vent next to his bed.  

“I wish you were still here,” He whispered. I could barely hear him over the clink of ice in the glass. 

“You wish who were here?” I asked lightly, stepping forward. His gazed up towards me and he beckoned me to sit down on the edge of the bed. I balanced myself on the edge and looked back at him nervously. I don’t think we’ve ever sat this close next to each other. 

Wordlessly, he handed me the glass of scotch. I took a sip and let the liquid bite my tongue, sending shivers down my spine. I handed it back to him. 

“I think it’s time you know about my sister,” he murmured. 

This is his story, in his words. 

+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

I know you don’t think very highly of me; I don’t think very highly of me either. Honestly, there are a lot of things I would change if I could. You’re young, but you’ll understand that one day. 

My parents and I lived here ever since I was a little boy. Back then, after the war, this place was like a castle. I loved living here. This was actually my room, believe it or not. And for an eight-year-old boy, it was my kingdom. 

I used to pretend that my mother and father were the king and queen and I was a prince. I would rule over my stuffed animals as if they were subjects. My parents actually encouraged it, they thought it was cute. My mother was a homemaker. Back then, most women were. So she was always around to cook and clean and play my childish games with me. My father was different. He was attentive when he was home but he was rarely home. See, he was a preacher. He was a “Man of Faith.” 

When you are young you just trust your parents. You take them on their word, you believe what they say and you have no reason to consider otherwise. So when they told me to go to church three times a week, I dutifully followed through. It was fun being the preacher’s son. My mother and I always seemed to bathed in a heavenly glow wherever we went. People knew us as the perfect family, a family of faith and God and virtue. My father was known as a man of God; someone the community should trust in. So when my father told me to ignore the sounds coming from the attic, I did. 


***


I first noticed the sounds the day we moved in.  I was sleeping when I heard a muffled cry coming from the air vent. The cry was immediately silenced with a dull thud. I fell back to sleep instantly. For the next few weeks I would hear the occasional pitter patter of footsteps or the off-beat thud in the middle of the night. My father told me that we had rats. I learned to grow accustomed to the random spurts of noise, much as children do. 

Then one night I was playing in my room when I should have been sleeping. I held my fake sword up to my stuffed animals and pretended to knight them. I was asking them to bow down to me when I heard it. 

“Hello?”

The voice was a muffled echo, barely reaching my ears. It was a girl’s voice. I think that’s why I paid it so much attention. I wasn’t allowed to have girls in the house. 

“Someone there?” The voice echoed again. I realized, at this point, that it was coming from the air vent next to my bed. I quickly scrambled towards it, letting my fake sword clatter to the floor. 

“Who’s there?” I asked, using the bravest voice I had. 

“I Polly. I live in attic.”  It’s then that I noticed how childish the voice sounded, how strained it was. I bent my head closer to the vent. 

“You my brother?” the voice asked. 

“I’m not sure. Are you my sister?” I countered. 

“Don’t know. Daddy says I have brother but won’t let me see him.”

“Why not?”

“Daddy says something wrong with me.”

“Is there?”

“I can’t think real good.”

“Oh. Who’s your father?” I asked. 

“Michael Larson.” 

“That’s my father!!” I yelled excitedly. “That means that you must be my sister if we have the same father.”

“That how it works?”

“I think so, but I guess I don’t really know.”

“I don’t know either.” We were silent for a little while. 

“Why do you live in the attic?” I finally asked, the question burning the roof of my mouth. 

“Daddy say I can’t leave because I not like everyone else.”

“So you’ve never been outside?”

“Don’t think so,” Polly said nervously. “Not allowed to talk about it.”

“Oh.” I sat back on the bed, puzzled.  “I’m uh, I’m going to go to bed,” I said hesitantly into the air vent. 

“Oh, ok,” Polly answered back. Her voice faltered and for a moment I thought she was going to cry. 

“But—but I’ll be back!” I said urgently, trying to calm her down.

“You will?”

“Of course, I’m your brother,” I assured her. 

“And I your sister.” 


***



The next morning I woke up excited. Not only was it Saturday, but I had a sister! I bounded down the stairs two at a time, eager for breakfast. Like every Saturday, my mother had laid out a full breakfast spread for us. After father led us in our morning prayer, I dug in to the steaming pancakes and sausages on my plate. 

“Woah, woah there, champ,” my father laughed as he watched me shoveling the food into my mouth. “What’s the rush?”

“I want to finish quickly so I can go play with my sister,” I explained through a bite of toast. 

My mother’s face went stone gray as if she had just seen a ghost. My father clenched his jaw and very carefully put down his fork and knife. They didn’t make a sound.  

“MJ,” he said with an edge he couldn’t hide. “You don’t *have* a sister.”

I looked up from my plate, confused. “Yes I do, she lives—“

“ENOUGH,” my dad roared, pounding the table with his fist. My mom was now looking down at her hands folded neatly in her lap. I saw a small tear fall onto her plate. 

“Can’t you see you are making your mother upset with your lies?” He hissed. 

“But, but I’m not—“ 

“Go to your room this instant, MJ,” he demanded. “And if you try to lie to us again I promise you that you will never get to leave your room.”

I pushed back my chair and ran from the table, hot, messy tears sliding down my face. I threw myself onto my bed and cried at the unfairness of it all. After a few minutes, I heard her. 

“You ok?” Polly asked. 

Anger flared in my chest. “No,” I spat bitterly. “I got in trouble and it’s all your fault!” 

“What happened?” I could hear her concern, but I didn’t care. 

“I told my dad that I had a sister and he yelled at me and grounded me!” I hiccupped between sobs. 

“You told daddy we talked?” she said in a panicked voice. 

“Kinda.”

“You shouldn’t done that,” I could hear her voice trembling. “I going to be in real trouble. He k-kill me.” 

“Yeah, well, you deserve it!” I screamed at the air vent. “You ruined my whole day! I was fine before I met you.”

I could now hear Polly crying through the vent. I thought her muffled sobs would make me feel better but they only made me feel worse. Guilt bubbled in my stomach. I put a pillow over my head to drown out her crying. 

I must have fallen asleep because when I woke up the pillow was on the floor and I could hear Polly again. But this time, she wasn’t alone. 

“No, no,” she whimpered. 

“How did you find a way to talk to him,” a voice hissed at her. I immediately sat up, my heart pounding in my ears. I knew that voice. 

“No, no, I be good. I be good,” Polly cried back. I could hear a thump and Polly cry out. I pressed my ear closer to the vent. “I talk to no one.”

“You’re lying,” my father’s voice yelled back. 

“No, I good. I don’t lie.” I heard another thump and now Polly was crying loudly. I shivered as I listened to what was happening above my head. 

“You better be my good little girl,” my father replied. “You know what happens when you’re a bad girl.”

“Please, please no. I good, I very good.”

“Take your clothes off.”

“No, no I don’t lie—“ Polly’s voice was interrupted by another slap. I heard her cry out and had to clamp my hands over my mouth so I wouldn’t either. 

“You heard me,” my father challenged. “Take your clothes off.”

I sprinted from my bedroom and ran all the way downstairs. A part of me really hoped to see my dad sitting in the living room when I rounded the corner. I prayed, I *begged* God that I would see my father sitting in his favorite chair. I prayed that I was just imagining things, that my creativity had gotten the better of me. But when I turned into the living room I saw only my mother, sitting rigidly on the sofa as she knitted. 

“Mother,” I said. Tears were still dripping from my face. “Mother, where’s father?” I was shaking. 

She looked up at me with a sad smile. “He’s praying, darling.” 

“Are you telling the truth?”

“Of course, dear,” she said. But her eyes told me something different. “Come on now,” she said. “Let’s listen to something on the radio. Your favorite program should be starting soon.”

I took my seat besides her and she turned the radio on. She hummed as she continued knitting, her mouth pressed in a firm and tight line. She held the needles so tightly that her fingertips were turning white. 

“I love your father,” she said. 

“I know, mother, I know.”


***


My father’s knife cut through the steak as if he was cutting through butter. The meat bled lightly, just how he liked it. 

“Are you done lying, MJ?” he asked without looking up from his plate. 

“Yes sir, I am,” I answered back. “I let my imagination get the better of me.”

He smiled at me and pointed his knife towards my mother. “And what do you have to say to the woman who gave birth to you?”

My face flushed red. “I’m sorry, mother.”

“There’s my good boy,” he said as he continued to eat. “I think you learned your lesson then.” 

“I did.”

The dinner talk then turned towards the church fundraiser happening the next weekend. My mother promised she would bake her famous pecan pie and my father discussed who from Bible Study would be attending. After dinner I excused myself to my bedroom. 

“Polly?” I whispered into the air vent. I heard a small series of sniffling, as if she were crying. Guilt boiled in my chest. 

“Polly, I’m sorry,” I mumbled. “Can you forgive me?”

“I guess,” Polly replied. 

“Are you ok?”

“No.”

I looked around my room for a second. “Well, whenever I’m sad I like to play a game,” I explained as I picked up my toy sword. “Do you want to play with me?”

“Ok.”

“Ok, well I’ll be the prince and you can be the princess. And we both have kingdoms that we can rule. Yours can be the attic and mine can be my bedroom. Does that sound fun?”

I heard her sniffle. “I be princess?”

“Of course!” I assured her. “You can be anything you want to be.”

And that’s how it started: with a game. We would wait until I heard my father go to sleep every night and then we would give our secret code. I would tap the inside of the air vent twice and, if she could talk, she would tap right back. Then we knew it was safe to play. Some nights we would rule over our kingdoms while other nights I would read her stories from one of my books. Some nights, we would just talk. It was nice, having her around. I grew accustomed to our routine. But like all routines, sometimes they break. 

Sometimes I would tap into the air vent and hear nothing back except some weird groans and the occasional thud. When I would go downstairs, I would always see my mother knitting silently in the living room, knuckles white. Father was nowhere to be seen. That’s how I knew he was in the attic with Polly. Polly didn't like to talk much after those times. 


***


“What outside like?” Polly asked one night. I was lying on my back, my head turned towards the air vent. I pondered for a second. 

“It’s...big, I guess,” I said lamely. “But it’s cold now because it’s almost Christmas time. There’s a lot of snow.”

“What snow like?”

“You’ve never seen snow?”

“No.”

“Well,” I said. “Why don’t I show you?”

Polly paused. “I don’t leave attic ever.”

I sat up on my bed. “What if you left just once? I can come and get you. I can take you outside so you can see the snow and then I can take you back! Father won’t have to know.”

“Like...like secret?” Polly asked. I could hear the excitement bellow out of her. “Outside! Outside!” she yelled, forgetting the hushed tones we normally used. 

I laughed. “Yes, let’s do it!” I screamed as I got caught up in the excitement. 

“When!?” Polly yelled. 

“We can go right—“

“Who are you talking to?” My father interrupted. My face turned beat red as I turned from the air vent to face him.  I was caught. 

“No-no one,” I mumbled weakly. “I’m just playing a game.” My father’s eyes wandered to where my stuffed animals were, shoved away into the corner, forgotten and abandoned. 

“With who?” He challenged. 

“No one, sir. Just myself.” 

His face turned to stone and he nodded gruffly at me. “Carry on, then. Just try to keep it down.” And he turned out the door. I nearly shit myself with relief that he had believed me. I waited a few minutes before I spoke again. 

“Let’s wait until he goes to bed, then I can take you!” I whispered. 

But I didn’t get a response. “Polly?” I asked after a few more minutes. “Polly do you still want to go outside?” 

“No,” my father’s voice answered back. “She doesn’t.”  I clapped my hands over my mouth and bolted upright from my bed. 

“MJ,” Polly answered back weakly. “Help.” 

But I stood frozen. I didn’t move when I heard thud after thud after thud. I didn’t move when Polly whimpered out for her brother. I didn’t move when I heard my father smack her. And I still didn’t move when the attic turned as silent as the snow outside. 

I stood there, in the middle of my room, with my hands balled into fists at my side. I stood there as I heard my father leave the attic, his steps staggered and heavy. I stood there as I saw the porch light blink into life outside of the window. And I stood there as I watched my father digging, digging and digging all night long. 

In the morning there was a raised patch of dirt under the maple tree that wasn’t covered with snow like the rest of the back yard. And the air vent? The air vent was silent. 

+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

My grandfather put down his glass and stared back towards the air vent. The room seemed heavier now. 

“Her—her name was Polly?” I asked. 

He nodded. “Like you,” he smiled weakly. “When you were born I asked your mother to name you Polly.”

“Does she know why?”

“She knows I had a sister. She doesn’t know much else.”

I was silent for a second. “What did you do after—after it happened?” 

My grandfather looked down into his drink. “Nothing. Just like what I did when it was happening.”

“What was wrong with her?” I asked slowly. “Why did, why did your father keep her locked away?” 

He was silent for a moment before he took a swig of his drink. “I think she had Down Syndrome. And I think my father was ashamed of that.” He sighed. 

“Grandpa, I’m so—“

“Don’t,” he interrupted. “It’s not necessary.” We sat in silence for a few minutes, listening to the gentle hum of the air vent. 

“Polly would have made a fine princess,” I whispered.  

He smiled and for a second I could have sworn that I saw the flicker of what he had been like as an eight-year-old boy. “Yes,” he agreed. “She would have.” 


[XXX](https://www.reddit.com/user/kmcooney/submitted/)
 Who’s the worst, most despicable person you can think of? 

Jeffrey Dahmer? Ted Bundy? Luis Garavito? Pol Pot? 

Of course, you could make your own arguments for any one of them, or anybody else for that matter. 

Yet, all of these people have one thing in common. They’re *human*. 

Preposterous people trying to act like monsters, either due to lofty, ridiculous ideals or some primal urge to revolt against society as a whole. It’s quite the bizarre phenomenon. Yet, none of these admittedly sick people have truly fallen into the abyss. Perhaps they’ve stared down into it. Dipped their feet in. But none of them have taken the plunge as a whole. Despite their efforts, they weren’t able to separate themselves from their inherent humanity. 

But that’s a good thing. That’s they were relatively easy to take down. 

The bad news is that every once in a while, ‘special’ cases will arise. In our circles, we call these individuals “the Void people”, or just the “Voids”. Individuals so far gone that they can hardly be considered humans anymore. 

The cause behind entities like these? Well, I wouldn’t know. Nobody really does. Maybe they were born with that latent potential. Maybe they underwent some obscure supernatural transformation. Maybe they’re experiments gone awry. Aliens from another planet. Shit, maybe they’re literal demons from hell brought here by some fool who just *had* to conduct some fucked up ritual. Who the hell knows? The only detail that matters is the fact that they exist. And dealing with them is more than a bitch.  

I’m sure you’re familiar with the concept of “Max” security prisons.  

Places where drug kingpins, terrorists and prolific serial killers etc. are sent. The places meant to contain the worst amongst humans. 


Well, those are a joke compared to where the Voids are kept. At a pair of undisclosed coordinates built in the underground of a tiny island somewhere deep in the Atlantic, there exists a prison unlike anything you could imagine. 

We simply call it “The Chasm.” A penitentiary for pure, unbridled evil. A collective evil that would surely yield humanity’s extinction in a couple of months if it were allowed to run rampant in the world. 

Let me emphasis this a bit further. The individuals that require being held there are not merely “criminally insane.” They are criminally absolutely out of this universe fucking bonkers. 

Of course, you wouldn’t know about any of this. Why would you? The government would probably sacrifice 1000 children before they’d divulge a single detail about the place to a person without high enough clearance.

But you know, that’s just how they are. 

Before I came, there were exactly 32 being confined there. Save for two that were still being actively pursued through the Brazilian underground and Russian tundra respectively, that was about all of them *in the world*. At least, we assumed that was all of them. Can’t be sure about anything these days. 

Each holding cell was fortified to hell, specifically designed to counter and contain the respective Void they were holding. If they managed to escape, there were 8 drones armed with Gatling guns, blades, grenades and rockets waiting for them within a larger chamber. 

If they managed to break through THAT, then 20 guards in mechanized suits would have to step in.

However, everybody understood the futility of that protocol. Those guards were getting slaughtered in seconds, regardless of the Void they went up against. Maybe minutes if they’re really skilled. Honestly, I’m not entirely sure why any of us regular guards are stationed here at all. Bureaucracy, I guess? Who knows what the government’s thinking. 

If the situation were to ever get too drastic, then there was really only one feasible counter-measure in place. A last resort, so to speak. The higher ups would have to call in something known as “Task Force Void Nova Hammer”, or TFVNH for short. I’ve never seen them in action before, nor do I know much about them. Not that I really want to, though. If you ever find yourself witnessing them in person, then that must mean you’re having a bad, *bad* day. 

So why am I disclosing all of this uber-classified information that would either get me killed or thrown in the deepest hole conceivable for the rest of my short life? Well… I’d estimate that there’s about a 90% chance that I’m going to die by the end of today. And even if I do make it out of this fiasco, my life’s never really going to be the same. 

So fuck it. Here we go. 

My day started out more or less normal. 

I was part of the unit guarding somebody named Jim Heninger. Well, that was his real name. Doesn’t evoke a lot of fear, does it? That’s why he had to call him something else. 

Since he used to be some psycho surgeon or something, we’ve dubbed him *The Surgeon*. Really creative stuff, I know. 

Standing at 5’7 (171 cm), 135 lbs (61 kg) (We were all required to memorize their physical stats), he doesn’t look like much. However, if you ever find yourself in the same room with him… no matter how big and tough you are… you’re getting dissected or something. 

The main danger surrounding him stems from the fact that he seems to be able to teleport on will. One second you’ll be staring at his dark, lifeless eyes, and after one blink, he’ll disappear in a cloud of black haze, only to end up breathing right down your neck. For that reason, there’s gotta be at least ten sets of eyes on his monitor at all times. There’s no way around it. If he’s not being watched, he *will* escape. 

He’s also kind of unkillable. No matter how many bullets you put through his head or blades you plunge into his chest, the guy just won’t croak. And once he gets a scalpel in his hands… oh boy. 

Of course, he’s just one out of 32, and comparatively speaking… on the tamer side. 

With that said, my guard shift ended without any incident. Routine stuff. Following that, I went on break in the lunchroom with my buddy Sandhu. Our conversations were usually pretty dry, but at least I can talk to the guy. It’s hard to get along with any of the other guards. They’re all just… weird, in one way or another. Anyway, lunch was usually the most enjoyable part of a working day in the Chasm.  

What I didn’t enjoy was the blaring fucking alarm and deafening, repeating automated voice blasting the word “BREACH” that went off right as I was about to take my chili out of the microwave. 

I could see Sandhu’s face drop at the disturbance. “You’re fucking kidding me.” He mouthed. 

Now, I’d only ever experienced one minor breach up until that point, and it was from the Surgeon. I guess none of us were paying any attention that day. He made it about 8 miles off the coast using a stolen boat, racking up a total body count of 145 in his wake. It took 3 full days to wrangle him back, and 4 more weeks to fix all the damage he’d done to the infrastructure.

That was all just one prisoner. If we were dealing with 3 or more, then our combined efforts as guards wouldn't have stood a semblance of a chance. 

There had only ever been one major breach in the Chasm’s history, in which 8 Voids had broken out nearly simultaneously. It was also apparently the only time that TFVNH had to step in. This was all around 12 years ago, long before I became a guard myself. The aftermath of that? I don’t have high enough clearance to know. But I’m willing to bet that it was nothing fun. 

We did have a breach procedure. It was a lengthy document, outlining exactly what we were supposed to do and where we were supposed to go. I’ve read it before, and its fucking garbage. It’s essentially predicated on the idea that we’re cannon fodder, and that we’re obligated to do whatever we can to contain the prisoners. If anybody actually followed the procedure, they’d die instantly. 

“Well, what the hell are we supposed to do?” Somebody asked.  

They only got shrugs in response. Except for Sawson, that is. 

I fucking hated Sawson. The guy seems to believe that his life’s an action movie and that he’s the invincible main protagonist. 

“Are ya’ll pussies or *what*?” he screamed at the top of his lungs, with a stupid grin plastered across his face. “We never get any fucking action! Let’s fucking go!!!” 

Before anybody could stop him, he picked up his rifle and swung the door open like the giant fucking dumbass he is. 

Since the alarm was blaring, we could hardly hear anything that was going on outside in the corridors. For that reason, we all rather shocked upon seeing *Morgi the Corgi* standing right outside. 

Imagine some guy walking around wearing a dirty, giant, creepy dog costume. Now imagine that this guy is 7’2 (218 cm), with a voice that’s simultaneously deep, raspy and childish. 

That’s Morgi the Corgi for you. 

I could see the bravado leaving Sawson’s face the moment he laid eyes on the abomination in person. We’d only ever seen him through a screen before. 

*”RUFF!!”* 

I always hated it when people tried imitating dogs. But hearing it coming from Morgi was a bit different and a lot worse. 

Before Sawson could even put his finger on the trigger, his head was mashed into pulp. Morgi began pouncing on other guards, effortlessly crushing limbs with his oversized “paws”. He’d switch between running around on his feet and crawling on all fours. The last thing I saw before running out of the break room was Morgi forcing the remaining, horrified agents to play fetch with him using a stray arm. 

But of course, it’s not like I managed to escape anywhere better. The entire place was in a fucking tizzy. The squad leaders were frenetic, attempting to scrap together some kind of suppression force. 

I couldn’t understand why they were so delusional. 

Are we guards supposed to be badass? Fuck yeah. Due to our field prowess, we were specifically selected from the existing pool of CIA agents and military personnel to be dropped into this godforsaken place. Put us up against a trafficking militia, terrorists etc., and we’ll smoke them. 

But what we can’t deal with… are things that aren’t supposed to exist in the first place. 

We watch creature-features and slasher flicks with the inherent understanding that we’re watching *fiction*. A type of visual catharsis for our inherent fascination with the dark and grim. It’s not supposed to be real, and we have no idea how to act once we find it standing right in front of our faces. Not even us so-called ‘elite’ agents. Like I said, I’m not sure why they even bothered keeping guards in the chasm to begin with. 

These were the thoughts that ran through my head as I bolted through the hellish corridors. At one point, I stumbled upon a crowd of guards leering over some rails. Shockingly, they didn’t seem concerned in the slightest. 

“What the hell are you guys looking at?” I asked them. 

A guard I recognized as Fenton turned around. 

“This is gonna be sick.” He grinned, gesturing for me to look below.  

I didn’t even know where I was going, so I didn’t realize that I’d wandered into the level right above the weight room. 

It was a sprawling gym with an abundance of the best equipment obtainable. But there was one guard that used it the most… 

*Branko Petrovic* 

A Serbian-American whose oversized frame hardly makes any fucking sense. I swear, when I first met the guy, he couldn’t have been over seven feet. He’s around 8’2 (249 cm) now. I’m not quite sure what kind of bizarre experiments they ran on him, but they sure as hell overdid it. 

Despite the alarms, he was in the middle of overhead pressing what appeared to be an ungodly amount of weight when one of the escaped Voids wandered onto the weight room floor. 

It was *Luze*, standing at 6’2 (188 cm), 205 lbs (93kg). Like all the other prisoners, the guy was a complete mystery. His mostly bare body was comparable to that of a bodybuilder’s, save for the hundreds of gnarly scars decorating his skin. 

The more disconcerting part of his aesthetic was the fact that he only had one half of his face. The other half consisted of his exposed skull, with some kind of red, electrical current running through his cranial bones. He had that same current running through his hands, which allowed him to savagely electrocute whatever organic material he touched, quickly rendering it into a pile of steaming, black mush. 

I guess that my fellow agents didn’t bother reading up on the prisoners they guarded, because Branko never stood a chance. It didn’t matter if you were superior to Luze in terms of strength. One touch and you were gone for. The only practicable way to take him down was by using ranged weapons. And even then… that task was easier said than done. 

Branko grunted like the dumb meathead he is, before grabbing an Olympic weightlifting plate and chucking it like a Frisbee at Luze. It connected, seemingly shattering his ribs. But it wasn’t nearly enough to take him down. As soon as he rushed forward, the ‘fight’ had been decided. Branko attempted to tackle him, a mistake so horrible that his whole body began twitching as his skin made contact with Luze’s fingertips. 

The electricity spread through his giant frame, causing his vitals to shut down within seconds. In no time at all, he was reduced to a heaping mass of scorched flesh on the floor. He didn’t even have time to scream. I could see the respective faces of my stunned colleagues drop as they witnessed what they likely deemed an improbable outcome. 

Idiots, that’s what they were. But truth be told, I was also an idiot for even bothering to stay. Not long after, the sounds of cracking bones and heavy footsteps began emanating from an adjacent walkway. 

Along with the rest of the agents, my gaze shifted towards what was sure to be another incoming menace. The locked, metal door to the corridor was suddenly dented from the other side. A *big fucking dent*, mind you. It only took one more blow to blast it off its hinges completely. 

Standing at 6’6 (198 cm), 242 lbs (110 kg) and arriving in a haze of blood, guts and limbs was the slasher-flick-esque killer colloquially known as *”WireHead”*. 

In congruence with his name, his entire head, save for a single eye, was wrapped in rusty barb-wire. He wore a decrepit, old leather jacket and jeans, complete with a large pompadour on top, like an 80s (or whatever) high school delinquent. 

Everybody’s main concern was the weapon in his hands – a large, iron bat wrapped in the same barb-wire on his head. If you didn’t die from the impact (unlikely), the subsequent infection would surely get you. 

And don’t ask us why we didn’t take his weapon away when we contained him. We did. But somehow… someway… he got it back. These things really can’t be helped. 

*What the hell is going on?* I thought. Breaches happened, sure. But it seemed as if *every* single fucking Void had somehow escaped. *How is that possible?* 

In any case, I couldn't afford to think deep into it at the moment. 

As WireHead began mowing down the mystified agents in his way, I found myself accidentally making eye contact with Luze from below. 

I nearly had a heart attack as I began pushing through the crowd. Even though I was implicitly certain of the fact that no other location within the chasm would’ve been much safer, I was still being driven ahead by my fight-or-flight responses, away from the immediate threat. 

It was kind of funny. I'd been through so many life-or-death experiences that my reaction to adrenaline coursing through my veins had been dulled. Well, it sure as hell got invigorated today. 

I guess that I wasn’t paying enough attention to my surroundings, because right as I was about to climb a staircase, I felt an over-sized arm slam into my chest, knocking me over in the process. I looked up to see another guard – Cade leering down at me. 

Sure, I was happy it wasn’t one of the Voids, but Cade wasn’t much more pleasant. 

“What’re you running for?” he shot me a smug grin. “This is a breach, isn’t it? Why don’t we do our jobs here and fix it?” 

“Oh, fuck off!” I spat at him, before trying to duck past. No luck there. He caught me by the collar and slammed me into a wall. He certainly had the weight advantage. 

Still, I didn’t practice hand-to-hand combat just to be rag-dolled by some asshole. I slammed my elbow down on his wrist, which managed to loosen his grip. I followed up with a knee to the stomach and then attempted to strike his neck. 

But then he caught my wrist mid-punch. 

“Nice moves!” He said, in an obnoxiously sarcastic tone. 

He took his palm and rammed into my chin, nearly causing me to black out. In the meantime, WireHead was getting closer. 

“Guess we’ll have to take this up another time,” he said. “Somebody’s gotta work around here.” 

I had no idea what he was thinking trying to take on one of the Voids, but I wasn’t trying to see his delusions through in person. Still in pain from his palm-strike, I pulled myself up and began running once more, all while the sounds of carnage escalated around me. 

But there was a glaring issue. *I had no idea where I was going.* 

The exits were surely going to be blocked off from the inside. 

*Do we have some kind of safe room?* I thought to myself. 

*No*. Of course we didn’t. We were entirely expendable. They 100% expected us to fight these things head-on, even though there was zero fucking chance of victory on our side.  

There was only thing I could do here. Survive until TFVNH showed up. Obviously, that wasn’t any kind of guaranteed reprieve, but my options were slim. 

Nevertheless, something rather surprising transpired. Amidst the cacophony of frenetic orders from our superiors, a familiar voice snuck in through my radio. 

“Hey… Jason… you… alive?” 

It was Sandhu. I picked up my radio and isolated his transmission. 

“Yeah. Where are you man?” 

“Block C. Got lucky and found something weird. It might save us though. Come on!” 

Obviously, there wasn’t much information there. But it was better than running around aimlessly. Thankfully, Block C was fairly close, so I was able to make it without running into another Void. 

However, when I got there, it was still as chaotic as ever. I swiveled my head around, trying to spot Sandhu. I yelled into my radio, but his response was drowned out by everything around me. As I searched, I began sensing a perplexing, sinister pressure that made it feel as if I were sinking into the concrete beneath me. I hardly had to guess the source. 

It was *Dyaxek* – 9’5 (287 cm), ???? lbs (????kg).  

Dyaxek was comparable in appearance to something you’d see in the corner of your room during sleep paralysis. A hulking, faceless figure wearing a sweeping black robe that jerked around in unsettling motions as he (or she, who knows) walked. 

I wasn’t sure how he actually killed people, mind you. As soon as anybody got within a certain distance to him, they’d freeze in place and begin bleeding from their eyes. And then… they’d just stay that way forever. 

Obviously, that wasn’t something I was looking forward to. As I looked ahead, I could see some unfortunate guards already getting caught in his death zone. In an attempt to avoid a similar fate, I turned the opposite direction and began running. 

And then I nearly shit myself. 

Standing about 10 feet away was the *Undead Nazi* – 5’8 (173 cm), 143 lbs (65 kg).

His name essentially told it all. A man wearing a dirty and tattered SS uniform, with a cracked gas mask covering his face. In one hand, he gripped his signature kampfmesser 42 blade that was inexplicably unbreakable, no matter what the hell we tried doing to it. In the other, he held a flamethrower hose connected to a massive tank on his back, which sprayed out some kind of scorching, black flame that would supposedly yield pain beyond comprehension if you were ever to come into contact with it. 

You could say that I was stuck in between a rock and a hard place here. The only other way out was taking the plunge over the rail in front of me, onto mass of scrambling bodies fifty feet below. 

Before I considered simply saying my prayers, I felt a hand tug at my sleeve from the side, giving me another heart attack. But this time… it was good news.  For once. I looked over to see Sandhu poking his head out from what appeared to be some kind of hidden door in the wall. 

“Let’s fucking go!” He whisper-shouted, before pulling me in. 

He closed the door behind him, plunging us into complete darkness. 

“What the hell is this place?” I asked, hardly expecting a detailed response. 

Sandhu illuminated his face using his phone’s flashlight. 

“Couldn’t tell you. But it’s kinda fucking crazy.” 

I could hear the Nazi beginning to spray his flamethrower from out in the corridor. I suddenly wondered whether or not Dyaxek’s “power” would apply to other Voids. In any case, it was better not to be in such close vicinity to them, so I followed Sandhu. 

He led me down some kind of hidden hallway. The walk was rather long – maybe around 8 minutes, and I eventually found myself in what appeared to be some kind of surveillance/control room. 

It was still dark, but there was an array of monitors giving off enough light to comfortably navigate around. But here’s the strange thing… the place looked kind of *haphazard*. No chance it was being used by the higher ups. The monitors were scattered around, connected by a mess of wires to multiple outlets spread throughout the room. There was also only one chair.

“I guess this is beyond explaining.” I said. 

“Yeah. No shit, huh?” Sandhu replied, before gesturing towards the monitors. “Check it out. What the fuck did we just find?” 

I took the suggestion, letting my eyes drift over to the screens. 

What I saw would’ve been normal… in any other scenario. Each monitor was streaming a different section of the prison, all displaying the utter carnage that was going on outside. The guards were being ripped to shreds. Some tried fighting. Most were running. But what they had in common was the fact that they were all being utterly obliterated by the Voids. 

I could see the Surgeon giving somebody a (forced) lobotomy, grinning like hell while doing so. At the same time, Morgi was chewing on a severed head like a toy. 

But then I caught something *interesting* on a screen below. 

It was WireHead and Luze, staring each other down. That’s when a rather obvious revelation hit me. 

*Of course* the Voids weren’t only going to kill the guards. They were sure as hell going after each other as well. That much should’ve been apparent from the beginning. I grinned, feeling some kind of obscure hope creeping into my system. 

That hope was only bolstered when I saw the Nazi utterly dousing Dyaxek with a relentless wave of black flames, with the latter struggling to move forward as a result. 

*Guess these bastards can be hurt after all.* I thought to myself. 

But of course, my hope was merely transitory. 

I wasn’t gonna kid myself. Even if only one Void was left standing at the end of everything… that just means it’ll be the strongest one out of them all. And we can’t stay in here forever. 

At this point, my future is uncertain at best. Maybe I’ll get lucky. Probably not. 

But in the meantime, I suppose I’ll enjoy the show. See how things turn out.

Next: https://redd.it/ct27tk[My name is Lily Madwhip and I think my dad is trying to kill me](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/al5sy6/my_name_is_lily_madwhip_and_i_wish_everybody/).

He put brussel sprouts on my plate. I know for a fact that brussel sprouts are poison. Paschar says they’re not, but they sure taste like it. I think. I never ate real poison obviously. My brother Roger once knew a kid who drank so much cinnamon that he had to go to the hospital because it was eating away the inside of his tummy. That’s what it feels like when I eat brussel sprouts, like they’re eating away at my insides.

“Eat your breakfast please, Lily.” my mom tells me.

They’re both trying to kill me. Brussel sprouts aren’t even a breakfast. What kind of parents make their child eat brussel sprouts for breakfast? I ask them this question.

“What kind of parents make their child eat brussel sprouts for breakfast?”

“You were told last night if you didn’t eat them with your dinner you were getting them cold in the morning,” Dad says from behind his newspaper.

*Oh yeah.*

“Brussel sprouts taste like garbage.” I haven’t eaten garbage either, but I’ve smelled it and it smells like brussel sprouts.

“Lillian Alexandra Madwhip!”

Adults use your middle name when they’re trying to make you do things. And somehow it works. Middle names are magic. Anyone who knows yours has power over you. That’s probably why some people don’t have middle names. The most important people don’t even have last names, like Madonna and Jesus and Garfield. Whenever they catch a killer they tell everyone the person’s middle name so if they escape, anyone who sees them knows how to protect themselves.

Dad throws down his newspaper and storms off to his work room with his coffee. He and Mom had a big fight after Jamal and I found all the dead animals out in the woods the other day. I heard them from my room where I was painting a still life. Dad said things and people around me keep dying and stuff about me being creepy and Mom said I’m his daughter so if I’m creepy, I get it from him. Then she got on her phone and called people who came and collected all the dead animals in big garbage bags. There was a whole crew, like six people. They had these huge, thick gloves on and wore masks like you see doctors wear when they’re operating on someone. One lady had a clipboard and she wrote down every animal they found.

There were twenty three and a half squirrels.

Things got worse when Mom came to tuck me into bed because I’d forgotten to tell her that Whiskers had died. All the yelling and banging of doors and the van parked on the front lawn and garbage bags I didn’t remember what started it all until she kissed me good night and saw his empty cage. Then everything started right back up again. Except for the van and the people with the garbage bags. I sure hope they don’t come back and dig up all my pets.

I take the bus to school. Our bus driver’s name is Ed. He’s been driving buses for thirty four years, but not the same bus because buses grow old too. He says his son was in the army but now he works as a “layabout”. I think that means he’s in the circus. I bet he got a job as the guy who shoots trapeze people out of a canon because he was in the army.

At morning recess I sit on one of the benches by the baseball diamond and watch a bunch of sixth graders play kickball. Jamal is playing with them. His school is down the street and he and a couple other Catholic kids hang out and play with us most mornings because their school starts fifteen minutes later. He looks happy for someone who still has nightmares about dead deer and birds banging and screaming at his bedroom window. He’s going to kick the ball straight at Tyler O’Neil and it’s going to hit Tyler right in the crotch. I’m amused because I get to see it happen twice. Paschar is in my backpack. He tells me I shouldn’t laugh at other people’s pain but when Tyler gets hit in the crotch Paschar agrees that it’s a little funny.

There’s a new girl in our class. Her name is Meredith. Mrs. C-D (that’s our teacher) has her stand up in front of class and introduces her. C-D stands for Carter-Dogbill. She’s got two last names. That probably makes it harder for other people to have power over her. Unless she’s got no middle name. Mrs. C-D used to just be Ms. Carter and then she married someone with the last name Dogbill and just nailed his last name onto the end of hers.

Meredith just moved to town. She’s real shy because she’s got these marks on half her face. She covers them with her hair, but it’s easy to see. Jeffrey Baker asks her what happened to her face and gets in trouble. Trouble in our class is these demerit slips you get for doing something wrong. Three demerit slips in a week and you get to go talk to the principal, Mr. Longbough. He yells a lot, and his face is always red from yelling. Meredith’s face is red too. Paschar says she got burned. I wonder if she’s a pyromaniac. That’s somebody who’s crazy about fire. I mean literally crazy. There was this boy in Roger’s grade who was a pyromaniac, and he went camping with his boy scout troop, saw a spider in his tent, and tried to kill it with hairspray and a cigarette lighter. He got burns all over his body because the tent caught fire with him inside it.

Mrs. Carter-Dogbill asks us all what we say to Meredith and nobody knows until Hanna Glass guesses “Hello?” and then we’re all like “Oh yeah.” It was pretty funny nobody knew what Mrs. C-D was talking about. I was going to guess, “Sorry you got burned” but I’m not supposed to know that I think.

Mrs. C-D makes Meredith sit next to me in the back of the room. Paschar tells me to be very nice because new kids are scared. I was going to be nice anyway. I make sure to blink a lot because I don’t want her to think I’m staring at her burns. They make her face look kind of waxy, like a candle.

“Hi, I’m Lily.” I tell her. New kids are the best because I haven’t freaked them out yet.

“I know.”

“Oh.” I don’t know how she knows that. Maybe some other kids already told her about me. I hope it wasn’t Rachel whose dog died from seizures.

Meredith pulls stuff out of her backpack. She’s got a green pencil that’s all glittery and has a rainbow eraser. Her notebook is three subject so it’s already three times better than mine. She pulls out a Barbie doll and sets it on the front of her desk like I do with Paschar and this thing is horrifying. It’s got no clothes at all, and most of its hair is missing. There’s black scorch marks on its face and one of its hands is melted into a lump. I can’t help it, I gotta stare at this doll.

“This is Barbie,” Meredith says and turns her Barbie toward me. Oh God, it’s face is kinda melted too.

I make Paschar salute Barbie. “This is Paschar.” Then I feel bad because Barbie doesn’t have articulated limbs like Paschar and her hand is a lump anyway.

Meredith sits next to me at lunch. Nobody else sits by me, so new kids usually end up there, but she doesn’t just sit at the table she sits *next to me*. She has a purple lunchbox with planets and comets on it. I have a paper bag with my name on it in Sharpee. Her lunch is a peanut butter sandwich and some carrot sticks and a plastic bottle of lemonade with OH MY GOD she has Oreos. I’ve got a Hi-C and some blue corn chips and a pepperoni and mustard sandwich. My dad snuck more cold brussel sprouts into my lunch. I can’t tell if its meant to be a joke or not. I swear, he’s trying to kill me.

Meredith asks permission from the lunch monitor to go use the bathroom and she leaves her melted Barbie and Oreos with me. Not like I get to keep them, but she says she trusts me to protect them. The moment she’s gone though, her Barbie starts talking.

It tells me it’s name is Nathaniel. I’ve never met another doll that spoke to me like Paschar does. I ask if it’s an angel like Paschar and it says it is. I wonder if every doll has an angel in it. That would be a lot of angels, but I guess if they run out God can just make more. I ask Nathaniel if Meredith knows he’s an angel, and if he minds being a melted Barbie with boobies.

No and no.

Then he tells me that Meredith has a gift like me. I ask him if she sees things before they happen and he says that she doesn’t. He says her gift is that she burns things.

“Like a pyromaniac?”

Kind of.

“Has she ever burned a spider in a tent?”

No.

She burned her parents though. Burned them right up. They’re not even buried like Roger is, they’re ashes and they got scattered in a park. He says Meredith lives with a foster family now and they don’t know that she burns things. They try to be nice to her but she’s always sad because she knows she burned up her folks and she misses them. It’s okay for her to be sad, Nathaniel says, but if she gets angry I need to get away. That’s when she starts burning things.

Meredith comes back and Nathaniel goes quiet. She looks happy because I guarded her Oreos and melted Barbie but I’m scared now because what if someone hits her with a dodgeball in gym class and she sets us all on fire? The boys want to play dodgeball all the time because it’s the only time they can hit us girls and not get in trouble.

The bell rings for afternoon recess and Meredith lets me have one of her Oreos because all I got left are brussel sprouts.

“Do you want to play on the swings?” she asks.

“Okay.”

I’m sweating the whole time we’re swinging. Out of fear, not because Meredith is hot. I don’t know how she burns things, Nathaniel didn’t tell me. I think she uses her mind but maybe she has laser eyes like Superman and Cyclops. Those are comic book characters though, they’re not real.

Lisa Welch and her crew of jerk girls start coming over. She always looks smug. Probably because she *is* smug. Her dad is a dentist so her teeth are always perfect and she likes to show them off by smiling at everybody, even people she hates like me. I’m probably going to need braces. I know Lisa and her friends are going to make fun of Meredith because making fun of people who look different is their favorite thing to do after chasing the boys around the baseball diamond when they’re trying to play kickball and telling each other stories about stupid stuff their parents bought them like Breyer horses and jewelry with their name on it in case they forget their stupid names. Stupid Lisa Welch and her crew of jerk girls.

“Hiiii Lily,” Lisa says. She makes it sound like she’s singing when she says hi. I guess that’s how smug people do things. “Who’s your new friend?”

I hop off the swing and stare at Lisa because I’m good at staring. “If you don’t go away you’re going to trip and break your front tooth on a rock.”

I’m lying, but Lisa Welch and her crew of jerk girls don’t know I’m lying. They just know that I tell people things before they happen. She covers her precious mouth and starts to run away, but then she trips and falls on her face and next thing we all know she’s crying and clutching her face and bleeding from the mouth and they’re all yelling to one of the recess monitors that I put a curse on her.

I’m just shocked.

“Lily Madwhip put a curse on Lisa!” they’re crying. Lisa is wailing like a banshee. That’s a Irish ghost that screams all the time. I saw one in an episode of Scooby Doo.

Mr. Longbough comes out of nowhere, steaming because he’s always red in the face like his brain is boiling or something. I think he has the ability to teleport because he’s never there and then the moment someone breaks a rule he’s suddenly right there. He starts yelling at me. “Lily, did you push Lisa? Come with me, young lady.”

Meredith hops off her swing. “Lily didn’t touch her.”

“Excuse me?” Mr. Longbough isn’t used to kids actually saying things to him besides crying or wetting their pants in pure terror.

“Lily just told her to go away and she fell on her own.”

By then the crew of jerk girls have hurried off with Lisa Welch and the recess monitor so none of them refute this. Not that they could. I mean that is really all I did. I’m still kind of in shock though because I’ve never had that happen before. I didn’t see Lisa fall and break her stupid tooth, I told her it was going to happen and it happened, even though I didn’t actually think it would. What if I told Mr. Longbough to cluck like a chicken and he started clucking like a chicken? That makes me giggle.

Mr. Longbough notices. He didn’t see my thoughts though, so it’s not funny to him. I end up going to his office anyway. He likes paintings of eagles. They’re all over his office. I wonder if it’s because he’s bald like the eagles. Maybe he wishes he was a bald eagle. I have to tell him again that I didn’t touch Lisa Welch I just told her to go away and she tripped and fell and broke her tooth on her own. I leave out the part where I told her that she’d trip and break her tooth before it happened.

Mr. Longbough lets me go but tells me to stay away from Lisa Welch. I had no intention of hanging out with her anyway. She and her crew of jerk girls all play with their expensive Breyer dolls and make fun of Paschar because I got him from a thrift shop and “he’s an action figure”. So what? I bet none of their dolls know anything.

When I get back to class, Meredith waves and smiles at me. Nathaniel her melted Barbie angel is sitting on her desk. I wave and smile back but I’m still scared because if I’m going to be friends with Meredith it feels like being friends with a shark. Maybe the shark likes you but then maybe the shark is hungry and doesn’t care. I hope she doesn’t burn me. I spend the rest of school quiet because I’m a little worried about saying things and making them happen.

After school, I take the bus home. Paschar tells me I need to be careful around Meredith. Yeah, I know. He tells me there are things I don't know. I know that too. He tells me things are about to get much worse, and that he's sorry.

I don't know what that means.

I get home and Dad is in the backyard. He’s dug up most of my pets and he’s been filling garbage bags with their remains. He says it’s unsanitary to have so many dead things buried in the backyard, and that they probably poisoned the grass which killed the deer and the rabbit and the twenty three and a half squirrels and all the voles and moles, but I point out that squirrels eat nuts not grass and there were raccoons too and besides what about that half a squirrel? What about the half a squirrel, Dad?

“You’re going to put my pets back.” I tell him.

He doesn’t. I don’t know why it worked on Lisa Welch and not my dad. Instead he tells me to go do my homework. And that we’re having pork chops and asparagus for dinner tonight. Asparagus? [I’m telling you, he’s trying to kill me](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/ami0cd/my_name_is_lily_madwhip_and_i_saw_the_angel_of/).Fresh out of college, I took a teaching job in a small town in central Wisconsin. In my sophomore creative writing class, I assigned a flash fiction exercise around Halloween. We’d studied urban legends and folklore, and it was the students’ turn to construct stories of their own.

Assignment length: 100-1000 words. Directions: *Scare me.*

The submission quality was as expected - these were sophomores, after all - but one story stood out halfway through my stack of papers: a piece by a quiet student named Jake. His first person flash fiction story seemed so real...like it was dipped in reality. A little too closely. Almost like he wasn’t making it up, but had been retelling something that happened to him. I put it aside, impressed.

Kate’s submission was the last paper in the stack. I remember the reading experience vividly: the beads of sweat accumulating around my temples, the *clickity click* of the red pen in my hand, and a weird feeling of dread in the pit of my stomach. I placed it on top of Jake’s story, and I thought:

*What the hell am I going to do?*

I still have photocopies of the original stories, and I often wonder, *why do I still have these?*

But there is something about them - they are so interconnected, and there is something so raw and beautiful about them. I have a strong affinity for interesting student writing, and it’d be a shame to let the flames of these stories be extinguished.

I’ll share the student pieces, and the subsequent events that transpired, right here - I do enjoy a good story.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Jake’s Flash Fiction**

*My parents put Grandma Rosie in a home when she started to “lose her grasp on reality,” they said. I still found it cruel. But she seemed content. Content enough, I guess.*

*I remember visiting her. She had an old, wooden rocking chair that faced the window. Outside was nothing but flat, fields of green. The green would eventually fade, and when it snowed it was carpets of white for miles and miles. I’m not sure which season Grandma Rosie liked the most. She didn’t do a lot of talking. She mainly listened to her radio, and always one station: 89.1.*

*But 89.1 never had a signal. It was always static. Grandma Rosie listened to this static, all day, seemingly waiting out her life. No one could reach her.*

*I visited one day to drop off a box of chocolates. Grandma Rosie rocked slowly in her chair with large headphones over her ears, staring out the window, watching the snowfall. I couldn’t tell if she knew I was there. I walked over and placed the chocolates on a small table, and her hand suddenly reached across and snatched my wrist.*

*“Shhh,” she whispered. “Listen.”*

*Grandma Rosie leaned in close, and I put my ear to hers. I lifted up the cup of her headphone and listened. There was only static.*

*I was about to speak, but she covered my mouth with her hand.*

*“Listen closer,” she said.*

*I did, but all I heard was more static.*

*“Soon, they will come,” she said. “They will come to take me away.”*

*This freaked me out a little, and I went home. I told my mom and dad about what happened, but they didn’t think it was that weird.*

*I kept thinking about it. One night I couldn’t sleep so I buzzed my friend Abby on our walkie talkies. She lived across the street, and she somehow she knew all about 89.1. She told me it was an old legend in our town, and you needed two things to explore the legend further: a radio, and a closet with the door slightly open. Face away from the closet, tune in to 89.1, and listen very closely. At some point through the static, you’ll hear the faint sounds of an organ, distant screams, and the dragging of metal chains along a gravelly surface. The open doorway is an invitation - keep your eyes closed, and only if you keep your eyes closed - a figure will appear and drag you into the closet. From there, your fate is unknown.*

*“How do you know this?” I asked.*

*“I’ve heard about it,” she said. “Don’t tell anyone. The less people that know, the better.” I looked out my window and saw Abby in her bedroom. She put her finger up to her lips.*

*“This is our secret,” the walkie talkie buzzed.*

*For the next few days, I kept thinking about the ritual and Grandma Rosie. Why would she be playing this game? Why did she want to be dragged into an unknown fate?*

*I again told my parents that I was worried about Grandma Rosie. They were very dismissive.*

*“Ever since Grandpa died, I think she wants to let go,” my mom said. “She wants to be with him.”*

*I wanted to know more, so I decided to try the game myself. It was late at night, and I opened my closet door just a crack. I sat on my bed with my back to the closet, tuned my radio to 89.1, and put on my headphones. I heard the static, and I closed my eyes.*

*I sat there for a long time, focusing very hard on the static. The longer I sat there, the more it felt like my room was shrinking. Kind of like the space was filling up with something else, like I wasn’t alone.*

*In my headphones I heard the distant organ, and I heard the screams that seemed far away, but sounded like they were getting closer. The screeching of the metal began, and then I heard a voice:*

*“OPEN YOUR EYES!”*

*I jumped from my bed, very startled. Abby was laughing hysterically through the walkie-talkie. I looked around my bedroom. I was alone. I looked out the window and saw Abby, smiling and giggling. She brought the walkie talkie up to her mouth.*

*“I totally scared you!” she said. “There’s no one there! You’re such a wuss.”*

*I noticed the closet door. It was wide open. The static of 89.1 hissed from my headphones.*

*“I was only joking,” the walkie talkie chirped. But I wasn’t so sure it was a joke.*

*Grandma Rosie died two weeks later in her sleep. Her time had come. And I was done fooling around with legends and superstitions.*

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jake’s story was the most interesting of the bunch. His writing needed some tightening, sure, but the ideas were there: a mysterious legend, sentimental characterizations, and an ambiguous ending. I truly thought he had invented the whole thing, until I read Kate’s submission.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Kate’s Flash Fiction**

*Panic. Fear. No one would believe me. Not ever.*

*I told him I was joking. About everything. It helps me sleep at night.*

*But I know what I saw. A young boy, a ritual, and death. Death itself. A black death with a clutching grip, an entity that surrounds its victim, dragging a companion to its secret and eternal lair.*

*But I was joking. Joking all along. Which made it okay.*

*I had to know. Know more. I went to her room. It felt recently vacated, like the plug had just been pulled from a sink. Headphones on the floor...static. Nothing but static.*

*Noises from the closet. Labored breathing. Fingernails squeaking on the door from the inside. I clutch the handle - something, something else. Something dark. Can’t open it. Won’t open it. Refuse to let it out.*

*I slowly back away. A tiny voice, squeaking.*

*Help me.*

*Static echoing in the small room. Nothing but static. I close the door on my way out. Won’t let it out.*

*Won’t tell. Will never tell. My story doesn’t exist. It’s simply not there.*

*It’s nothing but static.*

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here I had two, seemingly intertwined stories - Jake’s more traditional folklore story, and Kate’s personalized flash fiction, focusing on emotion, regret and secrets. Perhaps I’d been swimming in urban legends too long, or maybe I’d been the victim of too many horrendous student essays and stories to count, but I couldn’t shake the notion:

*This seems real.*

A few days after Halloween, I kept Kate after school. I wanted to know more, specifically, was she the Abby character in Jake’s story, and was she confessing to visiting the grandmother in her own piece? I pulled out Kate’s flash fiction, and I asked about how she wrote it. What was her inspiration?

She shrugged. “I guess it’s avant-garde. I was just experimenting with ideas. Did you like it?”

I nodded. It was an interesting piece, I told her.

“Have you ever heard of 89.1?” Kate asked me.

I started to speak, but couldn’t. A few words sputtered out, but were interrupted by Kate’s laughing.

“Oh my gosh, Mr. Patrick, the whole thing was just a joke!”

Kate explained how she and Jake conspired to write multiple viewpoints of the same story, partially as a creative writing exercise, but mainly just to screw with me. The whole thing was made up. It was a Halloween prank.

“We SO got you, Mr. Patrick,” Kate laughed.

I smiled uncomfortably. It was a good one, and yes, *they got me.* I told her that I enjoyed her piece, lets continue developing your avant-garde writing, and enjoy your Halloween.

But something didn’t feel right.

I had drinks with a veteran, freshman English instructor - me the first-year teacher in a new town, and he the wily, old mentor. I told him about the assignment and the stories Jake and Kate turned in. He laughed, and thought about it a bit more.

“That just seems off,” he said. “You said Jake and Kate conspired to play a joke? They were thick as thieves in my class at the start of the school year, but in the fall they stopped talking. Wouldn’t even look at each other anymore. Had some sort of falling out. I guess they made up.”

For the next few weeks I watched Jake and Kate closely - in my class and in the hallways. They didn’t speak once. Never even looked at each other. I scheduled a story conference with Jake, and I let him know how much I’d enjoyed his growth as a writer, especially his Halloween flash fiction piece. I grinned and told him that his prank with Kate had totally burned me. Jake smiled awkwardly.

“We got you, huh?” he said. “It was Kate’s idea.”

Everything was made up, he claimed. There was no 89.1, and he had no grandmother who passed away in a home. All of the characters and situations were straight, 100% fiction.

I told him good job, and to keep writing.

Still, the situation seemed amiss. Like I was missing part of the act. Was it possible that these two were so committed to screwing with me that they wouldn’t even speak at school? Or maybe they were dating and didn’t want anyone else to know, so they played it cool in the hallways and in class. They *were* 15-year old kids, after all. That seemed reasonable.

But It was keeping me awake at night. Nothing else mattered. I taught during the day, and I obsessed over the stories in the evening. News, sports, and current events faded to the background. The real world slipped away. I pushed forward.

Armed with a couple of possible last names (thank you, school records) I called senior citizen homes in the area. I was trying to track down my mom’s old friend, Rosie, I told them. Each phone call followed the same script: the receptionist went through the files and found nothing. No one there by either last name I had. 

I scoured the internet, and I spent too much time in the stacks of the local library. I found no folklore or urban legends relating to 89.1. And each time I felt like quitting, I pulled out my photocopy of Kate’s story. 

She *had* visited Jake’s grandmother. It simply felt so real - I *knew* it wasn’t fake.

In a last ditch effort, I spent a lot of time alone in my bedroom, listening to the static of 89.1 with my eyes closed and the door slightly ajar. I’d hone in on the static, and I’d listen deeply and intently for the chimes of the organ, the harsh and troubled screams in the distance, and the *clinkity clink* of the metal chains. Sometimes I'd think it was there, and I just had to focus a little harder. And I’d sense a presence in my bedroom about to creep out of my closet  - the dark mist waiting to drag me away. I wanted it to come, because I wanted this story to be real.

But it didn’t come.

One day at school I saw Jake and Kate smiling and laughing at Jake’s locker. I walked past them, and Kate *winked* at me.

That was the clincher. I finally succumbed to the notion that I’d been *had.*

It was over. I ended my search for 89.1. I had drinks again with my colleague - many drinks, this time - and I drunkenly told him everything I’d been doing. He found my investigation ridiculous, and ultimately dangerous.

“You like stories too much,” he said. “If I didn’t know any better, it’s almost like you’re trying to write one of your own. Just let it go.”

I pulled out the photocopied stories from my back pocket, and I pressed them down on the bar, staining them with splashes of beer. My colleague picked up Jake’s story, and he took a look at it for the first time. His eyes skimmed the page - and they stopped, cold.

“Wait,” he said. “You never told me about Abby.”

I shrugged. Abby was Kate, I told him. It was all part of the game.

“I wonder…,” he thought aloud to himself. “Hmm.”

He laid it out for me.

A year ago - about ten months before I moved into town - an eighth grader named Abby had gone missing. Seemingly vanished into thin air. One minute she was alone in her room, and the next minute, she was gone. Some suspected that she ran away, but there were no clues. No evidence of foul play. No suspicious or shady family members or neighbors.

She was simply, gone.

I read Kate’s piece again. My heart sank. The whole time, I assumed it was about her visiting the grandmother. But maybe I was wrong.

Maybe the squeaks and pleas coming from the closet were coming from *Abby.* Kate never specified who she was visiting or where she was.

I read the *avant-garde* flash fiction one more time, honing in on every word, just to be sure.

And at that moment, everything changed.

I spoke with the school administration, they contacted the authorities, and the police had conversations with Jake and Kate. It went nowhere. It didn’t matter that Abby had lived across the street from Jake. It didn’t matter that we had words on paper. They were just *stories*, the kids said. Only stories. Complete fiction. Jake had no grandparents in a home, anyway. They were sorry if they’d scared anyone. They were Halloween stories, after all. And pretty ambiguous stories, at that.

Jake even tearfully apologized for naming a fictional character after a missing girl - it hadn’t crossed his mind.

And I was now the monster for dragging two innocent kids into this mess. The staff ostracized me, and the town crucified me. I was done.

I left the teaching profession soon after that. I walked out of the school holding my small crate of supplies, and Kate smirked at me with a knowing glance through a first floor window. I haven’t seen her since.

I didn’t take much with me, but I did take the photocopies of the stories. I pull them out occasionally and relive the past. And sometimes, late at night, I’ll get a fire in my belly and a burning desire to travel back to that small, Wisconsin town. Maybe Grandma Rosie was a great aunt that Jake’s family referred to as Grandma, or maybe it was an elderly family friend. Maybe I *missed* something about the missing girl, about 89.1, about Kate’s intentions. Perhaps I can try the ritual a few more times, just to see what happens.

Or maybe it’s just all bullshit.

It was ten years ago. And I’m probably the only one that thinks there’s a shred of truth in those stories.

I’d be wasting my time.

But it still keeps me up at night - the slim chance that it’s all true. And oftentimes the *idea of it* is something I contemplate more than what really happened to Abby and the grandmother in the story: if it is true, why did the kids write it all down like that?

I don’t have a good answer. I’ll never have one.

I suppose that, just like me, they really just enjoy a good story.
Raucous music shook the window shutters as people paraded past, shouting and singing in memory of those they lost to the other world. Every year, on El Dia de Muertos, my small dilapidated shop shook. It was on the ground floor of a building so old the thundering footsteps outside reverberated through ancient wooden floorboards.  I watched the small flames of candles drift past the window, flashes of shadowed faces, sugar skulls and headdresses floating past like ghosts in the inky blackness. 

I waited for my next customer, sketching shadows with charcoal idly on a roll of paper, my supplies laid out around me in expectation of guests.

While I drew the curve of a forearm, the bell tinkled and a figure shuffled in, shambling and unbalanced.  I looked up, expectant and saw the sagging face of a partially decomposed corpse staring at me. Strings of limp hair hung about its face, a vague shape to its body that made me identify it as a her.

“Hello señora, please sit,” I said quietly, moving out of my seat and pulling out a cushioned chair. The woman stared at me, lips blue and eyes with a film of cataracts. Almost blind, but not yet. She dragged herself into the chair, bones clicking and bare feet making a slick sound on the wooden floor that once would have disgusted me. I didn’t even flinch, she was not my first customer. 

I sat, and I waited. After several moments of being observed, a raspy voice spoke.

“They say... you...” she began, voice gargled and almost indistinguishable. I could see the gashes on her throat in the low light, deep lacerations in her trachea. No blood, no gore. An older corpse I surmised, but with another glance at her eyes, not too old.  

“You can... make me look.... alive,” she spat, and then gasped for air she had no need for. I looked at her solemnly and nodded. Only living customers were comforted with a smile. 

“I can,” I said, and that was enough for her. She nodded and I picked up my tools and began to work. 

After spending years on the sets of B horror movies deconstructing faces, molding masks, playing with colour, lighting and shadow to horrify... It was easy to reverse the process. Easy to reconstruct a face. 

Hours later, a fresh faced woman shambled out of my shop. No payment from the dead. It was fine, money was not why I did it. I stared out of the window, saw her body disappear into the night, her face melt into the crowd, deceptively normal. I nodded in satisfaction.

For three years, I have been the makeup artist of the dead. 

I still remember my first customer and the bloodcurdling scream that came out of my mouth when I saw him. He had limped into my store with a torso covered in blood, lips blue and face swollen. He was a fresh corpse. Unemployed, working and sleeping in the same dusty store, weak with exhaustion, I had collapsed into a heap. I remember thinking, This is the end, Death himself has come for me.  

Dazed, I had struggled to come out of my petrified state and black spots danced before my eyes. The corpse had dropped clumsily to its knees and dragged himself towards me, eyes wide, blue lips moving in speech. It was the begging, the desperation that snapped me out of my haze. 

“Please. I won’t do anything. I just want to see her. I know she will be in the parade. I just want to see her,” he was choking, crying, no tears left for his dead flesh to produce but the anguish on his face sent a dagger into my heart. 

“Why, why here?” I had asked, struggling, pressing nails into the floorboards to not get up and run, far away in the face of the monstrosity in front of me. Frankenstein’s Monster stared back at me.

“I remember you, from when I was alive. You can change a face,” he had said and I’ll never forget his face, the look of hope that almost made his swollen, bloated face look human, look alive. 

“Please,” he’d said and I had nodded. 

It took hours to change him, to revisit and practice seldom used, abandoned talents.  My hands shook like leaves in the wind, I made mistakes, then fixed them, then made more. Four hours later, it was done. He had looked at himself in the mirror, shocked, awed, thanked me and limped out of the door. 

I did not ask him for payment, it didn’t even occur to me. I never knew if he had seen her, or who “her” was to him. I never knew if the fruits of my labour had helped him find solace.

The next year, there were more. I knew then, that it worked. 

For the past three years, every year, on Dias de Muertes, they shamble into my store, hoping to be alive for a night. Some come to join the parade without being noticed, others like him, come to see their loved ones, to hear their voices, while they can still pass for someone who is alive. Some come because they are curious about the magician who brings them back to life, just for a day.

I am an artist, putting layers upon layers on pallid, grey skin, breathing life into the lifeless. I have become a surgeon, teaching myself how to stitch loose bowels back into abdominal cavities, how to mold prosthetic eyes and insert them into empty, cold eye sockets. 

Many, I have had to turn away with tears blurring my vision and heart in my throat because they are simply decomposed beyond repair. 

I sketch again, getting charcoal smudges on my fingers and look up an hour later when the bell rings again. My next customer, for the first time in years, takes my breath away. 

I jump to my feet, skidding to a halt as the frail corpse enters my shop. It cannot be. No, it cannot. He comes in, closer and closer and I wonder why he doesn’t know... Why... Then I see it. Deep gashes around two empty sockets. 

He is blind. 

I stand there and shake, trembling and rooted to the spot. 

“Hello?” the man says, voice barely there, vocal cords so frayed it’s almost an inaudible whisper. I am mute. Suddenly, I am transported back years, to when I stopped speaking. It’s as if two years of speech therapy, two years of psychologists and clinics never happened. 

He shuffles closer and even blind, he can sense my presence. He turns slightly, ears facing me. I wonder if he hears my shuddering breaths, I wonder how decomposed his ears are, whether his hearing is sharp, or barely there, a whisper of yesterday. 

Before he can leave, mumbling uncertainties, I dive forward and put my shaking hand on his shoulder. I can feel the bone beneath it. He looks heartened, “thank you,” he says shakily as I maneuver him into the chair. 

I open my mouth to speak, but my throat clicks. I feel a sob building up and I cannot speak, I cannot breath through the headache pounding behind my eyes. It is okay, he speaks for me.

“Am I too late?” he speaks slowly and inaudibly, his voice is but a breath that rattles through his deflated lungs and brushes lightly past frayed vocal cords. I cannot speak. I put all my concentration into hearing his whispers instead. 

“I- I must be. But please...” he begs, he looks so sorrowful. I stare into those empty, gruesome eye sockets and pretend I can remember what his eyes looked like. 

“I just want to hear her, that’s all... Can you fix me? I just want to stand by the window... and hear her,” he says and finally, falls silent. Tears roll down my cheeks and I begin with shaking hands. 

All I can hear is my heart beating loudly in my chest. My vision tunnels until all I see is his face, my hands work using muscle memory like I am an automaton. Thoughts and memories batter at the walls of my head like hammers and daggers. 

Years, I hadn’t seen him in years. My life had fallen apart, I lost my job, the house and the same window to which he wanted to place his ear to. I never knew, what happened to him.... but now I did. I never found him, but he has found me. 


I don’t know how long it takes.  I cannot hear the tick of the clock. I still cannot speak. When my hands fall away, he notices it is over. 

“Do I look alive?” he asks, and he does. He looks exactly like the last time I saw him. Before he left my life, before he was taken from me and given to me in his stead, an empty grave for the disappeared.

“*Oh papa*,” I choke, voice finally free, and his face turns up to me in a shocked jolt. 

“You look wonderful.”I did one of those at-home DNA testing kits.

You know the ones, they can supposedly tell you your ancestral make-up, help you connect with long-lost relatives, that sort of thing. The specific test I used had this option to make your DNA available to law enforcement. That way, if there was a partial DNA match to a crime scene or victim, my DNA may help law enforcement identify the perpetrator.

Maybe I shouldn’t have opted in. The thing is, I’ve read about these a lot in the news. If you’re a true crime fan, you know that these kits can sometimes lead police to catch decades-old serial killers and rapists that have long eluded capture. My thinking was that if one of my family members is actually a monster… well, I would want them behind bars, regardless of who it is.

So, I opted in, but never really considered the possibility that there’d be a match.

And then there was.

I was contacted by my local police department and notified that my DNA had been a partial match to a Jane Doe, and that they’d like my help in identifying her.

That was honestly not what I was expecting. I was a match for a dead woman? The police explained to me that our DNA profiles indicated we may have been related, and that they wanted to know if I knew of any relatives who had gone missing or hadn’t been heard from in the past five years.

Five years? Yes, because they’ve determined her time of death was about five years ago based on the state of her body when it was found. They’ve reason to believe it’s a homicide, although they weren’t able to tell me the cause of death. Apparently, due to the state of her remains, it was impossible to tell.

Well, I didn’t know of any family members who’ve gone missing, but I don’t know my extended family all that well. I decided to get my mother involved, who does genealogy. She worked with the police, going through our family tree, but ultimately, we couldn’t find anyone. So, someone we didn’t know we were related to, possibly?

At this point, we decided to talk to the rest of my family, immediate and extended, to see if anyone else knew anything. Most of our family members thought it was pretty cool and wanted to see the mystery solved, though a few were angry at me for giving my DNA to law enforcement in the first place.

The police showed us a sketch of what they think the woman would have looked like, and my mother and I agreed she had some resemblance to my Aunt Linda, particularly in the strong brow and high cheekbones. The police decided to ask Aunt Linda and her two children, Ethan and Becks, to submit DNA samples. They agreed.

It took about two weeks to hear back from the police after their samples had been submitted – they probably weren’t at the top of the priority list for the crime lab. But when they did get the results back, they asked Becks and Aunt Linda specifically to come down to the station.

Becks actually asked me to come with her. She and I were really close growing up, basically best friends. We’ve lost touch over the years, but I still consider her a close friend. I agreed to go in with her, even though I wasn’t sure why she wanted me there.

When the police told us what they found… to say I was shocked is an understatement.

The DNA from Jane Doe was an exact match to Becks.

Of course, my initial thought was that there had to’ve been some mistake. I asked what the likelihood is that the DNA matched Becks without actually coming from her.

One in 5.4 billion, they said.

They told us that this was extremely perplexing and that they had no explanation for the match. I asked Aunt Linda if Becks had an identical twin that nobody knew about, maybe, but she shook her head. The police told us that identical twins don’t actually have perfectly identical DNA anyway, so that couldn’t explain the match.

I was perturbed. I’m sure you can imagine why.

Becks and Aunt Linda, though, were not. They laughed – actually laughed – when the police presented them with their evidence and shrugged it off. “Isn’t that just the weirdest thing?” said Aunt Linda. They were both smiling and giggling the rest of the time, which clearly made the police uncomfortable.

They told the police that they hoped Jane Doe could be identified one day, but that they were pretty sure they couldn’t help any further, and then left the police station. I followed after them in a daze, confused both by what the police had told us *and* by Becks and Aunt Linda’s behavior.

On the way home, I asked Becks if it truly didn’t bother her. She said, “Come on, Veronica, there’s obviously been some mistake. It’s just not possible for my DNA to match exactly with a dead woman’s. The cops screwed something up, and they’ll probably figure it out in a few days and call us and apologize. Don’t worry so much about it.”

I tried to take her advice. My mom even agreed with her, saying it had to be some sort of error and that it would get cleared up sooner or later.

Three days after we spoke to police, Becks, Ethan and Aunt Linda vanished.

My mom had gone over to their place to borrow some family photo albums from Aunt Linda to discover that the front door was unlocked and open. Nobody was inside.

We tried to reach them on their cell phones, but were informed that their numbers had all been disconnected.

Nothing was missing from the house – they didn’t take any personal belongings. Their cars were in the garage. It was like they just… vanished.

And they didn’t come back.

We reported them missing, of course. And a few days after *that*, the police asked my mom and me to come down to the station.

That’s when they revealed that they’d run Aunt Linda and Ethan’s DNA through their databases and came up with two more exact matches. To a Jane and John Doe, whose bodies were found within 50 miles of each other and the original Jane Doe. All of them died about five years ago.

Once is a mistake or maybe a weird, freakish coincidence. But three times? The police were baffled. They asked us for all the information we could give them on my Aunt’s family. They specifically wanted to know what they were doing five years ago.

All we could tell them is that they’d gone on a family vacation that year, and had been gone a week longer than they’d planned. But otherwise, we had nothing useful.

It’s been a few months since then. The police have no answers for us, and we have no answers for them. I keep waiting for Becks to call or show up. Or any of them, really. But it’s like they vanished off the face of the earth.

The worst part is that there’s nothing I can do. I’ve done so much research to try to find something that can explain what’s going on, but I can’t come up with a theory that makes sense. Nothing grounded in reality, anyway.

All I wanted to know is if I’m part Irish, and instead I ended up discovering that my family isn’t at all what it seems.*To Those Who Sleep*

This happened a few years ago. You may have heard rumors if you’re on campus. Some even circulated online. Nobody knew what really happened. Because I’m the only one who knows and I kept quiet. For a multitude of reasons. None of them matter now. Here’s what really happened.

The four of us were handpicked for this experiment by Prof. Richardson because we’d all studied under him, worked under him, and, as much as anyone can, earned his confidence.

He said this one was different. We had to keep it quiet. He wanted to keep details to a minimum. All he would tell us before going in was that he required a month of our lives and that if he succeeded sleep would never again be a necessity.

“Think of it,” he said, “6 to 8 additional hours every day. Your month will be paid back before the year is out.”

If he was right, he’d have a Nobel Prize for sure. It would change the world. We believed in him. Sleep would become a hobby. Imagine that. We felt lucky to be a part of it. We went in with the highest of hopes. We were so excited for a new future for humanity and for ourselves. I was the only one to leave that place.

**Week 1**

Prof. Richardson brought us out to the location in his van, explaining along the way what we were to do. For the purposes of the study, we were asked to remain in the ‘compound,’ as he called it. We would be locked in, in fact, and deprived of windows and wifi. Other than endure patiently, we didn’t have to do much of anything.

“My machine does all the work,” he explained. “It uses a complex mélange of soundwaves to disrupt the processes of sleep, evolutionary appendices from the days before civilization. The most immediate side effect you’ll notice is that you won’t dream. ”

Any other effects we noticed we were to catalogue. We were, as he said, “in uncharted territory” and so we had to “map out the dangers.”

The immensity of the project was inspiring enough. Then we saw the compound. The Octagon, as it was known. A concrete, octagonal structure built at the end of a labyrinth of dirt roads somewhere in the backwoods of Searcy, Arkansas. I’ve never been able to find it again. The Prof said it was originally intended as a jail for terrorists, but it was abandoned and never used. It’s virtually impenetrable, invisible to satellites, but for us it had been stocked with all the comforts we’d require for a month of dedication.

I don’t think know if any of us expected to really conquer sleep. We thought, perhaps, a reduction in sleep requirements could be possible. We spent a fair amount of the first two days speculating on how the machine works with its “complex mélange of soundwaves” and whether sleep really is an evolutionary appendix, as the Prof had claimed.

By the third day of only getting three to four hours of sleep, contrary to feeling groggy, we were more awake and full of energy than ever. We were alert and ready to debate these ideas. That’s when the excitement really hit us.

“He really did it,” JT said. JT was a big, ginger-bearded guy, the sort of guy who still has a healthy collection of Magic cards.

“We don’t know that,” James said, always the skeptic. He came from Australia just to study under Richardson, actually. “The machine could be stimulating the adrenal glands to mildly dose us with adrenaline all throughout the day.”

“Even were that so, wouldn’t change the fact that he beat sleep,” I said.

With our extra time, we were getting in tons of reading, played a stupid amount of Call of Duty, and still had plenty of time to sit around and debate. 

“I guess I have to admit it’s fucking amazing,” James said.

We all felt it. It was almost euphoric, the excitement we felt for being possibly the first humans to live without the need for sleep. Technically we still needed a few hours each night still, but we decided together that it was more out of habit than necessity.

Then, on the fourth day, Don said, “There’s something wrong.” Don was a serious one. Superserious. He used to be a Franciscan, I’d heard. It showed. He didn’t talk that much and when he did, it was usually worth listening to. This time he put into words something I’d been feeling, but I guess just kinda buried under the excitement.

“With the experiment or…?” That was JT.

“I don’t know,” he said. “It’s a feeling. This constant uneasiness. Like this isn’t going the way it’s supposed to be going or that we’re in the wrong place.”

“No, no,” James said, “I think that’s it: it’s this place. We all knew it was weird when we first saw it. This concrete octagon. But living in it—I think there’s something wrong with this place. Like something terrible happened here.”

“I understood it was never used,” I said.

“Governments always say that about torture prisons,” James said.

“It’s more than that,” JT said. “I feel it, too. I thought it was just from lacking windows at first. But that’s not it. I think it’s the angles. It’s like, the angles in this building don’t add up to what they should.”

“What if everyone’s dead outside?” Don asked.

James jump up so fast his chair clattered to the ground. “Cut that shit out, Don! Why would you even say that?”

“Well, what are you saying?” I asked. “This is a ‘haunted octagon’?”

“Yeah, James,” JT said, “was it built on an octagonal Indian burial ground?”

“Okay, you want to play that?” he said. “I can play. Look, the space around us transforms based on how we perceive it. Take a church. The people who go there perceive it as holy. So they do things, like leave their crutches behind when they force themselves to walk, or light their candles, or whatever. These changes to the space only enhance the perception of holiness and influence future visitors to perceive it in the same way and change it in the same way. Haunted places are the same. For one reason or another, they begin to be perceived as haunted. The more they’re perceived that way, the more they’re imbued with hauntedness. Even if you’ve never seen the place before, you pick up on the subtle clues, if you’re at all sensitive. In a way, it’s true to say it’s a haunted space. It’s true to say the church is holy. Our interaction with that space has made it something more than just wood and sheetrock, or whatever.

“So what I’m saying is, maybe some things happened here and we’re picking up on it. Some bloody awful things. And in that sense, yes, it’s a haunted octagon.”

“No, no, no,” Don said, “places are considered ‘holy’ because an authority telegraphs it to whoever will listen. Just like ‘haunted’ places make a lot of money off dumb tourists.”

“Whatever it is,” I said, “we all agree something isn’t feeling right about our situation. Maybe it’s the machine. I say we write it down as a side-effect.”

On that point, at least, we were all able to agree. It didn’t put any of our uneasiness at rest, but we wrote it down. We somehow agreed upon the phrasing right away, too. “Acute sensations that we’ve entered into something where we aren’t welcome.”

**Week 2**

We tried our best to ignore these feelings and carry on like we had been. Those first few days had been some of the best in our adult lives. But we never got back to those happy times.

I realized around then how short-sighted of Richardson it had been to leave us there without any means of contacting the outside world. When I voiced that opinion…

“That’s just what I’d been thinking,” JT said. “Richardson isn’t a dumb guy. You get me? I think he did this on purpose.”

“Why would he do that?” I asked.

“For science, of course,” he answered. “It’s one of those meta-studies, where we’re told it’s about one thing but it’s actually about how we react to the experiment. Like the Milgram Experiments.”

“Or it’s not his choice,” James said. “The government is making him do it. And that machine is designed to control us. Or some sort of cult. Scientologists.”

“This is a government-built installation,” JT said, “that actually makes sense. Not the Scientology part, though.”

“Think about it—“ James started, but I interrupted.

“Okay, okay,” I said, “let’s come back down to earth for a second. Best case scenario, Richardson is just a jerk who doesn’t care about our personal well-being. Right?”

“Give it a rest,” Don said, the one I least expected to snap at me. “Stop trying to act like the most rational guy in the room. You don’t know what Richardson’s into. He’s into other things, things he’ll never talk about publicly.”

I looked at the others and saw similar confusion.

“What are you talking about?”

“I’ve heard a little about this, actually,” James said. “He has some… fringe ideas.”

“Let’s just say he’s not the respected academic he presents himself to be,” Don said. “I’ve read some of the content he doesn’t publish. He thinks, and very seriously believes, that there’s something else, something besides this,” he knocked on the table. “Something more than material stuff.”

“That’s not completely strange,” I said with a shrug. I was expecting worse. 

“He put it this way,” Don continued, ignoring me. “Think back to the beginning of existence. There had to be conditions such that the universe’s existence was possible. If the universe wasn’t possible, then it couldn’t have come to exist. Does that stand to reason?”

We nodded.

“Okay, and those conditions cannot be material nor laws of matter, since those came into being with the existence of the universe. So whatever those conditions are, they have to be something other than the basic substance of the universe. Does that make sense?”

“I guess,” I said. “This isn’t turning into an argument for god, is it?”

He shook his head. “It’s an argument for a something that continues to exist. Except we can’t even say that. Because ideas like ‘something’ and ‘exist’ are developed by, for, and within physical reality. This is something pre-physical. Something pre-existence. Whatever it is allowed the universe to spontaneously be. Who knows what else it’s been doing these billions of years?”

“Just asking that question is already violating the stipulations—“ I started saying, my background in philosophy kicking in.

“Yes, yes,” Don said. “But he believes. He thinks it’s the source of free will. Our brains touch it somehow. And so he believes he can reach it, study it, use it. I didn’t get to read much more than that.”

“And if this experiment is something he’s not putting on the books,” James added, “it may have to do with his more peculiar interests.”

“So, instead of eliminating sleep, he’s trying to make us see god?” I asked sarcastically.

“I don’t know, brother,” Don said, “I’m just saying, if he thinks the brain touches another reality, this is just the kind of experiment he’d want to try to prove his theory.”

“You think he has this room bugged?” JT asked.

“I think he might be in here somewhere,” I said, without even thinking of what I was saying. 

They looked to me waiting for an explanation and with what looked like fear in their eyes. Strange we should be so afraid of this man we admired less than two weeks ago.

“I sometimes feel someone watching me sleep,” I explained, my voice starting to tremble. “I figured it was one of you at first. I feel it especially when I’m not quite awake, but not quite asleep. Those moments when you wake for a few seconds to adjust your pillow. I could feel and see and hear someone standing over me. Just breathing and watching. And I was too close to unconsciousness to do anything about it. Then I just fell back to sleep.”

I could see the terror filling the others’ eyes while I spoke.

“I’ve been feeling it, too,” Don said, almost in a whisper, like he was scared to be heard. “I thought I was losing it.”

“Me too,” James said. 

“Someone else is in here…” I said.

We drew closer together, our eyes darting nervously around the gray concrete room. We were all feeling the same thing, I’m sure. That we were trapped. Trapped inside this horrible building with someone or something else.

“Wait, wait,” JT said, “what would this person be eating? We don’t see our food disappearing. There’s no way out. There isn’t really anywhere to hide. We gotta start being sensible.”

I let out a sigh of relief. Because he was right. 

“Okay, let’s think about this,” I said. “Let’s say this is another effect of the machine. Phase 2: Paranoia.”

“Phase 2: Paranoia,” Don said with a consenting nod.

We wrote it down.

###

The next day, when we all gathered together for breakfast, JT asked, “Have you all had any… dreams?” 

We all shook our heads. 

“Richardson was right on the money with that one,” I said.

“Mmhmm,” he said, “do you know feral children don’t dream?”

“How do we know that?” James asked.

“They tell us. The few that get socialized. They say dreaming is something that starts only after. When they have language, object permanence, and all that shit.”

 
“What about dogs?” I asked. “Like, chasing rabbits in their sleep?”

“Autonomic responses.”

“Maybe language and object permanence impacts only the ability to remember dreams,” James said. “Both are consistent with the superficial data. The onus is on you to prove otherwise.”

JT scoffed. 

“What’s your point, anyway?” Don asked. 

“The point is, being dreamless—do you think it’s healthy? I don’t think it’s healthy. I think the machine isn’t making us not need sleep, it’s making us not feel tired. I think all of this might be happening because we aren’t dreaming.”

“We can’t really answer, can we?” James said. “Dreams naturally accompany REM sleep. So we don’t have any studies that differentiate between the effects of not dreaming and of not sleeping.”

“Or maybe we are dreaming and the dreams are just going somewhere else,” JT said.

I didn’t know what he meant by that. Nobody did. But we all stopped talking then and dispersed. Something about it felt too true.

**Week 3**

Our gatherings for theoretical discussions became rarer and rarer. We tended to isolate ourselves and eyed each other with suspicion. I still had those feelings of uneasiness and of unwelcomedness every day. 

And each night the figure standing over me. I was sleeping even less now. About an hour, tops. So little sleep that I’d started to catch it running away. 

The last time, I was awake enough to see where it was going. It’s this one particular corner of my room that always struck me as peculiar. I caught myself staring at it even when I didn’t want to. It’s a point where the angles are strange. My eyes had trouble focusing on it. The figure skulked straight to that point and disappeared into it.

When I woke up fully, I questioned whether I’d hallucinated the whole thing. Perhaps Phase 3: Hallucinations. I went over to that corner and looked at it closely. It smelled strange. Like turpentine. Then the more I stared at it, the more I forced my eyes to focus, I was sure, sure something was moving inside. And it was watching me. I heard this awful, hate-filled sound come from deep in the corner then. I didn’t wait around to understand what made that noise. I left that room for good. I took all my short naps in the library from then on.

While lying in the library, I overheard JT talking to someone in the corridor. He was telling him about the angles again. He said there are more degrees in the building than can possibly be in a standard enclosed shape. 2.7488 degrees more, he said. “Just enough to drive you nuts, but not enough to be obvious.” Whoever he was talking to said something I didn’t understand, something like, “Those are the degrees of ripping.” The voice was distorted somehow, so I can’t be sure. What I was sure of was, I didn’t recognize that voice at all. Whoever JT was talking to wasn’t one of us.

May be silly, but I was scared. I stayed there, pretending to be asleep while JT walked by. And as he did, I felt someone or something come into the room and stand over me. Then it went away. 

After a minute or so of telling myself I was being foolish, I went following after JT. I didn’t see him anywhere. I bumped into James and he also said he hadn’t seen JT. “Have you seen or heard anyone who shouldn’t be in here?” I asked him. 

James looked at me with a mixture of surprise and terror. “How’d you know?” he asked. “I haven’t told anyone.”

“About what?” 

He told me he’d heard his mother calling to him. Not a faint sound that he confused for his mother, but her voice, clear as mine, calling out to him. He almost answered her, he said. Almost. Then he stopped himself. “She’s been dead for a year, man,” he said. “Whatever was calling me—it  wasn’t my mother.” 

I saw he was shaking and his hands were clenched. I told him to hang in there. It might be aural hallucinations. I’d been hearing things, too. A crying child. So low at first, I thought it was the plumbing. 

“We should call a meeting,” he said. 

I thought about JT and what I’d heard moments ago. “Let’s just tell Don,” I said.

“As a side-effect of the machine, it makes sense,” Don said after we told him. “The sounds are not supposed to be audible. Yet somehow our brains must be picking up their random patterns and interpreting them as something. The brain assigns a memory to make the pattern meaningful.”

“Do you believe that?” I asked.

“Not for a second,” James said. 

But we had a shortage of rational explanations and that was a pretty good one. I’d hoped he was right.

A few days later, I found James in the gym, pounding away at the punching bag. I asked him if he was okay. He ignored me, so I went back to the reading room. A few minutes later he was behind me.

“That voice I’ve been hearing is not my mother,” he said. 

“Of course not,” I said. We’d already decided that, after all.

“No, I mean… I don’t know what I mean. It’s just, my mother was a kind person. Even if this voice is trying to sound like her, it’s not like her at all. It’s not kind. It’s not human.”

I put down my book and looked him full on to see if he was serious. He was. Very much so.

“She’s been telling me about all sorts of things,” he said. “She asked me if you remember the shed.”

I couldn’t say anything to that. I was speechless. I never talked about that. For good reason. Took me years to come to terms with what happened. It was a long time ago. I was out playing behind our house in the woods, as I often did. I liked to construct shitty treehouses. I went a little off property and came to this shed. I’d never seen it before. It looked old, though. I remember that. I heard a kid crying inside. Thinking I might have a friend to make treehouses with, I looked through the window. The kid was all chained up and there was a dog bowl on the floor. I wanted to help, but I knew I was trespassing. I looked around. That’s when I saw this man, off about twenty feet into the woods. He was dressed all in black, old-fashioned clothes. Like 19th century clothes. He had to have been watching me the whole time. Expressionless. I went running all the way home. 

I was so scared, I didn’t tell me parents about it until I was supposed to go to bed and I had to explain why I was terrified to go to sleep. They had the cops out right away. They found the shed. I heard they found the chains and bowl. But the kid was gone. I've always blamed myself for not helping the kid right away.

“Do you?” James asked.

“Yes…”

“Ok, well, she’s been telling me how to get out.”

I looked at him without a word, because he sounded so manic. 

“She said there’s a secret exit inside JT. We just have to cut him open to get to it.”

“James,” I said, unsure what else to say at that point.

“Oh, I know,” he said with a gulp. “I know it’s not true. I just had to tell someone.”

“I don’t know what’s going on in this place,” he added. “I’m scared, man.” 

So was I. We had to get out of that octagon.

**Week 4**

James and I started looking for ways out after that. Since we weren’t sleeping at all now, we had plenty of time to do it. Every time we thought we’d found something, it was a dead end. It was while we were doing this that we saw Don standing alone in the corridor with his back to us.

“What’s going on?” James asked me. Something about it just seemed strange.

“Don, you okay?” I called.

He turned around and with a smile gave us a big wave. “Bye guys,” he said and walked around the corner.

I looked at James to see if he was thinking the same thing as me, that something bad was about to happen, and he was already looking back at me. We took running after him. He was at the end of the next corridor already, getting in the elevator. “Don, no!” we shouted and ran after him, but the doors closed before we got there. He went up.

The thing is, the octagon is a one-floor building. There’s no elevator. Never before or after. I don’t know where Don went or if what I think I saw really happened. But I know I never saw Don ever again.

“I don’t understand,” James said. “What’s happening?”

Before we could take time to think about it, a group of people rounded the corner and were walking toward us. 

“I think we should go,” I said.

“Who are they?” he asked.

“James, let’s go,” I said.

“Why are they blurry?”

“I don’t know, but we’re going.”

I grabbed his arm and pulled him with me, then I ran. I ran until I got to the kitchen and hid myself between the wall and the fridge. I was sure James was right behind me. I could hear his footfall the whole way. But when I looked, he was gone.

I stayed there until my body couldn’t really take it anymore. Probably a few hours. When I slipped out, I saw someone peering at me from around the doorway. I was so startled, I backed up against the wall. It was a little boy.

“Hello?” I said.

Then I heard screams. The boy was gone. More screams.

I couldn’t just leave someone in distress. Not again. I ran toward the screams, scared of what might be happening to James. I heard a scream again, but this one choked out. It was coming from JT’s room.

I wished then and still wish I hadn’t opened that door. James was in there. He’d sliced JT open and he was feeling around in his guts. The shocked, agonized expression was frozen on JT’s face. 

“What did you do?” I asked.

“I have to get out,” James said as he dug through JT’s intestines.

I backed out of the room. I didn’t know what else to do. I just had to find somewhere to hide until Richardson could get us out of there.

Once I was out of the room, I heard James saying, “Mom?” and then, “Oh no, oh no,” and then he screamed. I ran back in. James was gone. The doorway to the room hadn’t left my sight. There’s no way he got out. But he was gone. And noxious, black smoke was coming from JT’s abdomen. It smelled like burning tires.

I went back to the kitchen. I found a supply of candles. Melted some wax onto paper towels. And I stuffed my ears with it. Then I curled up in a corner, with my eyes closed, and waited for sleep to come. I waited a long time, but eventually, it came.

When I woke up, Prof. Richardson was shaking me. He’d already pulled the paper towels out of my ears. I thought he’d come early. I found out later I’d been asleep for several days.

He asked me where the others went. I told him everything. As much as I understood. I tried to take him to JT’s body. But it was gone. Not a trace of blood. He took me to a hospital after that to make sure I was ok.

“I’ll foot the bill,” he said. “Also, you can forget about your student loans.”

“Is that how it is?” I asked.

“I put you in danger,” he said. “So yes, you’ve earned it. If you keep quiet.”

I told him I couldn’t keep quiet, because of what happened to the others. 

“You don’t think those things really happened, do you? Would all the laws of the physical universe suspend themselves just for you four? No, those were waking dreams. You weren’t supposed to dream at all. I thought I’d compensated for it. The machine needs tweaking. That’s science. The others are fine. They’ll be laying low for a while, until I publish the results. Please do the same.”

I wanted to believe him. I’ve always considered myself a rational person. I just didn’t believe him. Yes, it all could’ve been a dream. That would be the simplest explanation. But it was no dream. I tried to find the others. I never could. I don’t think they’re fine at all. I tried to tell police about it, but they wanted evidence. I couldn’t even show them the octagon. 

James, JT, Don, if you’re out there and read this, let me know you’re ok. And everyone else, let me tell you what I think. I think Prof. Richardson was right about one thing. Sleep really is something we evolved to protect us. Except, not from the creatures that roam the forests at night. It protects us from something much worse, something all around us. It’s not obsolete at all. Thank whatever you believe in that you have sleep and you dream.

[FB](https://www.facebook.com/spookyjared/)The ad offered five-thousand dollars, and said that the desired activity could be completed in an hour. It stated, fairly redundantly, that it was not a sexual thing; insisted that all the *witness* would need to do is sit in a chair and stare ahead. The only other details expressed were that you could not move during the “experience”, nor could you talk—this inability being out of a requested self-restraint, not through a means of physical prevention.  

Being an abysmally broke college student, and having a friend with whom I could depend upon for my rescue if something strange happened, I answered the ad only a few minutes after coming across it. The person who had put out the ad had provided a phone number, which I called—sending a text resulted in me being informed that it was a landline. The person answered, and we briefly discussed the location where the interaction was to be held, and I confirmed the amount of money to be paid. Like his ad, he repeatedly reminded me that it was in no way a carnal activity; apparently, he’d gotten a lot of answers to the ad from people with that particular preconception.  

My friend took the day off from work—insisted, despite my protests that we could wait until the following day when he was off—and we drove to the agreed-upon location. It was a house in a suburban neighborhood, which was somewhat comforting; if the man was an axe-murderer, there was a chance my screams of terror could be heard by quite a few people. I joked aloud about this, but my friend didn’t find it funny. The ad specified and the man reiterated that I be alone when entering the house, so I had my friend stay in the car. Being similarly broke, I offered him five-hundred dollars for his help; an *unnecessary incentive*—his words—to not leave me if the man turns out to be truly insane.  

I got out of the car and walked across the lawn, which—unlike those of other houses—hadn’t been maintained. The grass was high, weeds threatened to burst through the concrete of the driveway and sidewalk. The man had sounded fairly old on the phone, so I attributed the ill-maintained property to an inability to perform the duties, rather than some indication of insanity.  

I was instructed to immediately enter once I had arrived, so I didn’t bother knocking. The unlocked door opened into a foyer, and connected to this was a hall that led into a kitchen. The hall held a single door, which I assumed led into a closet or down to a basement. Leftward from the kitchen was a spacious room devoid of furnishing save for two steel fold-able chairs and an equally fold-able dinner table. The foyer, hall, and kitchen were in similar states of bareness, and aren’t worth remarking on beyond that. Sitting in one of the chairs in the great room was a man, who I knew at once to be the dealer of the ad. There was a certain familiarity about him; one of those times when a voice is an almost eerie reflection of the person from whom it issued.  

He nodded and gave a wave, but it did not speak. I approached and sat down at the chair opposite him. To my left on the dinner table was a box. The top of the box was a clear case, through which a neat stack of money could be seen. The base of the box was black, with a timer at its face, and a clasping mechanism which sealed the upper portion to the bottom. 

“It is a time-release device. Now that you’re here, I will start it” (he immediately does) “and once an hour has passed from this point, the box will open, and you are free to take your payment. You needn’t say anything once that time arrives, and can depart a slightly richer person. Now, all you must do is look at me. You may of course blink, but please do not speak or look away. It very important that you be both silent and still.”  

And so, the staring session began. It was expectedly awkward for the first few minutes—he stared right back at me—but after a while the oddness of the circumstances became dull, and I grew accustomed to them. His face wasn’t unusual, but it wasn’t exactly handsome; easy enough to look at, but not someone you would’ve necessarily *wanted* to linger on without incentive. He was about sixty-five, hair greyed and thin, face starting to sag, blue eyes slightly squinting—visual acuity no doubt dwindling.  

Despite his incessant assertions to the contrary, I couldn’t help but think that he derived some abstract sexual amusement from this. Some sort of “staring into the eyes of your lover” thing. But despite the incredibly uncomfortable experience of that hour—soon to be described—he at no point exhibited any behavior which would suggest arousal. 

About ten minutes in, the strangeness of the experience was doubled. From below and then far behind me I heard a shifting clamor, as if a group of people had ascended the basement stairs and gathered just before the kitchen; chatting excitedly. I was going to turn—the ad hadn’t mentioned the presence of others—but the man’s eyes seemed to almost plead with me to remain focused on him; he didn’t speak a word, though.  

Resisting instinct, I kept my gaze fixed on him, and listened to the noise of the crowd behind me. The weird thing was that while I could hear them talking, and even mentally differentiate between speakers, I couldn’t understand a single word that was spoken. They had moved into the kitchen by this point, but none of the words were intelligible to me. And even weirder was that it was obvious they were speaking English—I could recognize the nuance and structure of the language. 

The man’s eyes imparted nothing beyond the unspoken insistence that I keep mine on him. My inability to recognize the words which were clearly English troubled me greatly, and I started saying words in my head to reassure myself that I had not somehow forgotten the language. I couldn’t check exactly how much time had passed—the timer being too far out of my peripheral vision—but about forty minutes into the experience the voices were right behind me; *in the great room.*  

There were perhaps twelve distinct voices, all chattering and laughing and speaking some unrecognizable variance of a language I’d been speaking for nearly two decades. Women, men, and children conversed just behind me—not a single one, for even a moment, being understandable. I was terrified. Their appearance and migration from the basement to right behind me was strange, yes. But the possibility that something was wrong with me, that I might’ve had some sort of stroke or neurological slip-up, was far worse.  

My eyes had stayed on the man, but my mind had momentarily receded, turning over these bleak possibilities. Upon returning my focus to the man I saw that he was crying. Inaudibly, of course, but the tears were there; the lips slightly quivering. Instinct almost compelled me to ask what was wrong, but I stopped myself; both for the sake of the experience, and a new fear that speaking would somehow draw the attention of the partiers to me. And for some inexpressible reason I was sure that getting their attention wasn’t something I wanted.   

A new terror dawned, then. *What if the group continues their movement, and they press forward, swarming around us?* With each second that passed, I grew more certain that seeing these people would cause something horrible to happen. Their voices did grow louder, but no closer in proximity. I started to shake, my heartbeat quickened, and my breathing became labored. I tried to calm myself, but the presence of those people behind me was so dreadful, in a way that I still cannot find the words to properly describe.  

Against my control, as I shuddered, I let out a low moan. It was barely audible, more of a release of air than proper emission of the vocal cords. But the man’s eyes grew wide with terror, and from behind me, for the first time, I heard something I could I understand. 

*Oh, would someone like to join the party?*  

I froze in place, even my heart seemed to quiet its movement. The noise behind me still continued, but with considerably less people causing it. The attention of several members had apparently been drawn from the conversation. 

*Drawn to me*.  

I became like a statue, not even allowing myself to blink. The man’s eyes remained wide, but he’d stopped crying. He stared at me with what I can only describe as mindless terror. Despite my earlier belief that seeing these people would bring about some horrible event, I tried to see within his eyes even a dim reflection of the scene behind me. But nothing was reflected—not even his thoughts.  

*I could’ve sworn I heard a request to join the party.* A woman’s voice. 

*Think it was one of dear old dad’s friends?* A man’s voice. 

*Ha! That old fool couldn’t keep a friend if his life depended on it.*  

*You two sure saw to that!* A third voice, another man. 

*(A chorus of disconcerting laughter erupts)* 

*Oh well, shall we go back downstairs?*  

The others who hadn’t spoken seemed to respond in agreement, although I couldn’t understand them. As gradually as they had come, the voices went away; returning downstairs and eventually fading to inaudibility. A few minutes later, the timer beside us went off—indicating that the hour had passed. The man almost collapsed at this moment; sagging back in his seat and breathing raggedly. I went to help him, but he held up a hand, dismissing me. Before I could say anything, he cried out, “Thank you!”, and repeated the same multiple times between breathes. He’d started crying again, although these tears seemed to be from relief, or maybe even joy.  

After a few moments of this, he recovered himself and sat upright in his chair. He gestured to the box and said, “The money is yours. You are free to go. Thank you, sincerely, for accompanying me during this time...For noticing me. Please, take the money and leave this place. I’ll be heading out myself soon enough.”  

Despite the utterly bizarre experience, I didn’t want to ask any questions. That migratory horde of partiers had scared the shit out of me, and I didn’t want to remain in the home longer than I had to. I grabbed and pocketed the money—not bothering to count it—and walked away; waving behind me as I went. I made my exit as quickly and quietly as possible. I closed the door, relieved that I hadn’t heard rushing footsteps ascending the stairs. My friend was still parked outside, right where I left him.  

I got into the car and let out the heaviest sigh of my life. 

“Guess he was a no-show, huh? Not surprised. No one just gives away five grand.”  

“What are you talking about?” I took the money out of my pocket and showed it to him. He looked at the money, then to me with an expression of incredulity.  

“But you were only in there for five minutes! Did you steal it?”  

I laughed. The kind of nervous laugh you let out with someone says something extremely odd, or after you’d just survived some perilous experience. In my case, either one could’ve been the cause. I eventually composed myself and said, “What are you talking about? I was in there for an hour. The money was in a locked box with a timer set for that exact amount of time.”  

My friend’s expression went from one of disbelief to worry, and he pointed at the clock on his radio. I remembered what time it had been when I first left the car, and saw that only five minutes had passed since then. I stared at the clock, and then turned my gaze to the money, as if it would somehow reconcile the disparity in perceptions of time.  

“What exactly happened in there?” He asked this softly, which made me feel even worse. I didn’t want him to think I was crazy, or that I had hurt someone and stolen the money. But to avoid the former suspicion, I couldn’t tell him about what actually happened. I looked around, first at the house and the rest of the neighborhood, but saw no excess of cars which would’ve accounted for the presence of the partiers. Also, it was noon on a Tuesday—not exactly the prime circumstances for a party.  

“Please, just drive.” I wanted to get away from the house. 

“Not until you tell me what happened.” Firmer, but not yet confrontational.  

I took a moment to consider my options, then told him a version of the truth that didn’t make me sound crazy. I didn’t mention anything about the roving crowd of people. I told him about the experience with the man, and said that it must’ve seemed longer than it really was, or that maybe he had set the timer wrong. My friend listened quietly, and once I had finished, he sat silent for a moment—staring at the house through my window. I thought he was going to accept my answer, but without saying anything he got out of the car. Before I could stop him, he jogged across the lawn and went into the house. I should’ve gone in with him, but my nerves prevented me from re-entering. 

He returned a few minutes; silently entering and starting the car.  

“Well?” I really meant, *Well, what did* ***he*** *say?*  

“It was empty. Completely empty. No one was inside; there wasn’t even a single piece of furniture.” He pulled away from the curb and started driving down the street. I didn’t know what to say, so I said nothing, and he dropped me off at my house without saying another word.  

I don’t know what happened to me in that house, but the money is real enough. I’ve already used some of it to buy food. My friend didn’t want anything of it. I can understand that, I guess. I don’t know what he believes—I don’t know what I even believe—but hopefully he doesn’t think I did something terrible. Maybe he thinks I made the whole thing up, although there’s no way I would’ve been able to gather 5k together, certainly not for some prank.  

Regardless of the truth, the money is real, and for that I’m thankful. Have you ever walked through a hallway where *everyone knew* that you didn’t belong?

Imagine experiencing that in your own place of work.

I kept my head down and my ears up as I traveled through the central corridor of the children’s burn unit of St. Francis Hospital. 

This hospital doesn’t have a children’s burn unit. 

Even though I passed by a sign that proudly claimed it had been donated by the “Friends of Crespwell Academy for Superb Children.”

Nope. This place didn’t exist. I’d been working at St. Francis since July, and I knew every square inch of it. 

*Maybe* there was a wing that I had missed, right? 

But after advancing in a straight line for several minutes, I knew that was nonsense. I didn’t go around any corners or encounter any walls. I certainly would have noticed a half-mile hallway if it were real. 

The people were… *off* as well. There was a heavyset nurse with frizzy hair who stared with distrust as I passed. I encountered her three different times along the same corridor, despite the fact that she could not possibly have moved ahead of me.

Another nurse, frail and nervous-looking, tried to hand me a bag of blood. When I refused, she threw it angrily on the ground, where it splattered. 

I kept walking without looking back. [My list of rules had been very clear about the fact that I was to continue in a straight line for 47 minutes if I found myself in this impossible place](https://redd.it/dj5fgp). 

I glanced down at my watch. It was 3:09 a. m., six minutes since I’d arrived in this impossible corner of hell. 

The employees became more insistent as I walked on. 

“Doctor!” a resident yelled at me as he jumped out of a room, “the patient is coding! We need you, stat!”

I carefully avoided eye contact as I moved past him. 

“DOCTOR!” he screamed, “You’re killing her!” 

I wiped away a tear as I continued forward, ignoring the unholy scream that came from the room. I’d heard enough patients to know what a death wail sounds like, but I had no choice.

A minute later, I came across a pool of standing blood. It reached across to both walls of the hallway, and stretched twenty feet in front of me. As I watched, I could see it growing. A surly-looking man in a janitor’s uniform stood by, arms crossed, staring at me.

I didn’t think he was actually a janitor. 

Without slowing down, I plodded through the blood. Squish, squish, squish.

Damn. These *were* my favorite pair of Crocs. 

I entered a clear patch of hallway and checked my watch. It was 3:22; I’d been walking for nineteen minutes, which was thirteen longer than last I’d checked. 

The newfound quiet was more unnerving than the blood had been.

Then, slowly, I could feel tension growing in the air. Imagine a strange man standing two inches behind you who you can smell but not see as his breath warms the back of your neck. 

That kind of tension was coming from the room ahead. 

Slowly, the door came into view. 

I could see the numbers “191-” before I closed my eyes.

I kept them shut tight as I went by. Vertigo nearly sent me tumbling as I passed the door.

I didn’t care about the possibility of walking into a wall. I kept my eyes closed for a long time after that. 

Miraculously, I didn’t hit anything. 

When I finally opened them again, it was 3:27. 

Twenty-four minutes to go.

That’s when the hand tugged at my back. “Can you please help me?” squeaked a terrified voice from behind.

I stopped walking. I considered my options. 

Then I continued forward. 

“Wait!” he cried. “Please, I’m really hurt and I need your help!” He grabbed my shirt again and started crying. 

I wiped both eyes and moved onward. 

The greatest challenges make us grow. But that feat is achieved through forcing some small part of us to die. Children only have the energy and drive to play outside because the world hasn’t yet extracted its inevitable due.

I knew that I had to obey the rules, but doing so killed a little piece of my soul. I’d become a doctor because I had believed that I could give all of *me* to a cause and keep getting out of bed each day without a diminished sense of purpose.

But as I listened to the child walk behind me, crying loudly and begging for help, I accepted the fact that part of me was never coming out of that God-forsaken burn unit.

I passed the heavyset nurse again. Her eyes bulged as she saw the boy. “Doctor!” She yelled. “You need to help that child!”

I walked past without acknowledging her.

“DOCTOR!” She screamed. “What is *wrong* with you?”

I ignored her in the same way that I dismissed all the nurses, doctors, and patients who gawked at the boy in my wake. No matter what they shouted, I pretended not to hear them as I moved onward.

*“What HAPPENED to him?”*

*“Him? What happened to HER? Why would anyone ignore a child in that state?”*

*“Should we help him?”* *“No – the boy is HER responsibility.”*

The tears wouldn’t stop, no matter how many times I wiped my face.

I passed a doctor and another janitor. I recognized them as the people who had extracted Myron from the O. R. They stared, arms folded, judging me as I went by. 

“Figures,” the doctor explained to the silent janitor. “She wasn’t there for her little brother, either.”

I broke. I let my body double over and cried openly. Deep, *ugly* sobs heaved from my diaphragm, convulsing my frame as my mind teetered on edge. 

But I didn’t stop walking. Doctors can compartmentalize when facing issues of life and death, and my life depended on constant movement. 

The boy clutched my shirt as I wailed, and we walked. For no less than three miles, I endured the most bizarre trial of my life. 

A sudden change in the acoustics prompted me to look at my watch. 

3:51 a. m. 

47 minutes had passed. 

I allowed one, final, shuddering sob. Then I stopped and looked around. 

I was in familiar territory. 

The first friendly face was Lydia, a nurse that I knew was from *this* world. I wanted to wrap her in a bear hug and scream in delight.

She stared at me, her face contorted in horror. “What the *fuck* is that thing behind you?!”

My body temperature surely dropped five degrees as I felt a familiar tugging on my shirt.

I froze.

Panicked footsteps came rushing my way. I stared in their direction instead of looking behind me.

Dr. Scritt was in full sprint. “Dr. Afelis!” She yelled.

She was the consummate bitch, but in that moment I wanted to see her more than anyone else on earth.

“It’s been 47 minutes,” I heaved in a shaking breath, “should I look at *it*?”

Dr. Scritt stopped a few steps away from me.

Gravely, she nodded.

I swallowed, then slowly turned around. I told myself that nothing is ever as bad as we picture it, because reality is bound by rules that imagination is not. 

I was wrong. 

Imagine a pizza with the cheese stripped off. A lumpy mass of marinara is occasionally interrupted by chunks of sizzling meet that sit atop a mound of globby, yeasty dough. 

Now imagine that the pizza is a person, that person is a child, and one eyeball is hanging from an empty socket.

And that child has no hair, because all the skin is gone from his scalp, and that he has a gaping hole where a nose used to be.

“Help me,” he whispered. “Hel-”

His jaw fell to the floor, scattering teeth in every direction. The boy’s tongue dangled from his open throat, flopping aimlessly like a dying fish.

Then he squeezed my arm in a vice-like grip, screamed, and fell to the ground.

I looked down at the motionless glob of flesh that had once been a child. “Dr. Scritt,” I breathed, “is he-”

“Don’t be an idiot, Dr. Afelis, he was dead long before you brought him here.”

I stared at her in sudden realization. “Like – more than 120 minutes before?”

“Did your inane chatter suddenly achieve the ability to carry a body to the morgue, Dr. Afelis?” she asked as she bent over the corpse.

“Um. I’ll… find a gurney…”

“No one signs up to be a doctor because she’s afraid of getting blood on her manicure.” she snapped as she lifted the boy’s shoulders. “Grab the damn legs and let’s hope his body has more structural integrity than Jello. This cadaver’s not going to walk *itself* to the crematorium.”

Dazedly, I bent down and picked up the boy’s ankles. My stomach turned as his skin shifted under my grip like the flesh of barbecued chicken.

*Compartmentalize.*

Lydia held the door open for us as we carried the boy down the stairs, through the morgue, and into a corner where I had never needed to venture. 

I knew that the incinerator was there, but I had had no reason to use it.

“It’s too small to fit his body inside,” I explained as I gasped for air. Dr. Scritt was clearly in amazing shape; she had nearly sprinted across the morgue, and I had struggled to keep pace while hauling the body. “What can we-”

She grunted as she snatched the corpse from me and shoved his feet inside the incinerator. “If you’re going to bore me to death with ridiculous conversation, Dr. Afelis, then hurry up and make sure I’m dead before 120 minutes is up! Either that or fucking *help me!”*

It’s amazing what we’re capable of doing when an imposing figure informs us that we have no choice.  

Side by side, we forced the boy’s body into the narrow opening of the incinerator. When he got stuck, we just pushed harder. Both of us groaned with effort as his charred, melting flesh sloughed off like the skin of a rotting peach. Lumps of meat dropped to the floor as we peeled layers off the boy.

But he was going in. 

We were pushing his shoulders through when his [eye opened](https://www.facebook.com/P-F-McGrail-181784199029462/).

[BD](https://www.reddit.com/r/ByfelsDisciple/)

[Listen](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCcn_pa1QfNMRzbTuJqXSoRQ?view_as=subscriber)

-----------

[Part 3](https://redd.it/dkyurp)In the summer before I went off to graduate school, I was trying to stack as much money as I possibly could. This included working full time, taking up odd-jobs on Craigslist like helping people move, and tutoring high school students. One day while browsing Craigslist, I came across an ad for work as a junior animator / video editor. It paid $20/hour, so I instantly applied. I had passing familiarity with animation programs because my friend and I had spent years trying to design a simple video game. And my video editing was quite good, because I had run a popular YouTube channel when I was younger.


I got the job. It was weirder than I expected. The company was in a nondescript business complex in Irvine, and every employee had an electronic badge that unlocked doors. Certain levels of employees could unlock certain doors. Being at the bottom tier, I could only unlock the entrance, the door to the room I worked in, and the conference room where we’d have weekly meetings. I never saw any other rooms in the building, and never spoke with anyone who worked in them.


There were seven animators including me. We sat in a row of cubicles in our own small room. Our job was to edit cartoon knock-offs of popular children’s characters, typically Spiderman, Elsa, Spongebob, My Little Pony, etc. We worked on one or two videos per week, and basically we just created cartoon objects and settings. The work was surprisingly simple. There was very little real “animation” required.


The job paid so much that I hardly paid attention to how strange it was. The company divided our labor in such a way that none of us animators ever saw a video in its entirety. We each worked on a few seconds of it, and often, the project would be taken away from us and transferred to another department before we were finished.


The rules were odd. The animators and I were not allowed to speak to each other under any circumstance. We were not permitted to exchange names or introduce ourselves. Speaking, or looking at another person’s computer, was a terminatable offense. No two people were allowed in the break room at the same time, and no cell phones were permitted inside the building. Ever.


The room was strange too. It was blue. Everything was blue. The walls, the chairs, the keyboards, the door. A blue air freshener was taped to the wall of each work station, but it didn’t smell like anything. There was one object that was red: a telephone. It rang every so often, but we were not allowed to answer it. I was instructed to stand up from my chair and stretch each time it rang, but over time, I noticed that the other employees had been instructed to do other things. One of them took deep, slow breaths. One of them put his head down on his desk. Two of them left the room and returned. One swirled around in his chair. One coughed.


I noticed a few other weird things about the company during my short time there. It wasn’t unusual to see employees crying as they made their way through the halls. Any time I spotted one of them crying, they always tried to hide it. Some of them couldn’t. On a few occasions I saw a child wandering through the halls looking for someone, or maybe for a bathroom. When I brought this up to my supervisor, he told me “It’s bring your kid to work day for the department upstairs.” He told me that three times in two months.


--------------------


Things started to get really uncomfortable around the two-month-mark. One day, when I checked my company email account for the weekly briefing/workload assignment, there was an email titled “Lullaby.” Inside was a link to a short, low-resolution video of a young girl asleep in a bed. She babbled in what I believe was Russian or Ukrainian, and occasionally fidgeted or brought her hands up defensively to protect her face. It was clear that she was having a nightmare. Behind her, on the bedpost, was a blue air freshener, much like the one next to me in my cubicle. Whimsical vaudeville music played in the background.


I examined the recipients and sender of the email, and found that it had been sent from inside the company to several employees on a list. I forwarded the email to my boss and asked him what the deal was, and he quickly responded that it was a joke from our partners overseas, and that I had been mistakenly added to the recipient list. He told me to ignore it and keep up the excellent work, and that my review would be coming up, with the possibility of a raise.


More than $20/hour? I guess my memory *is* for sale, because I quickly forgot about the video.


Only a few days later, when I returned to the office after a holiday weekend, there was another email waiting for me, titled “Be brave, Spidey!” I was reluctant to open it, and now I wish I hadn’t. Inside was a link to a Russian-language website. When I clicked it, I saw a video of a real kid, probably four or five years old, dressed as Spiderman. The boy sat in what looked like a child’s bedroom. His mask was pulled down, and his costume sleeve was pulled up. The boy screamed and cried as an adult man wearing a Hulk costume gave him three different injections with a long needle. Off-screen, another person hurled stuffed animals at the kid, hitting him in the head with them, and even once hitting the needle as it stuck into his arm, causing the kid to wail even louder. By the end of the short clip, the boy was shaking and nearly catatonic. The Hulk man laughed and danced around him almost ritually. Cheerful kid’s music played the entire time.


As far as I could tell, the video was not acted. What I saw was a real “medical” procedure, and real terror. Horrified, I emailed my boss, demanding an explanation. I received none after about an hour (normally he replies within minutes or even seconds), so I left my cubicle and stormed down the hall to knock on his office door.


As I passed by our conference room, I heard my boss’s muffled voice, and then a bunch of other racket. I was so angry and freaked out that I didn’t care if I interrupted him – I badged the electronic lock and cracked the door open.


The conference room was dark, but I could see about fifteen men sitting inside at the far end of the wall. Most of them were dressed nicer than me, so I knew that they were senior employees who worked upstairs. A video played on a large screen at the other end of the room, and even though I couldn’t see it from my angle, I recognized the sounds. They were watching the same horrific video I’d seen an hour before. Some of the employees smoked cigarettes, like they were at a fucking gentleman’s club. Perhaps strangest of all, a conference phone sat in front of them, and a loud voice came through the speaker, talking in Russian. One of the men in the room occasionally replied in Russian.


-------------------------


I left work early that day, too freaked out to return to my station. By the time I got home I had a missed call from my boss, and a voicemail summarily terminating me, stating that the project was complete and that unfortunately our entire team was no longer needed. I didn’t give a shit. I didn’t plan on going back anyway. I spent the rest of the summer doing odd jobs, and trying to forget that company.


But weird shit continued happening, and it got worse and worse. 


A few weeks later, I visited my brother and his wife at their home in southern California. My niece Katie was five years old at the time, and could already operate electronics better than I can. She’s got an iPad, and spent a bunch of time showing me photos she’d taken of birds and insects and people. She’s also got Netflix and YouTube, and watches those regularly.


One night during my visit, my brother and I were on the couch watching one of the Hobbit movies. Katie was lying prone on the floor nearby, watching a cartoon on her iPad. When I leaned over and asked what she was watching, I immediately recognized the cheaply animated characters. 


It was a video I myself had edited. I recognized the ringing red phone, which I had designed after the phone in our office. I recognized the glass bottle the characters drank from. And I recognized the way the joints and jaws moved – all things I had worked on at one point during my brief stint at that company.


But I had never seen a full video. This one was about five minutes long. It featured two cartoon kids dressed up in Elsa and Spiderman costumes, stealing their father’s beer and getting drunk. Then, one of the kids trips and falls, smashing his face into a desk and splitting his skull open. Blood sprays everywhere.


I was confused and disturbed by this video, but it wasn’t until YouTube’s stupid Autoplay feature cycled to another “recommended video” that I really freaked out. Another video played, then another, and another, all products of my company, some of which I’d worked on. Every video featured recognizable children’s characters from Disney and Marvel and other big brands, but something weird – or violent – or sexual – took place in them. 


I pulled Katie away from the iPad and put Finding Nemo on the TV for all of us to watch. Before I returned home, I warned my brother about what I had seen, and advised him to keep her off YouTube for a bit.


-----------------


It wasn’t until I returned home and started digging around on YouTube that the true scope of these fucked up videos came to light. I found several channels with child-oriented names like “Silly Hero Fun” (not a real name, mods), all of which produce videos exactly like the ones I'd worked on. They all specifically target children using familiar characters, and they all link to more legitimate cartoons via the “recommended videos” algorithm.


The more I watched, the deeper the rabbit hole seemed to go. These videos are constantly removed, re-named, and re-uploaded, over and over and over. After watching about a hundred of these videos, I found that they all shared certain similarities, and can be divided into recurring themes. **By Intergalactic NoSleep Law, I’m not allowed to link the videos or mention the YouTube channel names, but if you want to find these videos for yourself, simply type “Elsagate” into YouTube and you will see for yourself. WARNING: the cartoon videos are disturbing, and the live-action ones are outright depraved. I consider some of them to be actual child abuse.**


------------------


The themes I’ve identified are as follows:


1. Some of the videos show characters **stealing alcohol and hurting each other.** One shows child-versions of Mickey Mouse getting drunk on their dad’s beer and then one of them splits his head open. This same video has been re-skinned over and over with Elsa and Spiderman, Paw Patrol, and Minions. Getting drunk and hurting yourself is ubiquitous in these videos. Also, burning yourself on a stove or getting sucked into an escalator are common. Accidental injury is the driving plot device. *Search “Elsa drunk hurt head” or “Mickey drunk hurt head.”* It works with Spiderman, Hulk, etc.


2. **The phobia of spiders and insects** is another common theme. I found a video showing Minions covering themselves in disgusting-looking bugs. The end of the video depicts a man drinking a bottle of urine, which I’ll discuss below. Another video shows Elsa, Spiderman, and the Hulk all being swarmed by insects. Sometimes they require hospitalization and surgery because of the bugs. The characters always react with horror to bugs, and the bugs always injure them. *Search terms include “Mickey insects” or “Elsa insects gross.”*


3. **Drinking from toilets, eating poop, drinking urine, and smearing feces on people’s faces** is another theme commonly portrayed in these videos. Many of them are live-action, with real actors dressed in costumes that target the attention of children. In one video, Spiderman and Elsa drink from toilets, and also find insects in one. In another, Venom buries Elsa alive and shits on her head. Another shows the Joker feeding excrement to Elsa and Spiderman. *Any of the character names with the word “poop” or “toilet” will return these videos.*


4. **Extreme medical violence and the phobia of sharp objects** is yet another theme you’ll find in these videos: children cutting each other’s fingers off with razors; doctors forcing needles into children’s arms, eyes, and rectums; and gory surgery are all present. In one, Hulk crushes Elsa’s bones and she requires injections. In another, Hulk gets needles shoved into his face and has his eyes pulled out with tweezers. In that same video, Spiderman throws sand in a child’s eye, and the child requires injections in said eye. Spiderman later gets sick from eating bad food and requires needles to be shoved into his body in multiple places. *Search terms include “Hulk eye injection,” “Elsa surgery,” or “Spiderman/Elsa sick.”*


5. **Pregnancy is frequently depicted as a curable illness.** Unsurprisingly, the cure is an abortifacient injected directly into the woman’s stomach. The worst video I found depicts tummy-aches, illness, and pregnancy in a very blended way, all of which require the use of needles to “cure.” In another live-action video with real people, an evil doctor chases *pregnant children* around with a giant needle while they scream and cry. Many of the pregnant women give birth to insects, or to logs of shit. *Search terms include “Elsa pregnant surgery” and “Elsa pregnant injection.” Really any of these cartoon names with “pregnant” works.*


6. **The helplessness of children** to protect themselves from adults is a popular theme, especially in the live-acted videos. In many of them, a very large adult man dressed as Hulk grabs children by their necks, holds them to the ground, rubs his ass all over their faces, or otherwise beats them up. *Search terms include ”bad hulk superhero battle.” It gets worse and worse the more you follow the video trail.* There are also tons of videos of toddler-aged girls being kidnapped and tied down by adult men, depicted in a playful manner. Many of the men are wearing frightening Halloween masks. The children are often crying and are not having fun at all. Some appear in pain. So many of these have been reported/taken down by YouTube that now the channel has converted all video titles to Russian, and they cannot be searched in English. This is the sickest channel I found, and the point where I completely stopped watching.


7. **Sexualization of children and depiction of pregnant children as a good thing**: Many of the “Elsagate” videos depict children in an arguably sexual light. The most popular channel with this kind of content stars two young Asian girls, and has three million subscribers. Many of the videos depict butt-shaking, “playing doctor,” and fake-vomiting. Others show girls and even boys celebrating their own pregnancies. *I won’t even provide search terms for these. Just don’t.*


------------------


It took me a while, and a bit of research, to pick up on the purpose of these videos. At face value, they’re all a bunch of psychotic nonsense. But when I started to see how they all mimic each other and build on each other, I realized that they must have a grand purpose:


-The fact that there are thousands of these videos, but they all cover the same seven topics, screams conditioning. The creators of these videos are banking on the probability that if kids watch enough of the videos, they’ll be saturated with two or three ideas: Hit your friends. Blood is funny. Poop is for eating. When an adult gets on top of you, don’t fight back.


-The fact that violence and sex are such recurrent themes tells me that the creators want to normalize them. They want kids to be desensitized to sex and violence. Maybe even curious about them.


-The comments in the videos reveal that a lot of the viewers are adults, and fetishists. Perverts. They really, *really* enjoy the videos of kids being kidnapped and tied up. They beg for more, and offer to support via crowdfunding.


In short, these videos are designed to groom children, and to satisfy perverts.


----------------


After digesting all this information, I contacted my brother, who had some terrifying news for me. Apparently, he and his wife had received several phone calls from people asking for *me*. When my brother asked who they were, they always hung up. He said “they always have an accent.”


Worse, a man actually tried to pick Katie up from kindergarten by claiming he was me. He gave the office my full name and told them he was her uncle, here to pick Katie up for a doctor’s appointment. When the receptionist said she was going to call Katie’s parents for verification, the man took off running. He didn’t even get into a car. He ran out of the parking lot.


I began receiving text messages from very long numbers. The texts always contained links to YouTube videos. I always deleted them and blocked the numbers. By the time I was packing up and preparing to move, the texts had stopped, but my brother told me that Katie came home with an air freshener in her coat, and couldn’t remember how it had gotten there. He sent me a photo of it, and I recognized it as the same type from my office. He said it had no odor.


---------------


Things settled down for a while. My first year of grad school blindsided me, and I forgot all about the strange incidents. But over the summer between my first and second year, something else happened that reignited my old fears.


I worked part-time at the university library. I always took the night shift because I could relax and work on grant applications, and didn’t have to deal with many students. But one night, an older man checked out a stack of medical books at my counter. He looked and smelled like a tenured professor, so I thought nothing of it when he struck up a conversation and asked me if I’d had my flu shot yet. I told him I had, and he smiled and turned to leave. But then at the door, he turned back to me and called out, “And has Katie had all of her vaccinations?”


By the time I recovered from the shock of his question, the man had disappeared into the dark outside. He left the books by the door.


[fb](http://www.facebook.com/felixblackwellbooks)




To say Ethan was the smartest twelve-year-old I've ever met would be an understatement. 

According to his school records, his first stroke of genius hit around the time he was in second grade when he multiplied three-digit numbers in his head while the other kids were just learning to add using their fingers. He has always been fascinated by mathematics, particularly probability which wasn't even covered in the syllabus yet. His teacher immediately requested Ethan's parents to consider him skipping a few grades, maybe even take a few tests to see if he was a genius. 

The Jones' were against that idea completely; they just thought it would be too much work in their already hectic life. 

However, the absolute lack of attention or love from Ethan's parents isn't the reason why he is in my office every day at 4 P.M. sharply. Frankly, I don't think that bothers him. He's not all too popular in school either, considering no kids wants to be friends with a know-it-all that could predict the outcome of Monopoly with the help of some probability. 

That's not what we're addressing here either. 

Ethan has been sent to me because he was the only one present at the crime scene when his 19-year-old baby sitter Kristin was brutally murdered by the serial killer who had escaped from jail a couple of weeks ago and was on a killing spree.

Well, he wasn't exactly a witness because while Kristin's head was being badgered with a hammer, Ethan was too busy counting the tiles on the bathroom floor. It was unfortunate really, but fate would have it that Kristin met the pattern of this rogue killer's previous victims. The Jones' returned home to a bloody corpse in the middle of their living room, and their young boy seated on a chair in the dining hall, playing on his iPad. 

It was Mrs Jones that believed her son required a psychiatrist given god knows what he might have witnessed that evening. She wanted to ensure if he was still normal. 

My sessions with Ethan haven't really been all that fruitful. 

I tried to keep the conversation going many times, but all I'd get in return were a few shrugs and maybe a half-hearted "Yea" now and then. 

Today, however, I decided to dive right in and talk about that gruesome evening. 

"It was a dark time for the entire town you know," I spoke. "The police didn't see it coming, nobody did. What were the chances?"

"I did." 

A voice! A sentence! That was a breakthrough for me.

"What's that?" 

“I had seen the man come to our house and stare every evening for a week,” Ethan spoke. 

“Who?” I pressed.

“The bad man who killed Kristin."

“I would see him from the bedroom window, I knew the police were looking, I saw the news and I knew he was going to do something bad.”

“I also knew he would’ve done it on a Tuesday or a Wednesday because that's when mom and dad don’t come home for a long time.” Ethan continued. “The chances were 2 out of 7.” 

I felt a chill go down my spine. It was peculiar to see a child talk about such an event with not even a hint of remorse. 

"Why-" I began, "why didn't you say anything, you could've saved her life." 

“Kristin never liked when I spoke about math, she called it weird,” Ethan replied. 

“Besides, I wanted to see if I was right.”I'm a pretty happy guy. I left state for college after high school, got a degree in psychology, and now work as a counselor for high school\-aged kids. My little brother Mack is happily married with a two year old son, which makes my mom turn her attention to me, heckling me about when I'll be able to give her more grandbabies. Life has been very good, but I've recently discovered something that may turn everything upside down.

My dad needed help cleaning out the attic, something which he said hadn't been done "since Reagan was in office." I agreed to help, but my brother wouldn't be joining us since he had work. I had only been in the attic a handful of times throughout my entire childhood, so being up there again felt surreal. Dust and cobwebs coated every box, chair, and trinket in sight. I almost had two heart attacks thanks to a couple of rats scurrying around, but my father and I managed to sort through a lot of things, figuring out what was needed and what we could throw away. While my dad took a break, going down to the kitchen for a drink with my mom, I continued to curiously scour the attic. That was when something colorful caught my eye.

It was one of my old comic books, lying unceremoniously on an end chair in the corner. I picked it up, waves of nostalgia surging through me as I admired the front cover, which depicted my favorite superhero, the Hulk, raising a car over his head, his teeth clenched. It had to have been almost 15 years since I had last seen that book. I was surprised at how good a condition it was in; The rats hadn't touched it. I flipped it open and began thumbing through the pages, enjoying a little piece of the past that had been forgotten. As I neared the middle of the book, however, a single sheet of white paper, folded horizontally, slipped out and drifted slowly to the floor, coming to land at my feet.   I kept a finger on the last page I had stopped on, so as not to lose my place, and bent down to pick up the paper. Opening it, I began to read the message that had been written:

I can't take it anymore. I wish that someone could understand what I'm going through, but no one ever will. Mom, I love you so much and I hate to do this to you, but it's the only option that I have. Dad, you did your best for me and Mack, but still, I have to go. By the time you read this I know that it will be done. Don't tell my friends the truth about what happened; Don't bury me, either. I don't want to be worm food. Mack, you were the best brother in the world and just know that this is not your fault. I'll be singing with the angels and watching over all of you from now on.

Darby

I stared at the note for a long time after I finished reading. I read it again and again, not knowing whether or not this was a joke. If it was, then  it was cruel and I didn't think that anyone I knew was capable of doing such a thing. I stared harder at the words. My heartbeat hammered against my ribcage as I pondered the possibility of the note being...legit? The handwriting was very similar to my own and written in orange ink, my favorite color pen to use when I would write in my journal or when I would write stories when I was younger. My head was spinning. Could it be possible that I had written this and simply suppressed the memory? I couldn't recall any negative experiences that could have made me consider killing myself, and I was sure that seeing something like this would bring such experiences to come back to me. But they didn't come.

"Darbs?"

I jumped, spinning around and hiding the note instinctively behind my back. My dad was standing near the entry to the attic, a confused look on his face. "Everything okay?"  "Yeah, Dad, I'm fine, thank you. Just uh...a little thirsty, I guess I should have taken my break too. You mind grabbing me a glass of water?"  "One glass of water, coming right up!" he replied, but as he descended the stairs, I could see him watching me closely. As soon as he was out of sight I folded the note into a square and stuffed it in my pocket. I waited until I finished my water before telling my dad I needed to get some errands done, and that I would help him finish the attic another time.

I went home and immediately tried comparing the handwriting in the note to my own. My current handwriting was a lot neater, but I could totally imagine myself as a teenager or preteen writing the way the message was written. Then again, if someone had been trying to copy my writing style, then that would explain the slight differences. After a couple hours of questioning my childhood I decided to sleep on it. Maybe I would call my brother and ask him if he remembered anything traumatic happening when we were younger. I lay in bed for hours, but just as I was about to drift off, I received a text message from my mother

.

"You found it, didn't you?"Part 1: https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/3iex1h/im_a_search_and_rescue_officer_for_the_us_forest/

Part 2: https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/3ijnt6/im_a_search_and_rescue_officer_for_the_us_forest/

Part 3: https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/3iocju/im_a_search_and_rescue_officer_for_the_us_forest/

Hey guys! I'm back from my training op, and I have a lot of really interesting stories to share with you. I've got enough that I'm going to break them up into two parts, this being the first. I'd love to put them all in one entry, but I just haven't had a chance to write them all down yet.
I didn't have anything too crazy happen while I was out there, but we did have one incident with a rookie that I found relevant. Since I'm sure you guys have been waiting for these, I'll just get right into the stories. I'll assign each batch of stories to the person who told them to me.

**K.D:** 
K. D is a vet who's been an SAR officer for about fifteen years. She specializes in high elevation mountain rescues, and is widely considered one of the best in her field. She was one of the more enthusiastic storytellers, and since we were together a fair amount during exercises, she ended up telling me about four that really stuck with me.

* The first she told me in response to my asking about her most traumatic calls. She shook her head and told me that really bad calls happen more frequently on the mountain, since the potential for nasty accidents is higher. 
About five years ago, one of the parks she worked at had a string of disappearances. It was a bad year, she said, one of the worst on record as far as weather went. They were getting about a foot of new snow every couple of days, and there were a few avalanches that killed some climbers. They'd warned people about staying on the mapped areas, but of course there's always those who don't listen.
In one particularly nasty case, an entire family got wiped out because the father decided he knew better than the officials, and he took them out into an area that wasn't safe. They were snowshoeing, and as best K.D could figure, they'd walked onto a shelf of snow that looked solid, but actually wasn't. It gave way, and this family went ass over teakettle almost three hundred feet down a slope. They landed on the rocks at the bottom, and the parents died instantly. One of the kids did as well, but the other two survived. One had a broken leg and fractured ribs, the other was almost unharmed save for some bruising and a sprained ankle. The uninjured child left his sibling behind and set out to find help. 
K.D said the kid didn't make it more than half a mile before a storm overtook him. Kid stopped to try and get warm, or maybe just to rest, and ended up freezing to death. They ended up finding the family with the help of some witnesses who saw them heading out into the wilderness, and she was the one to find the kid who'd frozen to death looking for help. She said it had started to snow, just enough to obscure long-distance vision, but not enough to make searching impossible. She saw a figure sitting in the snow up ahead, and she got to it as quickly as possible. She described, in detail, how as she got closer, she realized first that it was a child, second that they were deceased, and third that they had frozen in one of the most pitiful positions she's ever found a corpse in.
The kid was sitting upright, with his knees tucked up against his chest. His arms were curled around them, and his head was tucked up in his coat. When she moved the coat to look at his face, she saw that he'd died crying. His face was twisted, and the tears were frozen on his cheeks. She said it was painfully obvious that the kid was terrified when he succumbed to hypothermia, and as a mother, it broke her heart. She told me, repeatedly, that she hopes the father is burning in hell as we speak. 

* The other traumatic story she told me that stood out, in my mind, was one that happened when she was a rookie. Her team got a report of an experienced climber who hadn't come home the previous day. His wife was convinced that something bad had happened, because he'd never failed to come home on time. They went out looking for him, and had to climb what sounded like some very technically challenging parts of the mountain. They got to a relatively flat area, and K.D started seeing blood in the snow. She followed the trail, and as she went, she started seeing little bits of tissue. She wasn't sure exactly what body part it had come from, but the farther she followed it, the more there was. She follows this blood-and-tissue trail to a sheltered area under a cliff face, and she finds the climber. She said there was so much blood, more than she'd ever seen before. He was lying face down, one arm stretched in front of him, as if he'd died crawling. She looks closer, and sees that he's been partially disemboweled, which is where the tissue she'd seen had come from. The guy has an ice pick tucked into a hip holster, and it's covered in blood. Of course, they'll never be sure exactly what happened, but she said as best she can figure, this is what went down:
The guy had been attempting to climb up to the next area, and had been using his ice ax to ascend. He'd probably hit a loose patch, and had fallen. On the way down, or possibly when he landed, he'd gotten impaled by the ax, and it had disemboweled him. He'd drug himself along, tearing pieces of himself out as he went, and had died under the cliff face. She isn't terribly bothered by gore, but I guess a few of the guys who came to help her remove the body threw up when they turned him over and a good portion of his intestines spilled out.

* I mentioned to her that I was interested in hearing about any experiences she had with people completely disappearing. Her eyes light up, and she leans in close to me. 
'Wanna hear a real doozy?' She asks. 
She tells me about how, when she first started, there was a case that got a lot of attention in the media. A family had been out berry picking in an area of the forest very close to the entrance of the park. They had two little boys, both under the age of five, and at some point during the day, one of them vanishes. There's an absolutely massive search, and they find absolutely nothing. It's another of those cases where it's like the kid was never there in the first place. The dogs just sit down and don't pick up on anything, no trace of the kid is found. The search goes on for about two months, but is eventually called off.
Fast forward to six months later. The family comes back to place flowers at a memorial that's been set up there for the kid. They bring their other son. While they're placing the flowers, they lose sight of the kid for about three seconds, and in that span of time he vanishes into thin air. Now obviously, the parents are beyond devastated. It's awful enough to lose one child, but to lose two is beyond imagining. The search is huge, one of the largest in state history. There are about three hundred volunteers combing every inch of this park, looking for the kid. But again, there's no trace of him. The search goes on for about a week, with people looking miles from the part of the park he vanished from.
And then, almost two weeks later, a volunteer almost fifteen miles from the designated search area radios in that he's found the kid. They assumed that the kid was dead, but the volunteer says he's not only alive, he's in good shape. K.D and her team go out to recover the kid, and when they get there, she can't believe that this is the kid that's been missing. His clothes are clean, there's no dirt on him anywhere, and he doesn't appear traumatized. The volunteer says he found the kid sitting on a log, playing with a little twig bundle that's bound together with some old rope. K.D asks him where he's been, who he was with for those two weeks, and the kid tells her that he's been with 'the fuzzy man'. Now K.D firmly believes in Bigfoot, so she gets all excited and asks what he means by fuzzy. Was he hairy? But the kid says no, he wasn't hairy. He was a 'fuzzy man', and he describes a man that's blurry, 'like when you close your eyes but not all the way closed.' He says the man came out of the trees and took the kid with him deep into the woods. The kid says he slept in a hollow tree, and the fuzzy man gave him berries to eat. K.D asks if the man was mean, if he scared the kid, and the kid says 'no, he wasn't scary. but i didn't like how he didn't have eyes.'
K.D says they get the kid back to headquarters, and a cop takes him into town to talk to him more about what happened. She's friends with the cop that talked to him, and she said the kid described being kept in this tree by the fuzzy man, and given berries whenever he was hungry. He was allowed to wander around a very specific clearing, but when he tried to go further, the fuzzy man would 'get mad and yell real loud even though he didn't have a mouth'. When the kid got scared at night, the fuzzy man 'made it go brighter' and gave him the twig bundle. He said the fuzzy man was going to keep him, but he had to let him go because the kid wasn't 'the right kind.' He either can't or won't elaborate more on that. The cops are just sort of left scratching their heads, and the search for his brother is renewed with no results. The kid has no idea where his brother might be, and they never find him.

* The last story that K.D told me was of something that happened to her when she got separated from her training group when she was a rookie. They were learning the basics of high elevation belaying on a well-mapped side of the mountain, and she had to use the bathroom. She went off about fifty yards from the group during a meal break, and did her business. I'll tell the rest exactly as she told it to me'
'So I go to take a piss, and once I'm done, I start going back to the group. But I've only gotten about five feet when I realize that I have no idea where I am. And this wasn't a 'oh, I got turned around' lost. I mean I had literally no fucking clue where I was. If you'd asked me, I don't even think I'd have been able to tell you what state we were in. It was sort of how I imagine people with amnesia feel, you know? You're completely lost, and you have no idea what to do. So I stood there for a while, just trying to figure out where the fuck I was and what I was supposed to do. But the longer I stand there, the more confused and turned around I get, so I started walking. As I recall, I just picked a random direction and went for it. And as I'm walking, it's just getting worse and worse to the point where I have no concept of why I'm on the mountain in the first place. I'm just trudging through the snow, and then I start hearing this voice. It's kind of inside my head, almost. Like if a frog could talk, all low and croaky. And it's telling me over and over 'it's okay, it's okay, you just need to find something to eat. Find something to eat and you'll be okay, just keep walking and find something to eat. Eat. Eat.' So I start looking around for anything that I can eat, and I swear to god I've never felt that hungry in my whole life. It was bottomless, and I think I'd have eaten just about anything you put in front of me right then. I had no concept of time, so I had no idea how long I'd been out when I hear an actual voice coming toward me. I go toward it and see one of the other SARs, and he looks fucking terrified. He's running toward me, asking if I'm okay and what the hell I'm doing out here. 
And the scary thing was, as he's running toward me, I kind of see myself reaching into my belt for my hunting knife. I'm not even really thinking about what I'm doing, but what I am thinking is that I have to eat. If I don't eat, I'll never be okay again, so I just have to eat. He sees me doing that and he backs off right away. He yells at me to put my knife away, that he's not gonna hurt me, and that kind of snaps me back. All of a sudden, I know exactly where I am, and I put the knife away. I run to him and ask him how long I've been gone, thinking he'll tell me I've been gone for half an hour or so. But he tells me I've been gone for two fucking days. I've gone over two peaks and ended up almost on the other side of the mountain, and if I'd kept going, I would have ended up wandering into about three hundred miles of wilderness. They'd never have found me. He can't believe I'm not dead, and of course I don't know what the fuck to think. To me, no time has passed at all. I don't say anything, I just go back with him to a rendezvous point and I'm taken back to HQ  to be airlifted to the hospital. When I get there, they do all kinds of tests, and try to figure out what happened. As best they can guess, I had some kind of weird fugue state, which is kind of like amnesia, or a weird seizure that knocked my brain out of whack. But the truth is that we really don't know. It's never happened again, but I'll tell you, ever since then I never go out there alone. People rag on me for making them come with me when I have to leave the group, but I just tell 'em that listening to me piss in the snow is better than losing me for two fucking days on a freezing mountain.'

**EW:**
The next person I talked to was E.W, a former trainer who now works as an EMT. He still comes to ops like this to help out, but doesn't work full-time for us anymore. He specialized in finding lost kids, he just seemed to have a sixth sense when it came to knowing where they'd gone. He's a legend among the more senior vets, but he gets embarrassed if you compliment him on his work. He sat down with me at dinner one evening, and we ended up swapping stories. Most of them were just casual, but when we got on the subject of our weirder calls, I mentioned that I'd had a buddy who'd gone up a set of stairs. He got kind of quiet and asked me if I'd heard of a little boy who'd disappeared from his park a few years back. I hadn't, so he told me this story.

* They were out looking for this eleven-year-old boy, Joey, who'd gone missing near a river. Of course, the first thought was that he'd fallen in and drowned, but when they brought dogs out, they led SAR officers away from the river and up into a very densely forested area. When we do searches for people, we search in a grid pattern, and we search every 'box' of the grid incredibly thoroughly. What E.W's team noticed right away was that a very strange pattern was emerging. Dogs in alternating boxes were picking up Joey's scent, but losing it when they overlapped with another box. If you think of a checkerboard, Joey's scent was being picked up in random black squares, but never in red. This, of course, didn't make any sense, because how could the kid bounce from area to area without leaving a scent in each place he passed? E.W and his partner pass into a new box of the grid, and E.W notices a set of stairs about fifty yards away. He tells his partner that they need to go check near it, but his partner flat-out refuses. He tells E.W that he's made it a point never to go near any stairs he sees, and that while it may be routine, he's not to pretend that it's normal. He tells E.W that he'll wait in sight while E.W checks. E.W says he was irritated, but he felt for the guy, and didn't push him on the subject. 
'I walked over to the stairs. They were small, kind of like stairs into a basement. I don't really feel strongly one way or the other about them, the stairs I mean, so I wasn't scared or anything. I guess I'm like everyone else, and I just prefer not to think about them too much.
'Anyway, I went over and I could see that there was something lying on the bottom step, sort of curled up. My hear sinks, because of course you always hope for the best. And we were confident that we'd find this kid alive, because he'd only been missing for a few hours. But I knew right away that it was him, and that he was dead. He was curled up in a little ball on the step, holding his stomach. It looked like he'd been in horrible pain when he died, but I didn't see any blood, except some on his lips and chin. I radioed in that I'd found him, and we got his body back to command. That poor family, they were devastated. The parents couldn't understand how he'd be dead, 'cause he'd only been gone for such a short amount of time. And on top of that we didn't have any obvious cause of death, which just made it worse. I figured he'd probably eaten something poisonous, since he was holding his stomach when I found him, but I didn't want to guess. It's hard enough to hear that your kid is dead, let alone have some stupid SAR guy guessing about what happened. They took him away, and I went home and tried not to think about it. I hate finding dead kids, man. I loved this job but it's one of the reasons I left. I've got two daughters, and the thought of losing them that way just...' 
He choked up a little here. I'm not great with emotional stuff like that, and it's always sort of awkward to see a grown man cry, so I didn't really know what to do. He pulled himself together eventually, though, and he kept going.
'We don't always hear back from the coroners about cause of death. It's not really our job to know, I guess, and sometimes if they think it's foul play they won't tell us because of legal bullshit. But I've got a friend who works for the sheriff's department, and he'll usually pass along any interesting info if I ask. In this case, though, I actually got a call from him about a week later. He asks if I remember the kid, and of course I do, and he says some seriously weird shit is going on. He tells me, 'E.W, man, you're gonna think I'm crazy, but the coroner has no idea what happened to this kid. He's never seen anything like it.' My friend goes on to tell me that when the coroner opened the kid up, he couldn't even believe what he was seeing. The kid's organs were like swiss cheese. Quarter-sized holes were punched clean through just about every single organ this kid had, aside from his heart and lungs. But his colon, his stomach, his kidneys and even one of his testicles, were full of these clean holes. My friend said the coroner described it as if someone had taken a hole-punch and punched holes out of everything, they were so neat. But the kid didn't have a scratch on him, no entry or exit wounds. The closest anyone there had ever seen like it was a guy who'd filled himself full of buckshot a year or so back while cleaning his rifle. No one had a clue what could possibly have caused it. My friend asked me if I'd ever heard of anything like it, or if we'd had similar cases in the past. But I'd never even heard of something like that, and I told him I wasn't going to be of any help to him. As far as I know, the coroner determined the cause of death as something like 'massive internal bleeding', but no one knows what really happened.
I've never been able to forget that kid. I have nightmares about it sometimes. I don't let my kids go into the woods alone, and when we go together I never let them out of my sight. I used to love it out here. But that case, and a couple others, just sort of ruined it for me.'
Dinner was over, so we started to clean up and go back to our cabins. Before we went our separate ways, he put his hand on my shoulder and looked at me really close. He tells me that there's bad things out here. Things that don't care if we have families or lives, or that we can think and feel. He tells me to be careful, and he walks away. I didn't a chance to talk with him again, but that story stuck with me.

**PB:**
By pure coincidence, I got to talk to another vet, P.B who's been in the SAR field for years. We were partnered on a grid sweep during a training exercise, and we were chatting casually about how we liked the job, what kinds of things we'd seen, and the like. At one point, we passed an old set of stairs, though these were probably from an old fire lookout, given the area that we were in. I sort of casually mentioned that I was curious about the stairs, and that I wished I knew more about them. He got kind of quiet and looked like he wanted to tell me something, but wasn't sure if he should. Finally, he told me to turn my radio off. Obviously this is something we are never, ever supposed to do, but I did it, and he did the same. 

* About seven years ago, he tells me, he was out on a call with a rookie. They were in an area of the park that's had a lot of strange reports and events. Disappearances, stories about lights in the forest, odd noises, things like that. The rookie was totally spooked, kept going on and on about 'things out in the woods'. According to P.B:
'The guy wouldn't stop talking about 'the Goatman'. Just on and on, 'Goatman' this and 'Goatman' that. Finally, I told him that there was plenty else to be afraid of out here that was very real, and that he'd better get over this thing with the Goatman. The rookie wanted to know what kinds of things I was talking about, and I just told him to shut up and walk. We crested a little ridge and there was a staircase about ten yards ahead. The rookie stops dead in his tracks and just stands there looking at them. I tell him, 'See? That's something you should be afraid of.' The rookie asks me what the hell these are doing out here, and for some reason, I just open up and tell him the truth. Or what I've been told is the truth. I could have gotten in a lot of trouble for doing what I did, and I could get in a lot of trouble for repeating it to you. But you're a nice kid, and I want you to stop looking into this. Quit while you're ahead. So I'll tell you what I know, under the condition that you never breathe a word of this to the supes.'
I told him I wouldn't say a word, and he double-checks that our radios are off.
'When I first started out, we were a little less tight-lipped about them, and other things that happen out here. We warned people before they were even hired that there was weird shit going on. I guess the Forest Service was tired of having such a massive turnover rate, and they wanted people to know what they were getting into. So they started having people sign these agreements that they wouldn't go to the media about what they were going to see. The FS didn't want to scare people away, so the last thing they needed were spooked rookies running off to the media with stories of ghosts and haunted stairs. But eventually, they found that the agreements weren't necessary. People not only didn't want to talk about what they saw, they wouldn't. A few times, media tried to talk to people when kids or hikers would disappear, and no one would say a word. I can't really explain it. I guess we just... don't really want to admit anything is wrong. This is our job, to be out in the woods every single day. We don't need to be spooked, and the best way to avoid that is to pretend like everything's okay. So I'll tell you everything I can think of, and after that, I'm done talking about it for good. And I expect you not to bring it up around me, ever.
'The stairs have been out here as long as the parks have existed. We have records going back decades describing them. Sometimes people go up them, and nothing happens. Other times... Look, I really don't like talking about this, but sometimes, really bad shit happens. I saw one guy get his hand sliced clean off when he got to the top step. He reached out to touch a tree branch, and it happened so fast. One second his hand was there, and the next it was gone. Completely clean wound. We didn't find his hand, and the guy almost died. Another time, a woman touched one of the stairs, and a blood vessel in her brain exploded. Literally exploded, like a water balloon. She sort of stumbled down and came over to me, and all she got out was 'I think something is wrong with me.' She dropped like a sack of flour, dead before she hit the ground. I'll never forget the way the blood leaked into the inside of her eye. Before she died, I watched it turn red. I watched it happen and there wasn't a single thing I could do to help.
'We warn people not to go anywhere near them but there's always at least one idiot who does. And even if nothing happens to them, something bad always happens. Kids go missing as we're on their trail. Someone dies the next day, cut in half in a completely safe part of the park. I don't know why, but something bad always happens. I don't know exactly why they're out here, but it doesn't matter. They're here, and if we were smart, we'd tell our new officers exactly what they're capable of.'
We were both quiet for a little while. I was afraid to talk because I wasn't sure if he was done. He looked like he wanted to say something else. Finally he spoke up again.
'Have you ever noticed how you can't find the same ones twice?'
I nodded, expecting him to continue. But he just stayed quiet, walking alongside me, and eventually he started a story about the biggest deer he'd ever seen in the park. I didn't bring up the subject again, and I didn't press him for any more stories. He dropped out of the op the next day. Apparently he left before the sun came up; he said he was sick. None of us have heard from him since he left.

I'm going to stop here for the time being. I'll try and post the next part in the coming days, but what with it being the end of summer, things are pretty busy here. Thanks for the continued interest, guys, you've really awakened this curiosity in me that I didn't know I had!

**EDIT**: Part Five is up: https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/3kd90k/im_a_search_and_rescue_officer_for_the_us_forest/Hello again guys. 

I've finally got round to posting the next log! I would have put this up sooner but unfortunately I've had bikes to repair, and if *I* don't do it the customer's might go online and discover it's not actually that hard. 

I want to thank you again for the help you've given me in finding Alice. The guy who said he'd track down the mirror shop is giving me regular updates on his progress, and I've received a whole lot of help going through American missing persons reports. It turns out Alice's work haven't heard from her either, and they're going through their emails for Rob's submission to the show. Everyone's been really helpful, so thank you.

I've got to say, I'm sleeping worse since this whole thing began. It's strange to think that all the time Alice was out of contact, I was perfectly content. Yet now that she's got back in touch, every day I don't hear from her makes me that much more worried. That's assuming of course that it was her who sent me the email.

I really hope it was.

Thanks again everyone, and please let me know if you find anything.

[Part 1](https://redd.it/7asz8x)

[Part 2](https://redd.it/7bkk41)

[Part 4](https://redd.it/7dmuvp)

[Part 5](https://redd.it/7fdu9c)

[Part 6](https://redd.it/7h9jzb)

[Part 7](https://redd.it/7jabqd)

[Part 8](https://redd.it/7loh1l)

[Part 9](https://redd.it/7q3x6e)

[Part 10](https://redd.it/7uyiss)

*****

The Left/Right Game [DRAFT 1] 09/02/2017

**ROB:** Rice; non-perishable.
 
**ROB:** Soy sauce; non-perishable.
 
**ROB:** Salt; non-perishable.
 
**ROB:** Eggs; well they’re perishable but I bought’em fresh and I got hard boiled that’ll last a week.
 
It’s breakfast time, the start of our first full day on the road. Rob’s been up since 7 o’clock, cooking a meal for anyone who wants it. The aroma pulls us out of our makeshift beds, and arranges us around his portable stove. Our bowls are already full before we realise there’s a catch. The trade-off for this supposedly free food? A 10 minute lecture from Rob about the power of rice.
 
**ROB:** See in the Pacific, our guys used to be terrified of the Japanese. Whole armies marching on grains? Thought they were super soldiers. See the Japs know the secret. You give people rice in the morning and they’re goin’ for the whole day.
 
After dropping two large spoonfuls of his favourite staple into a bowl, and handing it to me, Rob breaks a raw egg over the top. The yolk clouds over as I stir it in. To be fair, the food is delicious, and it’s fun to watch Rob on his soap box. At least there are some things he’s willing to talk at length about.
 
I stare across the circle at Lilith and Eve. The latter has spilled rice onto her top, and her friend is teasing her playfully. Eve sees me looking over, meets my gaze, and turns back to Lilith, her tone dramatically muted. I return to my food, making a point to seem attentive to Rob’s speech. A minute later, the two girls decide they've finished their meal and I quickly realise so have I.
 
Devouring the last few bites, I place my bowl in the small tub of hot water next to the stove and casually wander over to their car. Lilith and Eve are facing away from me, silently packing up their sleeping bags. They refuse to look at me once I reach them, in a deeply conspicuous attempt at subtlety.
 
**LILITH:** Is he watching?
 
I glance over at Rob. He’s still talking at Bonnie, Clyde and Apollo, asking them to guess what “Breakfast” translates to in Japanese.
 
**AS** I think we’re fine. So… did you see the car?
 
Without answering, Eve reaches into the back seat and picks up a Macbook, the repository for all of Paranormicon’s footage. She presses play as Lilith and I huddle around her, blocking the view of any potential onlookers.
 
The footage depicts a familiar road. Lilith and Eve must have dropped off the Hitchhiker, and just made the next corner. I can hear them talking about the experience, both terrified and thrilled at the events of the day. Eve reminds Lilith that they need to look out for the car, Lilith swears and the camera immediately starts scouring the roadside.
 
**EVE (VO):** Look there it is!
 
**LILITH (VO):** I see it. Slow down… slow down!
 
The abandoned car comes into view. With Eve slowing to a crawl, and Lilith maxing out her camera’s zoom function, a precious few details can be summarily gleaned. The car’s windscreen and driver’s side window are broken, the keys are still in the ignition and, once Eve overtakes the wreck, it’s just possible to make out a dark stain soaked into the driver's seat.
 
**LILITH (V.O):** Stop the car.
 
Just as video Eve starts to slow to a halt, the real Lilith shuts the laptop. I glance between them, trying to keep my voice as low as possible.
 
**AS:** You stopped the car?
 
**EVE:** I mean yeah…
 
**LILITH:** We know you told us not to, but it was like, really weird so I went over and-
 
**AS:** You got *out* of the car?!
 
**EVE:** For the record I was super against it.
 
**LILITH:** Anyway, there wasn’t much in there that we didn’t get from the road, except there was a bag on the backseat.
 
**AS:** Did you get a look inside?
 
**LILITH:** Yeah… do you wanna?”
 
Lilith nods her head towards the back of their car. It takes me a second to realise what she’s getting at.
 
**AS:** It’s in the boot?!
 
**EVE:** It’s in the what?
 
**AS:** It’s in the trunk?!
 
**LILITH:** Yeah obviously, we couldn’t just leave it there. Look, you can watch the rest of the footage any time, we’ll even send it to you, but you NEED to look in this bag before we hit the road.
 
I check on Rob once more. He’s washing up the bowls and cutlery, exchanging small talk with Bonnie, oblivious to what’s transpiring a mere five metres away.
 
Lilith and Eve escort me to the trunk, reforming our secretive huddle before Eve lifts it open. A brown leather duffel bag sits front and centre. It looks expensive but worn, probably a few decades old. The pair gesture for me to unzip it.
 
**LILITH:** Just to preface this, I want to say… this whole trip has been fucking weird.
 
The bag isn’t exactly full. I rummage through the loose contents, finding a few sets of good quality men’s shirts and a pair of jeans. Further down I find a small and well used shaving kit. I’m starting to wonder what Lilith and Eve are so bent out of shape over when my hand hits the hard edge of a straight, rectangular object. Slowly, and with great care, I manage to extricate it from layers of wool and denim.

It’s a package, a heavy square block about the length of my forearm, neatly wrapped in brown paper. It seems completely unassuming except for a black wire hanging from the underside, leading back into the bag itself. Lifting the wire, a black plug rises out and swings slightly in mid-air.
 
**EVE:** Turn it around.
 
With both girls watching me intently, I turn the package in my hands. The wire connects to the charging port of an old Nokia 3210, which in turn is superglued to the package along with a few shards of exposed circuit board. Last, but certainly not least, are the words emblazoned on the brown paper, in imposing black typeface; C4 Explosive.
 
My mouth feels dry.
 
**AS:** … I wasn’t expecting that.
 
**LILITH:** I know, fuck this road right? There was tonnes more in his trunk too it was insane.
 
**AS:** Is this dangerous?
 
**EVE:** Not right now. It’s basically inert unless you have the detonator.
 
**AS:** You’re sure?
 
**LILITH:** We have Wikipedia downloaded on a hard drive. It’s the only reason Eve let me bring it here. She read the article like, three times. Anyway the Nokia’s out of battery.
 
**AS:** Ok well, I’m not even going to ask how you know that… I don’t get this why would someone bring plastic explosive for the Left/Right Game? I mean, what the hell are we heading into?
 
**EVE:** I have no idea. Do you know if Rob has any?
 
**ROB:** If I have any what?
 
When I look up, Rob’s only a few steps away from us. I hide the C4 behind my back, dropping it into my satchel next to my notebook. I just manage to pull my fingers out of the way as Eve instinctively slams the trunk shut.
 
**AS:** Tips for sleeping in cars. These guys had a rough night.
 
**ROB:** … Well I’m sorry to hear that. Just something you gotta get used to I guess. We’re hittin’ the road in 15/20 minutes. That alright with you guys?
 
**EVE:** Yeah totally.
 
**ROB:** Bristol, you mind helping me pack up?
 
**AS:** Not at all.
 
Painfully aware of what’s hanging at my side, I step away with Rob towards the now dismantled stove. Looking over my shoulder, I see Lilith and Eve are watching us go, their faces awash with apprehension.
 
I can’t say I feel the same. Despite my surroundings, and the multitude of unsettling events, I don’t have space in my head for apprehension just now. All anxiety is slowly being pushed out, its territory annexed by a bolstering sense of resolve. There are far too many strange things happening on this road and, even if it kills me, I’m going to find out what they all mean.
 
**ACE:** Rob, can I talk to you?
 
We’ve packed everything in the back of the Wrangler, and are about to get back on the road when Ace comes up behind us. Rob turns around, and I sense an icy shield raising up as he curtly addresses our compatriot.
 
**ROB:** What is it Ace?
 
**ACE:** Can I… can I ask you something? It’s… it’s ok if you need me to go home after...
 
The shield thaws. This isn’t the Ace we’ve seen before and Rob’s perceptive enough to notice. He engages, albeit cautiously.
 
**ROB:** What do you wanna ask?
 
Ace shuffles uncomfortably. Suddenly, he seems much younger.
 
**ACE:** Does the hitchhiker… does anything happen if you… if you don’t pick him up?
 
**ROB:** Oh goddammit Ace I told you, you can’t… … tell me what happened.
 
**ACE:** I… I was making my way down the road and, I was angry at how you’d been… and when I saw the hitchhiker I thought I should, you know, do what I said and... just drive by.
 
Ace starts to tremble, unable to meet Rob’s eye.
 
**ACE:** A minute later I look in the rear view mirror and… and he’s sitting in the back of my car. He’s just… just talking about the weather. I mean I swear I didn’t pick him up, but when I think about it all these memories come back. I start to remember pulling over, letting him in. It’s like I did it, but I didn’t even…
 
**ROB:** Did you talk to him?
 
**ACE:** No, no. No, I promise I didn’t say a word.
 
Rob stares at Ace in silence. Ace hangs his head, like a penitent criminal facing judgement.
 
**ROB:** … feel’s awful don’t it?
 
Ace finally looks up, confused at Rob’s words, searching the man’s expression for clues.
 
**ROB:** I did the same as you the first time. Just drove right by. Wasn’t gonna let some stranger in my car. Nearly jumped outta my skin when I saw him in the rear view.
 
Rob grins at Ace, who manages to smile shakily back.
 
**ROB:** You ain’t got the right gear for this Ace. I like to run a tight ship and I gotta say it pissed me off. If you wanna turn that Porsche of yours around no one’ll think any less of you but if you wanna keep on this road… how about you try to listen more and I’ll try to be less of a hard-ass.
 
Rob holds his hand out for Ace to shake. It’s an offer of peace, or at the very least an offer of terms. Ace accepts it, grimacing only slightly as he faces Rob’s iron grip.
 
**ROB:** ‘Bout time we hit the road.
 
Five minutes later we’re rolling into a deep valley, each member of the convoy appearing over the crest of the hill behind us. Everyone’s present and accounted for, including Ace.
 
**AS:** I have to say I’m impressed.
 
**ROB:** With what?
 
**AS:** With how you handled Ace. One might presume a guy who’s been divorced four times isn’t the best at conflict resolution.
 
**ROB:** Divorce IS conflict resolution.
 
**AS:** That’s a… good point. He seemed to be saying the Hitchhiker *made* him pull over. Is that really what happens?
 
**ROB:** Yep, he always ends up in the back seat, and you always remember picking him up.
 
**AS:** It's just... that’s not scientifically possible.
 
**ROB:** Get used to that.
 
We spend the next two hours in silence, with me typing up my notes and Rob navigating the sparse few turns that show up every now and then.
 
Ace’s testimony troubles me, perhaps because it stretches my favourite theory; that the game is an elaborate hoax perpetrated by Rob Guthard. I was content that the hitchhiker could have been an incredibly deft performer, but even if the man was a RADA trained thespian, that doesn’t make him capable of mind control. Ace could be insane, or an maybe actor himself, but those ideas sound exactly like the idle rationalisations I decried in Rob earlier.
 
I’m not sure what my theory is at the moment. I keep working, hoping to type my way to revelation.
 
A few lone trees have started to show up in the distance, towering wild pines with trunks as thick as barrels. Without my noticing, the trees grow slowly more numerous and, in that creeping way that landscapes change, it isn’t long until they span both sides of the road, encapsulating us in a deep, bright forest. Realising I’ve recorded everything of substance, and with Rob concentrating on the drive, I have no choice but to lay back in my seat and watch the world roll by. Despite the pervasive strangeness of the Left/Right Game, there is beauty on the road. Under the light shade of the canopy, the smell of pine needles permeating the still air, I actually feel myself starting to relax.
 
It only takes three words to change that.
 
The words don’t come from Rob, he’s as quiet as always. They aren’t spoken by the rest of the convoy either. The words are writ large in calligraphic gold paint, resting on a spotless white sign. Even from a distance, with the letters little more than a blur, I know what they’re going to say. They’re the words I’ve been dreading since I switched off the radio, the words I spent a long, troubled night hoping I’d never see.
 
“Welcome to Jubilation.”
 
It turns out there is room in my head for apprehension.
 
**ROB:** This is Ferryman to all cars. We’re going to be heading through a small town. No rules here, just keep driving and we’ll be fine.
 
Rob puts his radio back into the receiver, I try to ignore the distinct knot in my stomach.
 
**AS:** What does the name Chuck Greenwald mean to you?
 
**ROB:** 'Bout as much as John Doe, why?
 
**AS:** He’s the radio DJ here.
 
**ROB:** In Jubilation? How do you know something like that?
 
**AS:** I was listening to his show last night. What do you know about this place?
 
**ROB:** Seems like a good town. Folk don’t pay attention to ya, I just head straight through.
 
**AS:** You’ve never seen anything… untoward?
 
**ROB:** Some weird stuff now and again. I like to keep my eyes on the road.
 
The forest clears abruptly, like a parting curtain, to reveal a picture perfect American town, archetypal almost to the point of self-parody.

We’ve arrived in Jubilation.
 
There’s no denying this town is beautiful. We’re welcomed by a row of vibrantly coloured shops spanning the length of a long, wide street. At the far end, an ornate, grey walled town hall proudly surveys its domain. The place is immaculate. I fail to find a solitary piece of litter on the sidewalk, a single smudge on the plate glass shop windows. Every inch of Jubilation is pristine, tranquil... and noticeably deserted.
 
**AS:** Where is everyone?
 
**ROB:** I don’t know, there’s usually some around. Maybe there’s a game on.
 
We take the next right, then another left. The story’s the same at every turn, a beautiful, leafy suburban town, entirely bereft of its human population. The cafés are free of bustle, the surface of the public pool is still. We even see the school, a row of finger painted faces smiling at us from the kindergarten windows as we pass by. The building itself is locked up however, which is odd, seeing as it’s noon on a Wednesday.
 
Eventually the Wrangler pulls onto the first residential street we’ve encountered. The sign on the corner reads Sycamore Row. The quaint shops are replaced by luxuriate houses, all of them identical; white walls, wide porches and fresh green lawns cut to a uniform length. The road stretches in a straight line for about a mile, creating an eerie corridor of copy/pasted buildings. The strangest thing about the street however, is vocalised by Rob:
 
**ROB:** Well I guess we know where everybody is now.
 
In front of every house, a dining room table stands on the lawn, occupied without fail by a family of four. One husband, one wife, one son and one daughter. They’re sharing a meal together. A unit on the left clink their glasses of orange juice as they dine on pork chops and salad. The family on the right share a large hunk of meat loaf, broad smiles on their faces. Staring along the road I estimate upwards of eight hundred people, in neat subsets of four, all dining at the same time.
 
None of them seem to notice us.
 
**ROB:** Ferryman to all cars. Looks like we’ve come during a town celebration. Let’s not bother these good people as we pass on through.
 
Rob lets the car roll slowly down the street, his foot light on the gas pedal, trying to make as little noise as possible. The more families we pass, the clearer it becomes that every single one of them shares common characteristics. All of them are impeccably dressed. All of them consist of the same subset; husband, wife, son, daughter. Though their chosen meals vary slightly, they all share a raucous, almost oppressive happiness.
 
**APOLLO:** Small town America am I right guys? Ahaha
 
Apollo’s jokes don’t make things any better. I feel claustrophobic. Trapped. Some screaming animal deep within me knows that it’s surrounded, on every side, by something it doesn’t understand. I don’t know if I’m imagining it, but as we’ve continued down the road, everyone outside seems to be laughing a little harder, and celebrating a little more.
 
We’ve successfully crept more than halfway down the street, a sharp left turn coming up at the end, representing the road out of Jubilation. Another street comes up on the right, Acer Road. While we pass by it, I take the opportunity to glance down this new avenue, curious as to whether every street is like ours.
 
I don’t like what I see.
 
The houses are similarly prestigious, the walls pristine white, but like a spot the difference puzzle, it’s the subtle changes that make the picture. There are no tables, and no families on the wide green lawns. Almost every window I can see is broken. Cars lie abandoned in the road, with one smashed into a splintered porch. Above every door, an X has been drawn in red paint, and outside of each house, a small mound of clothes lie on the fresh cut lawn. A huge collective pile of men’s, women’s and children’s shoes tower at the end of the street… seemingly ownerless. 
 
**ROB:** Great going everybody. Let’s get back out there.
 
We’ve reached the end of the street, I breathe a sigh of relief as we bid farewell to Jubilation. I vindictively see it off in my wing mirror as we turn the corner. I immediately wish I hadn’t when, in the split second before it disappears from view, I glimpse the 800 plus residents of Sycamore Row.
 
They aren’t smiling anymore, and they’re all looking our way.
 
I welcome the forest as the trees rise up around us once more. The indifference of the nature is a welcome change to the saccharin, faux-civility of Jubilation.
 
**APOLLO:** Towns like that make me glad I’m a city boy.
 
**BONNIE:** I thought it was nice, wasn’t it like Wintery Bay?
 
**CLYDE:** I don’t think I’ve been.
 
**BONNIE:** Oh… maybe it was Shelburne Falls.
 
**CLYDE:** Oh it was a little like Shelburne Falls.

**ROB:** Guys we gotta keep this channel clear.
 
We hurry along the next road, and turn right.  The further we get from the eerie town of Jubilation, the higher our spirits seem to be.
 
**AS:** How long until we stop?
 
**ROB:** ‘Bout another four hours. Nothing big in between us and there though. Shouldn’t be a problem.
 
**AS:** Good to hear. So... what *does* “Breakfast” translate to in Japanese?
 
**ROB:** You heard that?
 
**AS:** Yeah, I’ve been curious all day. Does it have something to do with-
 
I jolt forwards, sharp pain in my neck as my head recoils back against my seat. Rob has stamped his foot onto the brake, bringing us to an immediate and shocking halt. Before I can ask why, my question is answered, as one of the colossal pine trees slams into the road ahead of us, blocking our route forward.
 
**ROB:** Goddamn it! You alright?
 
**AS:** I’m fine.
 
Massaging my neck, I look towards the base of the felled tree. The low end is covered in straight, sharp-cut marks. Someone has brought this tree down, timing its fall in an attempt to cripple the Wrangler.
 
**AS:**  Rob what’s going on?
 
**ROB:** Ferryman to all cars. Full reverse. Watch out for the people behind you.
 
The convoy pulls away, back down the road towards Jubilation. Rob waits for Apollo to start moving, then backs up himself. There’s a second jolt as Rob abruptly stops the car, surveying our means of egress.
 
**ROB:** Ferryman to all cars. Road’s done for but there’s a gap at the end. Be careful.
 
Rob’s right. Though the tree has fallen across the tarmac, only the thin treetop lies over the grassy bank between the road and the forest. There’s a bit of a valley between the edge of the road and the grass, and Rob wastes no time in showing the others how to negotiate it.
 
Twisting the wheel, Rob dry steers towards the gap and proceeds cautiously towards the roadside. I watch the asphalt disappear beneath us moments before the tell-tale bump. The Wrangler drops down the small bankside, and turns around the fallen tree. I watch the needle covered tip brush against my window as we roll past. With a second bump, Rob brings us back onto the road and pulls us over to the far edge, turning the Jeep to face towards the convoy.
 
**ROB:** Ok Apollo make your way.
 
**APOLLO:** On it Rob.
 
As Apollo swerves towards the gap, I hear something. The sound of a running engine, at first so quiet that it’s almost impossible to isolate it from the convoy’s own rumblings. It’s since grown louder however, and it’s growing steadily more noticeable.
 
**AS:** Rob, someone’s coming.
 
**ROB:** Apollo get yourself over here right now. All car’s you're on double time. Get moving!
 
Apollo accelerates towards the gap. His Range Rover shudders, banking on the grassy decline, but it’s hardly any effort to pull himself around the tree and back onto the road.
 
The noise in the distance grows louder. I can picture the vehicle careering towards the corner, just one turn away from having its windshield locked on the convoy. Though I have no idea what it might be, I don’t want to share road space with anything coming out of Jubilation.
 
The rest of the convoy can hear the noise now. Bonnie and Clyde roll over to the gap, and quickly but tentatively push themselves down onto the side. It’s clearly harder than Rob and Apollo make it look. After a few moments they travel across the bank, bringing themselves out on the other side.
 
The vehicle turns the corner.
 
A white truck skids into view, its tires shrieking against the road. A metal beam sticks up behind the driver’s compartment, and a hook swings with the momentum of the hard right turn. It’s a tow truck, though something tells me it’s not here to lend us assistance.
 
**ROB:** All cars, once you’re on the other side, drive. Wait around the left turn. I’ll radio if I they get by me.
 
**APOLLO:** What about you guys?
 
**ROB:** I’ll come once everyone’s across. Now ain’t the time for questions. Eve and Lilith get over here now.
 
We still have time to get everyone across, but every passing second feels like a precious, fleeting loss. Eve and Lilith are impatient for their turn. Dropping onto the roadside and coming back up in a matter of seconds.
 
The truck is gaining with incredible speed. I can just about make out the words “Jubilation Recovery” scrawled across the hood. Though the letters are rapidly becoming easier to read.
 
Bluejay takes her time dismounting the road. In fact she’s almost casual in how she maneuvers, whittling away at the remaining seconds we have. A swell of anger wells up inside of me as her wheels hit the road again. If she’s calm about this situation then good for her, but I can see Ace drumming his fingers frenetically against the steering wheel, now stranded alone on the other side.
 
I watch Bluejay follow the rest of the convoy to the next turn, displaying none of the urgency anyone else has shown.
 
**ROB:** Take it easy Ace. You ain’t built for this.
 
Ace takes the corner, heeding Rob’s plea for caution but unwisely taking it almost head on. His front wheel thuds over the edge of the bank, and the chassis hits the tarmac. The drop is just a little too steep for the Porsche’s clearance. Rob’s warnings ring in my ears as Ace accelerates on three wheels, his car engaging in a slow turn with little forward motion.
 
**ACE:** Rob, what do I do?! Rob?!
 
The pickup truck maintains its speed and aligns itself with Ace’s Porsche, its thunderous velocity defying all logic, all concern for Ace’s or their own safety.
 
**ROB:** Get outta the car Ace! Get out of the goddamn car!!
 
Ace struggles with his seatbelt, stress overpowering his motor functions. He unclasps it, and throws the belt to the side. He grabs the door and pushes. It swings open slightly, then immediately slams against the bark of the pine tree. For a moment that lasts all too long, he shares with me a look of pleading terror.
 
The door is slammed shut, crumpling as the tow truck collides with the passenger side of Ace’s car. Ace is launched against the the door, his head smashing against the window. The ungodly racket of shrieking metal suddenly gives way to silence.
 
**ROB:** Shit.
 
Rob climbs into the back of the car.
 
**AS:** Rob what can I do?
 
**ROB:** Stay here.
 
I hear Rob rummaging among the luggage as the tow truck reverses out of Ace’s Porsche. The hood of the tow truck is completely and impossibly unharmed by the impact, as are its two occupants.
 
They park the truck side on to us, the hook hanging a few metres away from the back of the Porsche. The the words Jubilation Recovery appear again, now accompanied by a slogan “Here to Help”. Two men in white shirts and blue overalls climb out and wander over to the ruined Porsche. They barely seem to register the situation at all, casually chatting together as they throw open Ace’s passenger side door.
 
The stunned Ace looks like he’s battling a concussion, only barely cognisant as he’s pulled out of the car. He quickly grows more aware as the mechanics grab him by each arm, struggling against them as his captors talk amongst themselves.
 
**ROB:** Let him go!
 
When I turn around, Rob is stepping out of the Wrangler. Apparently, hidden within those neat stacks of luggage, was a loaded hunting rifle. Rob raises the stock to his shoulder and repeats himself.
 
**ROB:** LET HIM GO!!
 
The mechanics pay no attention to Rob. They continue to frog march Ace over to the truck. One of them making a quiet joke to the other as they go. They laugh.
 
An awful bang erupts beside me, and a deep red hole bursts from one mechanic’s torso, blood slowly seeping out of the wound. Inexplicably, the mechanic does nothing more than look down at his wound, up at Rob, and then back to the matter at hand. He hardly breaks stride as he continues towards the truck, bleeding freely onto the floor,.
 
I hear Rob set about reloading the rifle.
 
The mechanics arrive at the back of the truck with Ace. There are two short loops of thin chain hanging from the lowest of the hook’s chainlinks. The mechanics feed Ace’s arms through one loop each, until he’s hanging by the armpits in front of the hook itself.
 
Rob fires another shot that goes nowhere.
 
The mechanics grab a handful of Ace’s hair, chatting as they do so, and lift Ace’s head up until his lower jaw is just above the hook.
 
In that moment, despite everything, despite all my journalistic ideals, my pursuit of truth, my duty as an observer… I close my eyes.
 
The visual disappears into darkness, but the sound doesn’t. The impact and the sorrowful, obstructed groan that follows penetrates my bones, reverberating throughout my very being. Another gunshot, and the sharp twang of a metallic ricochet. Ace’s cries continue as the engine starts up and carries him off back to Jubilation. I hear another gunshot, that sounds like it hits nothing but air.
 
As the engine, and Ace’s whimpers, grow quieter, a few moments pass before one final, measured gunshot echoes around the car.
 
**ROB:** … Goddamnit. GOD-FUCKING-DAMNIT!!!
 
The Wrangler’s chassis clangs as Rob kicks the side with all his considerable might. I open my eyes to see a fallen pine tree, a ruined Porsche, and an otherwise empty road.
 
When Rob climbs into the car, it’s clear he’s trying to regulate his breathing. An internalised rage lighting him up, barely under his control.
 
**ROB:** We have to go.
 
Rob turns us around, pointing the Wrangler back down the road. The quiet of the car echoes in my ears, along with other noises I can’t hope to forget. I watch the fallen pine grow smaller in the rear view mirror, overwhelmed by a feeling that I’m leaving more behind on this road than I can currently imagine.
 
Bereft of conversation, of logic, of any semblance of comfort, Rob and I do the only thing we can.
 
We take the next left.A paranormal circus wasn’t really my kind of thing, but I didn’t have any performances that evening and an anonymous benefactor had sent me a front-row ticket.

The sparkling black-and-purple circus tent was packed with people. I admit that I can be a bit skittish sometimes, and the macabre costumes of the undead clowns that would roam the aisles startled me an embarrassing number of times, but the show was a spectacle well worth the scares. The acts were at once chilling and captivating. I found myself holding my breath as the vampiric knife-thrower stabbed silver blades dangerously close to her prey, and gasped with the rest of the audience when the ghoulish acrobats clung precariously to each other in their aerial act.

Among the extravagantly dangerous performances, though, the show-stopper was none other than the circus magician.

Small and lean and dressed in a purple satin suit, the magician didn’t look any older than seventeen or eighteen. It wasn’t uncommon for young prodigies to enter the performance scene so early, but something about him was different. He exuded a kind of confidence that most wouldn’t learn to have until well into their career, and wore a slightly crooked smile that made him at once charming and dangerous.

As for his tricks, they were nothing short of breathtaking. With a wave of his hand, he turned the flowing purple drapes around the aerial silk dancer into fluttering rose petals and effortlessly caught the dancer in his arms. He called a volunteer to the stage, whispered something in his ear, and made him dance like a puppet on its strings. At one point he simply walked onstage and snapped his fingers, instantly engulfing himself in deep violet flames that rose high into the air before slowly sputtering out as he took a small bow, completely unscathed.

I rarely found much of a challenge in puzzling out the secrets of other magicians’ routines, since my own familiarity with magic usually made it easy to reason out how others would craft their own tricks. The silk turning into petals was a work of clever setup and practiced timing backstage. The volunteer who got hypnotized was most likely planted there. And while a full-body burn was a bold move, these circus performers were probably used to risking their lives daily.

I only began to suspect something was strange when the young magician began to perform a classic stage trick. A slender lady accompanied him onstage and lowered herself into a long wooden crate.

Conventionally, the crate would be placed on a specially designed table, but the table onstage was plain.

The crate was also commonly wide enough to fold the body into, but this one was a tight fit.

The feet sticking out of one side of the crate wouldn’t usually move, but these bobbed as the lady adjusted herself.

Mildly impressed, I was beginning to think of what clever trick the young magician had devised when the giant carpenter’s saw bit deep into the crate and the lady began to scream.

I gripped the edges of my seat and told myself it was just an act as the magician hacked into the crate. The screams grew louder and more frantic, and the crate rattled as the lady twisted in what appeared to be pain, her feet twitching spastically. Thick red blood began to pool underneath the crate.

The magician didn’t so much as blink. His blade and now his hand were stained, and blood dripped from the table as he relentlessly drew the saw back and forth, back and forth. The audience was silent and the lady just kept screaming, until there was an audible *crunch* and she went completely still.

That was a lot of fake blood. I wondered if they had concealed a jug of it somewhere. They must have gotten assistance from some big-shot Hollywood artists to get the black bits and chunks in there.

The magician put down his saw and turned the severed halves of the crate towards us to see. The audience gasped and murmured at the very realistic-looking torso-halves. I peered into the crate itself. Other than the grotesque severed body, it seemed to be empty and plain.

The magician swiveled the crate-halves back together and smiled. His eyes glittered strangely as he took in the suspense. Then he placed his hands on the crate, closed his eyes, and simply breathed for several long moments.

The lady’s eyes snapped open. The audience cheered wildly as the magician opened the crate, helped her to her feet, tidied her now blood-soaked dress, and led her offstage.

As the lights dimmed and the stagehands swooped in to clean up the props, I could have sworn I caught the metallic scent of blood.

==========

Of all the people who could come up to me, I was intercepted by a demonic clown on my way out.

He smiled wide with slit lips and jagged teeth, gesturing for me to follow.

“I don’t really need more pictures,” I said.

He kept gesturing. I let out a small sigh and followed him through the crowd to one of the side exits. We stepped out into the night and he began to lead me around the back of the circus tent.

“Where are we going?” I asked, beginning to grow uneasy.

The clown just smiled back at me.

I followed as far behind him as I could without seeming rude, which really wasn’t very far at all. Before I knew it, we were removed from the crowds at the very back of the circus yard littered with swampy puddles from the afternoon’s rain. Square black tents about the size of typical New York bedrooms occupied the grounds. The clown turned to me and pointed at one.

“You want me to… go inside?”

He nodded.

I swallowed. The clown stepped back in a comically exaggerated manner, as if to pantomime to me his intent not to harm me. Somewhat encouraged by this, I stepped up to the tent and gingerly brushed the drapes aside.

Sitting in the tent at a table with two slender wineglasses, surrounded by glittering yellow fairy lights strung along the walls, was the young magician.

Upon seeing me, he smiled, got to his feet, and held out his hand.

“Mr. Herring,” he said. “A pleasure to finally meet you.”

In retrospect, it was incredibly rude of me to not shake his hand, but hearing him speak for the first time combined with the fact that he knew my name caught me off guard. I blinked, dumbfounded.

“You know me?”

“Of course. From the Bellagio escape act, right?”

“Ah,” I felt myself blush a little. “That was a long time ago.”

“Certainly not long enough to forget. Please, come in. I’ve always wanted to speak to you.”

Somewhat awkwardly, I took my seat at the table across from the young magician. The clown walked in carrying a tall bottle.

“I do hope you like champagne.”

I raised an eyebrow. “Are you old enough to…?”

The magician laughed. “I’ll take that as a compliment.”

“Ah, apologies.”

“No, no, it’s really fine.”

As I sipped the rose-colored champagne, I couldn’t help but study the young magician’s face. Some of his stage makeup was still on, making his angled jawline and high cheekbones stand out. He wore unsettlingly vivid purple contacts that were covered only by the tips of his long thick eyelashes.

He certainly didn’t look old enough for any of this.

“Forgive me,” he said quickly, noticing my staring. “I don’t believe I’ve introduced myself. My name is Alexander Chase. On the stage they call me The Mirage.”

Hearing those words rang a bell at the back of my mind. I had probably heard some of my colleagues talk about him.

“The Mirage,” I echoed. “That’s in the name of the show, isn’t it? The Mirage Carnival.”

Alexander smiled. “Yes. This is my show.”

“That’s very impressive. Leading an entire circus troupe.”

“Thank you very much. I couldn’t have done it without you.”

“Without me?”

“You inspired me to begin performing. The Bellagio escape struck a deep chord, and since then I’ve followed all of your work. I’ve always wanted to be like you.”

This was completely unexpected. I could feel myself swell with pride.

“I dare say you may have already surpassed me,” I said. “The tricks today were very impressive.”

“You don’t know how much those words mean to me, Mr. Herring.”

“Please, just call me Bryan.”

Alexander smiled. “Bryan.”

The way his tongue formed the sounds sent a quiet chill down my spine. In his voice, my own name became mysterious and dangerous.

I was startled off my train of thought when a dozen heavy footsteps broke through the nighttime air, sprinting towards the tent.

“What is that?”

Alexander cursed. “They found me.”

“Who-”

“Quiet.”

More footsteps scrambled to meet the disturbance. There were shouts of alarm and a loud, resounding *crack*.

I looked to Alexander. He narrowed his eyes at the drapes covering the entrance to the tent. The commotion drew closer with every second.

A spray of gunfire tore through the grounds.

“Run,” Alexander said. “Don’t let them see you.”

Before I could process what he said, he grabbed me by the wrist, turned to the back wall of the tent, and swept his other hand through the air. The black fabric wall rippled and peeled open like a flower blooming.

“W-what…”

He waved his hand and the fairy lights blinked out, plunging us into the night. As the last of the glow faded, I thought I saw him take something small and shiny from his pocket and toss it on the floor. Then he leaped out through the hole in the wall, yanking me through behind him, and began to run.

“Alexander-”

“I said quiet,” he snapped in a hushed tone. “And call me Alex.”

Voices shouted behind us, the heavy thudding of boots in pursuit. Another round of gunfire tore through the air. I almost dropped to my knees and scrambled for cover, but Alex kept me running.

We ran out of the circus yard through a break in the fence and onto muddy dirt roads. My joints cramped up and I almost slipped and fell several times, but my adrenaline kept me going. I risked one look behind us but saw nothing in the dark. Police sirens wailed in the distance.

“Bryan,” Alex said.

“Huh?”

“We’re going to jump.”

I strained to see the ground in front of us. Closing in fast was a puddle spanning the entire width of the road, filled with muddy rainwater.

“Wait, Alex-”

“Jump.”

Something in his voice instantly compelled me to leap into the air, hurtling straight for the puddle. I yelped and held out my free hand, bracing myself for a face-first impact into inch-deep mud.

Then we broke the surface and sank deep into the cold murky water.

It was dark. I couldn’t see anything. I was somehow submerged from head to toe, tiny bubbles swirling around me like I had just dove into a pool. I stretched my legs downwards but couldn’t feel the bottom.

Alex squeezed my wrist.

Buried in the sounds of rushing water, I could hear my crashing heartbeat. I held my breath and long seconds passed, until we heard the sounds of boots splashing through shallow puddles directly above us. Then they were gone.

Alex swam upwards, pulling me along. We broke the surface and pulled ourselves onto a strangely smooth and supple floor.

As I caught my breath, soft yellow light flooded the small cubical space. We were back in Alex’s tent, surrounded by fairy lights. Alex’s purple satin suit was dry, and so were my clothes. There was no trace of water on the floor.

There was a *click* behind us.

We turned to see the man in full body armor and a helmet with a reflective visor. He held a pistol pointed at Alex.

Embroidered on his jacket was a patch that read *NSF*.

“Come peacefully,” he said. Perhaps I was mistaken, but his voice sounded like he was shaking. His pistol wavered, trained between Alex’s eyes.

Alex chuckled.

“Ah, you’ve got me. I really didn’t want to put Bryan Herring in danger, but you just had to choose today to storm my town.”

The armored man’s finger trembled on the trigger. He began to reach for the radio at his hip.

I swallowed. “Alex…”

“Now that you’ve seen Bryan with me, I guess it’s gotta be either you or him. Easy choice.”

Alex snapped his fingers. Deep violet flames sprang out of thin air and engulfed the man.

I gasped and scrambled away as the man’s armor caught fire like kindling. Wild gunshots rang out, but the bullets went wide as he twisted and screamed, the flames slowly consuming him.

Alex stood still, watching. A thin smile tugged at his lips. His eyes flickered with the flames, barely concealing something deadly behind them.

I cowered in the corner, only watching because I couldn’t tear my eyes away.

There was no heat to the flames, and instead of the stench of burning flesh, the sweet aroma of roses filled the air. The burning lump of a man crumpled to the floor. Slowly, the screaming diminished to small choking sounds, and after what felt like an eternity, it was quiet.

The flames flickered out. There was nothing left but a smudge of soot on the tent floor.

“Alex,” I whispered. As the adrenaline sputtered, a million questions filled my head.

The young magician let out a small, contented sigh.

“Alex,” I managed, this time loud enough to be heard. I was trembling. “You killed someone.”

“It was you or him, Bryan.”

“How?”

“They saw you with me, which put you in danger. I don’t want you to live my life of being pursued. Not that you could survive long.”

“But…”

He turned to me and put a finger to his lips. “No more.”

"Alex, I really need some answers."

He stared me down with his unsettling gaze. I don’t know what came over me, but I refused to falter. After a few tense moments, his eyes softened.

“One question,” he said.

I thought hard, but the million questions overlapped and echoed in an unbearably confusing chorus.

In the end, I could really only ask one question.

“You’re not human, are you?”

Alex smiled. He held out his hand and pulled me to my feet. I looked down at him now, waiting.

“No,” he said simply.

I nodded.

“It’s time for you to go,” he said. “I would love to spend more time with you, really get to talk, but… not today.”

“Will I see you again?”

“One question.”

I pursed my lips.

“When you get home, no telling anyone and no calling the police. Got it?”

I nodded, again.

“It was a true honor meeting you, Bryan. Something I’d looked forward to for years.”

Alex stood on the tips of his toes and leaned in close to my ear.

“Now, be on your way.”

I don’t remember anything after that.

==========

When I came to, I was lying in bed in my house. I had a pounding headache, and I wasn’t sure what day or time it was. It felt like I had been asleep for a long time.

A quick look around the house revealed that the power cord on my landline phone was cut and the antennae on my Internet router broken off. On my kitchen table was a sticky note with something written on it. Albeit shaky, I could recognize my own handwriting.

*1. No telling anyone*

*2. No calling the police*

*See you again* [*soon*](https://www.reddit.com/r/magpie_quill/comments/cs610i/swan_crossing_project_masterpost/)*.*

&#x200B;

[Next](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/crbzgw/im_a_magician_and_i_had_a_runin_with_something/)George yawned and fidgeted on the carpet. The light from my bedside lamp caught his blonde hair and made it shine like a halo. He twirled a lock from his fringe around his index finger, let it snap back into place, then started twirling it again.

The kid looked bored. He'd obviously agreed to come round mine for a sleepover because I was new at school, and he wanted to see what kind of house I lived in. Get a sense of what I was like. But I could tell he was already regretting the decision.

"I thought you said you had a PS4?"

George's eyes flicked around the bedroom, as if he was hoping the console would magically appear from somewhere. We'd been upstairs since dinner. He'd explored my room and we'd chatted for a bit, then watched some random shows on Netflix. Things were going okay at first, but as the last light bled out of the day and the sky outside darkened, I could tell George was losing interest. That was when I suggested we do something a bit different.

"Nah, I don't have one," I said. "Sorry. Are you still up for having a go at this game, though?"

"What, telling each other stories? Isn't that little kid stuff?"

George glanced at the watch on his wrist. I followed his gaze. George's watch was the first thing I noticed about him. He sits in front of me in English, and I spotted the watch after a ray of sunlight glinted off its face and caught my eye. It's a really nice watch. Most of the kids in my year have digital watches -- those blocky ones that light up when you press a button on the side -- but George's watch was different. More adult. It was one of the reasons I'd picked George to invite to over.

"Hey, can I try your watch on?"

George looked up at me and frowned. "What?"

"Your watch. Can I try it on? It's really nice."

George stared at me for a second longer. One hand moved to touch the strap on his wrist, as if to make sure it was still secure. "Sorry, I don't let anyone try my watch on. My dad says I'm not allowed." He glanced around the room once more, his eye going from the door to the dark window. He sighed. "Okay, let's play this dumb game then. What do I have to do?"

Ignoring the bored look on his face, I smiled. "It's really easy. We just take turns telling each other a scary story. Like, the scariest story you can possibly think of. Then whoever's is the scariest wins the game."

George rolled his eyes. He stretched his long legs out in front of him. "I don't know any scary stories. Besides, I think I might get some sleep soon. I'm pretty tired."

"Come on, just one each. You must know at least *one* scary story. Everyone does. Plus, I know loads of good ones." I watched George's face for a reaction. "Unless you're one of those kids that frightens easily, that is. Then I guess you might not like the game."

It was a risk, but George bit. "I'm not scared of anything!" The skin below his blonde hair creased into a frown. "I've watched horror films with my big brother that are rated 18! We even found one on YouTube that's been banned and I *still* watched it."

I didn't say anything. Just looked back at George and smiled. After a few seconds he let out another sigh. "Fine, let's play your stupid game then. But after you're done done failing to scare me, that's it. I'm going to bed."

\*

George went first.

His story wasn't bad, in fairness. It was one he said his uncle told him a couple of years back. Nothing I hadn't heard before. Basically there are two kids, and one of them gets hit by a car and dies. After the funeral, the mother gives the surviving kid some money to go and get liver from the store. Something to cook up for dinner. Because he's sick in the head, though, the kid pockets the money, digs up his brother, and removes *his* liver instead. Then later that night, the dead brother rises from his grave to come and get the kid in his sleep.

It's a decent enough story, but I'd heard it a hundred times already. I didn't let on, though. I made all the right faces, and jumped at the right parts. George got quite into it. He gestured his arms and his watch glinted in the light from my bedside lamp. His blonde hair spilled across his forehead. He was so into the story he didn't seem to notice.

After it was over he sat back, brushed the hair from his eyes, and grinned. "I thought you were gonna shit yourself at one point," he said. "You might as well give up now, anyway. I'm not scared of anything."

I looked across the room at him. The house was quiet now, and had been for a few hours. When we'd first come upstairs there was still noise coming from below: the faint sound of the TV in the lounge; the rattle of plates being put away in the kitchen. Now there was only silence. Beyond the bedroom window, tree branches rustled in the wind. The occasional car passed by on the road outside. That was it. I grinned at George.

"So you're not scared of anything at all?

"Nope. Nothing."

"Not even stories that are true?"

George let out a bark of laughter. "Nice try. Just hurry up and get it over with, will you? I'm already bored."

"Okay, fine." I shuffled forwards on the carpet so I was sat closer to George. Our knees were almost touching. George frowned, but he didn't move.

"My story is about a family," I began. "A family that looks normal enough on the outside, but isn't really normal at all."

George rolled his eyes again. He was starting to annoy me quite a lot by now, but I didn't let on. I just carried on with the story as if I hadn't noticed.

"This family moves around a lot. They never stay in one place for too long. They can't, you see; the family's good at disguising themselves -- they're good at hiding their secret -- but they still can't go taking risks. If they stayed in one place for any more than a few weeks, they might get found out. Someone might discover what they really are."

"So what are they then?"

I wanted to tell George not to interrupt -- to just sit still and listen to the story -- but I bit down the urge. Instead I just grinned at him.

"The family are monsters," I said. "They're all monsters. They travel from town to town, and they leave a trail of dead kids wherever they go."

I paused, expecting George to interrupt me again, but he didn't. He only stared back at me. There was no expression on his face as he twirled a lock of blonde hair round his finger.

"The family has a very specific way of doing things," I continued. "When they move into a new area, they find a house that's been left unoccupied. Not a completely empty house -- just one where the people that normally live there are off on holiday or something. One that'll be empty for a week or two. The family doesn't need long, see. A couple of weeks suits them just fine.

"So they break into this house, and then they go about setting the trap. It's their own kid they use. They send him off to make friends in the neighbourhood. Round the nearby parks, maybe off to the local school under a fake name. Tell him to get to know the other kids. The family is hungry by this point -- really, *badly* hungry -- but they don't do anything just yet. They've learned to be patient."

I paused and took a breath. This was a story I'd told before, but I found I liked it more and more with each retelling. The trick was not to rush, though. You had to savour it. 

I'd opened the bedroom window when we first came upstairs, and now a draught of cold air blew in. It ruffled the curtains behind George. Tree branches shook in the garden outside, the leaves whispering to each other. George watched me, not saying anything. I had his attention.

"The kid's parents don't have to wait long," I continued. "They never do. They've trained the kid well, see? He's not just a victim in all this. He may only be young, but he knows how the game works. Once the family has been in the area for a little while -- a few days; maybe a week at most -- the kid makes his choice. He picks a new friend to invite back to their house. The parents give him an incentive, too. He's still too young to share the tastes they have -- they tell him that's something he'll only acquire when he gets older -- but he still gets *something* out of it."

"What does he get out of it?" George's eyes were fixed on mine. His finger kept twirling the same lock of hair, over and over again.

"He gets the other kid's stuff," I replied. "Whoever he picks. He gets to keep all their belongings after his parents are finished with them."

Somewhere in the house below us, a door slammed. George's eyes flicked away from mine towards the bedroom door, then back again. I smiled at him.

"So..." George kept his eyes on me as he tried to formulate the question. "So... what exactly do the parents... what do they do with the kids they take?"

"Oh, they eat them," I replied. "They eat their insides. They tear the kids open while they're still screaming, and they pull out their guts and intestines by the handful. Wolf everything down until there's nothing left but a husk." I grinned. Somewhere below us, a floorboard creaked. The sound was faint and muffled, and I don't think George heard it. "Can you imagine what someone looks like when they've had everything inside them removed? They hardly even look like a person at all. It's like the stuff a snake leaves behind when it sheds its skin."

The glow from the bedside lamp made George's skin look pale. His lips were slightly parted as he stared at me. "But how do they get away with it?" He asked. "Don't the parents of the kids that get taken come looking for them the next day? When their kids don't show up back home?"

I grinned back at George. I'd been hoping he'd ask this. "Oh, the family's long gone by that point," I said. "They vanish like shadows in the night. The only thing they take with them is the remains of the dead kid. And when their parents come looking for them the next day, all they find is a locked house that belongs to somebody else."

Another floorboard creaked. It was louder this time, and we both heard it. The sound had come from the corridor outside the bedroom. George's head swivelled in the direction of the door. His eyes were wide in his pale face. "What was that?"

"Oh, that was nothing," I lied. "Probably just the house settling. There's nothing to be scared of, George."

I eyed the watch on his wrist. And imagined what it would look like on mine.

From the corridor outside came the soft sound of [approaching footsteps](https://www.reddit.com/r/samhaysom).I posted a picture of my great-grandfather over to r/OldSchoolCool a few days ago. I posted it on my main account (not this one). I regret posting it. It’s turned my family’s lives upside down, opened up possibilities I’d rather not even contemplate, and thrown into question everything I thought I knew. 

I was scanning some old family photos onto the computer for my Mum. I’ve always been fascinated by my great-grandfather – my Mum always has so many stories to tell me about him, and how he brightened her childhood – he was truly a remarkable character. Plus, he was a particularly handsome man – I’ve always loved that photograph of him, with his chiselled face and his dark eyes staring into the distance. He wasn’t looking directly at the camera. It’s the only photograph we have of him. My Mum says he was caught off-guard by that photograph, because he normally never liked having his photo taken. 


Before I posted the photo, I was pretty certain he’d be a sure-fire hit with the online crowd. And I was right. But you know, at the same time, I was still surprised by the extent to which people agreed actually with me – the photograph shot up to thousands of upvotes very quickly. My great-grandfather was internet famous.


I got the usual ‘Oh my goodness your great-grandpa was soo handsome!’ 

and ‘Is your great granddady single?!’ comments. 

Also: ‘Hey, can we have a picture of you, OP, so we can see how much of the good looks you inherited?’

The first few comments made me smile and feel oddly proud of my genealogical inheritance. After a while it started to get a bit creepy, as some people started to cross boundaries and take things too far – I started to feel guilty. 

Sure, there were some beautiful, respectful comments, discussion and questions – but as the popularity of the photograph steadily increased, so did its exposure to the world in general, and that was when the less-than-savoury characters started coming out of the woodwork. 

I never knew my great-grandfather, but from everything that I’ve heard, he was such an upright, almost regal sort of man – well-bred, well educated, respectable and dignified. A true gentleman, and he had been greatly loved and revered by my family. And now, it felt like an oxymoron, this clash of worlds – having my amazing, dignified great-grandfather on display for the ugly underbelly of the internet to ogle and make crude remarks. It felt like I was violating his memory; like I was literally whoring him out for my own personal gain. And what gain? A few arbitrary internet points?

I was about to remove the post – when two things happened, in fairly quick succession. First, someone kindly offered to colourise the photo and asked for details about hair/eye colour etc. I asked my Mum for details. She had been very close to her granddad, and she could remember everything very well. The most striking thing about him – that you couldn’t see from the black-and-white photograph – was that he had two different coloured eyes: one a deep green, and the other dark brown. In the black-and-white photo it just looked like there was a shadow over the darker eye. 

When the colourised version came, it was beautifully done. They got the shades exactly right. That made the whole ‘online sharing’ experience slightly redeeming, I must say. I showed my Mum, and it made her cry. I’d almost been afraid to show my Mum, because she had loved her grandpa greatly, to the extent that she still didn’t like to talk about the end of his days – all I know is that it had been an extremely traumatic time for her. She sometimes still tears up, if something happens to remind her about the end.

Anyway, a few minutes after the colourised version was posted for everyone to see, someone responded. 

*‘Hey there. I know this is going to sound really weird, but after seeing that colourised photo of your great-grandpa, I know a guy who looks EXACTLY like him! Seriously! He comes into my coffee shop almost every day so I see him a lot. It’s like his doppleganger or something! I’m going to take a photo and send it to you tomorrow morning. I swear, it’s exactly like him!!’*

I checked out the poster’s history, and it didn’t look like he was a troll or anything. I don’t know, something about his entire post history and earnest way that he’d written the message, made me believe him, and feel mildly interested about the promised picture. His enthusiasm seemed genuine, and so I was intrigued to see this alleged doppleganger. Most likely it wouldn’t look like my great-grandpa at all, though, I was sure.  After all, we’re often told by friends that they know someone who looks exactly like so-and-so, and when you see the proposed ‘twin’ later on, it’s usually quite disappointing. 

So I just replied:

*‘Hey, cool! I can’t wait to see the photograph of my ancestral twin, haha.’*

And then soon forgot all about it, basically. The next day, though, I got this message:

*‘Hey. So, I know I promised a photograph, and here it is. Just a quick disclaimer: I was hoping to get a straight head-on shot of the guy. I asked him if I could take his photograph, and he asked why, and I tried to briefly explain without sounding too stupid. Basically I told him that there was a picture on the internet that looked just like him, and I wanted to send his picture to a great-granddaughter of the dude he looked just like. It sounded progressively weirder as I tried to explain it, haha… It made me realise that things that are perfectly reasonable on the internet can sound so utterly bizarre in real life!*

*Anyways, I don’t know why but he got quite angry and wouldn’t let me take his photo. I mean, fair play to him, not everyone likes their photo taken to be shared on the internet. But I mean, it was weird how his attitude just did a 180… he’s always so friendly and nice and he tips really well. I would have expected him to say ‘no’ nicely. But it really upset him. He was very curt with me. I got the sense now that this’ll be his last visit here, which is a shame, because he seemed like a cool dude before all this* :( 

*Anyways so, I didn’t want to let you down after the build-up yesterday. Plus, the fact that he seemed so annoyed meant that he likely won’t come back, and so this would be my last chance to get a photo! So I know this is really iffy, ethics wise or whatever, but I sneaked a photo anyway, haha. He had to stop at the door – he held the door open for someone coming inside. So I *was* *able to snap a quick pic, but he wasn’t looking right at me, which is both why I was able to take the picture, but also why the picture isn’t that great.*

*It’s a side-pose so maybe you won’t be able to see the resemblance as well as if it had been from the front. But seriously, I still thinks it looks just like your mom’s grandpa. I hope you’ll agree. Let me know what you think.’*

***


Given the lengths this poor guy had gone to in order to attain this picture, I was quite amused, so I clicked the photo with neutral expectations. The man was visible in side-view, but I had to admit he did bear a passing resemblance to the colourised version of my great grandfather. Maybe he was a distant relative, somehow. It bears noting that the guy who sent the photo was practically on the other side of the world to me, and to my knowledge, I have no relatives in America, so this is really unlikely.

I thought the ‘doppelganger’ photo would amuse my mother, who of course, had known her grandfather very well. It would be interesting to get her opinion on it, I thought.

I took over my laptop to her and showed her the photograph. She glanced at the screen, first absent-mindedly, and but then she did a double-take. She couldn’t take her eyes off the screen.

‘My God,’ she said, putting her hand to her mouth. She leaned into the screen, peering at it. ‘Can you zoom in? On his face?’

I zoomed in as much as I could without making a pixelated blurry mess of the face.

She stared at him for what seemed like ages.

‘My God, it looks just like him,’ she said, finally. ‘I mean, honestly. Just like him. I mean – even…’

She ran her fingertips over the screen so earnestly and lovingly. 

‘Do you see the slight scar there? On his cheek, near this ear? He used to tell me stories about how he got that. A different story every night. I was so little – I’d sit nestled on his knee and gaze up at that scar, sometimes until I fell asleep. And – ’

She gasped and pointed at the scar on the man’s hand, which was clutching the cup of coffee. His sleeve was slightly lifted back. There was the trace of a scar protruding from his forearm, extending onto the back of his hand.

‘That one, too. That one was so prominent. It was a deeply-cut scar. I could feel that one underneath my fingers when I held his hand. It seemed huge to me, then, underneath my small hand. He’d tell me stories about that one, too. Silly little stories, to amuse me. Fights that he’d gotten into. Or mythical beasts he’d wrestled.’

She sighed and smiled, lost in her happy childhood memories for a moment, and then, I guess, the bizarreness of the situation hit her. The man holding the coffee in this modern photograph, was a young man. And yet he had the face and accurate identifying features of my mother’s grandfather.

She sat down heavily on the chair next to the table.

‘How is this possible?’ I asked, voicing the obvious question for both of us.

‘Could it be a hoax?’ she said. ‘Could this man – who sent you the picture – could he be playing a trick on you? These internet people can be so clever with their – their Photoshop stuff, can’t they? Could they have worked from your original photo?’

‘Well… yes… maybe but…’ I trailed off. I mean, it was the only possible explanation I could think of. Anything else would be too bizarre.

I brought up the original photograph, the one where my actual great-grandfather was facing towards the camera more head-on. The scar near his ear wasn’t visible due to the angle of his face. His hand wasn’t in view at all, either.

My mother and I both took in these details, wordlessly. She stared at me, her eyes wide.

‘This is impossible,’ she said. ‘It can’t be possible.’

I sat down next to her. We sat in silence for a while. My blood was ringing in my ears. There had to be *some* explanation, surely? It had to be a trick, or a joke, somehow. Or just a really, really weird coincidence? 

Having said that, the picture wasn’t *that* great quality. You could see the scars once my Mum had pointed them out, but not before. So maybe it was like an optical illusion, like one of those ‘hidden pattern’ type things that aren’t really there, but you make yourself see them, and then you can’t unsee them. Maybe it was like that, and the scars weren’t really there, and we saw them because my Mum expected to see them, because the man’s face looked a bit like her grandad, and she’d made me see them now, too. Hey, it could be a prominent vein on his hand, or the lighting, or something, and the lighting had caught it just right.

I said all of this to my Mum, and she nodded along, but I could tell she wasn’t convinced.

‘I suppose…’ she said, and then she trialled off. ‘But…’

‘What?’

‘It might have something to do with what happened at… at the end.’ She was staring at the floor, her hands clasped tightly in her lap. Her hands were shaking, and she seemed… frightened.

‘What do you mean?’ I asked, carefully.

She shook her head.

‘I’m being ridiculous,’ she said, and she just got up, and left. Her whole body was trembling, and I could see tears on her face.

***

You have to understand some backstory, even though admittedly I don’t know all that much. Mum has never spoken about those last few days, despite my previous careful prodding. All I know is, it was a traumatic time when she lost him. It was some sort of violent accident. I know no details beyond that. She still has nightmares about it, and was in therapy for some time. I was itching for details when I was little, but I had eventually made peace with the fact that I might never know. Any small details had been like gold dust. 
 
She talks about him all the time, his life, his character, passing on his wisdom. But never about those end days. Not to me (and never to my Dad, either, because I’ve asked him). It’s basically ‘restricted territory’ for our family to discuss. I think, partially because of the mystery around his end days, and what an amazing person she describes him to have been – I’ve always been so intrigued by this man’s presence in our family history, and the bond my mother shared with him, how he had shaped her character. I guess it’s because of this general awe and intrigue that I’d scanned that old picture into my laptop in the first place, and then why I posted it online. Because I wanted to share his essence with the world.

So, of course, my natural curiosity was *on fire* when she just walked away like that…. So close to telling me more, and clearly in some sort of turmoil. And she thought – whatever it was that happened at the end – might be related to this? This modern-day man walking around who looked like him? How on earth is that even possible, and what the hell was it that happened?

I really wanted to go after her and just open up my flood of questions, but she seemed in that unreachable mood again, liked she often did when she was reliving her traumatic memories. I could hear her crying and I didn’t want to open any wounds. 

So I just sat there awkwardly, my nerves a squirming bundle of unease… and confusion and an uneasy feeling of fear, I guess. I was trying to process things but just coming up blank.

*The modern photo was just a coincidence, we were seeing scars where there were none, and I’d managed to open up a whole can of traumatic worms for my poor mother, probably messing with her mental health. I should have known better than to post about this sensitive subject online at all.*

My mind was made up, then, to delete the post – and forget all about it.

***

I logged into my account and I had hundreds of new messages. I’d been offline most of the day, because my Mum and I had been discussing the new photo for quite a while. I opened my inbox with a bit of a sigh, expecting more of the same general comments of jokes and compliments and the occasional lewd remark.

Except, what was posted just amplified my unease by a thousand. I have no idea what to think. I’m terrified now…. I think I’ve opened up a Pandora’s box in our family history.

***

Here’s what happened: after that guy posted the modern photo of my ‘great-grandpa’ in the coffee shop, along with the colourised version from the other user… there had been a barrage of comments. Here is just a sample that I copy/pasted  and saved at that time (there were many, many others, though, some that I didn't even manage to read):

(Edit: I've now quickly edited out their usernames, sorry if this messes up formatting)

***

**User 1**: 

*‘Dude… this is gonna sound pretty random, but that guy looks just like a mythical figure famous in my hometown.  They say he’s evil and has a flying beast at his behest, that he’ll summon, if you cross him. The sounds of its helper-creature’s screams are enough to kill you. We have an old portrait of him in our Town Hall, it’s basically part of our heritage. They say that many years ago he and the Screaming Falcon wiped out half the town population because they mistreated him. I’m going to post the portrait tomorrow. Same chimera eyes and everything! Freaky!’*

(Reply to the above):

**User 2**: 

*Are you from my hometown? I won’t post the exact place b/c doxxing… but are you in South America? We have exactly the same legend here! Except we call him something different. We call him the Cunning Eyed One. They say he has two different coloured eyes because his flying minion can see through one of his eyes. Anyone he doesn’t like… anyone with attitude… the monster flies over immediately. Its screams are enough to paralyse you and pulverise your flesh, just from the sound alone. I used to be so scared whenever I heard screaming during the night. My mother would scare me and my brothers with the Cunning Eyed Man all the time whenever we misbehaved. And there are old people here who swear they’ve had run-ins with him, or know someone who has. Everyone thinks he’s real. I got thrills when I saw you mention the legend.’*

(Reply):

**User 1**: *I’m not from South America – I’m from a tiny town in Eastern Europe! How scary that you guys have basically the same legend over there! I’ve never heard anyone else mention this legend other than here in my home town.’*

***

**User 3** 

*Wow… now that you post those two photos… I have an old book of legends. One of the illustrations is of a handsome dark haired man with two eye colours. They say he’s a cruel monster disguised as a man, uncannily clever. Anyone who fails his tests is woken up to the sound of screaming, and the screams make their flesh rot and fall off. It’s described in so much detail with historical eye witnesses and stuff. The man looks like the photo here (sorry, OP, no disrespect to your grandpa, but it looks so much like him). This was an old legend from a small, remote Scandinavian village, I think. I can’t remember the name they gave to the monster. I’ll dig out the book and post more details. The way it was described gave me the creeps. Never heard anyone talk about this before, it was a really obscure legend.*

***

**User 4**: 

*’OMG I know what you guys are talking about! We have a similar legend in India! In the village where my parents were from! I am SO EXCITED to hear others talking about this! My mother would tell me about something that happened to her aunt when she was little by the (rough translation) ‘Cruel, One-Eyed Demon’ with his Helper, the ‘Screaming Devil’. They call him one-eyed because they said he could only see through his dark eye, or he closed one eye to look at you through his good eye. I’m going to have to type out that story properly for you – I’m going to get my Mum to tell it again. Seriously, me and my cousins loved and hated that story in equal measure, it was so scary and we’d never sleep afterwards! We’d freak each other out by screaming in the middle of the night and scare each other awake. My older cousin did that once and I peed the bed, I was so scared (TMI, I know). All the elders in our village would tell us about it when I visited back home. OMG I am so thrilled that other countries have this same demon guy in their history too! It makes it so much scarier… like he really roamed the world. Wow, I can’t wait to tell my cousins. This is, like, all my childhood excitement/fears rushing back!’*

***

**User 5**:

*’We have a very similar urban legend in the place where I am from. They say he has the strength of a thousand men, and he flies from place to place on the back of his winged screaming monster thing… it had a name, can’t remember it. They have different names for it. They say that he had different coloured eyes, one evil and one good, and depending on how he felt about you, he would use one or the other to look at you. If he looks at you through the black eye, you’re screwed, basically. I also remember something about the screaming. It was my grandpa who would tell us kids stories about him, that he heard from his mother. Pretty cool to see it being talked about on here. My family is from a small village in China, but haven’t heard anyone else mention it. I thought the stories died out with my grandpa.*

**User 6:**

*’I’m blown away. Honestly. I thought this story was just an urban legend confined to my family, or something! I had a great uncle who swore he saw this man with unusually uncanny, beautiful, eyes, that were two different colours. He was almost hypnotised by them. The man – who my Great Uncle always swore up and down was not a man, but rather a monster of some kind presenting himself like a man - was very strong, and my uncle was very scared. My great uncle was working in a factory on the night shift. This man managed to bend metal with his bare hands, or something, because he was angry. My Uncle was freaked out, and he managed to get away from that place, came come with a high fever. The next morning the people who were there at his work that night were found literally pulverised. On phone, will type out whole details later if anyone interested. Can’t believe others are mentioning this same sounding man in other parts of the world that match up to what my great uncle said. Never really believed it fully until now.’*


***

**User 7**:

*’Guys. I had that photo open in my browser, and my grandma walked past – she’s visiting us. I’m not lying I swear. She saw the photos and she did a double take and just froze. She’s saying the man’s a ‘terrible creature’ from her childhood. I’ve never seen her like that before. She was legit scared and asking me where I got the photos, why I was looking at him, where were these photos taken, was this man still alive, where was he…. and she was getting all worked up… she just left our house and she’s gone home now, really abruptly. Won’t answer my calls. She seemed really upset and shaken. I swear I’m not making this up.’*

**(Reply)**: *’Which photo? OP’s great gramps or the new pic?’*

**User 7** (replying to the reply): *’Both. I was comparing them side by side, just out of curiosity. I never expected a reaction like that. I’m really freaked out. And reading other replies here, even more freaked out. I’ll see if I can get anymore info from my grandma when she calms down.’*
***

**User 8**:*‘I feel really sorry for OP. Turns out her great-grandpa looks just like a legendary demonic monster guy.*’

**User 9** (replying to the above): *’What if OP’s gramps really is this monster guy? Everyone swears it looks just like him, and it’s his likeness that’s triggered all this discussion…’*

***

And on and on. Many legends and lore of a man who apparently looks JUST like my great grandpa, with two coloured eyes, one green, one dark brown, and different stories but all sharing very similar elements to the lore that follows this man all around the world. Lots of people saying they heard this legend, these stories around this man/monster/demon.

But here’s the worst part. 

I felt really tired out reading all that stuff. I mean, obviously, I reasoned that they’ve just latched onto the fact that my great grandpa just happened to have the same unusually coloured eyes as the man in these legends. But with my Mum’s reaction earlier I was just feeling bad and overwhelmed I guess, so I just left the laptop and I went to sleep. There were hundreds of comments I still hadn’t read, and I’d changed my mind and I didn’t want to delete the discussion just then, because there were so many people involved and the whole thing was just buzzing and taking on a life of its own, and so I felt like I’d be rude just to cut it off abruptly when there were so many people so excited.

Besides, it wasn’t even about my great-grandpa anymore, it was just that his multi-coloured eyes had unearthed a legend that people had thus far just kept tucked away in their little corners of the world until then. At that point, I was even slightly proud that my photo had managed to bring to light a hidden, very interesting sounding, obscure legend that many cultures seemed to have their version of. I felt I would enjoy the discussion more when I was better-rested.

I wanted to take another look at the updated discussion in the morning, so I left the laptop in the living room, with the page open.

Big mistake.

***

I woke up this morning and my Mum was sitting by the laptop, reading it all. Her face was white as a sheet, honestly. Even on her worst days she’s never been like that. Even on the days when she’s had nightmares that reminded her of how her beloved grandpa died… even when she’s been reliving the trauma, I’ve never seen her look like she did that morning.

I was kicking myself for leaving the laptop open, so I snapped it shut, quickly, so she couldn’t read more (kind of rude, but it was basically to protect her) and I just tried to laugh the whole thing off. She wasn’t in a great place, mentally, anyway, because my stupid post had probably awakened further traumatic memories for her about his death and just… I really felt awful to have pushed her to this point. The discussion about the legend of the two-coloured eyed man was an off-shoot and unrelated, she had no business reading about it in her anxious state.

‘I know, Mum. It’s weird how there’s a legend about a creepy figure… with similar multi-coloured eyes!’ I laughed. ‘I guess there must be something in our collective unconscious about people finding chimera eyes scary, or something. So they built a legend around that.’

She stared off into middle distance, her gaze still fixed on the place where I’d closed the laptop monitor.

I tried to talk about other things, I rambled on, actually. And she just sat there, transfixed. In shock. 

I was getting really scared now, so I got her a glass of water. She took it, just absent-mindedly, and held it, but didn’t drink it. 

I was feeling terrible, there were goosebumps on my arms. Somehow, reading all that ridiculous, hyping up and exaggeration of the lore surrounding a two-coloured-eyed man had messed with my poor mum’s head. Was she having a mental breakdown? I really was such an awful human being for throwing my family’s sensitivities to the mercy of the internet like this. I was wondering whether to take her to the doctor.

She put the glass down. And got up. She walked into the bathroom and slammed the door shut. I could hear the sound of her retching.

I ran behind her and stood at the door helplessly, crying too, now - really, seriously, feeling like such a terrible person for opening this whole thing up. People on the internet think they can say what they want and run their mouths and create theories and not realise that those careless comments and hysteria can really impact people in real life. How dare I open up my family, my poor Mum, up to that sort of stuff? She was having therapy for his death, she *still* had regular nightmares, for God’s sake. Why did I ever think this was a good idea, and why had I let her be exposed to those horrible, persistent people getting their kicks from relating their stories?

When she emerged, she was puffy-eyed and hoarse.

‘I’m so sorry, Mum,’ I said, and hugged her, held her tightly, trying to squeeze away the bad feelings, somehow, to protect her from all that bad stuff. To fix her through sheer determined love. I really, really, hate seeing her when she has one of her anxiety attacks. It was a constant fear of mine, to see her in that broken state, when I was little. If you’ve ever seen a parent in a vulnerable state, you know exactly how awful, how scary, how heart-breaking it is. ‘All that stuff on the internet, it’s so stupid, I’m so sorry…’

‘It isn’t stupid,’ she said, in a small voice. She basically pushed me away. ‘It’s what I’ve feared, all these years.’ She was looking at the floor.

‘Ok… so, Mum, I think we need to go see the doctor this afternoon…’

‘I heard the screams,’ she said, looking at me in eyes for the first time. ‘I heard the sound of the screams. When I was little…. I saw the…’ She coughed and put a hand to her mouth, and I thought she was going to be sick again. But she wasn’t. She swayed a little, but steadied herself.

‘I had no idea about the scale of things. I had no idea he was… I mean, I guessed a little… but… Oh God! I was always so afraid to face the fear I always had. I loved him so much. I never wanted to face it.’ 

She covered her eyes and started sobbing – deep, gut-wrenching sobs – and then she went into her room. She hasn’t come out.

I really have no idea what to think, how to feel. I can’t even concentrate on the newer posts and messages I received. I’ve deleted the original post now, with its photo and discussion. I just can’t handle it. 

I feel numb, but there’s this definite sense of terror, too, eating away at the back of my head. I feel so many large, unwieldly thoughts that make no sense, just clanging around in my brain, getting larger, like echoes, but I can’t focus on any one coherent thought. None of this makes sense. 

Edit: I just went for a nap, and woke up to find a letter from my mother. She’s written something for me and I think she’s gone out for a walk. I think it contains more info, finally, about my great-grandpa. I’m going to read it through and will try and update.

Edit 2: I'm sorry, it's been a really traumatic few days. I will update later on today (Saturday).

Edit 3: Update is [here](https://redd.it/6t9o1h)

[x](https://www.facebook.com/NoxLuca-910867395617919/)Janelle and I couldn’t get enough of each other in the beginning. We were young and insatiable, attached at the hip in every way. When I finally proposed, she responded with a tearful yes, but soon she began asking her own question; one I was less eager to answer. She’d hold me with her smooth, sweaty legs as we lay exhausted in bed. Her pounding heart would beat against mine as she lay on top of me and she would whisper “Can we have a child now?”

I was hesitant at the start, and would pick from a number of pre-loaded responses including “Soon” or “Of course, just not yet.” I was young and wanted to focus on my career, and the permanent jump into parenthood with no experience was a terrifying thought. Still, I loved Jan more than I’d loved anyone else. When we finally married in a small familial ceremony upstate, I began to realize I wanted to raise a child too. Though young, it was true we weren’t getting any younger. One night about a month after our wedding, Janelle squeezed me with her arms and asked “Can I have a baby?”

I’ll never forget the glint in her tear-filled, emerald eyes as I casually replied “Yes.” They sparkled with a passion I’d never seen before, and a sudden lust consumed her. Birth control was immediately cast aside. She straddled me with an unbridled passion and as we made love, I only then wished I’d said it sooner.

Those first few weeks we spent every evening in each other's sweaty embrace, rarely bothering to get dressed until the jarring alarm woke me each morning. Janelle began the bi-weekly habit of prancing to the bathroom to pee on a plastic stick, eager to see those two lines appear, but they never did. After a month of waning enthusiasm, she began to drag her feet. I consoled her as best I could, and soon suggested we see a fertility specialist.

My heart teetered on a steep precipice as I gave sperm samples to my physician. I had a feeling Janelle would have kids with or without me based on how passionate she was about it. As selfish as it sounds, I exhaled with great relief when she told me the problem was within her anatomy, not mine. Janelle was infertile; anovulation due to POF—premature ovarian failure. She was devastated.

The first few weeks I would gently try to help by suggesting alternative options, but it only seemed to exacerbate her miserable state. When I mentioned the suggestions from the fertility specialist such as donor eggs or adopting a child, her face contorted with a hatred I’d never seen her show before. I decided to let her come to terms with her infertility on her own. I did my best to be sensitive, supportive and caring, yet she only withdrew as the weeks stretched on into months. I felt like I was losing her, and an echo chamber of misery seemed to cast a permanent shadow inside our apartment. Then two months ago, Janelle had an accident.

I was on my lunch break uptown when I got a call from her in the hospital she worked at. She assured me everything was alright, she’d sliced the tip of her thumb off while chopping vegetables and needed stitches. I was going to rush over, but she assured me she was fine and to wait until after work. When I picked her up from the hospital, she rushed over and squeezed me tight, crying hot, wet tears into my chest as she apologized over and over for having been so cold to me. We held each other and cried, releasing the toxic buildup that we’d held in for so long. I teased her about her puffy bandaged thumb with dad jokes about hitchhiking and mentioned how she, with her perpetual thumb's up, appeared to be giving everything an approval of coolness. She groaned, but then truly laughed for the first time since her diagnosis. It felt like everything might actually be OK.

Janelle began smiling, laughing and truly living in the present with me once again. That sparkle that I’d missed for the past few miserable months returned to her crystal eyes. Facing our own mortality has a way of knocking other problems down to size, and Janelle seemed to follow that pattern of putting things into perspective. Despite her improvement in mood, however, she continually shied away from my physical advances. It was as if sex had no productive purpose anymore so she’d lost interest in it altogether.

“Please, not now,” she’d say or “I’m just not ready yet.” I’d nod and breath deeply before letting her know I understood. I wanted to spend my life with her, there was no rush. Then she began dressing differently. Long turtlenecks and blue jeans quickly replaced her form-fitting outfits. She would switch out into long sweatpants in the bathroom each evening, and I felt she was intentionally hiding any glimpse of her body to avoid leading me on. I began to notice the strange way her clothing hung, and I soon realized she’d been losing a dramatic amount of weight. In a matter of months, she withered away from the curvy woman I couldn’t get enough of into a slim, stiff version of herself. 

I began to spend more time at work, focusing on getting the raise that my employer dangled before me like bait. I tagged along to the trade show in Miami one weekend, realizing part of me just wanted to get away from Jan. I kissed her goodbye that Friday morning, expecting to see her on Sunday evening, but plans changed. The second day of the trade show was canceled due to a power issue, and I took a flight back Saturday instead. I was exhausted and only looked forward to a long shower, but concern grew when Janelle didn’t answer my texts I’d sent from the airport. Worry became panic when I called repeatedly and got her inbox. I rushed home and unlocked the door, but sighed with relief upon entering. Jan’s coat was on the chair and the shower was running.

“Jan, honey, I’m back a day early, everything OK?” I called to her, but the hiss of the shower seemed to drown out my voice.

“Honey” I called out and walked over to the door. My dress shoe slipped on the floor, and I fought to remain upright. I looked down in confusion to the spattering of red on the floor I immediately knew was blood. “Janelle!” I screamed out as dread twisted my heart in my chest. I turned the knob and flung open the door, my gaze following the blood trail to a serrated kitchen knife on the tile floor. Above it, sitting naked on the lip of the bathtub, was Janelle. 

I then understood why she’d stayed covered up from head to toe around me for the past few months. Large chunks of her skin and muscle were slivered away. Puffy, mottled skin encircled the sinewy craters she’d carved from her own body. In other places, large crusty scabs sat within bruised flesh, purple and infected. Deep gouges ran along her forearms and thighs revealing scar tissue, shiny and pink where the muscle had been whittled down. Some wounds were red and fresh, streaming glistening ribbons of blood from recently flayed strips. I struggled to remain upright as the butchered body of my wife turned to me with a smile, revealing what she held in her slender, peeled arms.

It was a mass of clumped meat, wrapped in a stitched-together quilt of Janelle’s skin. A sculpture comprised of her own carved flesh and blood, sewn into the form of a patchwork infant in varying degrees of spoil. It was a child produced from her own mutilated body, with a putrid thumb tip nose from the accident that triggered the horrific idea. Janelle held the thing to her now breast-less chest and rocked it gently back and forth in her hacked arms.

“Isn’t he beautiful?” she asked, looking down at the meaty collage with loving eyes wet with tears of joy. I fell backward on the blood-spattered trail on the floor, struggling to get away from the ungodly scene, but not before seeing it. Before I called the ambulance with shaky hands—before I vomited on myself, before I crawled from the bloody bathroom, before I could turn away from the horror—I saw it. I saw that nightmarish sculpture of a baby slowly turn its bloated head towards me, and [smile](https://www.reddit.com/user/mrmichaelsquid/).
We finally had two weeks off at the same time, Richard and I.

“Let’s go on a road trip! Somewhere random, somewhere we haven’t been yet. What do you think?” I wanted to leave enough mystery for this idea to be intriguing, and win out over the desire to spend our hard-earned vacation time at home doing spring cleaning.

“Well...” Richard pursed his lips as he weighed his options. I was the spontaneous one, while he tended to opt for more responsible ways to spend time. I put on my best combination of alluring smile and pleading eyes.

“Come on, please? I promise when we come back we can spend the entire rest of the time cleaning every nook and cranny of this place.”

“How about up to Maine?” Richard cracked a grin.

Three days later we had an Air BnB booked and the SUV packed. It had been so long since we had been able to take a trip like this together. I was determined to make the most of it; I spent the better part of the work day after the decision to go researching small seaside towns and activities.

The drive was estimated to be just over 7 hours according to Google maps. While we had a bunch of podcasts and games ready to go, I knew I was going to succumb to my desire to nap on long car rides. There is something about the sound of tires on the highway and the purr of the engine that soothes me. Just as expected, I fell asleep about 4 hours in.

A blaring horn startled me awake, with a semi trailer flying past my window to confirm the source. I rubbed my eyes.

“How long was I out?” I looked for the sun to see if I could estimate the time. “I learned in Girl Scouts how to tell the time from the stars, but I can’t seem to find the Sun. Must be about to set, huh?” My stomach growled so I turned my attention to my purse at my feet.

“Are you hungry?” I asked as I dug around in search of a snack. “All I have in here are mentos and I have no idea how old these are. Is there an exit soon? We can pull off for some food.” I looked back out my window to check for one of those huge blue signs listing restaurants or rest stops.

“Hon? What do you-“ I hadn’t looked at Richard yet. When I glanced at him just then I noticed he was staring at me. Right at me. Just his head was turned 90 degrees, a smile frozen on his face.

“What?” I asked, a smirk creeping to the side of my mouth. We used to do this all the time, playing driver’s chicken. It didn’t take long for my smile to wear away, though. This wasn’t chicken. Normally whoever was driving would always glance back at the road or give up after about 5 seconds.

Richard wasn’t giving up.

“Richard, look at the road!” I whipped my head from his eerie smiling face to the road in front of us.

“You’re going 80 miles an hour! This isn’t funny! You’re going to get us killed!”

I screamed as a red Honda changed lanes right in front of us.

Somehow, Richard smoothly changed lanes right around the car and back. I was looking right into his eyes that whole time. He hadn’t turned away from me, not to look in the rear view mirror, not out the front windshield, not even a little to the side. His eyes were locked onto mine, his smile never faltering. The weirdest thing was how his eyes looked. They were always my favorite feature of Richard’s. Deep mossy green, with perfectly long eyelashes. But now, they seemed darker somehow. It took me a few moments to realize that it was his pupils. They were slowly dilating, swallowing more and more of his iris into darkness.


That was an hour ago. No matter what I did he would not look back at the road. I tried to turn his head, scream, plead, cry, I even slapped him at one point hoping to break him out of whatever trance this was. The only time he moved was when I tried to grab the wheel from him. I won’t try that again.

Even though Richard won’t look at the road, he never hits anything or anyone. We’re still driving north, and I don’t know if he’s going to stop when we reach our vacation town. I don’t know if he is even my Richard anymore. I don’t know if I can call the cops, will they believe me? I’ll sound insane telling them my husband, whose eyes are completely black now, won’t stop driving the car and is just staring at me. Maybe I should try that anyway, I don’t know.

I do know one thing, though. We have to run out of gas eventually.


[Part 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/cadyg9/my_husband_is_still_driving_but_wont_stop_staring/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app&utm_name=iossmf) I have heterochromia.

My mom has it too, only hers is sectoral heterochromia. A part of her left eye is brown while most of it is blue. Mine’s complete. My right eye is brown, the left is blue. As a kid I’d get the most excited reaction out of the adults-

“His eyes are so beautiful!”

“Wow, they’re different colors!”

“How stunning!”

I’d like to say that my eyes are only one part of myself, that it’s just a slice of the pie that makes up me. But really, the only fascinating part of myself is the heterochromia. I’m average in grades. Height. Strength. IQ. Not much stunning charisma either- I tend to stick to myself.

But in the end, it’s my eyes that saved my life. And maybe the lives of a few others.

The killings started my sophomore year. A young couple going out to smooch in their car was found dead, mangled by some wild beast. Their faces had been eaten off, their tongues ripped out, and their eyes completely gone.

I didn’t know them, they went to the private school. All the same, the stories started up about the Gosbecks Knoll Beast.

My mom laughed when I told her about it. Apparently the ‘Beast’ was around in her highschool days too, two people turned up dead before it stopped. Conveniently, at the same time a bear was brought down in the area. She told me just not to go smooching any girls around there and I’d be fine.

Of course this is when I corrected her and said ‘boys’ but this really didn’t take her by surprise. Mom’s good like that.

However, this time, The Beast wasn’t content just to gnaw on the faces of horny teens on our Lover’s Lane.

When I’d gotten to school about a week after the first incident I knew something was wrong. Everyone was quiet, and a lot of people were crying. I found my friend Trent and asked him what was up. He criticized me for not checking my Facebook before he told me.

Douglas Stafford. Better known as Doug. Senior. Everyone loved him. He was a nice guy. Heck, even to lil ole wallflower me. I’d gotten lost my first day of freshman year and he pointed me in the right direction. Even offered to walk me there. I never talked to him again, but damn. I felt like I’d been punched in the gut.

He’d turned up dead in his parent’s garage. His face gnawed on just like the pair from earlier.

The next day there was a school assembly where the principal even teared up a bit and told us that it was okay if we were upset and if necessary we could take an absence from class to talk to the school counselor. Doug’s girlfriend Cathy was in the front row bawling. They’d dated since their little freshman years, and it was pretty obvious they would’ve one day gotten a house with a white picket fence and a dog.

Cathy was the last casualty of the school year, a few months later she was found dead in the forest. The Beast hadn’t been the one to kill her though- she’d hung herself and apparently Beastie helped himself, at least according to the rumors.

During the summer everything went quiet, and soon the talks of dead teens faded into the background. I think Doug’s parents started up a fund for depressed youth. I spent ninety percent of the summer in my bedroom playing way too many video games.

I also came out on Facebook. I got a lot of approval. A lot of ‘you’re perfect the way you are’. And a lot of ‘dude it was OBVIOUS.’

However, Trent didn’t see it as most people did. He unfriended me almost immediately and when I got back to school he’d apparently been badmouthing me to our mutual friends, none of them wanted anything to do with me anymore.

It hurt. I won’t lie, it hurt a lot. But I chose to ignore it for the most part. So I lost all my close friends. Big deal. I could get new ones.

Yeah, no, not happening.

Like I said, my social skills suck. The only reason Trent and I were friends in the first place was because we were assigned to be project partners in the fourth grade. We got a B. And now whenever he talked to me every other sentence had the word ‘fag’ or ‘queer’ thrown in someplace. Shows how little I knew about my best friend right?

But this is when the murders REALLY picked up the pace.

The first victim of junior year was Camille Dunn. She’d missed her bus home and decided to walk. The next morning a dogwalker found her stretched out on the sidewalk. Eyes gone and face eaten off. The Beast was back.

Clearly there was some madman or wild animal on the loose and everyone put up their guard. But now I think this is when the Beast got really cocky. He realized he could get away with this shit.

The next victims were in their damn *house*. An elderly couple, John and Beatrice. They lived across the street from me. When I woke up the next morning to sirens, my heart sank. I thought Beatrice’s heart finally gave out on her.

Noooo, the Beast just decided to up his game by ripping out said heart. It was the same thing though- ate the faces and the eyes. It got into the house through the back window, judging by the bloody prints. Kids whispered about how supposedly the prints looked like a humans but clawed. Sightings of The Beast grew in number. A freak that had fangs and glowing eyes, his only desire being to hunt and kill.

Of course my mom immediately kicked in a curfew and kept the house secure. At night I’d hear her wake up and walk around, as if to make sure we were safe.

I believed in the Beast when she saw it too.

I woke up to hear her scream and I ran to the source. My mom was white as a ghost, her hand on her heart as she stared out the now empty window.

“It… it was there. I don’t know what it was, but- fuck, fuck, call the police, call the police right *now*!”

My mom doesn’t cuss. She’s a classy lady like that. I grabbed the junior baseball bat I used as a kid and called 911. Cops showed up surprisingly fast and mom told them what happened while her eyes still darted to the window on occasion.

She’d gone down because she couldn’t sleep and it was at the window. Its shape was vaguely humanoid but its eyes did in fact glow. That’s when she screamed. It must’ve not expected her to see it as it took off running. And sure enough, when I went into the backyard the next morning, its feet were indeed clawed. I didn’t bother collecting evidence as I’m sure everyone would’ve thought I faked it, but I knew the Beast was real.

Two days later I got kidnapped by my so called ‘friend’.

I was walking home from school when Trent ran up behind me, acting all buddy buddy until he got close. Then I felt a switchblade press against my side. Trent was still smiling, but it was cold, dark.

“Start walking, you fucking queer.”

The biggest ‘well shit’ moment of my life.

I didn’t try to be the hero and get the knife, Trent was bigger than me and I didn’t have a prayer. We walked until we got to his car, where he pushed me into the backseat and he duct-taped my hands and feet together.

He drove us out of town to this abandoned old shed. Two other guys I didn’t know were waiting there, and I saw more knives. I was close to pissing myself while still being neck deep in denial. Surely this had to be a joke though. Just a prank to scare me.

Trent dragged me inside and slammed the door.

It was dark and I couldn’t see a thing. I got whacked in the stomach and the air whooshed out of my lungs.

“You fucking fag. How many times did you touch me when I slept over, huh?” I could hear the sneer in Trent’s voice.

I groaned as I was shoved to my knees. “Never, Trent. You’re not exactly my type,” I said as I struggled against the tape.

I got kicked across the face and I hit the floor. I felt one of my teeth come loose and blood start to pool in my gums.

Trent squatted down next to me. I could barely make out his silhouette in the cracks in the shed.

“Fucking liar. You’re a freak. And now you’re gonna be another victim of the Gosbecks Knoll Beast, old buddy.”

I felt the blade press right beneath my blue eye.

“Hope your mommy doesn’t miss your creepy ass eyes, faggot!”

I wanted to shut my eyes. Hoped that he’d drive the knife right into my brain so I didn’t have to feel it. Instead I felt my eyes stay wide open as the blade glinted, and I suddenly made out Trent and his three goonies…

Yeah. Three goonies. There were only two outside the shed.

Guess the Beast really doesn’t care for copycats.

I heard the scream before the tallest of the figures slammed the other two heads together. When standing straight up he almost reached the ceiling. Trent whipped around and the blade nicked below my eye.

“What the fuck-“

Another whack and Trent was on the ground. I heard him choking and realized I smelled blood.

The figure moved onto me and he hoisted me up to his level. I felt claws tear my shirt. I was certain I’d be dead.

Then I felt the monster pause.

“… Eyes?”

I passed out.

When I came to, it was now dark outside, and we were no longer in the shed. Now we were in a cabin, lit by a lantern.

And I saw the Beast in his entirety.

He looked vaguely human, wearing what looked like a loincloth, had pale skin and black stringy hair that hung down his back. His skin was occasionally broken up by patches of scales, and his fingers looked like a tiny blade stuck out of each. His spine was lined with thin bristles that would rise and fall with each breath.

Trent was hung up in the corner by a hook, awake and filled with terror. I could smell more blood. The Beast examined Trent’s face thoughtfully before his middle finger carved through his cheek.

I shut my eyes tight when I heard Trent scream.

The Beast made almost no sound at all, other than a soft hum as he worked on carving off Trent’s face. When I took a peek, I saw the gleaming white of Trent’s cheekbones.

My eyes shut again.

Finally when the screams went quiet, I heard footsteps approach. Felt his huge presence kneel over me. His hair smelled like pond weeds.

“… Open. Open your eyes.”

I did, although I’m not sure why.

His face was kinda human. Had a strong nose and gaunt features. But it was his eyes that caught me.

They glowed all right. But the left one was yellow, and the right eye was violet.

The Beast inhaled sharply before his hand reached up to my face. I flinched and tilted my head away but he only hushed me as he lightly caressed my cheek. His claws didn’t even break skin.

“… Eyes. They don’t… match.”

I swallowed. “N… neither do yours,” I pointed out.

The Beast grinned, his crooked teeth flecked with blood. “No. No they don’t,” He said, almost if he was trying not to laugh.

I don’t know what possessed me to do this, but I reached up to touch his face too. His skin was oily, it almost reminded me of a fish. “They uh, look good though?” I offered. Play nice with the monster, maybe you can go home.

This comment struck him, he looked shocked. Then he pulled me into the most uncomfortable hug of my life.

“… Only one. Thought I was the only one,” He sobbed, I felt his greasy tears hit the top of my head.

Really not sure of how to handle this, I patted his back, careful to avoid the spines. God knew they were probably poisonous. Thankfully the Beast seemed to appreciate this.

I’m really not sure *how* I fell asleep with a giant stinky monster practically spooning me, but when I woke up, the police were there. According to them, someone called 911 from my phone and told them where to find me.

Trent’s body was found strung up in the other room with the other two guys. They’d been almost entirely butchered. It was a miracle I was alive, according to the police.

I attended Trent’s funeral. I don’t know why but I did. His sister apologized for all the bullshit he did to me. I saved her the knowledge of the fact he was going to murder me and make it look like the Beast did it.

When I got home late that night I found mussel shells on my windowsill. I took them inside and let them rest on my dresser.

Top of my dresser’s covered with little ‘gifts’ now, from snake skins to smooth rocks to glass beads. I haven’t seen him since that night but sometimes I catch a glimpse of those mismatched eyes, glowing from my backyard.  

 I was driving through rural New Jersey when I saw him.

A hitchhiker, standing by the side of the road. Surprisingly well-dressed – black suit, slicked-back hair, narrow briefcase.

Now, I know I shouldn’t pick up hitchhikers. But I’m 6’ 4”, 230 pounds, with all kinds of hunting equipment in the back of my truck. It’s not like this prissy-assed businessman is going to beat me to death and leave me on the side of the road.

Besides, I need gas money.

“Hey, man,” I said, pulling over to the side of the road. “I’ll give you a lift, if you pay me for gas.”

“Of course,” he said in a polite, almost British, accent. He reached for his wallet, and pulled out three crisp, $20 bills. “This enough?”

I grinned. *That’s way more than enough.* I greedily snatched the money from him and clicked the locks. “Get in, bud.”

He climbed in. His blue eyes shifted from the crumpled Wendy’s wrapper on the dashboard, to the mysterious, sticky goo on the middle console.

“Sorry, the car’s not clean. I’m going hunting,” I said, turning back onto the highway.

“Hunting. Interesting,” he said, in a strangely enthusiastic tone. “Have you always liked to hunt?”

“No, it’s the funniest thing. Never thought I’d ever hunt. Love animals, got three dogs at home. But there are so many deer around these parts, when the winter comes… a lot of ‘em starve to death. Not to mention all the car accidents they cause.” I trailed off, and we fell into uncomfortable silence.

“Just hunting for the day, then?”

“No, my buddy Matt and I will be out there the whole weekend.”  

He let out a laugh. “The *whole* weekend? Your wife’s a saint for letting you go.”

*My wife? How did he –* But then my eyes fell on the steering wheel, and the silver ring on my finger. “Ah, yeah. Mary’s a doll. She’s actually pregnant, you know. 5 months with a little girl.”

He gave me a crooked smile. “A girl, huh?”

“Yeah.”

I could feel him staring at me long after we had fallen into silence. It made me feel uncomfortable; I clicked on the radio.

“How did you meet Matt?” he asked, fiddling with the dial. All that came through was static.

*That’s a weird question,* I thought. “Um. He and Mary were close friends. So when we got married, I got to know him well.”

“Mmm-hmm,” the man said. He stroked his chin thoughtfully, and I was suddenly reminded of a psychiatrist.

“Are you a psychiatrist?” I blurted out.

He laughed. “Definitely not. I work in finance.”

“What type of finance?” It was *my* turn to ask the questions, now.

“Futures,” he replied, noncommittally.

I glanced over at him. A small smile was on his lips, and I noticed his fingers had gravitated from his lap to the briefcase at his feet.

My heart began to pound.

*Click, click.* He undid the clasps; the case creaked open.

“What’s in your briefcase?” I asked.

“Work.”

“What kind of –”

His long fingers disappeared into the darkness of the case. He was pulling something out! My body began to seize up; the steering wheel felt like ice under my fingers. “I have a lot of hunting equipment back there,” I said, “so you better not be –”

I stopped.

He was only pulling out a sheet of paper.

For a few minutes, he was quiet. Reading the paper, intently and silently, as if his life depended on it. *Scrtch, scrtch –* his fingers slid over it, as they traced the text.

Then he slipped it back into the case, and snapped it shut.

*What was he reading?* I thought. But before I could get the question out, he turned towards me. I could barely see his face in my peripheral vision; but I knew he was staring at me, for minutes on end.

Then he broke the silence.

“Don’t go hunting,” he said, his ice-blue eyes boring into me.

“What?”

“Turn the car around. Go home to Mary.”

“What?!”

“She needs you.” He paused. “*Madeline* needs you.”

I paled.

I never told him we were going to name our baby Madeline.

“How did you –”

“He’s going to make it look like an accident,” he said, his voice gravelly and halting. “Just a simple hunting accident. The most punishment he’ll endure is thirty-five minutes in the police station, writing out his statement.”

“But –”

“Let me off at that diner, up ahead. I like their Cobb salad very much.”

“Matt’s going to kill me? What are you talking about?”

He turned to me, eyes wide. “What are *you* talking about?”

“About what you just said!”

“All I said is I’d like you to let me off at the diner, please.” He pointed to the exit, curving off the highway. “You’re going to miss it if you don’t slow down.”

With a shaking hand, I clicked on my blinker. Pulled off the exit, into the parking lot. My heart pounded in time with the *click-click-clicks* of the cooling engine.

“Thank you for the ride,” he said, pulling his briefcase out with him. “Have a good drive, will you?”

I couldn’t squeak out a reply before the door slammed shut.

\*\*\*

I didn’t believe him. But my nerves were too shot to continue the trip, either. I texted Matt that I was sick, turned around, and went home to Mary. Mary was thrilled; Matt was disappointed. A little *too* disappointed, if you ask me.

A month later, after ignoring most of Matt's calls and texts (which became increasingly frequent and desperate), I heard a faint thumping noise at the door. When I flicked on the porch light -- there was Matt, hunched over our doorknob.

Holding a lockpick.

We called the police. Since then, life has been great. Just a few months later, our wonderful little Madeline was born. And as soon as we got back from the hospital, on our doorstep was a little teddy bear, a pink bow sewed on its head. There wasn’t a return address, or a card of any kind.

But I think I know who it’s [from.](http://www.blair-daniels.com)“I’m sure she’s just driving and can’t answer her phone, she’ll be here any moment.”

I tapped my fingers on the desk and shot a pitiful smile at the little girl opposite me. It was a hollow promise. We’d already been sat there for so long it was starting to get dark outside.

I’d already sent my teaching assistant home. What was the good in both of us suffering?

This wasn’t new. Some days it was minutes but often it was hours; the only thing consistent about Charlotte’s mother was her ability to forget she had a daughter. 

Charlotte was a bright child and a pleasure to teach. I couldn’t understand why everything seemed to be so against her.

The other kids were cruel to her, leaving her out of games and group activities. I’d tried gentle, private words with kinder members of the class, encouraging them to include her. They all said no.

*They said she was a witch.*

Children can be evil. You really get to see that when you teach the little crotch goblins. They were eight years old and already ostracising someone weaker, even going so far as to infer she was some sort of monster. How cruel. 

It made me really sad. The poor girl just couldn’t catch a break. It was like no one wanted to be around her; she was a magnet forcing itself to the wrong end of another magnet. *She repelled.*

“It’s ok Miss Tackett. I know she isn’t coming.”

Charlotte stared blankly at the desk in front of her. She hadn’t bothered to put her coat on, she was that conditioned to expect being forgotten. Her legs swung lightly back and forth below it. 

“Of course she’s coming Charlotte, your mother loves you... she’s, uh, just very busy.”

That was a half lie. I couldn’t definitively prove that Charlotte’s mother loved her, and it certainly didn’t seem that way sometimes. She would arrive late but unconcerned, almost reluctant to collect her child.

She looked haggard and tired, more so each time I saw her. She often looked like she hadn’t slept in days. She was jumpy, anxious and irritable. It was obvious she needed help, that she was struggling.

I tried not to judge her but it was hard, I sat with her forgotten child every day after that bell rang. How tired do you have to be to forget a child? Your only child. 

And just like the other kids in the class, when Charlotte’s mother would finally arrive, she looked at her as if she were some kind of monster.

“She doesn’t love me.”

I felt my heart drop. They were words you never wanted to hear a child say about their mother. They should all feel loved. Valued. The worst part was that she didn’t even seem bothered, she was immune to it.

I remembered the time I’d tried to make a report to social services about Charlotte. My concerns seemed like nothing to them. The girl was fed, clean and always arrived on time. She wasn’t withdrawn from school and didn’t seem bothered by her lack of friends.

*”We can’t investigate a mother for lateness just because it irritates a school.”*

That was what the lady on the phone said to me. Then she hung up. I tried. I really did. I wanted so badly to help Charlotte but I didn’t know how to. I wasn’t irritated by sitting with her like the social worker inferred, I just knew there was more to it. I could feel it. 

“What makes you think that she doesn’t love you?” I asked, desperate to draw out something that could help me help her.

“She’s scared of me.”

“What do you mean she’s scared of you?”

“She locks her room when we get home and she doesn’t come out until it’s time to take me to school.” She answered nonchalantly, swinging her feet under the desk.

“Doesn’t she make you dinner?” 

“Of course Miss Tackett, she leaves it prepared on the kitchen side, all I have to do is eat it.”

I thought of what an isolating existence that must be. To have no one to talk to all day and then go home to silence. What did Charlotte mean her mother was scared? What was her mother doing in that room? 

“Does she have anyone in there with her?”

“No Miss Tackett, she just stays in her room. She says it’s the only way she’s safe.”

A lump started to form in my throat. If she only felt safe in her room then why didn’t she keep her daughter in there too? *What was wrong with this woman?*

“Why wouldn’t she be safe?” I asked, struggling to reel in my own curiosity. 

“Because I’m there. I told you she’s scared of me.”

Her words were jarring. It took me a few moments to compose myself. It was a baffling thought, that anyone could be frightened of such a sweet young child.

“Why wouldn’t she be safe with you? What does she think you’d do to her?”

“Because I’m a witch. She thinks I might hurt her.”

Charlotte continued swinging her legs under the desk, her vacant state resident on her face. It broke my heart. I started mentally preparing a lesson on the effects of bullying. 

She was so confused, she’s twisted up the cruel taunts and the abuse at home and started to consider herself a monster. It was devastating. 

“Charlotte you aren’t a witch. You can tell me if the other kids are mean to you... I’ll talk to them. Why do they call you that?”

I fought back tears. I’d thought that getting into teaching would be fun and fulfilling but pupils like Charlotte were haunting. They worked their way into your thoughts long after that bell had rung.

“Because I broke Stephanie’s arm, with my mind.”

I was taken aback at her answer. 

I remembered the incident she was referring to. It was early into the school year and Stephanie tripped on the playground. She broke her arm in two places, it was nasty. A few other kids started a rumour that Charlotte had used her witch powers to do it. 

They had all stopped standing near her outside after that, despite my protests and pleas. They’d hammered it in so hard that it was her fault that Charlotte started to believe it.

“Stephanie fell Charlotte. You didn’t do it.”

“I made her fall.” 

“*You don’t have witch powers!* The other kids are just mean.” I practically screamed, trying to contain my rage. 

That was unprofessional. I know. I shouldn’t have been discussing the other kids, and especially not my feelings on them, with the victim of their targeting. I couldn’t help it, I just wanted to see her smile.

The rhythm of her swinging legs ground to a halt and she turned to face me, vacant eyes locked with mine and suddenly not so vacant anymore.

*She laughed.*

It was like the sound of nails running across a chalkboard slowly, dragged out to prolong the torture. It wasn’t a child’s laugh. It was something mocking, awful. I felt the sudden urge to walk out of the classroom and leave. Like everyone else in her life already had.

I couldn’t explain where it came from. Had it come from her? Or did I imagine it. No. It must have been me. *She was a child.* I had to stop thinking like that.

“What if the other kids are right though, Miss Tackett?” She asked sweetly, following that awful laugh.

“They aren’t.” I shook my head and composed myself. Charlotte’s mother would be here soon and I could talk to her about her daughter. Make her see how serious the situation was. I could help. “There’s nothing wrong with you.”

Charlotte’s facial expression changed. She frowned, trying to process my words and what they meant to her. It didn’t take long but I could see her calculating. Trying to work out weather she believed me or not. Maybe I was finally getting through.

Then it happened. 

I felt a crunch. Out of nowhere I was struck by a steering pain in my arm. I felt parts of bone brush past each other as they snapped and jutted out of different point of flesh. I fell to the floor, screaming. 

“I never said there was, Miss Tackett. I like being a witch.” 

*She was doing this.* A child. It was her.

“Charlotte, please stop!” I begged. “Your mother will be here any moment, please.... please stop.” I pleaded, desperate for her to stop hurting me.

Her eyes weren’t so vacant anymore, they focused on me with laser precision, revelling in my realisation that I’d gotten it all so badly wrong. 

I thought about how terrified her mother must have been. About how I hadn’t listened to her classmates concerns. All I’d ever seen was a victim. I was so wrong.

She looked at me writhing on the floor in agony and she rolled her eyes. I felt my heart pounding so hard I thought it might burst through my flesh. 

“She’s not coming, Miss Tackett.” Charlotte stood up from behind the desk and took a step towards the classroom door. 

“What did you do!?” I panted, wondering if that poor, tired woman was out there. If she was in the car and it was all just a cruel trick.

The little girl flashed me one more sinister grin as she exited the room.

[“She isn’t coming Miss Tackett. My mother forgot to lock her door last night.”](https://www.reddit.com/r/ThePickledGnome/)

[TCC](https://www.reddit.com/r/TheCrypticCompendium/)We're not supposed to watch the local broadcast channel.

At least, that's what my neighbor Donna says. "I hide the remotes. You can't be too careful with kids in the house, you know?" she said, as she leaned against the fencepost.

"You hide the remotes… so your kids can't turn on the local channel," I repeated.

“Yup. Works wonderfully.”

I only moved in here a few weeks ago. So far, everyone was friendly and nice. But Donna… she seemed a little cuckoo. A house-wide ban on watching the local TV station? Really? I mean, I get it if she were talking about some adult program or something. But local broadcasting channels don’t usually air sex and violence, do they?

“Um… why don’t you want them watching the channel?” I asked.

She blinked. Then she laughed, throwing her head back. “Ha, ha, ha! Good one. I’ll catch you later, Rebecca, okay?” She squeezed my wrist, smiled, and then headed off down the sidewalk.

I stood there, dumbfounded.

A few days later, I went over another neighbor’s house for some tea. Melinda Patel, the woman in the blue colonial on the corner. After we’d talked for a while, I decided to mention it. "Do you know Donna?" I ventured.

Melinda nodded, taking a sip of tea. "Oh yes. We go way back. Both original owners!"

I glanced around, then I lowered my voice. "Don't you think she's a little… crazy, with the whole TV thing?"

"Oh, yeah, definitely."

I breathed out a sigh of relief.

"It's absolutely insane that she keeps a TV. With two little kids? It's too risky. Yeah, I know she says she hides the remotes, but you know how kids are. They find *everything."* She shook her head. "Insane."

I stared at her, at a loss for words.

"When my kids were that age I said no, no siree, not taking that risk.” She took a sip of tea. “Gave me *so* much peace of mind.”

“What exactly is on the channel?” I asked, with a small laugh. “Porn? True crime?”

Her eyes locked on mine. “Don’t joke about it. Please.”

She kept staring at me, with such an intense look that I fell into silence. I changed the subject to her flower garden, and her peppy personality snapped right back.

And then there was Geri.  Around 4 PM she swung by our house, an hour after I’d returned from Melinda’s. “Just wanted to see how y’all are settlin’ in,” she said, giving us a big smile.

“Yeah, we’re good!”

She came in, all smiles and chit-chat. But when her eyes fell on our big screen TV, mounted over the fireplace, she froze.

“Oh. You have a TV.”

“Yes, we do.”

“Well, okay,” she said, eyeing our five-year-old son playing in the corner. She lowered her voice. “Did you tell him not to…? No, okay, let me show you. You can actually program the TV so it *can’t* go to channel 13. A neat little hack I learned the first few weeks here.”

“That’s okay,” I said. “We don’t need it.”

Suddenly, realization swept over her face. “Ah! Y’all don’t have cable. Good idea. You can get so much with streaming services and all. We’ve got cable, but we’re sure to disconnect it at night.”

“Ah, smart,” I said, finally catching the gist. “So the kids won’t sneak down and watch it while you’re sleeping, huh?”

“No. We don’t got kids. But you know, we don’t want to end up like Jeremy. Waking up in the middle of the night to his TV on…” She shook her head. “So awful.”

“What happened to him?”

She glanced to my son again. “Not in front of him,” she whispered.

Then it was back to small talk, and soon after, she left. “So weird,” I said to my husband, Ben. “Why’s everyone so weird about the local broadcast channel?”

He shrugged. “I dunno.”

“I mean, they can’t be broadcasting something *so* awful, right? Aren’t there laws about that?”

He nodded. “Maybe it’s some sort of bizarre prank they’re playing for us. Like hazing. Or maybe a psychological experiment?” He laughed. “Did we unknowingly move into a neighborhood of social psychologists?”

“I don’t know. But it’s really weird.”

After our son Nathan fell sleep, I found Ben sitting in front of the TV, turning the remote over in his hands. “I’m thinking about turning it on,” he said.

“Turning on channel 13?”

He nodded.

“I’m going to bed,” I said, crossing my arms, “and I think you should join me.”

Ben broke into a grin. “Ha! You’re scared. Well, listen. You go on upstairs and hide under the blankets. I’ll be up in five minutes.”

“Okay, fine.” I plopped down on the sofa next to him. “I’ll watch it with you. You win.”

He grinned. The TV flickered on, casting eerie blue light on the walls. I watched as his thumb pressed the numbers **1 3.**

Then it was on.

A man appeared on the screen, sitting at a desk. He was relatively attractive, but his hair was slicked back with too much grease, and his makeup was caked on. And his teeth were white—too-white, like that Ross in that episode of *Friends.*

“Ew,” Ben said.

“Yeah, well, local broadcast channels don’t have much budget.”

“Still. Couldn’t they do better than this? He looks like a mannequin and a used car salesman had a baby.”

“Oh my gosh,” I said, laughing.

“It’s true. Even his hair looks fake,” he said, gesturing. “Probably a toupee.”

“He’s too young to be bald.”

“Maybe a wig, then?”

“Okay, okay. Sssh, let’s hear what he’s saying.”

"The weather's going to be cool,” the newscaster said, gesturing to a poorly-CGI’d map of the town behind him. “High of 50s and low of 40s. Now, let’s get to the local news.” The map disappeared and he sat down.

“Our first news item is about local woman Melinda Patel.” A small photo of her appeared above his shoulder.

“Oooh, ooh!” I slapped Ben’s arm. “That’s the woman I had tea with this afternoon!”

“Really?”

“Yeah! She told me she did some work on the school board, but I didn’t know she’d be on the news!”

“Last week, Melinda Patel passed a motion to have discounted school lunches for everyone,” the newscaster continued. “No doubt, the fact that she’s fucking the principal played a role in the decision.”

Ben and I froze.

“Uh—what did he just say?” I said.

“He said she’s fucking the principal.”

“He can’t say that on TV!”

“Well, now we know why the kids aren’t allowed to watch,” Ben said, starting to giggle.

I stared at the strange mannequin-man, dread sinking in. He smiled back, eyes blankly staring ahead as he read off the teleprompter. “And Geri Johnson, the local librarian, drunk herself to sleep after a rough day with the kids.”

“Wait. I thought Geri said she didn’t have kids.”

He shrugged. “Maybe she lied. Maybe this guy is making it up. For all we know this guy is just spewing garbage to get people to watch.”

The smile faded from the newscaster’s face. He inclined his head, slightly, blue eyes locked on the camera. “Let’s move on to new resident Ben Hernandez.”

My blood ran cold.

“He can’t keep his froggy little mouth shut, can he?” the newscaster said, in a lilting tone. “He has to compare me to a mannequin so his wife thinks he’s funny.”

His blue eyes stared at us from the screen. Empty and hollow. Mouth curled into a small smile.

“How does he know that?” I whispered. Ben glanced at me, fearfully—then grabbed the remote and quickly pressed the power button.

The TV didn’t turn off.

“Let’s… let’s get out of here.”

He grabbed my hand. We both stood up, backing out of the room. But I couldn’t look away. Couldn’t look away as his blue eyes *followed* us, as we moved away from the TV.

Just before we got out of view, he smiled.

[Part 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/ls08p6/were_not_supposed_to_watch_the_local_broadcast/), [Part 3](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/lth68u/were_not_supposed_to_watch_the_local_broadcast/)I’ve been researching Mesopotamia my whole life. I remember being fascinated by that civilization ever since I was a pre-teen. Unlike my friends and schoolmates, I spent my time daydreaming of Sumerian kings and the Euphrates River.

I then grew up, went to college and became a Sumer researcher. I’m not a particularly prominent historian, but I’m one of the very best when it comes to translating Sumero-Akkadian Cuneiform writing, especially from around 2,800-2,500 BC. 

I wasn’t expecting a lot when I was invited to translate some newfound tablets; I mean, I was personally excited, but was sure the contents would be mundane enough.

My employer was a little private museum in Istanbul that specialized in artifacts from the Gilgamesh dynasty, and prided itself from having snatched these new items from the British Museum.

I was welcomed at the airport by the owner’s second assistant, a flamboyant and clever Arabic man who spoke English with almost no accent. “I’ve been assigned to accompany you during your stay, Madame. Please inform me of your every need”.

Eymen was a pleasant man around my age, the Turkish version of an English butler. He gave me space to work but politely reminded me of making at least two meals a day when I was too deep in my work. His presence helped so much with my productivity.

Still, no matter how great an experience it was, I’m terrified of my findings.

The following is my translation of one of the tablets.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

We humans are being killed daily. The Sygil are an inferior species in every way, but they have something we lack – something that should be a curse and yet, somehow, is their biggest strength: they don’t know when to give up.

They surprised us with their resistance. And they are so numerous; the Sygil took a habit of procreating like the rats or ants, and now they are as numerous as the stars in the sky. They always had plenty of children, but most of them would die of disease or being attacked by the predators on their precarious houses. 

That way, their numbers were always around the same, unless they were on war between themselves – which happened constantly, for simple resources like water. But now some of the Sygils, merely through observation and the trial-and-error method, learned of our medicine and architecture and they started to flourish and prosper – too much. 

After invading and overpowering their fellow Sygil from other tribes, a group reached our empires and slaughtered us. We hit them back, with our better horses, better weapons, better built men. And we slayed them, but despite that, they never, never stopped. They are indefatigable. 

I wish I could understand why. We’re taller, stronger and dotted with brains they would think only a god could possess, and still, they fight.

Just because they learned how to walk in two legs a while ago they think they can rule the world; despite the fact that their reasoning is puny and their sciences are non-existent. They don’t even know how vast the world is. That’s laughable. 

Like their ancestors – even inferior hominids – their life is only worth after procreation, so their children dead before mating age are useless and forgettable. This primitiveness is what enrages me about them the most. 

The Sygil wants our other secrets, our King – they want to be us.

Tired of seeing my sisters and daughters die, I’m utterly ashamed to admit that I was scared and reached out to the King. I advised him to strike a deal with the Sygil. 

At first, he refused; but after a lot of our blood was shed, and only around a few hundreds of us remained, our king Gilgamesh finally decided to surrender to the inferior species so the rest of us could be safe. We would retreat to our underground city, and live safely for generations to come.

The King would stay with them on the surface to rule them and develop their society, and stay there with them for precisely 4.560 years before we fiercely take our world back.

Of course they agreed. They don’t even understand how much time that is; but it’s not a lot for us. We never die, we are simple reborn on a new body on a new generation, every time wiser, stronger, purer.

We are moving to our fortress deep inside the Earth by the ending of the forthcoming Araḫ Addaru Arku month. We will make no mistake this time; we’ll keep the Sygil under constant surveillance and learn all their secrets. 

Next time, we won’t have any weaknesses; just like they almost did to us, we will destroy them all mercilessly.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

I was shocked to realize that *we* are the Sygil. There’s a way more advanced civilization living underground on this planet as you read this.

By chemical testing, the museum expert was able to determine the age of this tablet with incredible precision. The Sumerian Calendar is very alike to the Gregorian Calendar we use nowadays; it has 12 months, alternating between 29 and 30 days, following the moon cycles, which have 29.5 days. 

There’s a 13th month with 33 days called Araḫ Addaru Arku that only happens every 3 years; it was added to compensate for the discrepancy. 

It wasn’t hard for me to convert 4.560 years for them to our Gregorian calendar, using the tablet’s age as the year zero.

And I found out that the real humans, with their superior brains and hatred for us across millennia, are coming back to reclaim their land soon. How soon? According to my calculations, the 4.560th Sumerian year is next year[.](https://www.reddit.com/r/PPoisoningTales/)For several years I've been an avid reader of NoSleep, but because of my profession, I was never permitted to submit content to it (or to anywhere). Occasionally an Area 51 story pops up. "I used to work at Area 51" or "I snuck into Area 51", etc. These stories always made me want so badly to finally jump in here, but I always held my tongue until now.


Using a series of proxies and all kinds of networking jibber jabber, I *think* I'm in the clear making this post. I won't bore you with the details.


I came here to NoSleep after years of lurking to correct a lot of the misapprehensions and legends about the most infamous military installation in the world. I'm doing this now because even if I get caught, I have a really useful insurance policy: I'm seriously ill and not likely to recover, and I've got no family that I'm in contact with that could be retaliated against. There's nothing anybody can do (uuuuh I think...).


---------------------


There is *no such thing as Area 51.* Sorry! And the fact that it's the golden egg of conspiracy theories worldwide is exactly what the US government wants. I'm writing this in a bit of a rush and I don't have any of my thoughts organized, so I'm just going to break it down as follows:


**Groom Lake / Paradise Ranch / Edwards AF Extension / Restricted Training Facility UX104**


These are a few names for the place you know as Area 51. I don't know much about its history, but essentially it *was* intended by the US Air Force to be a secret weapons-testing facility during the Cold War. It had a few on-site extensions; one of them was for developing experimental rocket and jet engines, one was for training contingents of troops for nuclear warfare and post-apocalyptic survival, etc. But much like the third Star Wars movie, the site and its purpose got out around the time of the Roswell incident, and a media frenzy popularized the base. The government tried at first to quell speculation about it, but then adopted another strategy: feed into the hype, and simply move the base a few dozen miles away. 


Today, Groom Lake (Area 51) is a small but functional military airport and base. It's got a bunch of bunkers mostly housing low-security servers, and some munitions tests are performed there. Staff are regularly moved in and out, mostly folks who are low on the totem pole and trying to climb up the ladder to the real facility. There are some very outdated nuclear fallout shelters that are still maintained and used for storage. The facility consumes an enormous amount of power, and everything possible is done to make it *look* like a well-guarded military base that is engaged in some huge, secret operations.


The employees really do fly there every day from Las Vegas on conspicuously inconspicuous jets marked as "JANET," sometimes referred to as "Just Another Non-Existent Terminal." And they want you to notice. And wonder. They want you to wonder where those jets are going.


And they never want you to spend one second thinking about where they came from.


--------------


**The real "Area 51"**


This is the most exciting part, because as far as I can tell in my limited and clandestine researching, nobody has ever divulged the real secret before. It's pretty highly guarded, and they straight up murder people who are stupid enough to share it. Murder isn't even the right word. They *erase* people from existence. Sometimes entire families. That's why the government freaks out when they find that one of their employees is terminal and has nothing left to lose. It's why if you're an employee there, you only see *their* doctors, so that they know about your health before you even know about it. They want you to die real quick of a sudden heart attack, so that you never have a moment to think about how you might do a public service and air their dirty laundry. And sometimes they induce those heart attacks when they determine you to be an HMT, or “health-motivated threat.”


But I didn't need to see a doctor to know that I am suffering from the same malignant tumor that killed my father: glioblastoma multiforme. Every three months we get a health evaluation, and every six months we get a CAT scan. I simply didn't report the very damning symptoms this past eval, and I'll probably be gone before they scan me next. I really wanted to do this instead. Maybe just to be the first, I guess. The only other thing I've ever done with my life is fix computers.


The real secret military base is McCarran International Airport in Las Vegas.


The history of the airport was always bound up in military involvement. Before and during WWII, the Army Corps of Engineers and the Air Force were building, storing, training, and doing all sorts of things there. Basically the government (and its corporate benefactors in the military-industrial complex, of course) acquired full ownership of the airport around the time Area 51/Groom Lake exploded in the public eye. It was a rush job, and a simple solution.


For all intents and purposes, McCarran is an airport. It moves civilians in and out and all over the world just like any other airport on earth, but its subterranean operations are really something else entirely.


---------------


First of all, you have to understand the structure of this military base.


Because it serves ostensibly as a business of public transportation, every single aspect of the base has dual functions. This is called “masking,” and it is deployed with remarkable effectiveness at McCarran. To name a few examples, the constant take-offs and landings of airplanes provides sound-camouflage for cutting-edge engine tests. The public completely ignores these sounds and dismiss them as the standard cacophony of airports. Some of the jets themselves are even equipped with technology under test, while others are used to transport hundreds of government employees dressed as vacationing civilians. At any given time in McCarran, up to six of the gates* (corrected by a reader; I initially said terminals) are filled with employees of the highest echelons of the US military and government. They sit around on their iPhones, dressed as college kids in their pajamas or weary businessmen. And they’re paid to look the part.


The entire base is heavily guarded by plainclothes soldiers. Military police, tactical specialists, counter-terrorism forces, and all kinds of soldiers scurry about the airport dressed like cops, airport security, and desk attendants. Their weapons are usually concealed sidearms; the real firepower is packed by the boys waiting around underground. Assault rifles and armor-piercing weaponry is stored around the airport’s public spaces in various places. It’s not hard to do, because nobody’s looking for it. And of course they hire a good number of civilians to work the TSA and other positions; this is called “mixing” and it’s necessary. What kind of airport would never post any job listings?


Have you ever watched the mechanics ducking in and out of the planes outside, or seen your luggage loaded onto the plane as you board? Well, all of that cargo transport activity acts as a cover for the mass movement of special forces, lab equipment, military hardware, exotic building materials, etc. It’s not hard to do. They drive one of those rigs by with all the luggage spilling out of it, and then you instinctively don’t question what’s on the **other** four rigs behind it. We even have mix-ups and spills occasionally, and nobody bats an eye.


You're always exposed to some level of radiation while flying (and McCarran, by the way, is why the standard of safe exposure is set where it's at), but excess radiation from weapons-testing is vented into the earth and out of the nearby desert. Having an airport to explain the radiation is an effective means of ridding the base of nosy folks with Geiger counters. But the true genius of this top-secret military installation is at the largest scale: the base was built under an airport because of the enormity of its power consumption. But it consumes a lot more power than a regular airport, so it was built in a city that consumes a tremendous amount of power – Las Vegas. So the base is hidden from view, even on the electric power grid. Area 51? Not so much. And that’s on purpose.


----------------


**Inside the base**


So if Area 51 is the distraction, what do we call the real one? It has many names, but it’s usually referred to as the “NEXUS.” That’s an acronym, but not many people know what it means. Not even me. Everything about the Nexus, from its operations to its structure, is compartmentalized. That means everything is need-to-know, and virtually nobody knows anything more than their own specific task. You could work in an office in the Nexus doing something like accounting, and never have one single clue what the woman next to you does. Or the guy down the hall. They say not even the President knows exactly what’s going on there, just a few generals and some dudes in the CIA.


The business culture here is insane. It’s like North Korea. Everyone is smiling, everyone is fine, and everyone is happy to say just a few phrases about what it is they do (when we’re allowed to socialize, which is not much). Every line is bugged, every room has a camera in it, and nobody knows who’s watching/listening or when. So that makes you think, nobody here is telling me the truth about anything. Not even the guy I share an office with. I wonder if any of us know why we are here. People you’ve worked with for a long time will suddenly get “reassigned” or have a “medical emergency” and you’ll never see them again. And nobody will remember that person, no matter how many people you ask.


I actually got hired to do some programming for the Navy when I was in my early 20’s out of college, and then got sent to Groom Lake to do server tests. They liked my IT/networking skills, so after a series of strange psychological tests and mountains of non-disclosure agreements and background searches, I got offered a job “at a facility near Las Vegas proper.” Here are a few stipulations of that job, by the way: It’s a $1,500,000 after-tax lump sum plus a $220,000/year stipend, housing/car/medical paid for – but psychological breakdowns, anxiety attacks, grave health conditions, and family issues void the contract. I also sign approximately 2 new non-disclosure agreements *per week*, most of which read “under penalty of death” somewhere. Employees aren’t allowed to leave the grounds for 5 years, and we all live underground. Term of service is 5 years, then 4 in debriefing, wherein we get to live in Vegas but report to another facility four days a week. We are discharged and observed for the rest of their lives. Our passports are permanently void; we cannot ever leave the continental US. I heard a statistic that 20% of former employees commit suicide. I don’t know if it’s true, but if it is, I bet it’s actually “suicide.”


The base is underground. It’s a network of large structures called hives, which form what is called the “Colony” or the “Nexus.” We make lots of Resident Evil jokes, by the way. Except unlike in that movie, the government doesn’t try to make its employees feel comfortable with fake forests and windows overlooking digital cityscapes. It is a dark, dreary, Soviet-style labyrinth of halls and bunkers, replete with all sorts of submarine-like features: water- and air-tight hatches, trap doors, reinforced blast doors, etc. The only exception are the office ‘buildings’ inside where chair-moisteners like me work. They look just like the office you work in. Except the men with guns standing guard 24-7 everywhere, looking over your shoulder. Oh, and the beautiful, almost surreal glow of the cutting-edge laboratories that pock the lower levels of each building. I’ve never been in them, but I’ve passed by a few times.


-----------------


There are **4 hives** to my knowledge (although I wouldn’t be surprised if there were more). I work in Hive 1. I run some of the servers with a few other guys on one particular floor (there are 16 floors in our hive), but we monitor and maintain all of the servers in Hive 1 so we move around a bit. I’ve gotten to skim some of the data that passes through, and from what I can tell, we’re the most boring hive. I’ve compiled the following list based on the things I’ve intercepted on our network and also from hearsay from other coworkers. The Nexus has multiple networks and they’re all decentralized, but there are some ways in which they communicate, and it is via those lines of communication that I am privy to *some* sensitive information. Here’s what I know:


**Hive 1:** finance, accounting, operations/organization divisions, troop training/housing, and some small-scale weapons testing. 


**Hive 2:** Chemical engineering, some nano-tech research, and “advanced psychological fitness,” whatever that means, for elite military forces. Probably black-ops stuff and how to survive thirty years in solitary confinement at a Siberian prison. I also have reason to believe this is the hive where the bigwigs meet and live.


**Hive 3:** Upper levels = bioweapon and disease research/testing. If the government has zombies, they’ve got to be here. I’ve wanted to make so fucking many zombie jokes over the years, but I never know which of my coworkers is a rat. Lower levels = Advanced space-travel and space-warfare technologies. Particle engines and gravitational beams and the like (guessing, no real evidence). Science-fiction stuff. I once saw an email with all sorts of coded language, marked “A-B,” which is widely believed to refer to “astrobiology.” That’s alien life. Maybe it’s just some single-celled organisms or fossilized plants from some meteor, or maybe it’s something much more advanced. Whatever it is, there must be some reason it’s not on the upper levels with all the biologists.


**Hive 4:** Total informational blackout. There are encryptions and firewalls and network security features protecting this hive that I’ve never seen before, not even on top-secret Navy projects I worked in the past. I’m being very nonspecific in the language I use to describe our server clusters and networks because I don’t want to tell them exactly who I am. They’ll eventually find out anyway. But there’s a widely-whispered rumor about Hive 4: allegedly, the most terrifying thing in the world is in that structure on floor 15.


There are a few unusual things about Hive 4. First of all, none of the top brass has clearance to get in there. They access it remotely via video feed in their conference rooms, and materials are often transported from 4 to 2 for physical review. I don’t know why our bigwigs won’t go into 4, but maybe it’s because it’s too dangerous? There was one guy who worked in 4 a few years ago when I first started, and he caused the first Nexus-wide lockdown I’ve ever seen. He was being escorted through 1 thumpers (what we call the squads of black-booted soldiers that grant access to different hives), and he started shrieking about IDA’s. I didn’t hear his screams, but I heard the gunshot while I was eating lunch. They put a bullet in the back of his head before he could finish his sentence. IDA’s, by the way, are inter-dimensional anomalies. I have no further information on what those are.


Another thing I’ve read minimally about are “the twins.” I don’t know who or what these are, but they’re the “above-top-secret” gem of Hive 4. It is treasonous to even correspond about them on our secure networks unless you are cleared to do so, and only four employees are. I’ve only seen a few things about them. One was a medical record. No vitals, unusual vocalizations that manifest hallucinations and psychosis in nearby employees, and skin that produces violent nausea when touched. The document was basically speculation that the skin functions much like the Australian stinging tree or a jellyfish.


I read documents about people who worked with them as well. In 4, a woman was remanded to the psychological ward after being in the same room with them, and a soldier who stood outside of the laboratory where they are kept basically killed himself. Specifically, he peeked inside during a routine access, then began bashing his own brains out with the butt of a pistol while singing an Irish folksong. The woman who was remanded to psych was even weirder: during breakfast with her colleagues, she grabbed a fork, stood up, walked out of the mess hall, stripped all of her clothes off, blinded herself in both eyes, then somehow managed to make her way all the way up to Floor 1 where the access corridor to Hive 3 is located. How she managed to operate the dozens of keycard readers, passcode boxes, and retinal scanners is still under review. Last email regarding her was sent in 2012, about how she sits in the dark of solitary on Floor 11’s psych ward with a permanent and blissful grin on her face.


One of my colleagues whom I trust told me that he saw the twins once through hacked access to a video feed. He said they are woman-like, about twice as tall as a full-grown man, with unidentifiable black growths dangling from their heads (like hair but thicker), and they basically float a few inches off the ground and drag their toes lightly as they move. They’re utterly pale. He never saw the faces, but he claims that they appear to distort reality (or at least the video feed) in such a way that space looks bent around them. Perhaps these are the IDA’s that earlier dude was screaming about.


------


This is all I have for now. But hopefully the world knows the truth someday about what goes on down here. We are all basically prisoners. We have very limited and supervised access to the internet, so if you don’t hear from me again, assume they figured me out.


-------


my name is [Felix](http://www.facebook.com/felixblackwellbooks)


edit: Wow, thanks for the gold, stranger!

I’ve been wanting to get something off of my chest for a very long time. The only person who knows the whole story is my wife, and she didn’t find out until we were already engaged. I didn’t have anyone to talk to about this, because anyone who knows will think ill of me. It’s been fifteen years since these events took place, so I finally feel safe enough to talk about them anonymously. 


I had a really hard time in high school. Traumatic events in my childhood combining with hormonal changes didn’t make me the most easy going guy. I’d consider myself handsome now, but at the time I was 5’4’, paler than fresh linen and bone thin. My hobbies were all indoors and solitary in nature and I found it hard to make friends. I was the “lone wolf” that everyone warns you about. 


The only friend I had in the world was my creative writing teacher, Mr.Artis. He was an older guy but I think he saw some of himself in me. He let me hide out in his office to avoid the jocks who taunted me daily. We would talk about writing and what we were reading, but most of the time we just talked about life. 


He had talked me down a few times. I was massively depressed, suicidal even. I never went through with my plans because he was always there for me. He talked me through things that I thought no one else would understand. He understood the anger like no one else did. I hated the boys who would bully me, I hated the girls who would giggle at me as I walked by, I hated the teachers who turned a blind eye, or the ones, like my gym teacher, who almost encouraged it. 


I think if it weren’t for Mr.Artis, I wouldn’t be here to tell my story. If I hadn’t had him to talk to, to confide in, the self loathing and anger and disgust would have bubbled over a lot sooner than it did. I’m thankful for that. 


My Junior year of high school, Mr.Artis got sick. They didn’t tell us what he had, but he missed almost a month of classes. Not having anyone to talk to, took a toll on me. I wasn’t allowed in his office alone, so I lost my hiding place. Being around more often meant that I was an easier target. The assholes who tormented me day in and day out, stepped up their game.


Almost every day was torment. The bullying escalated from just taunting me to physically hurting me. I was punched square in the nose one day, another time, they slammed my hands in my locker door and locked it shut. 


On top of everything going on at school, my mom and dad had been fighting for a while. The week of the event, my mom left. Neither of my parents understood me, but mom tried. Leaving me alone with my father is something that I still haven’t forgiven her for, fifteen years later. 


I know what I did was stupid. I know that it was the most drastic solution to something that would change over time. I didn’t see it that way though. My dad kept a gun in the attached garage. It was loaded and tucked away for emergency situations, like going to the shooting range with his buddies.


On Monday, I took the gun to my room. Dad didn’t notice that it was missing, because the drawer where it’s kept is mostly empty. I posed with it in the mirror, practicing my icy stare. I knew right away what I wanted to do, although the thought of just using it to blow my own brains out crossed my mind a few times. I didn’t want to go out like that though, I wanted to leave a lasting impression.


I counted the bullets in the gun seventeen times; there were only three. I didn’t know where to find more ammo, so I knew that I would have to make every shot count. One bullet was for John Carter the asshole who filled my locker with piss filled balloons. The second bullet was for Mike Wallace who catfished me for weeks pretending to be a girl in our class, and then stood me up when I asked “her” out. The final bullet was for myself, I didn’t want to go to jail, and I sure as hell didn’t want to keep living. 


On Friday morning I tucked the gun into the waistband of my jeans, wearing a big hoodie to cover the bulge. Everything felt different, entering the school, like I was dreaming. The school itself almost looked like a set, on a tv show, all conversation blurring like background murmurs. I suppose, looking back, that I had detached myself emotionally from the situation. 


I was calm and collected as I walked the halls, looking for my victims. I was early and classes hadn’t started yet, but I figured John Carter would be in the gym shooting hoops. I made my way down the corridor that lead to the athletics wing with determination. 


“Harold!” I heard a familiar voice and stopped. I turned to see Mr.Artis standing at his office door, “Come in, I need to speak with you.”


“Hey- ah, it’s good to see you,” I awkwardly smiled back at him, “Listen, I’m kind of busy right now, can this wait?” I was a man on a mission, I didn’t want to lose momentum. 


“No it can not, come in.” His tone was kind, but the sternness was undeniable. He held open the door to his office and entered behind me. 


I asked him why he had wanted to see me, but he simply stated that he wanted to talk. He asked me how things had been while he was away but I didn’t want to talk. The answers I gave him were short, cold, nothing like my usual self. I could tell that he knew that something was up, but didn’t want to push me. 


As I leaned back in the chair, wishing he would just leave me alone, my sweatshirt lifted slightly, the bulge becoming more evident. 


“Harold,” Mr.Artis whispered, “What on earth is that for.”


My cheeks turned bright red with embarrassment at being caught, and my heart started to pound in my ears. I knew it was over then. Mr.Artis was cool, but he was still a teacher. I assumed that the police and my parents would be called, that I would be kicked out of school and possibly sent to prison. 


I tried to speak, but I couldn’t. Words got caught in the back of my throat, my eyes welling up with tears and I just broke. The weight of the world which I had been carrying finally broke my back and all I could do was sob. Mr. Artis didn’t say a word, just waited for me to compose myself. When I finally did, I told him about everything that had been going on. I had never cried in front of him before, and the emotion that flowed out of me was surprisingly relieving. 


When the tears stopped and I had run out of things to say, Mr.Artis held his hand out for the gun. 


“Are you going to have me arrested?” I asked.


“No. What good would that do?” He asked. 


I couldn’t stop apologizing, but Mr.Artis’ eyes were kind as he told me that everything was going to be ok. He told me that he understood what I wanted to do, but that it was the wrong solution. Comforted by his presence and finally being able to get everything off my chest, I almost agreed with him.


I gave Mr.Artis the gun, which he said that he would dispose of. I knew my dad would be livid that it went missing, but that was a problem for another day. I thanked Mr.Artis for everything and went to class.


I was late to Spanish, but I told the teacher that I was in the nurse's office. Seniora Miller didn’t question it, my eyes were still red and my nose was runny. The rest of the class was uneventful, but just as the bell was supposed to ring, the principal came over the speaker with an announcement:


“May I please have everyone’s attention. Last night, at 8:06 p.m. our school lost a beloved member of our faculty. Mr. Gideon Artis found peace last night, after a lifetime struggling with a hereditary disorder. There will be a service on Tuesday, for anyone who would like to attend, and all counselors will be available all week for any student of faculty member who would like grievance assistance. We will now have five minutes of silence, for Mr.Artis.”


There were gasps around the classroom as the announcement played, but Seniora Miller quieted us down. We bowed our heads out of respect and sat in silence. 


I often ponder what happened that day. I wonder if Mr.Artis was a ghost, but seemed so real. My mental state that day was far from sane, and it’s possible that I hallucinated the whole thing; my subconscious finding a way to stop me from making a terrible mistake. 


The biggest mystery of all, is that of the gun. I know I took it from my dad’s drawer, I remember counting the bullets, over and over again. I remember the way it felt, heavy in my waistband, and I know that I handed  it over to Mr.Artis. The next weekend my dad went to the shooting range, and I was ready for hell when he couldn’t find it. Except that he did find it, it was right there in the drawer, still loaded with three bullets. 


I can’t explain the events that took place, but I guess a part of me wonders if Mr.Artis just wanted to look out for me one more [time.](http://www.facebook.com/d0nutblink/)


 I forgot how to whistle yesterday.

Eventually it came back to me, but I must’ve looked like a fool standing there in the aisle at Target, pursing my lips as I tried to find the right muscle movements. I don’t recall the last time I tried to whistle, so perhaps it was lack of practice that led to my inability to remember how.

Not like riding a bicycle, whistling. Then again, it’s probably been longer since I’ve been on a bike, so I don’t have much faith that skill will return as easily either. And after the hip replacement in ’17, the nasty fall I took last summer down Jared’s steps (I offered many times to help him fix those steps and he never took me up on it), not to mention the dizzy spells and fuzzy vision that just seem to come on with no warning as of late, I’ve no business getting on a bike.

Helen watched me, her brow creased with a look of concern. 

A thought crossed my mind. *Am I still standing there? Was that yesterday? Where am I?* 

But I’m home now, laptop on my bony old knees as I kick back in my Barcalounger with the cat purring on my legs. Helen is here too, knitting on the couch. I must’ve gotten a weird look on my face again because Helen sat her needles down and reached for my hand. I get confused sometimes, but Helen is my beacon, my rock that guides me back. I don’t know how I’d get on without her.

We’re in the living room of our apartment, doing our own things but still together. The television is on, but no one is watching. Just background noise. There was a time when no one wanted background noise; back then the quiet was peaceful. Now the quiet is too loud, filled with passing trucks, the shake of the train rumbling by, even the upstairs footsteps and random squabbles of neighbors. The background noise of life got to be too much to listen to, so we drowned it out with the ambiance of a television sitcom laugh track.

I remember why I tried to whistle yesterday. Helen bent down to get something off the bottom shelf at Target. I thought she’d appreciate that, make her smile, show her that this old goat wasn’t too far addled to whistle at the sexy backside of the woman he married almost sixty years ago. 

But instead of making her smile, I worried her. I must’ve been an awful sight like that, my lips rolling around trying to find the right position to make noise. Probably thought I was having a stroke. By the time I found Helen’s eyes and tried to explain I was trying to whistle, the moment had shifted.

As you get older, worry piles on like interest from a loanshark. It doesn’t take long before people are sitting you on a bench, asking if you know your name, what day it is, all that jazz. You have to work through the progression, nod along politely and not get angry about a small misunderstanding that morphed into something bigger than it is.

I wanted to jerk my arm away from the Target pharmacist leading me over to a nearby bench and yell out, “Let go of me, I just wanted to whistle at my wife’s sexy bottom, you twit!” But if I do that, it becomes a whole other thing. Then they’ll say you’re angry AND confused, which means they’ll call the cops or an ambulance. Which one they call depends on if you’re in a Target or a Walmart.

That path leads to even more questions, some needle pokes, a different person in a white coat asking the same questions, all which you have to nod and smile along. By now it’s been far too long to share that you only intended to make your wife smile, too many people involved at this point.

An ordeal like that eventually leads to another hushed conversation around the dinner table when the kids visit, deciding if maybe now’s the time to move me to a home. I’m getting too unruly, I need constant supervision, constant care. I get up to go into the kitchen and tell them off but Helen takes my hand, tells me it’ll be alright, nothing’s going to happen.

I remember now, the whistling incident wasn’t yesterday. It couldn’t have been. There’s ice on the windows today. We had gone to Target for sparklers and snap pops for the grandkids for when we went to Jared’s house for his 4th of July party. 

We used to have the party at our place, back when we had a house in the country. But the house was too much for us to manage so we sold it and moved to the apartment we’re in now. First-floor walkup, no stairs. Probably why we hear so many noises too, being ground level right next to the street. Plus the upstairs neighbor is a hefty man, a good guy, don’t get me wrong, but not light on his feet by any means. I tried to tell him he should try to work that weight off, it only gets more difficult as you get older. Daniel I think his name is. Does something with computers. I don’t think he took my suggestion well, even though I meant well by it.

I see Helen furrowing her brow at me again. Did I do it again? Or am I still doing it? *Is this Target? Where am I?*

I’m at home, in the Barcalounger. I go to stroke the cat who likes to warm my legs, then I remember we haven’t had a cat for quite some time now. But I could’ve sworn I felt his warmth on my legs, the purring vibrations…

I remember now. We never did get the sparklers, or the snap pops.

I open the door and I’m in a hallway. It’s bright, far too bright for this time of night. Now I’m confused again, like when I tried to whistle at Helen at Walmart yesterday. Or was it Target? Yes, it was Target, we were there to get sprinklers and snap pops for the grandkids for when we went to Jared’s house for his 4th of July party. Maybe he’ll have fixed the steps by then. That’s where I cracked my hip last year. It was last year, wasn’t it?

It wasn’t sprinklers, it was sparklers. We were getting sparklers and snap pops. For Jared’s 4th of July party, which was yesterday. But it wasn’t yesterday, because the window is frosted over with ice, and Helen is… where is Helen?

“Helen?” I call out. She doesn’t answer. I swear her hearing is getting as bad as mine. Maybe I should try whistling for her, she’d have a laugh about that. Did I ever tell her that’s what I was trying to do that day in Target when the ambulance came?

I step into the hallway, but it isn’t our hallway. It’s too bright. Something’s wrong.

“Mr. Sanders?” a voice called out behind me. I turn and see a woman at the nurse’s station. She’s a bigger gal. Maybe I should tell Daniel about her, they’d be good for one another. Or did I tell her about him already? 

Wait, I think I did, when she wished me a Merry Christmas last month. I don’t think she liked the suggestion, but I meant well.

It couldn’t have been last month. Yesterday I was at Target with Helen, buying sparklers and snap pops for the grandkids when we-

“Are you okay, Mr. Sanders?” She asked. I felt her hand on my arm. Reminded me of Helen’s hand. Warm, soft, gentle.

“I… I was looking for Helen,” I said after much deliberation.

Her brow furrowed, much like Helen’s did when she saw me trying to whistle. I must’ve been making the same face.

“She’ll be back soon,” Effie said as she got up from her seat and walked over to me. She walked with grace, even for her size. Not like Daniel. Maybe they wouldn’t be a good match.

“Good,” I said. “I get lost without her, she’s my rock.”

Effie led me back into my room and helped me back into my bed. This place wasn’t that bad. I remember not wanting to come here after I tripped and fell down Jared’s busted step, the same one I offered to help him fix all those times. Forty-five years pouring concrete for a construction company; we could’ve fixed that step in a jiffy. But he said no. 

I told them all I’d be fine at the house. No, not the house, the apartment. We had a first-floor walk-up, no steps.

*Steps.* 

I remember now, Helen fell down the steps too. Did I pull her down with me? There was so much blood. Was she okay? I got worried, I started shaking. *Where is Helen? Where is my wife?* 

I must've startled Effie, because she put her arm around my good hip and pulled me closer to her, steadying me and holding me up as I regained myself. I relaxed a bit. Of course, Helen was fine. Effie told me she'll be back soon. She wouldn't lie to me. Effie knows that Helen is my rock, I get lost without her. I told her so.

Wait, did I just tell her? *Was I talking just now?*

I must have been because Effie nodded and smiled at me as she pulled the warming blanket over my legs. It vibrated softly. It helped with the circulation after the accident.

“Can I get anything else for you?” Effie asked.

“When you see Helen, tell her I’m in here,” I said. “She gets as lost as me sometimes.”

I felt a hand on my shoulder, turning to see Helen in the chair beside my bed. I leaned into it, feeling her warmth against the cold.

“Oh! Here she is,” I said, smiling at Helen. “I thought I lost you for a moment!”

Helen smiled back at me, her eyes bright as ever. I don’t know what I would do without her. She’s my rock.

“I’ll leave you two be, Mr. Sanders,” Effie said. She turned the television on, some old sitcom on TVLand, background noise to cover the sounds of hospital instruments buzzing and beeping.

Before she closed the door she turned and smiled at us. It wasn’t her typical bright smile. It seemed confused; kinda happy, but also kinda sad.

[Maybe she was trying to remember how to whistle.](https://www.reddit.com/user/writechriswrite/comments/dj9mhx/end_of_the_line/)   


Thank you. Thank you so, so much. 

I live in a small, 1100 sq. foot, ranch style home. I've lived here for 7 years and never had a complaint, until just last year. 

My wife and I always joked that our home was haunted. Things were always moving around or disappearing completely from where they were left last. 

"You have a terrible memory," my wife would say, blaming me when something went missing.

"When you lose something it's just the ghost, but when I do I'm an idiot?"

More than a few dumb arguments started because of these paranormal events that took place.

My wife was convinced the ghost made its home in our basement, claiming that when she goes down to do laundry, it watches her.

"I can feel it!" She tried to convince me. I didn't have any clue how close to right she was.

It was a dark Sunday night. Not just some "*it's getting late*" darkness, but an eerie, star obscured, pitch black. 

Our weekend was nearing a close and our sights had shifted to work the following morning. We couldn’t have been less prepared for the impending chaos.

My wife was lying on the couch, reading a book while completely under a blanket, one of her many lovable quirks.

“I always did it as a kid and it reminds me of being young,” she told me with a smile, back when I first caught her doing it before we were married.

I had been working on my laptop, preparing for a deadline that I had been under prepared for that upcoming week.

From under the blanket just a few feet away on the couch I heard my wife’s *I need you to do something* voice.

“Sweetie..”

I rubbed my eyes and looked over at the shifting blanket as she peeked out from underneath.

“Yes?” I asked.

“Will you get the laundry from the dryer?”

I sighed. I knew she had scared herself with whatever she was reading, and now wouldn’t go down to the basement because of it.

“Fine,” I said, annoyed by the minor inconvenience but secretly glad to get away from my computer.

“I love you.”

I could hear the words as they exited her smiling lips.

“I love you too, goofball.” I covered her face again with the blanket.

I began my march to the basement, flicking on the light switch at the top of the stairs and slowly trudging down the creaking wooden steps.

The basement has always been a good 10 or more degrees cooler than the rest of our home, a fact that didn’t help to ease my wife's fear of being alone in it.

It is completely unfinished with cement floors and exposed wooden beams in the walls. I had intended on finishing it when I had the money, but that day had yet to come.

The dryer was off with a green light blinking, indicating a finished load. I pulled open the door and started heaving the clothes in large, two handed hugs, into a basket. 

Before I had finished I heard something pop, followed by the sound of wood hitting concrete. My heart jumped. As afraid as I was in the moment, I knew I couldn’t justify my wife's fear of the damned souls looming in our basement. I gathered myself and then walked around a corner wall to another empty, square room where the sound had originated from.

Along an internal section of wall, nearest the ceiling, was a now open and dark tunnel-like space that was comprised of earth and, in some spots, support structures of the house.

On the hard cement floor was a piece of wood that had covered the crawl space originally.

“How did this fall?” I asked myself.

I considered, in that moment, getting my hammer and nails to cover the space again. But as I stood in the small section of the basement that I had seldom visited, I felt something. I felt someone. The sensation of someone watching me was undeniable. I hadn’t felt it during my previous visitations to the basement, however, in my wife’s defense, she did the laundry far more often than I.

I stood there, motionless as I looked into the dark crawl space that I hadn’t known existed.

“Hello?” I called, hoping my wife wouldn't hear.

“Ryan!” She called from upstairs, her voice muffled by the floorboards that separated us. She never used my name like that unless it was serious.

I pried my eyes from the deep abyss and ran up the stairs as fast as my body would allow.

“What’s going on?” I said, panting and looking around the living room.

The blanket on the couch was vacant now.

“Sweetie, don't fuck with me - I coulda tripped up those damn stairs.”

There was nothing. I never knew her to be a prankster, nor was she sneaky in any sense of the word.

I made for our bedroom which is nearest the rear of the home. The lights were off and I hadn’t had my phone on me. I walked inside and could only make out our messy bed illuminated by the light that barely crept in from the living room.

“Christina?”

It was then that they made themselves known.

A man gripped my throat from behind me. I struggled as much as I could, the sheer surprise and terror coursing through my veins. 

He tightened his grip as I wrapped my fingers around my door frame. He had been directing our struggle into the hallway and I wasn’t going easily. When I thought I was finally shaking his grip loose, a second person approached us and rammed my head into the wall.

I could feel the blood leaking down my face slowly. My vision was faded now and motor skills had been dialed down to 2. 

They silently directed my body back to the basement stairs and tossed me down.

“Christina..” I could barely even formulate her name with my lips as I stained the concrete with my blood. I tried to lift myself but sent a shock of pain through my arm as I realized I had broken several fingers.

I lifted my head and watched as 3 figures made their way down the basement stairs behind me. The last one had her in his arms. She was bound like a trophy deer and unable to speak through the duct tape that was wrapped several times around her head.

“Fuck- fuck you,” I managed.

They dropped her carelessly to the floor with a thud. I shook my head and felt tears filling my eyes.

One of the men approached me and grabbed my leg before dragging me closer to her in the center of the basement.

I tried to look into her eyes. They had hit her too hard and now she was barely conscious.

“Its OK, you’re gonna be alright,” I mumbled quietly through my tears to her, unsure she could even hear me.

Behind us the 3 men had been gathered, silently whispering to one another as they pulled supplies out of a duffel bag.

My strength had left me completely. I was sure that I had broken a leg as well as my fingers, and my head injury made comprehension of anything a difficult task. I shifted my hand that still had function up to my face and wiped away the blood and tears from my eyes.

The men had dispersed and began making a shape on the ground around my wife and I with spray paint. They filled the room with odd rune like symbols before lighting candles.

“What is this?” I yelled through my pain. The men were unfazed and continued finishing up the process.

I heard a muffled grumble coming from my side. I writhed over and saw her blinking back to consciousness.

“Shhh, it’s OK,” I said, brokenhearted and panicking. I watched tears fall from her cheeks onto the cold ground.

A hard kick to my ribs pulled me out of the moment, and I could hear her whimpering through the tape.

The men were laughing. The sadistic fucks laughed as they took turns kicking me and my wife as we lay helpless on the ground. I could hear her gasping for air, and suddenly none of my pain mattered.

When they finally grew tired, I struggled to listen as they whispered something about sacrifice.

I needed it to end. Her suffering. I couldn't watch her in pain - choking and crying in a puddle of her own making. The flashbacks came as every story and movie predict. She was so beautiful the day we first met. Sarcastic but quick to apologize if she thought she offended you. She loved laughter and only lived to please the people around her. Selfless and gentle.

There was a change in the demeanor of our attackers. Where before everything was a game to them, now they seemed much more serious.

One of them approached Christina with a small knife in hand.

“Through pain, through suffering, we summon thee.” His voice spoke, breaking their long silence.

I couldn’t watch as he hunched down over her, silent tears falling from her eyes.

“Please..” I said, desperate for divine intervention.

And then, he came. From the corner basement room, a strange figure shambled into view. He appeared to be gaunt and naked, but my blurry vision failed to harvest any detailed imagery.

The men were transfixed with the violent ritual they were performing, and so the man went unnoticed.

I didn’t need clear vision to perceive how lightning quick his reflexes were. I resisted the urge to blink as he disarmed the man with the knife, and cut out his adam's apple.

The other men stood shocked and hesitant to react. 

When one of them finally dared to retaliate he found himself face first on the ground with stab wounds up and down his legs, rendered incapable of walking.

The third man had clearly gone into a state of shock. He attempted to flee toward the stairs, but the naked man caught him quickly and viciously carved at his face.

I couldn’t fathom what was going on. My wife was whimpering still, but had as full a view to what was happening as I did.

The naked man stood to his feet, covered in blood, and clenching the knife. He approached me slowly, turning me onto my back to face him.

I could see now that he hardly looked human at all. His arms and legs were covered in what must have been years worth of exposure to dirt, and his eyes glowed like a cat’s in the dark.

I attempted again to wipe my eyes when he held out his hand. He was grasping the blade of the knife now and toward me he pointed the hilt.

I accepted.

He lifted me to my feet and directed me toward the second man who he had rendered unable to walk.

“No! Please!” He said, visibly trembling.

Those words meant as much to me then as they did to him just a few minutes before.

I won’t say here what happened next. I can’t. But the next morning, after a lot of deliberation, the police and several ambulances escorted 3 corpses from the property.

My wife and I are blessed. We shouldn’t be alive, and yet here we are, a year later. She’s pregnant now and we can’t wait for our family to grow from 3 to 4.

I still don’t know much about the man under my house. He respects our space and we respect his. What we do know now is that he loves fried food. There’s not much you can do to say thank you to someone who saved the life of your entire family, but I think that a bucket of fried chicken every night is a good start.

From our family to yours. Stay [safe.](https://fb.me/ryrywrites)My son Thomas vanished on 30th November 2004. He was 12 and had been playing football in our front garden when he disappeared off the face of the Earth.
 
There was no media circus for Thomas, despite my best efforts to get his case some attention. He wasn’t at a “cute” age, and although people pretended to be sympathetic, I overheard more than one person in our small market town gossiping that he’d probably run away. We hadn’t always been the most stable family, if truth be known. In small towns like ours, everyone latches on to any negative gossip they can get their hands on. It’s like a local pastime.
 
True, my husband Dylan and I had been arguing a couple of hours before Thomas went missing. 
And it shames me to say I knew he could hear us shouting from outside – the banging of the football against the house’s walls got louder and angrier as our argument escalated. When the police officer we reported Thomas as missing to heard we’d been arguing a lot recently, I saw his eyes glaze over. A runaway, he was thinking. Just another runaway.
 
A couple of weeks of frantic searching from us later, the police were suddenly more interested. But by then, any evidence they might have gathered had long gone. No trace of Thomas was ever found.
 
I always left the front light on for Thomas, even years later. I never gave up searching, and all my 
energies went into it. My life was searching for Thomas. Work, friends, and hobbies fell by the 
wayside one by one. Dylan was initially sympathetic, and our arguments even got better for a while. 

By the end of the first year, I started to notice his heart wasn’t really in the search anymore. By the time the second anniversary rolled around, he started telling me to “get over it”, “move on”, and “stop acting crazy”. I threw him out. He didn’t argue. I’d never felt so alone.

I’d taken to sleeping with Old Ted, the toy Thomas had loved as a young child. He’d carried it everywhere for years and loved most of its fur off, before sheepishly giving it to me at the age of ten. “Thought you might want to keep it,” he’d said, avoiding my eyes. I’d tried not to laugh and put Old Ted at the bottom of a drawer for safekeeping. Who knew that token of his childhood would be so important in keeping me company on hundreds of lonely nights when I cried myself to sleep, missing my boy so much it physically hurt.
 
Last night was windy and at first I thought I was imagining the knocking. It got louder and more 
insistent. It was 10pm, almost time for me to go to bed, and I was irritated that someone would 
bother me at this time.
 
The door swung open, and there he was. My darling, wonderful Thomas. All grown up! It took a while for my eyes to relay the information to my disbelieving brain.
 
“Hi, Mum,” he said. His voice was deep and manly now, but as cheeky as ever.

I collapsed into his arms. My emotions were too overwhelming to say anything; I just heaved and 
cried into his shoulder. He half-hugged, half-carried me to the nearest chair and sat me down. I looked into his face, surveying the miracle. His features had filled out and he even stubble now, but there was no doubt about it – there was my boy.
 
“I’ve missed you! I missed you so, so much, darling!”
 
He grinned again, and nodded towards my hands.
 
“I can see that.”
 
I only realised then that I was still clinging to Old Ted.
 
“But sweetheart – where have you been? What happened? I thought you were dead – thought 
some scumbag abducted you.”
 
Thomas shook his head.
 
“There’ll be time to explain all that. Where’s Dad?”
 
I swallowed and wondered how to explain. I hadn’t spoken to Dylan for years.

“He’s not here.”
 
“Mum, can you get him here? I really want to see him.”

How could I say no? I dialled Dylan, hoping he still had the same mobile number. To my relief, it 
rang and he answered. I told him I needed him round straight away: it was an emergency. His 
grumbling made me angry – any hesitation was time away from my boy – but he relented eventually.

As we waited, I spoke to Thomas, a decade and a half of things I wanted to say to him spilling out. Whenever I tried to move the subject on to where he’d been, what had stopped him coming back or what made him leave, he clammed up and said all would be clear later. I was terrified of scaring him away again, so I backed off. We mostly talked about what his cousins and school friends had been up to. He found it funny I’d left the light on every night, but from the distinctive way he looked away when I mentioned it, I knew he was touched.
 
Dylan turned up after a few minutes, moaning about how I’d “called him at this ridiculous hour” and how I was “hysterical”. I said nothing; I couldn’t formulate the words. I simply grabbed him by the arm and dragged him into the lounge.

I’ve never seen someone stiffen so quickly and completely. Dylan looked like he’d been given an 
electric shock. Thomas didn’t rush to him. It was the strangest reunion I’d ever seen.
 
“Hello, Dad,” Thomas said. His voice was harder, somehow.
 
“Impossible,” Dylan muttered, finally.
 
“It’s him, Dylan!” I cried, feeling the tears of joy sting my eyes again. “It’s our Thomas!”

“Don’t be ridiculous, Martha,” Dylan barked at me. “It’s not him.”

I was taken aback. How could he look at this man, so obviously our boy, and not recognise him instantly?
 
“Look – I don’t know who you are,” Dylan growled at Thomas, stepping into his space, “I don’t know whether you’re after money, or attention, or what. But I want you to get out of this house this instant and never come back. You’re not our son.”
 
Thomas stood his ground. He was a good six inches taller than his father now, and much more sturdily built.
 
“Oh yeah? What makes you so certain, Dad?”
 
They looked into each other’s faces, sizing each other up.

“How about you tell Mum why you’re so sure I’m not your son?” Thomas challenged.
 
I was lost. All I knew was the creeping sense of dread growing in my gut.
 
“What does he mean, Dylan? Can one of you tell me what’s going on?”
 
Dylan breathed in through his nose and closed his eyes. He paused for what seemed like an age.
 
“I’m so sorry, Martha.”
 
This was the first time I’d ever heard Dylan apologise in over two decades of knowing him. I almost wanted to put my hand over his mouth, stopping him saying what I knew he would say next. I didn’t think I could bear to hear it.

“It was me. I did it. I killed Thomas, the day he went missing. I… strangled him. And hid his body in the lake.”
 
A deathly silence fell over the room. I felt my heartbeat pulsing in my ears. Every night I’d spent crying, sobbing away in my then-husband’s arms – it all raced past my eyes in that moment. I thought I might vomit.
 
“That’s it, Dad?” Thomas scoffed. “You’re not going to tell her why? Nah, didn’t think so. After all these years, you’re still a coward. That’s why you killed me, isn’t it? Didn’t want me blabbing to people about what you’d done to me over all those years? Fucking pervert. Your freedom, your reputation, your life – I was worth sacrificing, so you could keep going as if everything was normal.”

Dylan didn’t respond. He simply bowed his head.

I don’t remember grabbing the heavy lamp from the coffee table. I don’t remember slamming it, 
with all my strength, into the back of Dylan’s lowered head. I don’t remember the immediate 
aftermath. I just remember dropping the blood-spattered light to the floor and looking at 
Dylan’s oozing corpse, half his head missing. My whole body was shaking.
 
I put my hands over my face and sobbed. Thomas – or whoever the hell this twin of his was – held me.

“Who – are – you?” I gasped through desperate cries.

“I am Thomas, Mum. I promise.”
 
I believed him because I wanted to. That counter-balanced my knowledge it was impossible. Maybe Dylan had just thought he’d killed him, and Thomas had survived and run away to start a new life?
 
There were two spades in the garage. It took Thomas and I two hours to dig a shallow grave – he was tough and strong, and dug quickly. We didn’t speak as we carried out the task, or as we lowered Dylan’s body into it. I spat on his body before we filled it back in again. By the time we’d finished the job completely, it was almost dawn.
 
Thomas looked at me sadly.

“I want you to drive me somewhere,” he said quietly. I nodded.
 
He directed me to the lake at the edge of town. We sat in silence for a moment.

“This is where he took me,” Thomas said.
 
I lowered my head to the steering wheel and cried. I felt like I might run out of tears. Thomas’s hand was on my back for a moment – and then it was gone. I lifted my head. The passenger seat next to me was empty. I’d half-expected this, but it felt like my heart was being ripped out for a second time.
 
As I drove home alone, my grief was replaced by something better: a plan. I’m going to sell my 
house. I’ll use the money to pay for a team to dredge the lake. They’ll find his remains, of course, and I’ll give him a proper burial. 
 
Once that’s done, I’ll join my boy. There’s nothing left for me in this life and I only want to be with Thomas. I hope I’ve done him proud. As I sit here, cuddling Old Teddy and thinking joyously about how we’ll be reunited properly at the end of this month, I couldn’t be happier.“You’re such a fool Jason, grow up.” Pulling her hair into a tight bun, my girlfriend pushed my hands away from her breasts. Her tone was dry as usual, it was why I loved her.

“If I’m such a fool, what does that make you?” I winked playfully, nudging her shoulder.

“A fool fucker.” She responded without missing a beat, causing us to burst into uncontrollable laughter.

Jumping from the bed, I walked towards our living room scratching myself. Grabbing for the remote I turned on the television, flipping to the local news.

*Local actress Mariah Sanders has snagged the role of a lifetime, having been cast as the leading lady in Martin Scorsese’s newly announced film…”*

A grinning headshot of my girlfriend peered back at me from the TV. I stood there speechless, wondering what the hell was going on. My girlfriend was many things, but an actress was not one of them. We’d been dating on and off for almost four years, and I knew her anxiety would never allow her to perform in front of the camera. She was a delicate flower, and I did my best to protect her.

“Umm, Mariah — I need you to come here for a second.” We stood together in the living room, rewinding the news story over and over again. A quick Google search confirmed it wasn’t an isolated thing, it was everywhere. Her face was plastered on *TMZ,* *People* and every other gossip rag you can imagine.

“This has to be a mistake, I don’t know how, but this has to be a mistake.” Mariah was trembling, clearly overwhelmed with the moment. Her phone had been ringing off the hook, but she hadn’t even glanced at it. “This is so fucking weird, I don’t understand what’s happening. Soon everyone is going to find out I’m a fraud, oh god —” Choking back tears, she ran into the bedroom and shut the door behind her. I stood there, scrolling through endless articles and mentions on social media.

As the day wore on, things got even stranger. A Wikipedia page appeared, and soon it was filled with dozens of previous TV and movie appearances. Hundred of photos from commercials, adverts, and photoshoots began to pop up not soon after. It happened at a dizzying pace, her catalog growing with every minute that passed.

I could hear Mariah’s sobs from the bedroom, I could only imagine what she was going through. It was like her life was getting rewritten by an unseen auteur and she was powerless to stop it. Her history was being stripped of her and we had no way of explaining it.

“Jason, you need to see this.” Her voice quivered, barely loud enough for me to hear. Huddling around her phone screen, I watched as the news ticker flashed with a breaking headline.

*Deranged Chicago Man Kidnaps Actress Mariah Sanders*

Now there were two famous people in our household. Reading through a *CNN* article, I discovered that I was being accused of kidnapping my own girlfriend from her non-existent downtown apartment. A neighbor that was interviewed described a brazen and violent daylight kidnapping, and ended by saying Mariah was the sweetest person she knew — it was terrifying.

“Please tell me this is the world’s most elaborate prank, so I can hate you for a week then get over it.” Eyes filled with fear, Mariah looked at me with her beautiful pouty lips. I wanted nothing more than to lie to her, to tell her everything was going to be okay, but all I managed to do was give a sullen shake of my head.

“So this is all, real?” Before I could respond, the door flew from its hinges, wood splintering everywhere. A team of SWAT officers poured in, covered in kevlar. Grabbing Mariah by the shoulder, I pulled her into the bedroom and shut the door behind us.

Somberly, I looked squarely at my love and said, “You need to yell that I have a gun and I’m going to shoot you if they come in here. Until we can figure out what’s happening, I need to escape, and to do that, I need time.”

Begrudgingly, Mariah told the police what I asked her. As I expected, they couldn’t risk storming the room — so they’d stall until a negotiator arrived.

“Babe this is all so confusing. But hey, you’re famous now, so that’s something,” we both chuckled in-between cries, “I will find you and we will figure this out — I promise. Love you, forever and always.”

With that, I slipped through the window and disappeared into the night. Starting over was the hardest thing I ever had to do, but five years later, I’ve managed to eke out an existence.

During that time, the only thing that kept me going was Mariah — I watched her career explode from afar. She became a bigger and bigger starlet, climbing to the highest echelons of Hollywood. It was painful, but I was so proud of her accomplishments despite everything that had transpired.

That was until an interview she gave three days ago. Dressed in a graceful white dress, she sat on a couch and spewed lies to a late-night host.

*Your bravery and quick thinking in the face of such danger is truly incredible — you’re amazing Mariah, simply amazing. America wants to know, how did you do it?*

*Well Jimmy, I simply fed into his delusions. I did what I know best, I acted. He believed I was his girlfriend, and I knew if I played the part well enough, I could eventually help direct his actions. When he jumped out of that window I broke down, I couldn’t believe it was finally over.*

The words grated against my heart, leaving a permanent scar. Deep sadness was replaced by an immense rage. She’d never spoken about that night before, and I believed that was to protect me. But she was so clearly deluded by her newfound fame, she’d do anything to curry favor with the masses.

As I sit here, in a barely running 94’ Chevy, I watch her living her new life. New man, new dog, new house. Well, history has a habit of repeating itself — [no matter how hard you try and erase it.](https://www.facebook.com/SpookBrain/)Michael Zinsky wasn’t my usual type of client.

He wasn’t a spurned lover, looking for revenge. Or a murderer, looking to snuff out the witnesses to his crime. Or a husband, hungry for his wife’s insurance policy.

He was just an ordinary guy, looking out for his sister.

“I wouldn’t normally resort to… such drastic measures. But Harold has become so awful. Treats her like garbage. Doesn’t give a rat’s ass about her, or anything, except for that stupid band he sings in with his work buddies.” He blew his nose loudly. “You understand that – right, Switchblade?”
 
I winced. “Uh, that’s just my alias, Michael. You shouldn’t… like… actually call me that in casual conversation.”

“Then what should I call you?”

I blinked. Clearly, he had never done *anything* like this before. “Uh, do you have the cash?”

His eyes darted around the diner. Then, from his pocket, he pulled out a wad of hundred-dollar bills.

“You can’t just – they’ll see it!” I hastily threw him one of the napkins. “Wrap it up in that. And do it *discreetly.*”

He wasn’t discreet – but, thankfully, the diner was nearly empty at this hour. “It’s *twice* your usual rate,” he whispered, very loudly. “I wanted to give you a big tip, so you’ll do a good job.”

*A tip? You’re not ordering an ice cream cone, Michael. You’re ordering a hit.* But I took the cash, smiled, and buried it deep in my pocket.

“And I don’t want you to kill him.”

*What?*

“Michael, you know I’m a hitman, right?”

“Yes. But Nancy needs his income – she’s been a housewife for the past twenty years. No work experience, no education past high school. There’s no way she could support herself on her own.”

“*You* could support her, with the cash you just gave me.”

He shook his head. “I’ve tried. She won’t let me. Cares too much.”

I sighed. “Well, okay. Suppose I did take you up on this… job. What do you even want me to do to him, if not kill him?”

“I don’t know! Scare him. Threaten him. Just make him stop being so terrible to her.”

“But it’s risky business. I mean, he’ll know what I look like, and –”

“You’ll go on Sunday morning. He’ll be napping alone in the house – won’t even see you come in.” Michael looked down at the table, and then added: “It’s the only time he’s ever alone in the house. The only time… he *lets* her leave.”

My belligerence evaporated, and I felt a pang of sympathy. “It’s that bad?”

He nodded.

“Okay. I’m in.”

---

The house was a tiny little thing, shoved into the gap between a massive brownstone and a dilapidated food mart. It would be a challenge to do it without any witnesses.

Good. I like a challenge.

I snuck through the backyard, creatively using the various bushes and fencing to hide from onlookers. I then stepped into the open window, like Michael told me to.

The knife was heavy in my hands.

I turned left at the kitchen, and crept into the living room. In the center stood a microphone, a music stand, and some sheet music – presumably for Harold and his band. Nancy’s needlepoint supplies were pushed into the corner, taking up as little space as they possibly could.

I walked into the next room.

And there, in the armchair, sat Harold.

Fast asleep.

I retrieved the chloroform from my pocket. With the grace of a dancer, I lay it against his nose.

And then I set to work.

---

I visited Nancy myself a few weeks later.

I like to do that sometimes. Pose as a friendly neighbor, see how their lives have changed in the wake of my work. Yes, I know it increases my chances of getting caught. But, as I said, I like a challenge.

When she flung open the door, her eyes were bright, and she wore a smile.
	
“Hi! I’m Smith Baker,” I said. “Just moved here – a few houses away from you, behind the food mart.”

“Oh, how nice! Please come in.”

She led me into the living room, and I smiled. The music stand and other equipment were thrown haphazardly in the corner; Nancy’s needlepoint was sprawled across the sofa, taking up as much space as it possibly could.

“Smith, this is my husband, Harold.”

He just stared at me. Still, silent, pale.

And then he started shaking wildly, clawing at the raw, red mark across his throat.

“Oh – sorry – I should explain.” She sat down, with a small smile. “He’s not trying to be rude. It’s just that… well, he had an accident, a few weeks ago. And now he can’t speak, I'm afraid.”

She patted his arm, comfortingly, as he clung to her. “Or sing, unfortunately.”

Hmm.

An “accident.”

That, mysteriously, cut his vocal cords –

And left the rest of him untouched.

I could see Harold’s hands shaking, his lip trembling. I wonder if he was thinking about the first thing I said to him, when the chloroform wore off.

*If you don’t treat Nancy right – I’ll slit your throat again.*

*And next time, you'll lose more than just your voice.*

I smiled at Harold. “Would you like a cookie?” I asked, holding out the tray. “I baked them [myself.”](https://www.facebook.com/scaryblair)My ex always hated our dog, but he probably would’ve taken her too if she weren’t so ugly.

If Loulou were one of those cute mini golden doodles or corgis, or even one of those goofy-looking dogs that are charming in their ugliness — think Danny DeVito or Steve Buscemi, only in dog version — then I have no doubt he would’ve claimed ownership of her too, along with everything else in our apartment.

But Loulou is just a plain old ugly dog, and for that and so much else about her, I’m forever grateful.

I don’t want to talk about my ex too much here, because this isn’t about him, but I do need to explain why I was traveling across the country in the middle of the night with my few worldly possessions loaded up in the back of a bumpy uHaul van.

My ex and I had been together six years, never married. He said marriage was outdated. I said fine. Was I upset by that? Yes and no. Well, yes. But I kept quiet. I loved him.

Five months ago he tells me he wants to split up. He said it just like that. “I want to split up.” No shaking of the hands, no tears in his eyes. Not even a change in the tone of his voice.

I was in the kitchen when it happened, eating honey bunches of oats for breakfast. He was standing in the hall. “I want to split up,” he said, and then he grabbed his bag and left for work, leaving me to sob as my cereal got soggy in the bowl. Loulou heard me crying and nuzzled her snout in my lap. She whimpered along with me as the hours went by. I skipped work that day, sat on the couch and watched the sunlight pass over the walls of the apartment I’d always thought of as our home together.

The thing is, my ex made way more money than me. He was happy to cover the bulk of the rent, he’d said. Happy to buy the furniture. Happy to lease the new car for us. Happy to pay for this and that, loading up our apartment with nice things.

When the time came for me to move all the things that were actually *mine* out of the place, I realized I had even less than I did six years ago.

It all barely filled the uHaul van. I didn’t have a couch or chairs: those were his on paper. I didn’t have any dishes or silverware: we’d thrown out my old ones when he’d bought a fancy new set a couple years ago. I didn’t even have a mattress: he’d gotten us an expensive memory foam king size. I remember I’d always wanted to let Loulou hop up on that bed to snuggle while we watched movies in our room. My ex wouldn’t hear of it. “Stop treating the dog like it’s a person,” he’d said. “She’s lucky she gets to even live inside the apartment with us.”

I was the one who got Loulou from the pound, back when she was a puppy. She’s a street dog, or she was, until the people from animal control swept her up one day as she’d been rummaging through an overturned trash can. You can tell she’s got a good amount of pit bull in her, but beyond that she’s an all American mutt with a big boulder of a head, a weirdly thin body and stumpy legs. She waddles more than walks, and she snores like crazy, but she’s a total sweetheart. When she sees kids, she lies on her belly and waits until they get close before she gives them kisses. We didn’t even train her to do that.

One afternoon about a year or so ago, Loulou came up behind my ex and licked his ankles, and he turned and gave her a small kick right in the head. It wasn’t enough to hurt Loulou, but that was when I should’ve known.

Looking back, it’s amazing how much you can convince yourself someone is who they’re not.

—

So the uHaul was packed, I’d quit my hourly job, and I was now on the road toward my sister’s place in Spartanburg, South Carolina, where I’d been promised a place to stay for the time being.

It was a 10-plus-hour drive, just Loulou and me in the front of the van as we rumbled through the endless pastoral of farmland and cow towns. I’d purposefully decided to take the smaller highway to avoid traffic, since I was still uncomfortable driving the uHaul, and the scenery made me glad I did. Tall fast food signs rose up into the sky like totem polls against clouds so big and white they almost made you want to cry. But I’d promised myself I was done crying. Or at least until I’d gotten off the road.

I’d had to pack the uHaul by myself, so it had already been early afternoon by the time I set off. After about four hours on the road, the sky began to dim over the highway. Just as the sun sunk beneath the ridges of the mountains in the distance, I heard a loud *clang* somewhere below my feet.

All at once, the uHaul van started shaking.

It felt like the wheel was fighting against me. I kept having to grip it and yank it back straight.

I had trouble seeing out the back window because my stuff was piled up, but I managed to get over to an exit that was just ahead.

As I slowed the van down now that I was off the highway, I saw a sign sticking out from the roadway:

**Richard and Sons Auto Repair**

**1/4 mile ahead**

I know you’ve probably heard a story like this before. A story where a car breaks down in the middle of nowhere on a backroads highway, a young woman by herself. Maybe she meets a creepy guy in overalls who says something like, “Well… you must be lost, little missy…” as he eyes her like she’s a good meal he’s about to devour.

But it really wasn’t like that.

“Evening, ma’am,” said the perfectly normal looking guy inside the auto repair shop. “How can I help you? Oh, and who’s this cutie?” he added, taking notice of Loulou at my side.

The shop’s owner was a man named Richard Meadows and he was a pleasant, polite, and well-dressed older gentleman, his gray hair neatly combed and his buttoned shirt starched bright white. He ran the place with his two sons, both of whom were waiting in the garage.

“My sons Abel and Dean will run diagnostics, then you and I can head into the office to call the uHaul folks,” Richard said as we walked up to them. “Don’t want this to be on your tab, after all. Abel, want to take the keys?”

I handed the keys to the son named Abel, who was a little chubby and pale, his shaved head dotted with moles. He seemed shy and only nodded when he took the keys from me.

I only mention Abel’s appearance because the other son beside him, Dean, was almost shockingly handsome. He had a thick head of sandy blonde hair, a chiseled jawline, and broad shoulders under his denim work shirt. He was that level of teen-movie-hearthrob handsome that made my face suddenly hot.

Walking with me out to the uHaul in the lot, Dean took out a clipboard, licking the tip of his pen as he angled it downward. “So the truck just started rattling on you?” he asked.

I stuttered through what had happened, feeling like a nervous high school girl again, but he just smiled and nodded the whole time, his voice calm like a doctor at a bedside. “Hmm… well, I’m sure we’ll figure it out. And like my dad said, don’t worry. We’ll make sure the uHaul folks pay up, not you.”

I thanked him, trying to ignore the fact that I was blushing for no reason.

“Good thing you’ve got a body guard here with you,” Dean added, smiling down at Loulou. “What’s his name?”

“Her,” I said. “And her name is Loulou.”

“Well, hi there Loulou.” When he reached down to pet her, Loulou stepped back and showed her teeth, growling under her breath.

“Loulou!” I said. “Bad girl!”

Dean just laughed. “Nah, she’s cool — just protecting her mom, right Loulou? Honestly I wouldn’t trust some random auto repair dude either.”

“No, it’s not you. It’s just my boyfriend — or, I guess my ex boyfriend now — he just… yeah, I don’t know. I guess he made her a little skittish around guys like you.”

Dean raised his eyebrows a little, but then he pursed his lips and nodded as if he understood, and I appreciated that he didn’t ask anything further about it.

He told me to go wait on him, that he’d handle everything from here.

When I got back to the office, Dean’s father Richard had already sorted out the bill with the uHaul folks.

“Free and clear,” he said.

There was nothing else to do but wait for the van to be ready. A TV hanging in the corner was playing a muted episode of Judge Judy. Richard took a seat across from me in the waiting area and petted Loulou while telling me a little about himself and his family. His wife had died a year and a half ago, he said. “Passed suddenly in her sleep, which is a mercy, I suppose.” It’d been a tough string of months, but he and his sons were close. They were getting him through it.

Loulou seemed to sense his sadness, because she showed more attachment to him than most other male strangers.

“I hope you don’t mind me speaking out of turn,” Richard said as he stroked Loulou’s head, “but I’m relieved you have this dog here with you.”

“Why’s that?”

“Well… not to scare you, but there’ve been some… incidents.”

He told me he didn’t want me to cause any undue worry, but there had been seven women found dead in the woods beyond the corn fields down the highway over the past year and a half.

“All the victims were like you: young women, traveling alone,” Richard said. “So it’s good you got this girl here,” and he put his face close to Loulou, who licked him on the cheek. “Ah, good girl. Such a sweetie.”

“I mean, I appreciate you giving me a heads up, at least,” I said.

“Sure, and like I said, didn’t mean to scare you. Probably nothing.”

“No, it’s nice of you. You guys have all been really nice,” I added. “Dean was… he was very helpful.”

“That’s just the wonderful service and dedication you would expect from the world-famous team at Richard and Sons Auto Repair.” Richard laughed. “But I do thank you, sincerely.”

I almost asked if Dean had a girlfriend, as if that weren’t a totally crazy and pathetic question to pose to a total stranger, but before I had the chance to embarrass myself, the other son, Abel, shuffled into the office and murmured something to his father.

Richard nodded, saying to me, “Well, looks like you’re all set.”

“No paperwork or anything?”

“Nope, all taken care of. Get you a receipt for insurance purposes, but otherwise you’re good to go. Here, let me walk you and Loulou out.”

On our way out of the office, I debated the merits of giving Dean my number, trying to balance the pros and cons. Was it better to risk wild embarrassment if I get rejected, versus the regret I might feel if I did nothing? I was so new to the single life again that I didn’t know how any of this worked anymore.

It turns out the decision was made for me, because Dean was gone when we got to the van.

“Dean head off already?” Richard asked.

Abel nodded. “Had a date,” he said in that whisper-quiet voice of his.

“Oh, another date? Why am I not surprised.”

Of course, I thought. And really, what did I expect? Just because Dean was working at some nowheresville auto repair shop didn’t change the fact that he was still wildly handsome and easy to talk to. If anything, girls probably swooned over the fact that he could take a car apart by hand, peeling off his shirt afterward, his muscles gleaming with sweat, etc, etc. I felt like an idiot.

“Well, sure was great to meet you,” Richard said, “and so nice to meet you too, miss Loulou.”

His son Abel reached into his pocket and dangled the keys out in front of me, while Richard got down and gave Loulou one last head scratch.

I took the keys from Abel and smiled. “Thank you,” I said.

He smiled back, but he didn’t break eye contact, and for a split second a shudder passed through my body, something I can’t explain.

“Drive safe,” he breathed.

—

The backroad highway that night was dark-dark, what my sister would call “country dark,” but what I would call “horror movie dark.”

It seemed the smaller highways like this were only busy during the day, because I only saw a car pass by every few minutes or so. Fields of corn along the roadside swayed under a cloud-choked moon. The night air was punctuated by far away train whistles, which sounded to me more like muffled screams.

I don’t know if I was just freaked out by the warning Richard had given me, or if there really was something to be said about this stretch of highway, but I kept getting a feeling as if eyes were staring out at me from the fields. I sensed I was driving into the mouth of a beast, already on my way to being digested by the darkness.

Up ahead, the corn fields ended and were overtaken by forest, a dense swath of evergreen trees, and the moment we drove past the fields, Loulou started barking.

I swear I almost crashed the car.

“*Oh my god* — Loulou! Loulou calm down!”

She was going crazy, turning her head side to side as she barked back at whatever we’d just passed on the side of the road.

“Loulou, relax, girl!”

But I couldn’t even say that without my own voice choking up. *Seven women found dead in the woods beyond the corn fields,* Richard had said. My hands felt slippery on the wheel. I’d never been comfortable driving a uHaul van before and it didn’t help that the darkness seemed to devour the headlamps, so that I could barely see a few feet in front of me down the highway.

I tried turning on the radio, got static, and turned the dial, but then thought the better of it and shut it off again. Better to be in silence, just in case —

In case what?

My mind was going in so many directions. And even saying there was silence would be wrong, because every few minutes Loulou started up again, pawing at the backseat and the windows, barking like crazy and growling. It was like she was fighting a ghost and wanted to break out of the car. I glanced out the windows but could only see darkness on either side of the road — that, along with the shadowed outlines of trees, stumps, power lines, all of which looked like monsters to me.

Eventually we entered South Carolina. We passed out of the rural area, and it was only when the bright flood lamps of passing car dealerships and 24-hour fast food places illuminated the inside of the cabin that Loulou fell silent.

But even then, for the last three hours of the car ride, she never fully relaxed. Especially when we passed through the occasional pockets of empty rural areas, she seemed stressed. Occasionally she’d perk up, as if she’d seen someone outside our window, floating along with us. Her body language would stiffen. By now I just let it happen. I told myself she was just tense from traveling.

She seemed desperate by the end of the trip. I could tell she was exhausted. She hadn’t slept all night. I was exhausted too. Loulou’s howls and barks had kept me alert, but it hadn’t exactly done well for keeping my eyes on the road. I felt the kind of twitchy panic that usually came from drinking too much coffee, my eyes darting from side to side, feeling like I was about to crash into something any minute.

My sister had texted me before she went to bed and told me the key was under the mat. It was around 3 a.m. when I pulled up to the curb outside her house and put the van in park.

When I did, Loulou shot up.

“Okay… yes, we’re here, girl. You can relax now.”

In the glow of the van’s cab, as I reached over to grab my night bag, I could hear Loulou breathing deeply. She was taking fast and muffled breaths, panting. It sounded like she was trying to catch her breath after running.

“Hey, chill out,” I said as I grabbed my bag and sat up again. “What’re you panting for, girl? We’re already — ”

I froze.

Loulou was totally still beside me. She was facing the back of the van. Her mouth was closed. Her tongue wasn’t hanging out, her chest wasn’t rising and falling. She was calm and focused, breathing slowly and silently.

It wasn’t her.

The breathing wasn’t her.

It was coming from somewhere in the back of the van.

Just then, Loulou showed her teeth and growled.

“Oh... okay, girl…” I said, trying to keep my voice normal. I was shaking. I could barely feel my body. I was floating outside of it. “Let’s… let’s head on inside now… come on…”

I fumbled with the door handle. I almost fell when I stepped out. I tried taking out my phone and dialing 911 but my hand was shaking so bad I couldn’t even unlock my home screen.

Loulou hopped out and circled me. She was on high alert. Her head was low and she moved like a predator, keeping close to my legs.

I walked backwards with her up the driveway, but she stayed between me and the van, pacing quickly from side to side. I managed to get my phone unlocked. I was about to hit the emergency call button when I heard something move inside the van, a metallic *click*.

The back door, I realized.

I’d locked it, but it could still open from the inside.

The street was dark, only one lamppost glowing off at the intersection down the road. Everyone in their homes were asleep. I was totally alone. In the darkness, I heard something scrape at the back door from inside the van. Then a soft *clunk* as the door opened. It opened slowly at first, as if a creature inside were checking to see if it were safe.

I hit the emergency call button just as the door swung all the way open.

*“911 what’s your emergency… 911 what’s you’re emergency…”*

But I couldn’t speak. I was frozen.

The door bounced back as it fully opened, and then out fell a naked body, tangled limbs hitting the pavement, a mess of blonde hair shimmering in the dark.

When the person rose up again, I almost passed out.

It was Dean.

“Hello? Hello?” I said into the phone. “I need… I need help. Someone… he was in my van. Please send police to — ”

Loulou barked and jumped forward

“*Jeeeeee-sus fucking Christ*,” Dean said, shaking out his limbs, “can someone please tell this fucking dog to shut up!”

Dean was covered in sweat, wearing only his boxer shorts. He looked sickly and diseased. “All fucking night it’s just *bark bark bark*, *yap yap yap*!” He exhaled and stretched out his arms, and I saw he was holding a knife in his hand. With his free hand, he swiped back the sweaty hair off his forehead. “Cooped up in a hot ass truck for hours under all your useless shit — had to take off my clothes it was so damn hot — and I gotta hear that fucking dog barking nonstop?”

“Please send help!” I said into the phone, repeating my sister’s address over and over. “Please he’s got a knife!”

“*Oh, he’s got a knife, does he? Oh boo hoo*,” and Dean walked forward, holding the knife out toward Loulou, tossing it casually from hand to hand. “Every time I try to make a move, this bitch goes nuts on me. *Yap yap yap yap!*”

“Dean… please, just — I don’t know what you want, but please — ”

“You should be thanking me, you know that?” He waved the knife from side to side, as if reprimanding me. “I’m way out of your league, so the fact that I chose you tonight, it’s really an act of charity.”

“Okay,” I said. I would’ve said anything to get him to go away. “Okay, I’m sorry.”

“You want the truth? It wasn’t even me who wanted you. I thought you were a six, maybe a seven at best. But my brother? He thought you looked tasty enough. So I say, okay, fine. Sure, I'll get you and bring you back to him. I’m a good brother, aren’t I? That’s what good brothers do. They do favors. I wanted his first time to be special.”

“No, I know, I know… you’re a good brother — ” I still held the phone up to my ear, hoping the operator could hear me.

“This all could’ve been so easy. So fucking easy. Would’ve been over by now. But no — because miss *yap yap yap* over here — ” He gripped the knife tight, squatting as he stepped forward, his eyes on Loulou. “So keep on crying into the phone, but make sure you tell them your dog is dead too, because the bitch deserved it — ”

“No!”

Dean lunged forward, slashing the knife at her. Loulou yelped and flipped to the side as the blade swept across her back, her body scrambling over the pavement, but then it was Dean who screamed, falling back as his knife landed on the ground.

“Fuck! Jesus Christ! My hand!”

Even in the darkness I could see the blood pour from Loulou’s back where the blade had sliced her open, but I could also see her spit out a mangled hand onto the pavement, as if it were nothing but a squeaky toy.

“I’m gonna kill this dog!” Dean screamed. Blood poured from the stump at his wrist. With his other hand, he reached down to grab the knife, then turned to face her.

But Loulou was already upon him, lunging up in the air, her own blood streaking off the gash in her back as she flew.

This time, she aimed for his face.

—

A severed hand, it turns out, is a more than adequate DNA sample.

It only took a few days before the police were able to match Dean’s DNA with the DNA found on the bodies of the seven women who were found in the woods down the highway from the auto repair shop.

Dean’s mugshot showed a guy with a mutilated, torn up face, bruised and bloody and held together with stitches. When the police had arrived that night outside my sister’s house, they had found him half dead on the sidewalk, blood leaking from his neck. As for Loulou and me, I had already carried her inside the house. The police found us on the tile floor of the kitchen, Loulou bleeding out in my lap, unmoving, while I whispered to her, “I love you, girl… I love you so much…”

It wasn’t long before Dean’s brother Abel was arrested as an accessory to the crimes.

During a news conference a few days later, the police chief said that for the past year and a half, the two brothers had been using road traps on the backroad highway to cause damage to passing vehicles, forcing them to stop. In most cases, they fixed the cars and that was that — nothing more than a scam to gain business for their father’s shop. But when the driver was a pretty young women, the two used the shop’s tow truck to lure the women away to a remote location past the corn fields. DNA samples from at least four of the women were found inside the truck.

“With the last would-be victim, the brothers appeared to have gotten reckless and instead lured her right to the repair shop,” said the police chief during the press conference. “Had the young women not been accompanied by her dog, a pit bull mix by the name of Loulou, there’s no telling what — ”

I closed my laptop. I didn’t want to hear the rest.

Later, I saw in an online article a photo of their father Richard shielding his face as reporters surrounded him. There was no evidence he’d been involved in any way. He’d seemed shocked when the police came to the auto shop. I felt bad for him. He seemed like a good man. I couldn’t even imagine what he was thinking.

The police chief had said the brothers had been committing the assaults and murders for the last year and a half, which means they would’ve started right after their mother died. The timing made me feel sick. Richard had said his wife’s death was from natural causes, that she’d died peacefully in her sleep. I like to believe that’s the case. I like to believe the brothers had waited for their mother to die, and that’s the only reason they started their murderous spree right after her funeral. Despite all they did, I really hope — if only for Richard’s sake — that they hadn’t gotten impatient and done something to their own mother.

It was surreal trying to get settled in a new place after all this. I felt like my old life had been years and years ago.

My ex did text me once, though, just after he heard the news. “Hope you’re okay,” the text said.

Normally I would’ve sat for hours, deliberating over how to respond.

But now I texted back right away.

“I am,” I said.

I watched three dots pop up in the bubble as he was typing something, then they disappeared again.

—

That night, the news ran a segment about Loulou. There was a whole ceremony in her honor.

Normally I wouldn’t have watched the rest of the coverage of the case. It was already traumatic enough. I was told I would have to testify, that it would be a long process, and I wanted to avoid it as much as I could.

But I made sure to watch the news segment on Loulou.

*“A moment of celebration today as Loulou the scrappy pit bull mix gets a hero’s welcome* *outside the Eastside Animal Hospital,”* said the news anchor.

So many people had showed up to the animal hospital earlier that afternoon to celebrate Loulou’s discharge. The footage held on Loulou’s face as she eyed the crowd of police officers, the news crews, the reporters and hospital staff. I was right beside her in the footage, looking just as awkward.

“See that, girl?” I said as I watched the coverage with her later that night. Loulou was curled on my lap on the couch as I stroked the long scar on her back, the jagged ridges where the animal doctors had sewn her up again. “That’s you and me on the news — see, girl?”

Loulou had been sleeping, and now she lifted up her head, drowsy from the commotion of the day. She didn’t seem too interested about her 15 minutes of fame. She just sighed and plopped her head right back down again on my stomach, and went back to sleep.

When the news was over, I nudged Loulou awake, and after she went outside to pee, the two of us shuffled down the hall. I led Loulou into the guest bedroom. As I pulled down the covers on the bed, Loulou went to lie down on the hardwood floor in the corner of the room, by herself.

“No, no — come here, girl.”

She glanced up at me, one paw on top of the other.

I patted the bed. “You sleep up here from now on. Come on up.”

She made a soft noise, her tail wagging. Then she hopped up awkwardly on the bed, still a little sore from her wounds.

As I shut off the lamp, Loulou nuzzled up against my legs, resting her head on my thigh.

“Comfy?” I asked.

She sighed a grumbly, growling purr in response.

“Get used to it, pretty girl,” I said. “You've more than earned it.”Doctors see shit that would make your skin crawl. Sometimes it involves literal shit. Occasionally some skin nearly *does* crawl, though “melt” is a better term for what Necrotizing Fasciitis does to a person.

[But no textbook could have prepared me for the moment that I stood shoulder to shoulder with the chief of medicine, forcing the decaying body of a charred kid into the incinerator as his one functioning eye glared back at us in hateful judgment](https://redd.it/djmjk2). He was wedged in the narrow door at the shoulders, with only his head sticking out into the room with us. His jaw had long since fallen off, and the rotting tongue danced above his inverted face like a charmed snake.

“Dr. Scritt,” I whispered in a quavering voice, “what are we supposed to do? We’re bound by *primum non nocere*, so don’t we have to-”

“You’re bound to help the *living,* Dr. Afelis, which includes me and *possibly* yourself if you help me out *right fucking now.”* She grunted this while moving her hands to the top of the boy’s head. As she pushed, the entirety of his scalp slid off like a flaky scab ripped from a wounded leg. A fresh, clean, white skull shined from underneath as the boy’s torn skin dropped to the floor like so much ground beef. 

“They’re easier to grab without the skin. Push down on its head.” Then she batted his tongue away like an annoying fly and pressed deeply into his shoulders. Her fingers disappeared into his flesh like a boot into thick mud. 

Dazed, I pushed against the boy’s exposed bone. I was shocked to realize how cold it was, and how it twitched as he fruitlessly tried to bite me with a jaw that didn’t exist.

“I hate to give away the ending of this story, but you’re going to be *real* surprised what this thing can do in about ten seconds if you continue fondling it with the restrained intensity reserved for jerking off an octogenarian. *Push!”* she yelled as she leaned in.

The body slid into the incinerator with the gentle resistance of a bowel movement.

Once inside, the boy screamed.

Dr. Scritt shoved me violently aside, slammed a padlock into place, then spun the dial.

I looked back at her in shock. She was a bitch, for certain, but she’d never touched me before. 

Still, I was a first-year intern. The chief of medicine could pretty much force me to eat pus and call it ice cream.

“Dr. Scritt,” I asked shakily, “why did you put a *padlock* on the inciner-”

The shrieking from beyond the lock was loud enough to shake the floor. 

“Turn it on!” she commanded me.

“Where are the-”

She pushed me away once more and frantically clutched at a series of buttons that had been behind me.

“Dr. Scritt!” I yelled in response to the shove, “*why* are you-”

*Slam. Slam. SLAM!* 

The padlock bounced as the incinerator door was hit from the inside.

A chill settled over my body even as the temperature grew noticeably warmer. 

“This is a custom incinerator,” Dr. Scritt explained as she grabbed my arm and pulled me away from the door. “It will heat up *very* quickly, so stand-”

SLAM SLAM SLAM SLAM

The pounding from inside the incinerator grew more forceful. I actually wondered if the padlock would hold. It flailed wildly back and forth with the rhythmic hitting.

CRUNCH.

“It’s at 200 degrees!” Dr. Scritt called as she looked toward the gauge. “We need it to get to two thousand!”

My head swam. “Most medical incinerators can’t even *get* that hot!”

*CRUNCH*

Dr. Scritt turned to face me. “You’re right, most can’t.” She looked back. “500 degrees.”

I gaped at her. “Is it really heating that quickly?”

She betrayed no emotion in her response. “Can’t you feel the change in the room?”

For the first time, I realized that I was sweating profusely. “How am I this hot? We’re standing ten feet away-”

“So we’d better back up,” she continued. 1,100 degrees.”

SLAM

With a light tinkling, a tiny screw fell to the floor and rolled away.

“Dr. Scritt,” I breathed quietly.

“I know you’re sorry that it took so long to get the boy here.” She paused. “We’re *all* sorry.”

CRACK

“Dr. Scritt, the door to the incinerator-”

“1,500 degrees.”

A wave of heat squeezed fresh sweat from every pore.

“I don’t know if it will hold-”

*CRACK*

“Seventeen hundred degrees!”

“The padlock is bending, the metal will melt!”

“That’s why we keep hundreds of padlocks in reserve.”

*SLAM CRUNCH CRACK*

We both stopped breathing.

A hand-shaped indentation had slammed *into the metal,* warping it from the inside and leaving a seemingly impossible mark.

We waited.

“One thousand, nine hundred and thirteen degrees.”

We waited longer. 

Nothing happened.

Sweat stung my eyes so badly that I couldn’t see. When I wiped it away, I found that my arm was even saltier, rendering the pain worse. 

“I think,” Dr. Scritt uttered in a voice just above ‘inaudible,’ “that I stopped it.” 

I stared through the shimmering heat waves radiating from the incinerator. Lumps of shorn flesh lay on the ground nearby. The smell of roasting carrion wafted through the air and gently tickled my gag reflex.

I released the breath I had been unconsciously holding. “So – we’re safe?”

The door to the morgue slammed open, and another intern sprinted inside. I recognized him as J. D., a nervous guy who looked like he was in perpetual shock. “Dr. Scritt!” he called across the room. “It’s Dr. Brutsen – Rule 10!”

Despite the heat, a chill settled over the room that could have frozen my ass cheeks together.

“Prepare an O. R.! Now!” she shock back authoritatively.

He quickly disappeared. 

She turned to sprint out of the room.

“Dr. Scritt!” I called back. 

She wheeled around and faced me.

“What should I do about the incinerator?”

She stared back like I had a dick instead of a nose. “You should learn to know when things are dead, Dr. Afelis. Enough haunts our lives without us carrying those who have left us behind.” Then she turned around to rush out of the room. “If you want to provide a modicum of usefulness, you can take a gurney out to Court Street. The roof is a long way from here.”

With that, she disappeared out the door. 

*

What the fuck was Rule 10?

My hand flew to my pocket.

It was empty. 

Fuck, fuck, fuck. The list must have fallen out while I’d been hauling the human mush into the incinerator. 

I’d needed a classmate to die before I could see the list of rules. But once it was so easily accessible, I’d just taken it for granted. 

I swore to learn a lesson from this, and knew that I wouldn’t. 

I’d read the rules once. Why would I need a gurney? 

I decided to sprint outside and find out what was happening first. 

The chilly night air latched onto my cold sweat, sending chills into every crevice in my body. 

I ran.

And – I saw nothing. 

There was no traffic. There were no people. I looked left, right, and left again. 

Then I looked up.

Oh, shit. 

*That* was [Rule 10](https://redd.it/dj5fgp).

Dr. Brutsen was standing a few feet from the edge of the roof. In the nearly full moon, I could see his body jittering like it was held by marionette strings. The entire scene was *wrong.* How, and *why,* could his limbs be moving like that?

He was moaning softly.

No, that wasn’t it.

He was crying. 

Nausea took hold of me as I realized that he was dancing closer and closer to the edge. 

I nearly collapsed as I remembered what the rule demanded. *Either wait for an extraction team to find you, or jump four stories to the sidewalk on Court Street.*

“Wait there!” I screamed at him. “Dr. Scritt is coming to get you!”

“No, no, please!” Brutsen screamed, although I don’t know whether he was talking to me. “Don’t make it angry, make them go away!”

*“Hold on!”* I hollered back. “You’re almost safe!”

He wailed. “I’m sorry, I tried to lock them out! Please, please don’t do this!” 

His body bounced and flailed like an electrified fish. It was so bizarre, so *wrong* to watch this man jittering out of control in the rooftop moonlight, that I nearly cried.

A door on the roof slammed open with such intensity that I could hear it clearly on the ground below.

“NO!” Brutsen wailed in response. “No, please stay away, I’m sorry, I’m SORRY!”

Then he stepped away from the edge. I heaved an *enormous* sigh of relief.

That relief evaporated when I realized he had only moved back to allow space for a running start.

I watched in horror as Dr. Brutsen – my coworker, my peer – ran forth and leapt into the night. He fell, arms and legs spinning, toward the concrete where I stood [four stories below](https://www.facebook.com/P-F-McGrail-181784199029462/).

[BD](https://www.reddit.com/r/ByfelsDisciple/)

[Listen](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCcn_pa1QfNMRzbTuJqXSoRQ?view_as=subscriber)

-----------

[Part 4](https://redd.it/dlz1tf)I don’t celebrate birthdays anymore. When you get older you try to forget they even exist. You really don’t need a reminder telling you you’re slowly becoming an outdated dinosaur, and I’ve always found commemorating the harrowing approach of your own death a rather morbid notion. So I suppose having my birthday in the middle of a nationwide lockdown was somewhat of a godsend.

That didn’t stop my mother from sending me a present though. She always found a way to annoy me, in the best way possible, and she’d out-fiddle the devil himself just to put a smile on my face. I don’t know how she did it, but this morning, when I went to let Dave, my cat, out, I nearly tripped over it. An anonymous brown package just laying there, *inside* my flat. How the hell did she pull that off?

I chuckled internally as I desperately tried to decipher what was scribbled on the front of the package. It was clearly in her handwriting. I’d recognize it anywhere. The worst f’ing handwriting you’ll ever see. Like if you grabbed a crow, dipped its beak in ink, and let it peck randomly on the paper.

*TO JEFFY, LOVE MOM*

I yelled to Dave to hurry his shit up, but he wasn’t having it, so I just closed the door, and brought the package with me inside, carefully placing it down on the kitchen counter. Mom was a next-level prankster, so I made sure to investigate every inch of it, weighing it, gently shaking it, before finally opening it.

I scratched my head in puzzlement. It wasn’t much. Just a DVD. No note or anything. My mom wasn’t very technical, and the thought of her burning a DVD was quite frankly absurd. Did she even own a computer? Maybe dad helped her out? Or my brother? I guess there were ways she could have pulled it off, so I shrugged, and plopped the thing into my laptop.

After whirring discordantly for what felt like minutes, I was finally greeted with a single video file named *Jeffy’s Home Videos 86-90.* I caught myself smiling sheepishly in the reflection on my screen. I didn’t even know we had a video camera back then, so it was a very thoughtful surprise. Sort of an atypical gift from my mom, but I was still halfway expecting it all to be some elaborate prank. Maybe it was a rick roll or something?

But no, to my mild surprise it seemed like a pretty extensive collection of genuine home videos from the 80’s, complete with ridiculous low resolution, graininess, horrible audio, and an abysmal cameraman. They seemed to be in the wrong order though, starting when I was 4, then younger and younger, which, to me, proved that it was my technically challenged mom who’d compiled them.

I sat for about half an hour enjoying every second of the shaky cam time travel, reliving moments I’d entirely forgotten, laughing at how weird everybody looked back then, and boggling at how I was still alive. I was a stupid, stupid kid, always falling over and running into things. I sent my mom a picture of me and my bottle of wine relishing the ancient videos, with the caption *Thanks for the home videos mom<3* *Best birthday gift ever*!

But then it got strange. I’d just finished watching the summer of 87, when we apparently spent the holiday out by my grandpa’s cabin by the sea. I was two years old then, and my brother Justin must have been five. It was a wonderful trip down non-memory lane, since I had no recollection of it, and I was anxiously looking forward to videos from my first year. I didn’t have any photos or anything from back then, my mom said they’d must have been misplaced when they moved a decade ago, but she could never seem to find them again.

It was the summer of 86 according to the date in the bottom left corner. A shaky cam, more than likely maneuvered by my dad, looking over a tall white fence. A family of three was gathered on the other side; husband, wife, and a tiny toddler. I didn’t recognize any of them, but I suppose they must have been our neighbors. We moved every couple of years when I was a child - something about my mom’s work - so it was an educated guess.

There was some barely audible whispering as the camera was lowered, now facing the grass. I replayed this part several times, but I could never really hear what was said. Just fragments of it made sense. *We...Move...Leave...Hurry* were the only words I could make out. Then the camera was raised, once again peering over the top of the fence. The family was gathered out by the front porch of a house, the toddler with his assumed mother, and the assumed father operating a hose, spraying water on assorted flowers. Then the camera moved again, focusing on the cheery face of my mom. She was wearing a bright red sun hat, real cheesy looking, and the first time I saw it I giggled uncontrollably.

“Let’s do it,” she said, grinning widely.

A chill ran down my spine. Those exact words have no meaning without context, you know. Could point to absolutely anything. *Let’s do it. Let’s go get ice cream. Let’s do it. Let’s drive down to the beach*. Innocent things. Mundane snapshots. But the way she said it, and the expression on her face; I knew instantly that something wasn’t right.

Moments later the shaky cam got shakier, now running around the fence, and into the backyard of the family. The cameraman, assumedly my dad, stopped at the gate, zooming in on the woman’s face. She looked shocked. Scared even, holding onto the toddler tightly, and backing away towards the front door. Then my mom came into view again, and I realised why the woman appeared so frightened. I had to replay that moment several times too, because I couldn’t believe it. Couldn’t believe it was her.

She was wielding a knife. A huge butchery thing. She turned and grinned to the camera, waving the knife around playfully, before suddenly charging at the woman, her terrifying high-pitched screams echoing through my kitchen. I almost stumbled to the floor as I watched the carnage unfold. My mom stabbed the woman brutally in her left leg, causing her to collapse on the front porch, the toddler rolling down onto the grass, wailing hysterically. The assumed father suddenly became aware of what was happening, and his eyes widened as he yelled something, running to the woman's aid, only to be stabbed in the neck by my mom as he came within arm’s reach.

The next two or three minutes were dedicated to my mom stabbing the two of them repeatedly, the fleshly, pulpy, mangled remains at the end of it hardly even human in appearance any more. Absolutely drenched in blood, my mom turned to the camera, laughing maniacally. She suddenly noticed the wailing toddler in the grass, and quickly wiped clean the knife with the inside of her dress, placing it down on the porch. She then gently lifted the toddler, hugging him tightly, smearing blood all over the child.

“We’ll name you Jeffy,” she said, and kissed him, *me*, on the cheek, before waving to the camera.

I slammed the laptop shut, and staggered back, hyperventilating uncontrollably. No. It couldn’t be. It had to be some kind of prank, right? Right? Some unbelievably elaborate prank. You could do that these days, you know? Fabricate shit like that? Right? Deep fake and everything?

My phone vibrated. A text from my mom. I read it. Then again. Once more. Then I grabbed my laptop and got the hell out of there.

*I didn’t send you any videos, but your father is coming over to sort it out.*

*Stay where you are, Jeffy. Everything will be alright. Don’t move. We’ll be right there.*

[Mom<3](https://www.reddit.com/r/Obscuratio/)

[UPDATE 1](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/g615qz/my_mom_sent_me_some_old_home_videos_for_my/)

[UPDATE 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/g6s8q3/my_mom_sent_me_some_old_home_videos_for_my/)

[FINAL](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/g7rgbp/my_mom_sent_me_some_old_home_videos_for_my/)I met twelve-year-old Bradford only an hour ago.

Now his head is smashed in and he’s lying in a pool of blood in the middle of my basement floor.

The police will be here any minute to arrest me, no doubt.

They’ll gather testimony from the other three boys that were here tonight, then from the nearly one hundred other boys that have visited my basement over the past seventeen years.

Alright, writing that down makes me sound like a pervert, but I’m not a pervert. Let’s get that out there.

This is my final confession.

It all started in the year 2002. I had just graduated with a master’s in psychology and was working at Top Hat Video to pay the bills while pursuing research on Psychedelic Therapy on the side.

While exiting the local Cinemark after seeing M. Night Shyamalan’s Signs on opening night, I noticed a group of four boys gathered around the ticket booth, one of whom I recognized as a neighborhood kid, Jimmy McConkie. They had just learned that the 11:15 pm showing was sold out and were trying to figure out whose mom could pick them up. 

Jimmy saw me and called out. “Hey Marcus! How’s it goin?”

“Jimmy, what’s goin on?”

“Signs is sold out,” he said, visibly disheartened.

“Damn, sorry man. I just saw it,” I said.

His face lit up and his friends gathered around. “Well, how was it?” he asked.

“It was horrifying,” I said. “So good.”

“Oh man, well, we’ll have to try tomorrow,” he said, turning to his friends.

They nodded in affirmation.

Then I started thinking. 

My latest research had been on the use of psychedelics to treat early childhood trauma. In theory, the drugs would help access a higher plane of existence, which, with the guidance of a licensed professional, could be used to gain a deeper understanding of the trauma. 

Of course, much of what I was studying back then is almost common knowledge in progressive psychiatric circles today. LSD, MDMA, and Psilocybin (as found in mushrooms) are used regularly in underground guided-therapy sessions nowadays, but back then, no way. In the 1960s or 70s? Sure. Early 2000s? No.

On a whim, I invited the boys over to my house. I told them I’d give them a preview of Signs without spoiling too much. Since the kids still didn’t have a ride home, they accepted my invitation. They packed into my Subaru Outback and I took them to my home. For all the talk about stranger danger, these twelve-year-olds were much too confident coming with me. Though, again, I had no ill intent. I never did, at any point.

It sounds so creepy writing it down like this, but a handful of willing kids was exactly what I needed to test my methods. If the combination of psychedelics and hypnosis could work for trauma, why not for fun?

I served the four of them Pepsi while I got the basement ready. I set up four chairs in the middle of my unfinished basement, turned on the surround-sound speakers, and got a bell from the storage room. I ground up tablets of MDMA and fed them into the dry powder inhaler.

I brought the boys down and invited them to take a seat.

“I’m gonna set the scene for you,” I said, handing them blindfolds. “Imagine you’re on a farmhouse in the middle of rural Pennsylvania.”

Once their blindfolds were fastened, I started the binaural beats on the speakers. “You are surrounded by hundreds of acres of cornfield,” I said and rang the bell.

I took the powder inhaler to each one and instructed them to inhale on my count. “One… two… three… breathe in,” I’d say, spraying the ground MDMA. “This will help you envision the scene a bit better,” I told them.

They were giddy with excitement as I walked them through the story. I could tell when the drugs kicked in because their reactions became more animated. Once I realized my power, I’ll admit I embellished the details a little bit, but the boys were having the time of their lives.

Although I wanted to go deeper, I stuck with the story, making sure to get their permission before veering into spoiler territory. I ended on a strong note then let the high wear off before driving them home.

The boys decided, on their own volition, that they’d tell their parents they saw the movie as planned and that it was fantastic. They knew it was sketchy going over to a single neighborhood man’s house under the radar, so they promised each other to keep quiet.

As the months went on, that same group of four boys returned a few more times, asking me to take them on some sort of adventure. Sometimes they had specific requests–I want to fly; Let’s do a haunted house; How bout a creepy version of Disneyland, etc. Other times, they let me call the shots.

The process was simple enough. I played around with drug types and dosages, along with my hypnosis techniques and music. Eventually, I had formulas for every type of occasion.

As that group of four boys got older, they brought their younger brothers and other neighborhood kids as a kind of sacred rite-of-passage. 

In 2007, Jimmy graduated high school. He went on to other things and I stayed in the same place, continuing my research. Eventually, I got a job teaching Psychology 101 at the community college. By that time, I had myself a group of about eight regulars aged twelve to fifteen that would come over about once a month and allow me to take them on whatever adventure they (or I) wanted. 

Again, not a pervert.

After applying blindfolds, dimming the lights, putting on music, and giving each of them a couple inhales of my special powder, I told them to imagine various scenarios. I’d give only a basic level of detail and allow their drug-infused brains to fill in the gaps. I’ll admit I pushed the boundaries sometimes to see what kind of reaction I’d get. 

It was around the year 2015 when I made my first real breakthrough. I had a group of six boys, I think. After the regular setup, I decided to do something a little different. To the best of my recollection, here’s how the session went:

“I want you to imagine you’ve arrived at an abandoned mansion in the middle of the desert. It’s the biggest house you’ve ever seen. Very dark, very creepy. You open the rusty gate that guards the property and walk through, kicking your feet through piles of moldy leaves. 

“You slip past what remains of the front door and walk in on a grand entrance. Double staircases, a giant crystal chandelier, granite floors. It smells of mildew and dust, like it hasn’t been touched in years. Cobwebs cake seemingly every corner. As you step in and take in the utter beauty of this masterpiece of a mansion, you hear something—the faint lull of a cello.

“Intrigued, you follow the sound, taking you down long, winding corridors to a two-story library. The shelves are stocked with books, but they are dusty and rotted much like everything else in the house. The faded sun makes its way through the large stained-glass windows, giving off glares of all colors. In the center of the room is a beautiful woman. She is the composite of every beautiful woman you have ever seen.”

Each of the boys shifted, smiles creeping on their faces. I couldn’t help but smile too.

“That beautiful woman is the one who’s playing the cello. She plays with such fervent passion. The way it reverberates through the library sends a chill down your spine. As you stand there, watching her play carefully with seemingly her whole body, you notice that the second-floor mezzanine is beginning to fill up with people. People you know. Friends, family, acquaintances. They wear somber looks as they take their place standing above you. None of them seem to notice you standing there.

“Suddenly, you realize why they’re there. Off to the side, behind the cellist, is an open casket. Your heart sinks as you begin to understand the situation you have walked into. You cautiously approach the mahogany casket as the cello croons in the background. You lean forward to get a closer look at the body. There, with taut white flesh, closed eyes, and caked in makeup, is your dead body.”

One of the boys yelped and fell out of his chair. The others snapped out of hypnosis, ripping the blindfolds off. A couple of them had tears streaming down their faces.

I turned off the music and nervously watched them compose themselves in silence. There were so many emotions in the room, I couldn’t get a good read on the boys. Eventually, once things relaxed a bit, one of the boys approached me.

“I’m gonna go home,” he said.

“Okay, do you need a ride? Are you okay?” I asked.

“I’m… I’ll be fine. I just—” he paused for a moment holding back tears. “I’ve been an asshole to my little brother lately. Now I’m worried that I’ll die, or he’ll die before I have a chance to make things right. I don’t want things to end like this. I want him to know—” 

He looked around to the other guys and saw that their emotions seemed to match his own. “I want him to know I love him.” He walked upstairs, out the front door, never to be seen again. 

A few of the other boys expressed something similar—that there were a few people in their lives that they had been jerks to, that they had lied to, that they hadn’t been nice to. They wanted to make things right.

For the first time since I had begun this endeavor, I felt good about myself. It was the first time I had dared do anything meaningful with the therapy and it seemed to be effective. These boys’ lives were changed for good because of this simple session. 

Fast forward a few years and I have had almost a hundred different boys come to do guided psychedelic therapy sessions with me. They all understood the gravity of keeping it on the down-low—a point that tended to be baked into the initial invitation.

Tonight, however, I took things too far.

Rather than using the therapy as a method to help the boys explore themselves, I attempted to use it as a method to learn the secrets of the universe.

Just a few hours ago, a group of four boys, two of which I had hosted before stopped by, asking if I could conduct a session. I had nothing else going on, aside from a little reading and late-night solo drinking, so I let them in. They had just come from basketball practice. 

They followed me into the basement and took their seats. The two boys that had been there before—Adam and Bryson—explained the process to the two new boys—Bradford and Trey. The two new boys seemed nervous, as most first-timers are, but they trusted their friends enough to proceed.

I started the music, dimmed the lights, and instructed them to place the blindfolds on. I took another sip of whiskey then walked the inhaler around, giving each boy three puffs of my special sauce.

Aside from generalities, I don’t usually plan these ‘adventures’ too far in advance. I suppose it was the late-night reading of Lovecraft infused with alcohol and a relentless thunderstorm that led me on tonight’s particular excursion.

I started the session slowly, allowing about thirty minutes for the drugs to take full effect, all while occasionally ringing the bell.

“You find yourself in the middle of the woods one evening, the pink sky filtering through thick rows of pine trees. You walk carefully, mindfully through the woods, the soft padding of fallen pine needles cushioning your every step.”

The boys slouched in their chairs as they fell deeper into hypnosis.

“As you walk along, smelling the sweet smell of the pines, hearing the chirping crickets, you find a fallen wooden sign half-buried in the ground. You dig it out and brush it off. On it reads something quite peculiar. ‘This way to the end of the world,’ it reads. You find a tree with an old rusty nail about six feet up and determine that this must be what the sign was attached to.

“You continue trekking through the woods, all while keeping an eye out for whatever *the end of the world* might be. The further you go into the forest, the darker it gets. Pretty soon, you start to feel something. You start to internalize the gravity of the situation. Although you thought the sign was silly at first, you now believe it. You become confident that you are about to discover something groundbreaking.

“The chirping crickets suddenly stop. Ahead of you is a metal stairway that leads down into a wide hole—about fifty feet in diameter. You edge closer to the hole and realize that the fading daylight doesn’t offer you enough to see the extent of its depth.

“You consider turning back, but the unwavering sense of curiosity gets the best of you and you decide to descend the stairs. You go slowly at first, testing the loadbearing of each step carefully. After about twenty stairs, you feel safe and start descending quicker. Another hundred feet down, you happen upon a heavy metal door with rusted bolts and hinges.

“You push the door hard and it squeaks open revealing a man playing basketball alone in an empty arena. Each time the ball bounces, it echoes through the building and into the stairwell you occupy.”

Some of the boys sit upright, smirking.

“After making a long three, the man grips the basketball and turns slowly to face you. He walks to you very carefully. As he gets closer, you realize the man is huge.”

The boys grip their seats.

“Once he’s about fifty feet away, you recognize him. It’s Lebron James!”

The boys laugh in excitement. One of them stands up and pumps his fist. I can’t help but chuckle to myself at my spontaneity. Lebron James is probably the only current NBA player I can name.

“When he gets to the doorway, standing right in front of you, a serious look passes on his face, and he begins to speak.” I clear my throat and drop my voice.

“’I know that you think you’re just having a fun time, going on a psychedelic adventure, but you have to understand something,’ he says. ‘This journey is important. Very important. What you are doing has the potential to unlock all the mysteries of the earth. You just have to keep going. Promise me you’ll keep going.’”

One of the boys swallows hard. All of them nod in agreement.

“Then, the ball he’s holding turns to fire. He dribbles it a few times and spins it on his finger, apparently unfazed. He hands you the ball and you hold it with both hands. The flames dance around the ball without burning you. ‘This will help light your path,’ he says, then slams the door. Lebron James is gone. You continue down the stairwell, your path lit by the flaming basketball.

“After another hour of descending the stairs, you reach a second door. This one is equally heavy and rusty as the first. As you push it open, you hear the sound of waves crashing. You lean your shoulder into the door, as you did with the first one, and shove it open. Sand spills onto your feet. You look upon a beautiful endless beach of white sand bordered by blue, crashing waves on one side and lush jungle vegetation on the other. A cool, saltwater mist touches your skin.

“When you hear the ding of the bell, the sun will disappear,” I said. “One… two… three…” I dinged the bell and waited for a moment. A couple of the boys leaned forward.

“You can still hear the waves crashing and feel the ocean mist, but the world is pitch black. No stars. No moon. You can only see the few feet of sand in front of you, as illuminated by the flaming basketball. As you focus on the sound, you hear someone walking toward you. When I count to three and ding the bell, the sun will reappear, and your mother will be standing there. One… two… three…” I dinged the bell again. The boys smiled nervously.

“This woman brought you into the world, she fed you, clothed you, changed your diapers. Your mother sacrificed so much for you. You feel this. In this moment, you internalize an undying gratitude for your mother. You would do absolutely anything for her—you’d take a bullet for her or jump in front of a bus. Absolutely anything.”

I wait for a moment, allowing my words to marinate.

“Your mom stands in the sand about fifty feet back, looking at you with a smile. She invites you in, but you can’t move—you’re stuck in the stairwell. As soon as you realize this, you see someone else approach. A man dressed head-to-toe in black emerges from the jungle with a machete. His identity is concealed by a leather black mask.

“Your mom continues to smile, unaware of the man in black approaching. You try to call out, but you can’t speak. You wave your hands furiously until she pays attention. A look of fear passes over her. As she turns around to confront her attacker, the man hits her over the head, knocking her unconscious. You notice for the first time that there is a large cage in the sand behind the attacker. The man drags your unconscious mother into the cage, slams the door, and locks it. You look at her limp body sprawled out on the metal floor of the cage and are filled with rage. 

“You try to move again but can’t. You try to scream but can’t. The man in black notices you and approaches. When he is standing right in front of you, he dangles the key to the cage and laughs a deep, ugly chuckle. He then throws the key out of the door, over your head. You hear it clank down the staircase, disappearing far, far below you into the void. The man pulls his mask off revealing a horrific, warped face with gaping, bloody holes where his eyes should be. He speaks again: ‘one more door.’ The door slams shut, booming into the stairwell.”

One of the boys shakes his head furiously. The others look angry. *It’s working,* I thought.

“As you continue descending the stairs, lit by the flaming basketball, you feel brave and confident, like you can confront whatever lies in the third and final door. You can get the keys to the cage. You can save your mother and you can find the secrets to the end of the world. You just have to keep going. You have to be—”

Thunder cracked outside, loud enough to make me jump and snap the boys out of hypnosis. They ripped their blindfolds off and stumbled to their feet, breathing heavily.

“Oh my god, that was intense,” Adam said.

“You don’t want to keep going?” I asked.

“Man, that was enough for one night. Great trip though, I loved meeting Lebron James. That felt so real. Didn’t that feel real?” Trey said to the others. They nodded in agreement. 

“Damn lightning woke you guys up,” I said.

“Well, thanks for havin’ us over Mr. Marcus,” Bryson said, picking up his hat.

As they started up the stairs, I noticed that not all of them snapped out of the hypnosis. Bradford sat still, blindfold on, still gripping his chair.

“Should I wake him?” I asked the others. This was Bradford’s first session and I didn’t want him to freak out when he awoke.

“You guys go ahead, I’ll wait for Bradford to wake up,” Adam said. 

Bryson and Trey disappeared a couple minutes later after making plans with Adam to meet up at Bradford’s house when . Adam then took a seat in the corner, excited to watch the session with Bradford proceed. 

“You continue descending the stairs, a blast of cool air blowing past you,” I said.

Bradford visibly shivered.

“What’s your strategy?” Adam whispered to me.

I turned the music up, allowing Bradford a few minutes to descend the stairs.

I walked over to Adam. “The key is to get each of the patients in touch with as many emotions and feelings as possible. Happy, sad, afraid, amused, etc. Then I try to create sensory experiences—exposing them to heat, cold, smells, tastes, etc. The more the hypnosis can infiltrate their brain, the more effective it is.”

“What’s your end goal with this session?” Adam asked.

I smiled. “We have five senses, right?”

“Yeah. Sight, smell, touch, taste, and… what’s the last one?”

“Hearing,” I answered.

He nodded.

“But a lot of our brain is unused, right?” I posed.

“Yeah.”

“So, what if we *can* experience other senses, but don’t know how to activate them?” I asked. “Like in the same sense that birds or whales know how and when to migrate. Or how any number of animals and insects can locate food or water in almost any scenario. They have these intuitions that we don’t quite understand.”

“And you think these sessions can activate those extra senses?”

“I don’t know if it’s possible to activate them in the real world, necessarily, but I do believe that we can activate them within the hypnosis.”

“What kind of senses?”

I took another sip of my whiskey. “It’s still a theory, but I think we can tune our inner antenna, so to speak, to understand the secrets of the universe.”

“Like what?”

“Like if we’re alone in the universe. Like how all this came to be. Like what happens to the souls who have passed,” I said.

Adam sat in contemplation for a moment then smiled. “Damn, well let’s hope Bradford can bring us home,” he said.

I tipped my glass to him, sipped my whiskey, then took my place at the front of the room. Bradford hadn’t moved an inch.

“As you descend the stairs, you begin to hear voices calling from above. You hear your dad, your siblings, your friends. They all voice their support. *You can do it! Keep going! You’re almost there! Be brave!”*

Bradford sat up tall in his chair. *Getting closer,* I thought.

“The flaming basketball finally finds an end to the staircase. You step onto a cobblestone landing and look around you. You have descended into a large silo of some kind—maybe a cave or a well—with nothing but a door of similar size and configuration as the first two against the wall. On the ground, a flicker of light reveals the location of the cage keys wedged between two stones. However, before you pick the keys up, you realize that you must first open the door.

“Just then someone descends the stairs behind you, but you don’t feel scared. The person steps into the light of the flaming basketball and you realize that it’s you. You are standing face to face with yourself. He smiles at you and you smile back.”

Bradford smiled and I looked to Adam, he gave me a thumbs up.

“The other you puts his hand on your shoulder and looks into your eyes. He’s almost like a more self-assured version of yourself. He’s fearless. He’s brave. He’s a hero. ‘You must understand,’ he says. ‘You have been endowed for this mission. You were chosen long ago for this mission. Behind this door lies a cloud of knowledge. When you open the door and step inside, you will be immersed in this cloud. You will be met with a deep understanding of the mysteries of the universe. You will see the origins of creation. You will understand the immensity of all that exists. You will know these things and understand them in a way that will allow you to communicate your findings to others in the real world.’”

I took a deep breath and looked over to Adam again for approval. He nodded, a look of utter anticipation on his face. “Do it,” he mouthed.

“The other you stands aside and disappears, leaving nothing between you and the door. You understand what you must do. You take three steps forward, place one hand on the cold metallic door and apply pressure. As you do so, you feel something trickling down your upper lip. You stop pushing and wipe your nose. You are bleeding.”

Adam and I watched Bradford carefully for about fifteen seconds before he gently wiped his nose. He motioned his head to look down at his hand and opened his mouth in surprise. There was blood—actual blood—on his hands.

“Holy shit!” Adam whispered to me.

Frankly, I was more shocked than he was. Bradford was my first completely immersed patient. He was in my complete control. This was not an empowering thought, mind you, it was a horrifying one. I briefly considered pulling the plug on the whole thing right then—guiding him away from the door and back up the staircase to the real world, but I didn’t. 

Goddamn Lovecraft.

I swallowed hard and held my bell steady.

“Now, I’m going to count to three and ring the bell. When you hear the bell, you will push open the door and become immersed in the cloud. After a few moments in the cloud, I will ring the bell and you will exit the cloud and close the door behind you.”

I repeated the instructions then took a deep breath.

“Here we go,” I mouthed to Adam. He nodded.

“One… Two… Three…” I said, then dinged the bell.

Bradford jolted, flailing his arms and grunting. His chair rocked violently. I instructed Adam to steady it, so he didn’t tumble off. How responsible of me.

The jolting stopped after a minute and Bradford sat still. Both his nostrils were bleeding now.

“Now, when I ring the bell again, you will exit the room and close the door behind you. One… Two…”

Bradford stood up abruptly, sending the chair and Adam sprawling onto the floor behind him. He ripped his blindfold off and looked around frantically, like a trapped animal.

“Bradford, it’s all okay,” I said, but I knew it wasn’t. 

He didn’t wake up on his own volition. Nor was there an external stimulus to wake him up—my bell, or a loud noise like the thunder before. Something *inside* of the hypnosis woke him up.

Adam stumbled to his feet. “Bradford, it’s alright buddy. It’s me, Adam, right here,” he said and reached for him.

“No!” I yelled. “Don’t touch him. Come here,” I told him. Adam obeyed and stood next to me against the wall.

Bradford looked around anxiously for another minute, his feet unmoving, then fixed his eyes on the concrete block wall on the opposite side of the room. 

“Stay here,” I said to Adam. I walked to the other side of the room, between Bradford and the wall, the bell clutched in my hand. Frankly, I didn’t know what to do. I had to assume he was still under some kind of hypnosis, though I didn’t know *whose.*

“Bradford, when I count to three and ring the bell, you will come out of hypnosis. Again, when I count to three and ring the bell, you will come out of hypn—”

He bolted straight at me, knocking me to the side and plowing straight into the wall, headfirst.

“Shit!” I yelled, stumbling back to my feet. Adam ran over. 

Between the two of us, we held Bradford down. He had a large gash on his head and a steady stream of blood pouring down his face, but he didn’t *seem* to be in pain.

“Bradford, listen to me,” I said.

He turned his head toward me, revealing jittering pupils, as if there was an earthquake behind those eyes. 

Adam was crying. His phone buzzed across the room, diverting our attention for a moment. “Do we call the cops?” he asked.

“Yes, call 911,” I said, trying incoherently to piece together a story in my head.

Once Adam got to his phone on the other side of the room, Bradford began seizing, knocking me on my ass. I backed up, recognizing my feeble body to be no match for his apparent raw animal strength.

“Please, Bradford, breathe with me,” I said.

He again eyed the block wall and ran at it with full force, his skull crunching on impact. Blood spattered on the wall and the floor. He fell onto the ground with a hollow thud.

Adam screamed.

I tried to lay Bradford’s lifeless body straight when his eyes shot open, a look of pure terror on his face. “No!” he screamed and rolled away from me. He got onto his hands and knees, breathing heavy. 

As I carefully eased toward him, he let out a loud grunt and began hitting his head on the concrete floor with inhuman intensity. The sound of his head repeatedly crunching against the floor like that will haunt me forever. Blood continued to pool beneath him.

I backed away from him, helpless.

Adam screamed in horror.

After five or six hard hits, Bradford finally collapsed onto the ground, splashing in his own blood.

Tears were streaming down my face. Adam was sobbing uncontrollably.

A few moments passed in bone-chilling silence.

“Did you call anyone?” I asked with a shaky voice.

Adam stared unblinking at Bradford’s mangled head resting on the ground.

“Adam?”

He snapped out of it. “Uh, no, I—” he said, swiping through his phone. 

“Okay—the story—our story—” I started.

Then Adam’s eyes grew wide.

“What?” I asked.

“The others. Trey and Bryson,” Adam said, staring at his phone with his hand covering his mouth.

“What is it?” I asked.

“When they got to Bradford’s house, they found Bradford’s mom on the kitchen floor,” he said and looked up at me. “She’s dead.”

“Shit,” I said.

“It’s the hypnosis. It has to be,” Adam said.

“No, that’s impossible, the hypnosis can’t control someone who isn’t under hypnosis,” I said, nervously. “It can’t be related. No way.”

“You said that the goal is to tap into other senses, right? To activate other parts of the brain?” Adam said.

“Well, yeah, that’s a theory, but either way, how would that kill Bradford’s mom?” 

“I don’t know. The only thing I can think of, is that, clearly Bradford was all-in. I mean, you hypnotized him into a bloody nose, didn’t you? Maybe when you put our moms in a cage on the beach… I don’t know,” he said and slipped his phone into his pocket. “Which—oh shit—I need to check on my mom,” he said and darted up the basement stairs.

Now I sit here in my cold, mildewy basement with this dead boy’s body, penning my final haunting confession.

For the record, I want to apologize to Bradford’s family. I take full responsibility for his death. And in the case that I am the cause of Bradford’s mother’s death, I apologize for that, too. I don’t really want to think through the scientific implications if that *is* the case, to be honest.

All I know is that whether I spend my days as a free man or behind bars, I don’t know that I’ll ever be able to sleep again wondering what Bradford saw when he opened that door and stepped into the cloud.

Something he saw drove him to this madness. That much is clear.

I hear the police sirens outside now.

One last note to the psychiatric community or those who may be looking to build upon my research: Some things are better left [unknown.](https://www.derekwalker.me)I didn't hear Michael at first.

The noise of the mower filled my head like a swarm of angry wasps, drowning everything else out. I was finishing off the last strip of grass, closest to my neighbour's wall. Being as quick as I could. The last hint of light was bleeding out of the sky, and I wanted to get back inside as soon as I could. A beer in front of the TV was calling.

But when I reached the far end of the garden and cut the power, I heard a voice behind me.

"Paul?"

I jumped slightly. You know when you're so caught up in your own head you forget your surroundings? My wife is back from holiday tomorrow — she's been off in Spain with a couple of her friends for the past week — and I'd been thinking about my plan to meet her at the airport. Timings, when I'd need to leave, all that. I was in my own little bubble. The voice floating over from my neighbour's garden punctured through it.

I turned from the mower and stared over the low wall into the garden next to mine. I couldn't see anything at first — the sky was mostly dark overhead, and the only light spilling into the gardens came from single street lamp on the road behind my house. It did little to shift the shadows.

"Over here."

I shifted my gaze and finally saw him. Michael. My new next door neighbour. I'm pretty bad at guessing kids' ages, but I reckon he has to be around 10. He's got a shock of messy black hair and these big, brown eyes. The kid's a starer, too. I've only seen him a couple of times since he and his mum moved in last week, but every time I do he gazes at me like I'm an animal in the zoo. It's a little annoying. This was the first time he'd actually spoken to me, though.

"Oh, hey... Michael, is it?" I actually knew his name perfectly well — I'd bumped into the estate agent selling the house next door and he'd told me — but I didn't want to appear over familiar.

"Yeah, I'm Michael. And you're Paul, my mum said."

"That's me. How are you guys settling in?"

"Okay, I guess." Michael stared up at me with those large, brown eyes of his. I don't have much cause to talk to kids, so I may have been completely wrong about this — but I had the feeling Michael was making a lot more eye contact than someone his age normally would. He hardly even blinked. Young kids — at least in my limited experience — tend to be all over the place. Little bags of energy. But Michael was the exact opposite.

*It's probably close to his bed time*, I found myself thinking. And then, off the back of that: *You want to be glad he's not bouncing off the walls. If he was one of* those *kids, you'd never get any peace.*

Amazingly, considering they were still in the early moving stage, I'd barely heard a peep out of Michael and his mother. I'd been expecting to hear the sound of furniture shifting and boxes being lugged around all week, but I hadn't. They'd hardly made any noise at all. I'd hardly *seen* them at all, for that matter. They'd arrived late one evening the previous week, and I'd caught a glimpse of them from the window of my study — but that was pretty much it. I remember Michael's mum as a tall, attractive woman who looked a little older than me, but I hardly even got a proper look at her face. And this conversation with Michael was the first interaction I'd had with either of them.

*I'll go round at some point when Beth's back home*, I thought now, folding down the mower's handle. Then we can introduce ourselves properly.

"So, Michael," I said, picking up the mower and carrying it back along the garden, "what are you and your mum up to this evening? I'm guessing it must be close to your bedtime soon?"

"Nah, nowhere *near*," he said.

I chuckled. "Okay, well *my* bedtime's pretty early, so I'm going to head in and catch a bit of TV, I reckon. I'll see you round, yeah?"

I reached the little wooden storage area at the end of the garden and slotted the mower underneath. I was on my way to the back door when Michael's voice stopped me. "Paul?"

"What's up, mate?"

"Do you always mow the garden so late?"

I smiled. "No, I usually try to get it done when the sun's still out. Only my wife's back home tomorrow, and I wanted to get the place looking nice for her. I guess it must look pretty odd to be out here mowing at night, eh?"

"Nah, I don't think so. I think *everything*'s more fun at night."

"Oh yeah?"

"Yeah! I go on adventures all the time." I could hear the excitement in Michael's voice, even though I couldn't see his face properly. He was just a shadowy outline in the darkness of his garden. "One time we even went night fishing — have you ever been?"

I shook my head. "I've been fishing once or twice, but only during the day."

"It's *way* more fun at night, I reckon. Everything's more sneaky at night."

I found myself grinning again. Despite my urge to go back inside, the kid was sort of entertaining. "Well, maybe you and your mum can show me and my wife sometime. Sounds like you guys are way more exciting than we are."

I turned once more to the back door. This time I was actually holding the handle when Michael's voice stopped me.

"Paul?"

"Yes, buddy?"

"Paul, do you have anything to drink? Like juice, or anything?"

I hesitated. "Er, I'm not sure. I don't think I—"

"Do you mind if I have a glass real quick? Mum's still sleeping, and she's been super tired this week. I don't want to wake her."

I paused with my hand on the door. If Beth had been in, I probably would have said yes straight away. Likely without even thinking about it. But standing there in the dark garden, I was suddenly aware that it might look a bit odd if I invited a 10-year-old kid into my house. Even if he *was* my next door neighbour. And I doubted his mum would like the idea all that much.

"Do you not have anything to drink at your place, mate?" My hand was still on the door, but I hadn't turned the handle yet. I stayed in the same position, my mind whirring with excuses. And when I heard a voice directly behind me, I almost jumped out of my skin.

"No, we don't have anything." 

I spun round and found Michael standing about a foot away from me. Staring up at me with those large, brown eyes of his. The kid must have clambered over the garden wall while my back was turned. Must have done it without making a sound.

"Please, Paul? Just a super quick drink, and then I'll go back home. I won't even sit down, I promise."

I made a quick mental calculation in my head. Our back door opens straight into the kitchen, and I had orange juice in the fridge. Michael would probably be in and out in a couple of minutes. His mum might find it a little odd that he'd been inside the house if he told her — but wouldn't she find it just as odd if her new neighbour had refused her kid a drink when he asked? 

I hesitated for a couple more seconds, then sighed. "Okay, go on, then. But you have to make it quick, okay? I really do want to go to bed soon."

Michael smiled up at me and nodded. I turned the handle and stepped inside.

\*

"So you're a bit of a night owl, huh?"

"What does that mean?"

I opened the fridge and grabbed the orange juice. "It means someone who prefers it at night. You know, because you said you go on adventures — night fishing and stuff?" I moved to the drying rack by the sink and grabbed a glass.

"Oh, yeah. I'm definitely a night owl."

I started pouring juice into the glass. "Man, not me. Or at least I wasn't when I was your age. I used to be scared of the dark."

"You'll get used to it."

"Hm?"

"I said you get used to it. Once you spend enough time in it."

"Right."

I turned and handed the glass of orange juice to Michael. He took it from me and smiled. He moved the glass towards his mouth, then paused, watching me over the rim. "You know, my mum doesn't like me doing this any more."

"Doing what?"

"Going in to houses with strangers. Not after last time."

I stared down at the kid. He looked back up at me, the smile no longer on his face. Somewhere down in my stomach, I felt something uncomfortable squirm. "What do you mean, mate? What happened last time?"

Michael glanced over his shoulder at the closed back door. As if he was checking to make sure his mum wasn't there. He moved the glass of orange juice away from his mouth and placed it on the kitchen counter. Then he shrugged.

"Nothing, really. It's just that in the place we used to live, I made friends with this old man who lived a couple roads over from us. He invited me in for a drink, too. Only then he got weird."

*Oh Jesus*. I tried to keep my expression the same, but I was suddenly wishing I'd said no to the kid's drink request after all. This didn't sound good. Some old pervert in his last town had invited him in for a drink, and then he'd *got weird*. How was his mum going to feel about him being on his own in my house now, given that something bad had clearly happened in the last place they lived?

"He... got weird?" The words were out of my mouth before I could stop them. I should have just sent the kid packing there and then, but I guess my curiosity got the better of me. Michael shuffled on the spot, staring back at me.

"Yeah, he wanted me to come down to the basement with him. Told me he had this really cool Lego collection, and I asked if I wanted to see it. He *insisted* I see it, even when I said I had to go."

My mouth suddenly felt dry. "So... did you go with him?"

Michael shook his head back and forth, hard. "No way. I ran back home. Mum told me I have to only go as far as the kitchen when I'm in strangers' houses."

I felt mild relief wash over me. Then I replayed what Michael had just said, and felt the relief being replaced with confusion. "Wait, how do you mean?" I asked. "Are you in strangers' houses a lot, then? Like friends of your mum's, and stuff?"

Michael opened his mouth, then closed it again. He turned and moved his hand back to the glass of orange juice on the kitchen side. But instead of picking it up he only prodded it with his finger, sliding it over the surface. When he looked back at me he carried on speaking as if he hadn't heard my question.

"Mum was really angry when she found out about the man. She made me promise I'd never, *ever* go back there."

"Did she tell anyone? About what that man said to you, I mean?"

"No way." Michael looked away from me again. There was a slight smile on his face, like he was in on some joke I wouldn't understand. "She did something *way* better than that."

"Oh yeah? What did she do?"

"She made him disappear."

I had my mouth open to ask another question when I realised what Michael had just said. The next thought I had was that I must have misheard him. "What did you say?"

"I said she made him disappear. I told you, night's the best time to hunt."

Michael fixed me with those brown eyes of his. Only right then they looked darker than brown. Almost black.

"I... I don't..." I tried to find words, but I was at a loss. Michael smiled up at me.

"It's funny," he said after a moment. "People think mum won't come in unless she's invited, but they've got the rules all wrong. As long as *one of us* has already been invited, then it's fine. She can come back with me any time she wants."

The kid smiled at me once more. "Don't worry, Paul. I'll tell her you were nice to me. Make sure she goes easy on you when you meet her. Thanks for the juice."

He turned away and pulled the back door open. I found my eyes wandering over to the glass of orange juice, my mind vaguely aware that he hadn't touched a drop of it. But when Michael spoke one more time, I turned back to him. He was framed in the open doorway, half lost in the night.

"It'll take some getting used to," he said, "but you won't be scared of the dark much longer."

Before I had a chance to reply, he'd [melted into the shadows](https://www.reddit.com/r/samhaysom/).Well you really screwed up this time, didn’t you? You found a gnarly deal on a beautiful home that almost seemed too good to be true, and you jumped at it. And now that you’re all moved in, you’ve started to notice some anomalies.

You know the type: the spooky-dooky anomalies of the supernatural persuasion. Bumps in the night, doors opening and closing by themselves, auditory hallucinations of voices and whispers. It’s more common then you may think, but not everyone realizes the danger. 

These signs could be proof that some forsaken lost souls inhabit your property. Maybe the previous grandmother self-immolated in the attic. Maybe dear old dad went suddenly insane and repainted the house with the blood of his children, or mom tried seducing demons in the basement. If this sounds even vaguely familiar to you – and you are looking to the good ole internet for help, then you’ve come to the right place.

You see I have this friend – well, *had* this friend named Nathan. A couple months back, Nathan found a house for sale in southern Georgia. It was nestled along a remote stretch of woods just outside of Waycross. It was a historical area - an old colonial style home just under 5,000 square feet, six bed/ six bath with white picket fences and a dozen acres. The quintessential American dream house by all accounts. 

The price was unbelievably low, but after Nathan contacted the real-estate agent he found that the price that he had seen listed was indeed the price that was being asked. For most people, I imagine this would’ve raised some pretty big red flags, but Nathan was an idiot. The confident type of idiot that believed machismo is substantial for conquering all of life’s obstacles. 

I know it’s not kind to speak ill of the dead like that (spoiler alert), but I’m just trying to give an accurate portrayal of the kind of person Nathan was. Y’know the alpha male who hits on your girlfriend, lives at the gym and probably spanks his meat to his own selfies. For people like Nathan, friend is really just another word for ego-reinforcer.

 He was cocky, and often let pride get the better of him. His wife Janelle was actually my ex-girlfriend from awhile back. Bit of a skank, but practically a supermodel. They had two kids; Natalie and Mason who were both spoiled brats. Again, I’m just trying to give an honest perspective of them in hopes that we may all learn something from what happened.

You see what happened to Nathan (which I’ll get into later) was something which I believe could’ve been easily avoided if only he had followed a few simple instructions. After the funeral, I got to pondering on the matter, and realized that what we all really need is a set of rules to follow if you believe your house is haunted. Let’s begin.

Rule #1 – When looking to purchase or rent a house, always ask for the history. Odds are if a house is being offered at way below market value then there is a very good reason for it being that way. 

Nathan didn’t do this, and thought that the under-market price was simply the universe handing him something he didn’t really earn as it often seemed to do. Nathan jumped at the offer, and within a few weeks he and his family were approved to begin moving in. I volunteered to help them move in, and I’ll be honest, the house was absolutely gorgeous. 

Things were great for them at first, but Nathan soon started noticing some odd occurrences. It started with this knocking sound, that seemed to reverberate all over the home at odd hours. He said he could never seem to pinpoint where it was coming from, and it never seemed to originate from the same place twice. Eventually he just chalked it up to the house settling, but that was just the beginning. 

Rule #2 – Trust your gut. Your home is the last place you should feel uncomfortable. If you get that inkling of discomfort in the back of your mind that never seems to fully dissipate, pay attention to it. It’s probably your subconscious trying to warn you.

Nathan tried ignoring these sounds, told his wife that it was just normal or the wind and comforted his children when they felt scared. He had two dogs; Rusty and Sailor. Both of them black labs and both seemed to become very anxious after moving in. Nathan did his best to get medication to help the dogs relax, but it didn’t seem to help much.

That brings us to rule number 3; along with your gut, you should also trust your pets. Animals have instincts far greater than humans. It’s been said that man is the only creature who will sense danger and still wander into it. Animals have a sense for the supernatural; dogs and cats in particular. If you find them growling at what appears to be nothing, or constantly staring into specific areas of the house, then pay attention to that. Odds are they can see something you can’t. 

Nathan told me that Rusty; the older of the two dogs would pace the hall each night for hours. He said it was like he was standing guard over something. On more than one occasion, Rusty suddenly blurted into a ferocious bout of barking and snarling. Nathan would come out into the hall, but never found anything. He grew concerned for Rusty and took him to the vet, but the vet confirmed he was in good health. 

Meanwhile Sailor – the younger dog slept at the side of Mason’s bed each and every night. The poor boy soon developed crippling nightmares that would torment him relentlessly, and Sailor seemed to sense it. Each time Mason would wake up screaming, Sailor would be there to try and comfort him. 

And that segues perfectly into our next rule. Rule #4 – beware the nightmares. Young children are similar to animals in the way that they seem more perceptive to things that adults are not. This one can be difficult, because there are many root causes of nightmares with things like anxiety, depression and other mental illnesses. The telltale sign, is whether your child suddenly develops them soon after entering the home.

Poor Mason had absolutely horrific dreams and night after night he would be tormented by them. He often spoke of ‘the blurry man’ that came to him while he slept and whispered terrible things. He even said that sometimes he would see the blurry man while he was awake, but never more than a quick glimpse and always in the shadows or outside in the woods.

Nathan and his wife worried that perhaps Mason was Schizophrenic, but multiple doctors confirmed this was not the case. They tried giving Mason sleeping pills, various supplements and burned incense to help him sleep more peacefully. It worked for a while, until Natalie started having them too.

Rule #5 – Try to determine what kind of spirit you’re dealing with. If you see flashes of a small child running through the halls at night, or orbs spiraling in the air, then odds are your ethereal neighbor is rather benign. Some people even discover they rather enjoy life with a spectral roommate, and find their antics to be rather interesting. 

Most believe that spirits who pass away before completing what their soul desired will become stuck in a sort of purgatory. Many are scared, confused and angry, but some – primarily young children seem to be almost jubilant at times. Most of these are unnerving but altogether harmless, but then there’s the other spirits.

Rule #6 – If you or any member of your family develop inexplicable bruises, cuts or lesions then do not take them lightly. This should be a massive red flag, and is a very bad sign. If you feel as though you are being attacked as you sleep, and wake up with unexplained scratches or wounds then just get the hell out of the house, honestly.

A malevolent spirit capable of inflicting physical wounds is not something to be trifled with. Odds are it’s a demon, and honestly that is the best-case scenario. There are other non-Abrahamic related entities that could be responsible as well. They are very rare, but if encountered, well I’m afraid even my handy set of rules won’t be enough to stop them. 

Natalie and Mason suffered multiple scratch marks, wounds and even a few bruises that almost looked like bite marks. Nathan’s wife Janelle was also subjected to these attacks. The children’s teachers at school began to notice, and became quite worried for their safety. 

Obviously their first thought was not paranormal, but rather that the children were being abused at home. Only when social services threatened to remove the children from his custody did Nathan finally agree to move them out of the house. Janelle and the kids moved in with her mother a couple hours away, and Nathan was left all alone with the dogs.

Rule #7 – Let people know what is going on. Yes, I know the thought of admitting to a close friend that you believe your house is haunted may be a daunting one, but it’s usually better than the alternatives. 

The modern world rarely takes these claims seriously. We put ghosts in movies and video games, but when someone actually claims to see one, we aren’t so quick to believe them. Technology and science have led us to believe we are safe. That is our folly, but it’s also a topic for a different day.

This is yet another rule that Nathan did not abide. The worse that things got for him and his family, the more secluded he became. On numerous occasions he phoned the police saying that he believed someone had broken in, but they never found evidence of it. Eventually they even put him on a blacklist, and warned that any further contact would result in legal trouble.

Rather than tell his parents or brother or any of his friends what was going on, he retreated into himself. He became fidgety and paranoid, at times refusing to return phone calls and texts from his loved ones. He just broke contact, and things only got worse.

Rule 8 and 9 sort of belong in the same category, although one is a little more extreme than the other. Rule #8 - If you suspect something is up, it doesn’t hurt to perform a cleansing. Like I said earlier, the modern world has little time to entertain the notion of ghosts and the supernatural, but that shouldn’t ward you off. 

If you’re unsure about whether your home is being haunted or not, then a routine cleansing can do wonders for you. I’m willing to bet there are mediums and priests in your town that can get the job done. Even if you can’t find anyone local, you can always just go online and find instructions for yourself. It’s not as effective that way, but it’s better than nothing.

Rule #9 – if you’re really feeling as though you are in danger, get someone to perform an exorcism. It’s the step that no one wants to take, but desperate times call for desperate measures. Priests and spiritual leaders are your go-to for these kinds of things. Even if you yourself are not religious, these people honestly do know how to help.

There’s some evidence that Nathan was attempting to do this, but it’s unknown why exactly it didn’t work out. Maybe he second guessed himself, and thought he could handle it, or maybe his ego took control once again. 

Nathan had been collecting evidence for a while, and had amassed quite a stash of clues. He had audio recordings which relayed banging on the walls and footsteps in the attics. He took multiple videos, but none of them really showed anything except for the last one, but by that point it was too late. In his journal he also wrote that he experienced items in the house levitating on several occasions, but sadly he had no recorded proof of this.

Rule #10 – the big one! Whatever you do, don’t try to antagonize the spirit. This should really go without saying, but angrily challenging the spirit or daring it to manifest is a really bad idea. But as you may have guessed, Nathan and his unlimited stream of testosterone decided to do just that.

He got really drunk one night, and began ruminating on all that had been happening. Nathan was always a skeptic, but even he couldn’t ignore the psychological impact on his family whether it was imagined or not. He realized his relationship with his children and wife were being heavily strained, and his new house had become a place of hostility. This made Nathan very angry. 

So Nathan stood up, and shouted at his empty house for the spirit to come forth and face him. He was met only with silence, and so he shouted again. Never once did the spirit’s answer his call. After a few more verbose challenges he broke into a bout laughter, probably believing himself to look ridiculous. Apparently not everyone who was watching felt the same though.

Nathan managed to stumble into bed not long after, and was out cold within a couple minutes. Nathan had kept a security camera in his room in hopes of capturing proof, and that night he found something.

At around 2:13 am, Nathan is seen beginning to stir in his sleep in the security video. He grunts and speaks briefly, but the words were unintelligible. Suddenly his eyes sprung wide open in the bed, and began glancing around the room.

Nathan appeared to be struggling, but his body didn’t move. It is believed he was suffering an episode of sleep paralysis which left him temporarily paralyzed. His eyes continued to dart rapidly around the room. Then something happened that no one who saw the video could explain.

The bedroom door slowly rolled open, but the darkness of the hallway was all-consuming. Nathan’s chest began franticly pumping up and down, and his eyes stretched wide-open.  

Something was then seen moving in the hall. It could’ve been chalked up to a trick of the light at first, but then a hand was seen reaching through. It was gnarled and spindly, like the wretched malformed appendage from some abyssal denizen. 

The figure slowly sauntered through the doorway; it’s tall, dark silhouette nearly grazing the top of the door frame. It had no definite features, appearing only as a hooded, humanoid individual. No eyes or face, just a shadow corporealized from Nathan’s deepest nightmares.

Poor Nathan was heard mumbling and whimpering franticly, but in his paralyzed state he was unable to fight back or flee. He could do nothing but watch in absolute horror as the thing approached him. It stopped at the foot of his bed, and just stared at him for about a minute.

Nathan continued to hyperventilate and didn’t appear blink once during the entire ordeal. The thing then finally moved closer. It then leaned down only a couple inches away from his face and appeared to whisper something. It was too quiet for the mic on the camera to pick up, but needless to say it did not make Nathan feel any better about the situation.

Suddenly the thing lashed out with it’s twisted hands, constricting like pythons around Nathan’s throat. In his paralyzed state, he couldn’t even struggle against his shrouded attacker. Within a minute Nathan’s chest stopped moving, and his eyes fell still.  

The entity retracted it’s hands and just stared at him for about a minute. Then – as if taunting those who would see the footage, it looked directly into the camera. It whispered something again, but again it was too quiet to discern what it was. Then as quickly as it had appeared, it waltzed out of the room and vanished back into the darkness.

Nathan was found by his wife Janelle a few days later, and she called the police. After an autopsy Nathan was determined to have died via strangulation much as what was shown in the video. Cops scoured the premises and found footprints from the intruder. However, the footprints were soon matched to a pair of Nathan’s own boots.

The police of course were not so quick to believe that Nathan was simply killed by supernatural forces. They conducted interviews with neighbors, friends and family members, but none of them seemed capable or motivated enough to have done it. There were no signs of breaking and entering, and nothing had been stolen from the home.

They came to me and conducted an interview as well, but of course, that was a futile effort. I mean sure; the fact that Janelle was my ex-girlfriend was reason to suspect me, but I quickly dissuaded their accusations. Nathan was my friend, despite him not really being a good friend. What kind of friend bones your girlfriend behind your back anyways? I’m not bitter about it though, at least… not as far as the police are concerned. My alibis were solid, and that’s good enough for them.

This brings us to my final rule; rule number 11. Make sure you exhaust all other options before coming to the conclusion that your house is in fact haunted.

If only Nathan had taken a little more time to investigate his home and himself more thoroughly then maybe he’d still be alive today. Maybe he would’ve found the mini wireless speakers hidden in his attic to play the sounds of knocking. Maybe he would’ve found the patches in his air ducts that leaked mild doses of hallucinogenic drugs into his home. Maybe he would’ve detected the dog whistle alarm that caused his dogs to react so strangely. 

If he bothered to check himself, he may have found trace amounts of Suxamethonium; a paralyzing toxin that once ingested will leave the person immobile yet conscious to all pain. It would’ve been difficult to find - as even coroner’s do not normally test for the substance unless specifically requested. 

No matter how you really slice it, this entire ordeal really comes back to Nathan himself. If only he had been a better person and not constantly demeaned his peers at every turn. If only he hadn’t been so stubborn and proud. If only he hadn’t gone behind my back and boned my ex-girlfriend thus ruining our future and sending me into the spiraling depths of crippling depression, then maybe I would’ve helped him. 

So, you may be wondering; is this my confession? No, of course not. This is only my list of suggestions and rules for how things may have turned out differently for Nathan and his family. These are all hypothetical explanations, and are in no way to be considered incriminating evidence to be used in court against me or anyone else for that matter. 

Besides, if this really was a confession, then that would make anyone who read it an accessory to murder, and we certainly wouldn’t want that. I hope you can understand that, and I do hope that we can trust each other in this regard. After all, I have really good software for tracing IP’s and reddit makes it incredibly easy to access them. We wouldn’t want YOUR house to suddenly become haunted, now would we?Every night on my walk home from work, I listen to true crime podcasts. Even though my favorite podcast already released their episode for this week, the app said there was a new one. Excited, I hit PLAY.

***"It was a small town--the kind that still has Mom and Pop shops lining the street, the kind where everyone knows your name. But little did the residents know that they would soon be rocked by a horrible crime."***

I stopped at a traffic light. The red glowed in the darkness, glinting off the wet street. A black SUV sloshed by. Across from me, eerie blue refrigerator lights glowed from inside a corner deli. The chairs all up on their tables, feet in the air.

The signal turned to WALK.

***"That chilly September evening was no different for the young student. She'd left her shift at the local store and walked back home… except she never made it home."***

*Young student. Local store.* Damn, this was hitting close to home. I was a part-time student at Franklin Community College, and worked at the local convenience store.

And, of course, I was walking home.

I glanced behind me--looking at the alleyway behind *Alessandro's Pizza,* which was dark except for the neon light spilling from the sign.

***"Her boyfriend reported her missing the next day. The town conducted a volunteer-led search, and after two days, they found something."***

Dread formed in my stomach, anticipating "a body." But what he said next was so, so much worse.

***"Washed up on the shore of Worthington Lake, they found a pair of size 9 red Converse sneakers."***

I stopped.

And looked down at *my* red Converse sneakers, damp from the rain.

*What the hell?*

My heart began to pound.

***"The shoes were sent to a forensic analyst, who would compare its wear pattern to another pair of her shoes to try and determine if they belonged to the victim."***

A rumbling sound made me jump. I turned--to see a dark SUV turning left at the intersection. *Didn't I see that car a few minutes ago? Maybe it’s following me, and—*

The car passed me and disappeared into the darkness.

*Come on, Sarah. Get a grip.* Converse are popular sneakers. A little out of fashion, but still. 9 is a common women's shoe size. And what college student *doesn't* have some sort of a job? What, you think you're listening to some sort of prophecy of your own death?

Yeah, right.

***"After a few weeks, the results came back. The analyst was certain: the shoes belonged to none other than Sarah Campbell."***

The blood drained from my face.

*Sarah Campbell.*

*My* name.

*What the fuck? How--*

I didn't have time to think. I forced myself to move. I broke into a run. The small shops turned into a colorful blur.

***"Searching the lake came up empty. Without a body, a crime is hard to solve. But police didn't give up. And finally, a witness came forward: someone had seen a car parked at the lake that night, around 2 AM. A black SUV with darkened windows."***

No, no, no.

*What the hell is going on?*

I whipped around. The street was empty. No people, no cars. *No witnesses,* said the little voice in the back of my mind, the one that’s watched way too many true crime shows. My eyes scanned the shops. All closed.

***“There were six black SUVs matching the witness’s description in the Franklin area. But one of them, in particular, caught Detective Nolan’s eye. It belonged to Jon Kelly… a registered sex offender.”***

*Vrrrm.*

The sound was so soft I almost didn’t hear it over the voice of the podcast. I whipped around—and there it was. Two blaring-white headlights behind me.

Coming from a black SUV.

I forced my legs to pump faster. The car didn't speed up; it crawled along, slowly, taking its time. Like the driver knew he could catch me, no matter what. I glanced back, trying to make him out behind the darkened windshield—but the headlights were too bright to see anything.

***"Kelly wasn’t*** **just** ***a registered sex offender. He’d been convicted of assaulting a woman he worked with… who had multiple piercings and short dark hair, just like Sarah.”***

The car crawled down the road. Stalking me, like a lioness stalks her prey. I veered left, onto our dark residential street.

*Just a few more steps.*

Headlights flashed across me, illuminating my running shadow on the pavement. I didn't look back. I just ran, as fast as I possibly could. The little brown house with the yellow shutters came into view. I sprinted across the grass, grabbing my keys from my pocket.

*Click.*

I threw the door open--and slammed it shut behind me.

Then I turned the deadbolt, collapsed against the door, and began crying.

I heard the *rush* of the car passing our house, continuing down the road. But I wasn't safe—Gabe wasn't home yet. I was alone, in a dark house, with someone driving down the street who knew exactly where I lived.

Still sobbing, I checked all the locks. Then I called Gabe, who assured me he was five minutes away.

I made my way down the dark hallway and headed into the bathroom. Then I set my phone on the counter, grabbed a clump of tissues, and began to blow my nose.

*Click.*

I jumped. Whipped around.

But it wasn't coming from outside the door. My phone's screen lit up--the podcast was still playing. I must have hit it when I put the phone down. It had skipped several minutes forward, according to the play indicator.

***"What do*** **you** ***think happened to Sarah?"*** the baritone voice asked.

I reached for it, to turn it off—

***“Well, she'd told me she wanted to run away before."***

I stopped dead.

It was Gabe's voice. Clear as day, coming from the speakers.

***"She did? Why?"*** the voice asked.

***"She wasn't happy with her grades, her job, her parents. She told me sometimes she'd dream of just… moving to some random state and leaving it all behind."***

I froze, staring at the mirror.

*I never said that. Never.*

*Gabe… was lying?*

***"I mean, that was hurtful to me as her boyfriend, you know? I thought we were going to get married someday. But apparently she didn't feel the same way."***

My heart pounded in my ears.

***“So you think she just skipped town, and is happily living her life out somewhere else? Rather than being abducted or murdered?”***

A pause.

***“Yes. That’s exactly what I think.”***

***"That’s all for now! Thank you to our listeners…"*** The outro played. I stared at my reflection, everything coming down all at once, my mind trying to race and catch up with what it meant—

The front door creaked open. Footsteps sounded outside.

"Sarah! I'm back!"

I backed away from the door.

"Sarah?"

My eyes fell on the window. I ran over to it, turned the lock. *Push--*I popped the screen out.

Then I swung a leg over, pulled myself through the window, and ran as fast as I could. It started innocently enough. I was reading on the bed while my boyfriend, Charlie, was playing on the computer with his friends. I don't play many games so it's interesting to listen to the things he says to his friends, even if terminology goes over my head sometimes. There will be moments when I'll be focusing on something and he'll just spout off words that sound extraterrestrial. 

I'll just laugh it off and continue with what I was doing, it wasn't my thing but he enjoyed it and it wasn't hurting anyone, initially. Like I said I had my nose between the pages reading about various armchair philosophies as Charlie raved on in the background play Call of Duty, I think. He had won a match and swiveled his chair to face me, like a dog when they did a trick right. 

“Finally got a win tonight.” He exclaimed, more for himself than for me.

“That's great babe,” I replied offering an admittedly false smile, I was happy he was happy but I can't say I was invested. He turned back to the computer and talking to his friends again, they were hyping each other up.

I heard Charlie mutter. “Now that was Poggers.” It was such a random word that it tickled my brain when I heard it and I couldn't help but laugh. Charlie leaned back in his chair as if he was exhausted himself as he swiveled to face me once more.

“I can't believe I just said that unironically-” he echoed my laughter offering a painfully adorable smile. “-I feel like I should wash my mouth out with soap.” He repeated the word a few times, making sure to let out popping noise when mouthing the “P”. We both laughed it off and he said goodnight to his friends. It was time for me to get some quality time with him and with that my book remained on the nightstand until morning.

In the morning I woke up early and felt like I had gotten a really good sleep so I was in a good mood. And when I'm in a good mood, I make breakfast. I heard the stairs creak and figured the smell of bacon had lifted Charlie out of bed. He stumbled into the kitchen, his hair a complete mess. “That smells Poggers.” He groggily moaned.

With mild amusement, I went to laugh. Charlie's face conveyed confusion as he stood in the kitchen. His eyes strained and mouth still slightly agape. “I totally meant to say great.” He continued turning his gaze to me. “God I'm tired.” He chuckled before shuffling over to help me finish up with breakfast.

The rest of the day was pretty normal. We even decided to go on a little impromptu date, the best we could with the world the way it is. But when we were winding down for the night, getting ready to brush our teeth. Charlie informed me that “Today was Poggers babe.” I politely replied that if he was trying to mess with me it was going to get old fast.

He shook his head. “It just kind of came out sorry.” He said raising the toothbrush and dragging it across his teeth. We both brushed our teeth and in unison spit into the sink, as I was wiping my mouth I could see Charlie leaning in for a kiss. I turned my head but when I met him face to face I a putrid smell climbed into my nostrils. It was enough to make me recoil away from him, it was like battery acid poured over rotting roast beef.

I instinctively put my hand over my nose. “Your breath is awful,” I told him. Which we both knew was odd, he just brushed his teeth and it's not like he has gingivitis or anything. He went to point out as much by pointing to the sink but stopped. I followed his cue and looked into the sink where we had spit our toothpaste out. On my side of the sink, there were a few lingering bubbles.

On his side of the sink, however, still clinging to the white porcelain was a thick and frothy substance. It was a sickly yellow with streaks of red the would suggest Charlie's dental hygiene had degraded significantly in just one night. He quickly reached over and turned the faucet on, opening his mouth he checked out the condition of his teeth, they looked completely fine.

It took a good bit of water for the mess he had spit into the sink to budge at all. Eventually, with the convincing of steaming hot water, it disappeared. I went to say something to him but he was captivated by his reflection with his mouth moving ever so slightly. His lips quietly repeating the “P” sound over and over. I told him that we should just go to bed and we'll make an appointment to see the dentist, make sure something weird wasn't going on with bacteria or something.

We made our way to be and settled down for the night. With the lights turned off and the dark of a sleeping world creeping in I closed my eyes. I don't know how long I was asleep for but I was woken slowly by a small prodding on my shoulder. Charlie was ever so gently poking me, like a child who wants their parent to wake up on Christmas but is afraid to make them angry.

I shuffled my body, still coming out of the throws of deep sleep my body was sluggish and the blankets felt like they weighed thirty pounds. As I turned over I reached behind me to flick on the light and the sudden brightness momentarily stunned my vision. I started wiping my eye and was about to ask what was wrong when a very familiar and pungent smell assaulted my senses again.

It was worse this time like it had been sitting for a while. I struggled to keep my urge to vomit subdued, this was made all the more difficult when I moved to brace my new position and felt my fingers press against the sheets. As my fingers pressed down, a hot and viscous liquid rose from the divots I had made.

Then I saw Charlie. His face had that sickly yellow shit caked onto his face, he looked like an infant that fought hard against eating his baby formula. His mouth was moving and words were coming out but just barely. His voice was raspy I could tell they were painful, his body would tremble every time he started to speak. “Po...g...e.s” 

Such a horrid sight, watching each letter accompanied by a small spittle of the disgusting liquid and before long I could see how it was about to get worse. As he kept going-

“Pog..er..”  
“Pog.... gers.”  
“P-p-p- oggers.”

I could see thin trails of smoke lifting from inside his mouth and under his lip. Horrified, I hadn't moved my hand yet but once the new drippings had made their way to my hand I could feel an intense burning sensation. Charlie started to shake more violently as I finally snapped to my senses and ran to the phone.

Dialing 911 as fast as I could I heard Charlie behind me beginning to shout “Poggers” over and over. I could just imagine the molten ooze spewing from his mouth like Yellowstone as he attempted to clear his mouth of the heat. I didn't know what to even say to the operator so I told the lady he had severe burns and trouble breathing.

Keeping the phone off the hook as the operator confirmed that an ambulance was on the way I made my way back to Charlie. It was so much worse than I first saw, the blankets on the bed where he was facing away from me were soaked. The liquid had saturated the sheets and bed to the point that they were dripping onto the hardwood.

Plumes of smoke rose from the hardwood threatening to bore right through the floor but it wasn't my biggest concern. I couldn't help but picture Charlie laying there all night, saying that stupid word over and over, suffering but not wanting to disturb me. He looked so weak, I don't know what that fluid was but it was taking all the nutrients Charlie needed to function with it.

The whites of his eyes were beginning to stain yellow like a smoker's walls and his skin was so visibly dry I thought he was going to start molting. He barely recognized the man I knew as he rose from the bed, shambling to his feet. It looked like some cheesy zombie flick with a small budget but seeing it in person, happening to someone I loved, was so painful and scary.

I started to worry about my safety as he got closer to me, the same yellow substance dropping from his slack jaw. His eyes were so different, I felt as though he couldn't even see me, he was just heading towards something. “Poggers.” A whisper came from his mouth, well-formed letters unfettered by the slob dwelling in his mouth. The voice was ethereal, it didn't even sound like Charlie anymore. 

Before Charlie closed in I saw the sanctity of blue and red lights flashing beyond our bedroom window. Quickly I ran to the front door letting paramedics in and trying to explain to them what was going on as we headed back up the stairs. Charlie looked so weak but it took the three of them to subdue him as he fought back. His grotesque saliva burning holes in their clothing, though I don't think they noticed.

They made it apparent that I wasn't allowed to go with him as they loaded him into the back of the ambulance. As they drove away leaving me to my own devices I could see one of the paramedics pressing a needle into Charlie's neck and that was that he was gone. I was left standing there all alone in the dark.

Eventually, I made it back upstairs and started cleaning up the mess. Luckily the piles of vile no longer burned on contact, though the texture was still enough to make me wince. I didn't think there was a point washing anything so I just pulled the bed with its covers out to the alleyways and rested them against the garage.

I didn't sleep that night. Was so out of it I almost didn't hear the phone ringing, someone from the hospital telling me I could visit. I was there in no time. While looking at Charlie who was still pretty heavily sedated but conscious, I asked the doctor if Charlie had said anything yet. The doctor said it would be difficult for Charlie to speak as he had chewed through his tongue during his night there.

Looking at my boyfriend I could see that even under sedation his jaw was moving up and down, his lips pursed and contorted as if trying to speak. However, with the drugs and the lack of a tongue, all that came out  of his mouth were small whistles of air.

As I stared at Charlie I heard something behind me, a commotion caused by another person being rushed into the ER. Turning around I saw one of the paramedics that had helped get Charlie into the ambulance rushing down the hall. So many people were talking at once and I'm sure I must have been the only one to hear it. 

The ambulance drivers speaking low under the mutter of voices and the chaos of chirping machinery. 

“This is not [Poggers](https://twitter.com/Author_jo_jo).”
[Narration by The Dark Somnium](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uAkfCvP-Eoo&t=1s)

----------------------

My grandfather was a combat pilot. Even though he always felt distant I liked him. When I grew older, I realized that he was always aware, always looking for any signs of danger. Shell shock, PTSD, it has many names. My mother told me that he didn’t use to be like that, that he changed when he came back from Vietnam. 

My grandpa's profession was likely the reason why I was obsessed with space, astronauts, planes and pilots. We used to talk about it when we were together. He was a really skilled and high-ranking officer in the army, and he knew some people, even a couple of really well-known astronauts. When I once asked him, if he met anyone who went to the moon, he simply replied: 

"Don't ever talk to me about the Moon, boy. It's a dark and evil place."

He died back in 2004 from natural causes.

About two months ago, we decided to renovate my grandparents’ old house. While clearing out the attic. I found an old metallic box. In the box, there was a number of things which as I assumed belonged to my grandfather. There was a military medal, a stack of papers and an old picture of my grandfather and two other men I didn’t recognize. My grandpa looked around 40, so I assume that the picture was taken in the 70s. All of them were wearing space suits, and the scene was a typical backdrop used by NASA, but the logo was missing. Only a blank monochrome background. The mission patch was titled Dawnbreaker. I didn’t understand anything. My grandfather was an astronaut? Why did he never tell anyone about this? Dawnbreaker? I never heard about such mission. It must have been covered up really well. But why?

I found the answers in the papers on the bottom of the box. I’ll rewrite the literal contents below, but I warn you that many people might find it very disturbing.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

My dear family,

If you ever find this, I must confess something. In 1972, I wasn’t in Vietnam. I wasn’t supposed to tell anyone, but if you have found this, it probably doesn’t matter anymore. Back in 1965, me and a handful of other pilots were selected for a non-public team of astronauts, who would participate in covert missions in space for our government. We wouldn't get the glory and fame of regular astronauts, but our country needed us, and so we were there.

In early 1972, we were told that for an unspecified period of time, our country had a secret satellite orbiting the Moon. They never told us what it did, or why it was there, just that a few weeks prior, it had crashed to the surface on the dark side of the Moon for unknown reasons and that the data it carried was crucial. The government needed to recover it, and thus was sending me and two other astronauts to reclaim the satellite’s memory module. The equipment of the planned Apollo 18 mission was essentially transferred to us. From what we'd been told, the Apollo team was furious. They had a reason to be after all. It seemed that whoever we've been under was much more powerful than NASA. The whole mission was top-secret obviously. 

I was officially deployed to Vietnam, while in reality we underwent extensive training for the mission. After a couple of months, we found ourselves standing on the launch pad in front of this behemoth of a rocket, that would take us to the Moon. I was the mission commander, while Lt. Carver was the Lunar Excursion Module (LEM) pilot and Lt. Ackermann was the Command/Service Module (CSM) pilot. 

The flight to the Moon took roughly three days. After arriving, we made a couple of orbits around it. Each time we flew behind the horizon created by the Moon itself, I felt a bit of helplessness when our communication to the whole world went dark, as the signal got obscured by the spherical mass of rock and dust below us. The dark side of the Moon was nothing like the light side, which we see on almost a daily basis. Instead of smooth grey fields and tranquil lunar seas, it was completely covered in dark, deep craters and holes, like as if it was being slowly eaten away by the universe itself. It was finally decided to begin the descent to the surface. Me and Carver exchanged wishes of good luck with Ackermann and in the Lunar Module named Charon we separated from the CSM named Trinity. 

After we announced “Charon has touched down,” our response wasn’t cheers and applause, but just mere “This is Trinity, congratulations Charon! I’ll relay the news on the other side. Be safe out there pals.” 

Just like that we became cut off from the rest of the world.  Ackermann was our only link. While he was above the light side, he could communicate with ground command, and while above the dark side he could communicate with us. Never both at once. Even though the CSM’s orbital period was roughly two hours, we would be in touch for only about 35 minutes each orbit.

We landed on a flat plane inside a huge crater. Contrary to what some people believe, the sun shines at the dark side of the Moon the same way as the light side. The amount of light depends on the lunar phase. It was still shining daylight in the place where we landed, but we knew that it would go dark in a few days. I felt excited and curious about what awaits us in this alien world. 

We waited for about an hour and a half to get the command’s reply from Ackermann and spent the time by preparing our suits. 

“Command sends their congratulations. You’re to proceed with the recovery.” 

Everything was dead silent as I stepped on the surface of the Moon. I tried to think of something excessively inspiring to say, but that those times were already over. With Carver, we assembled the rover and after planting our flag next to our spacecraft, we drove off. As we drove across the surface, I saw what I though was a flash, like a glare reflected by something metallic in the far distance. Since it was fairly common to see flashes of light because of an interesting physical phenomenon caused by the space radiation interacting with our eyes, I didn’t give it much thought and soon forgot about it. 

After driving for a couple of hours, we reached the satellite – or what was left of it. We immediately noticed that something wasn’t right. There were dozens of footprints around the probe, leading to a set of two tracks, dragging out into the distance. 

“What the hell is this?!” asked Carver in disbelief. 

“I don’t know, but it seems that somebody got what we came for before us,” I replied. 

Both the tracks and the footprints were different than ours. Whoever took the data wasn’t here under the American flag. As I expected, we didn’t find the data box. We found the part where it was supposed to be, but it was missing. Luckily for us, we were just in contact with Ackermann, so we reached out to him to describe our findings. 

“This doesn’t make any sense. Who would take it? Russians? They don’t even have a lunar program! Even if somebody took it, how could we not be aware of that? How can the Russians land on the Moon without us noticing?” he responded. 

“As far as we know, the Russians have no idea that we are here, you know,” said Carver over the radio. 

“We’re going to follow the trail” I cut off their conversation. 

“Are you guys sure about this?” asked Ackermann. 

“Hell, I’m not sure about this. We’re clearly missing something here. But I’ll do as you say, cap,” responded Carver. 

“Yes. If whatever was on that probe was so important for two countries to send people here to retrieve it, we have to find out what happened to it,” I replied. 

“Copy that Charon. I’ll relay your whereabouts to command as soon as I can. Be careful out there.” 

Our oxygen was about at half capacity now, but we moved on with hopes of solving this mystery.

It wasn’t long until I saw something in the distance. As we got closer, I realized that that it was a spacecraft. Its design was different than ours and it was decorated with a flag of the Soviet Union. I couldn’t explain why, but I felt that something was really odd about the spacecraft. If there really was Russians with us on the Moon, they would have picked up our comms long ago, so there wasn’t a point in hiding. 

“To the unidentified Soviet lander, this is the crew of Dawnbreaker, please respond. We know you’re here, we have you in sight.” 

Nothing. 

We attempted to contact them several times again in both Russian and English, but always received only silence in response. We got closer and I realized why I found the spacecraft odd before. It looked like it had been there for a while. We didn’t see much of the interior through the small windows, which had been covered with something from the inside. 

“Our air is running low and I don’t like this Miller. We should really head back now.” said Carver with clear uneasiness in his voice. 

“I know, but we have to find out what’s going on here.” 

It took some time until we figured out a way to open the airlock. No one was home. The inside was a mess. The interior was splattered with brownish-red fluid, presumably contents of one of the many opened food packages lying on the floor. Or was it …? No. I quickly pushed that thought out of my head. 

It was a two-seater craft. There was a small amount of leftover supplies and samples, but no signs of the satellite’s black box. There was a space suit hanged on the wall near the airlock. Two occupants, and one space suit with a clearly missing name tag. We both quickly realized that the other one must still be out there somewhere – along with its occupant. At this point, we were really low on oxygen, so we rushed to get back to our spacecraft. 
As we reached Charon with the last bits of oxygen in our suits, I realized something. 

“Tell me, Carver, was it just me or did we not pass the wreckage on our way back?” I asked. 

“Fuck. Don’t even mention it. It wasn’t there, that’s right.” 

We shared our intriguing discovery with Ackermann later, and he was as surprised as was command when he informed them in turn. That night I took watch for the first four hours. It wasn’t really a night, since the sun was still shining, but for the sake of timekeeping, we referred to the time when we slept as night. 

When it was finally my turn to sleep, I had a dream about following the flash that I saw the previous day. I walked on and on, until I found the same space suit from the Russian craft just lying there, in the dust. The limbs were twisted and contorted in gruesome ways, but it was clear that someone, or something was inside that suit. I approached and slowly began opening the sunshield that obscured the inside of the helmet. I looked in terror, as I saw the inside. It was my face, covered with brownish-red blood. In place of eyes, there were only two gaping holes. 

The next day we started picking up something on an unused channel of our radio. It was a faint signal coming from somewhere in the crater. We tried to patch it to the speakers, but it didn’t make any sense. It was just a repeating sound resembling a person vocalizing the sound of a single letter or vowel but stretched to about 3 seconds followed by equally long pause. It was very distorted, and it clearly wasn’t a loop, since each sound was just slightly different than the previous one.

We ate, and once again prepared for moonwalk. It was darker than the other day. The sun was still shining, but it was steadily creeping its way under the horizon. We followed the source of the signal for about an hour when we found something lying in the dust in front of us. I tensed as I looked closer and found out what it was. 

It was a space suit. 

The same as the one in the Russian lander. 

“Well, it looks like we found our missing friend.” Said Carver with disbelief. 

I didn’t say anything. I simply jumped off the rover, and slowly, silently approached, the suit.

“What are you doing Miller?” continued Carver. 

Just as I was about to open the sunshield with my shaking hands, the suit *came alive* and grabbed my hand. With the sound travelling through our suits, I heard a weak “Pomogite” – meaning help in Russian. 

We carried him to our lander. The patch on his suit revealed his identity as “Tarkov”. He was in shock and hypoxic. I don’t know how long or why he was just lying there but he was lucky to be alive. For the next couple of hours, he fell in and out of consciousness. He eventually woke up. Our Russian was bad but luckily, he spoke English enough for us to understand each other. He didn’t remember why he was there, what had happened to him and his crew or what his mission was. 
When I looked out of the window, I realized that our flag was gone. There were no footprints, it looked like as if it simply vanished. At this point each one of us was really concerned, and we asked to terminate the mission. The command refused, explaining that the recovery of the satellite’s data was of paramount importance. We decided to continue our search tomorrow and went to sleep.

I again had the same nightmare as the day before. I woke up terrified and drenched in sweat. I saw Tarkov standing by the window and looking out. He then walked over to Carver, and just stood there, looking at him while he slept for about a minute or two. Silently, I asked him: 

“Tarkov, what are you doing?” 

but he just mumbled something like “them” or “when” and lied down. I didn’t sleep for the rest of the night, and I kept an eye on him, but nothing interesting happened.

The next day we found a picture or a map of the crater we were at in a pocket in Tarkov’s suit. There was a point a few miles from where we were that was marked with a cross. Tarkov didn’t know what was there, but I soon realized that it was right in the direction where I saw the flash on the first day. We had to check it out. 

Me and Carver later took off and headed towards this mysterious target while Tarkov stayed in the Charon. In reality, our rover had enough power to carry all three of us, but I insisted that it didn’t, and that he should stay behind. 

“I don’t trust this guy,” I said to Carver after I was sure that Tarkov was out of range of our short-range radio.

 “We land on the moon. We don't find the box and suddenly the probe is gone. Then we find a supposed-to-be-dead Russian who doesn't remember when was the last time he took a shit. And now, we're heading towards an inconspicuous place that was marked on his map he knows nothing about. You bet I don't trust him. Hell I don't trust a single step I take in that direction.” he replied. 

“What are we going to do with him?” he asked later. 

“I don’t know yet. But we can’t take him with us. Neither the LEM or CSM is built for an extra passenger. You know that,” I responded. 

“And I’m afraid he knows that too.” replied Carver. 

The sun was setting. After driving for a while, we reached something, that puzzles me to this day. Right there, in front of us, was something I can only describe as a three-sided pyramid. It was about 10 feet tall and its surface was completely smooth and black as night. 

“What in the world is this?” asked Carver with a shiver in his voice. 

We walked around it and took pictures. 

“What the fuck?!” I suddenly heard through my radio. 

I turned around and saw Carver frozen in place, staring at something. There, in the remaining faint light, was a space suit about 20 feet away from us. I recognized the missing name patch and realized that it was the suit from the Russian spacecraft. It was standing upright, on its feet. The sunshield was open to reveal a sight that terrifies me to this day. It was empty. The suit was empty. But it was standing upright. I came back to my senses after I heard a crackling noise coming from my radio. 

“….you….don’t….belong……here…..” it spoke in a low, deep, distorted voice. Then out of nowhere, I was blinded by an intense flash of light. When I recovered, the thing was gone. 

“Carver? Are you alright?” I asked. 

He was silent at first, and then replied: 

“Man, fuck NASA, fuck the army, fuck the satellite, fuck this whole mission! I want to get out of here, NOW!” 

Without any debate, we ran to the rover, and drove off back to Charon.  

When we came back, the sun had already fallen below the horizon, and it was almost completely pitch black. The airlock was open and Tarkov was standing in front of the module in his suit. Damnit. In the rush, we completely forgot about him. I approached him and started: 

“Listen, Tarkov, there is something you…” I stopped when I noticed that he was holding something behind his back, but it was too late. 

He swung and struck me with a sharpened rod. I hit my head on the inside of my helmet and dazed fell to the ground. When the ringing in my ears stopped, I saw him and Carver fighting in the dust. I stood up and thrown myself into Tarkov, propelling us both a dozen feet away. Before I was able to stand up again, he was already on top of me. We struggled and just as he got grip on the lever that was used to release my helmet, I struck his head with a sharp rock. His visor cracked, and while his air was slowly escaping his suit, I picked myself up and grabbed the rod. It was already stained with blood. He lunged at me, but I stabbed him in the chest. He then fell on top of me, and when our helmets touched, he spoke as the last of his air was pulled out from his lungs: 

“He is not your friend. Follow the voice”. 

I picked myself up and walked over to Carver. I saw that his suit was punctured on the thigh, and brownish-red blood was being sucked out into the airless vacuum all around us. When I brought him inside the Charon, I realized that our first aid kit was gone. He was bleeding a lot, and I managed to slow it down, but I had to treat him properly. I was afraid, that if we took off, he would bleed out in zero gravity even faster.

 “There was a medkit in the Russian thing, wasn’t it? he said. 

“Yeah” I replied. 

“Miller, you have to go and get it. Fuck. It’s not that far from here, is it?” said Carver. 

“No, it’s not. Are you sure you can hold on until I get back?” I asked. 

“Yeah, just go”. 

So I went. 

“Don’t die on me Carver. That’s an order.” I said before leaving.

As I said, it didn’t take long until I reached the Russian lander, but it felt like ages. Throughout the whole journey, I waited for something to jump out of the darkness around me. I wasn't surprised when I saw that the suit that was previously hanged on the wall was now missing, but still, I felt a shiver run down my spine. I took their medkit and headed back as soon as I could. But I couldn’t stop thinking about Tarkov’s last words.  

“He is not your friend. Follow the voice” I kept repeating inside my head.

 I then switched the channel on my radio to the one we heard the incomprehensible noise on. It was still on. I realized that it was stronger in one particular direction. 

“Follow the voice” I said to myself. 

Was this the voice Tarkov meant? Who is not my friend? Tarkov? Carver? The Mission commander back at Earth? I had to find out. I drove off in the direction of the signal. 

After driving for at least 15 minutes, I reached a small, crater about 30 feet in diameter. With my headlight on, I immediately saw that something was inside, but I couldn't recognize it yet. I stepped over the edge and walked into the crater and switched my light to full intensity. 

I stood there, paralyzed with raw terror for what felt like hours. There was a rectangular block of the same material as the pyramid in the center of the crater. A body was lying on top of it. Its limbs were contorted in the most twisted and gruesome way possible. His eyes were missing and in their place were only two gaping holes. It was Carver. There was a small box stuffed inside his mouth. It was the black box from the satellite. I took the box and ran out of there as fast as I could. Carver was dead. If Carver was dead, who was the Carver I left in the Charon? “He is not your friend” was the only thing I had on my mind the rest of the way back.

When I returned, Tarkov's body was gone but Carver was still there, lying, bleeding. But it wasn’t Carver. What was that thing? 

“Thank God you’re back, Miller” said Carver. 

Not Carver. Carver was dead. Mutilated. Dead. 

“Miller, are you alright?” continued not-Carver. 

“Yeah, I’ve got the kit” I replied. He couldn’t know that I know. 

*It* couldn’t know. 

I treated his (*its*) wound and the bleeding finally stopped. I strapped him in (strapped *it* in) and then strapped myself in. I didn’t tell him (*it*) that I had found the blackbox.

 I didn't tell *it* that I found *him*. 

With the engine roaring below us, the Charon split in half, and the crew compartment pushed us up, into the void while the legs stayed planted on the lunar dust eternally. 

Now I already wrote on several occasions, that I had felt minutes pass as if they were hours. The ascent and rendezvous took only a bit more than a dozen of minutes. But those minutes felt like decades. I wanted to scream so loud that my lungs would break and I wanted to vomit. But I couldn't because *it* would find out. I wanted to black out but I couldn't. I had to save Ackermann. After several lifetimes, we finally docked with Ackermann and the Trinity. Throughout the whole ordeal, we kept him updated, but meeting him was different. He was scared. But I was scared even more. He didn’t know that Carver was not Carver. I did know. 

I did unstrap first and pushed Ackermann out of the docking tunnel. I did kick Carver (not-Carver) right in the face when he followed. I did close the docking tunnel behind me. 

“WHAT THE HELL ARE YOU DOING MILLER? WHAT IS WRONG WITH YOU?” shouted Ackermann and slammed me to the wall of the command module. 

“DON'T OPEN IT, MIKE! IT'S NOT CARVER! That thing in the LEM is not Carver do you understand?!” I shouted back in pain. 

Even though he was a battle-hardened soldier, Ackermann finally broke into tears. I floated past him over to the controls, and before I undocked the Charon, I glanced at the docking tunnel window one last time. 

There it was. A thing with Carver’s face and body, but not Carver. Staring at us. But his eyes were completely smooth and black as night itself. He opened his mouth in a way that was simply not possible for a human, and let out a loud, disturbing screech that I wish I could forget so much. 

In a heartbeat, it turned to dead silence, as the Charon detached from the CSM, and drifted into the void. 

Me and Ackermann didn’t say a single word throughout the three-day journey back to Earth. 

We were placed in quarantine for months after we came back home. Nobody ever explained to us what happened on that mission. I never learned what was on the blackbox. Honestly, I didn’t want to know, after all I experienced. But whatever was there was apparently enough to cancel all other missions to the Moon and beyond. They eventually released us and made it very clear that we’re *never* supposed to talk about it. I never saw Ackermann from that day on.

The only time I talked about him was when a pair of men in suits came to my home one day a couple of years after the mission. 

“Captain Miller, have you been in touch with Lieutenant Ackermann lately?” one of them asked after we exchanged our greetings. 

“No, I never spoke or heard from him since the mission. Did something happen?” I replied. 

“I’m sorry to tell you, but Lieutenant Ackermann was found dead in a nearby forest yesterday.” 

I had to sit down. I didn't know him that well, but we spend a considerable amount of time together in training, and we lived through hell itself together, so it was more than enough for me to considered him a friend. Poor Mike. 

“How did he die?” I asked. 

“We don’t know yet. But he had multiple fractures on all of his limbs, and his eyes were gouged out.”

--------------------------------------------------------------

[Part 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/856tjv/i_know_why_we_never_returned_to_the_moon_part_2/)
=======Six words. So innocent, and yet, they had ruined everything.

“Daddy, look what I can do.”

I had turned, smiling, to see my daughter’s newest magic trick. I stopped smiling when I saw it. My heart stopped, my blood ran cold--a disturbing reminder of things past. 

I grabbed her by the shoulders, a little too hard. Made her promise to never tell another soul about what she could do. I made her swear so many times. She was crying by the end. Her face was ugly and contorted, her nose dripping snot. But she promised. 

I always knew that would not be the end of it. I knew what I had to do. Slip some sleeping pills into her drink, and cover her face with a pillow, like I had done with her mom. But I could not bring myself to do it. I loved her far too much, even more than I had loved my wife. 

And as she grew older, looking more like her mother every day, I knew it was only a matter of time. 

I still remember the night my wife told me, the night of our fifth anniversary. She had bought my favorite scotch, cooked us both some thick steaks, and sat me down at the dining room table. Our baby son was sleeping soundly in his room.

“I have something important to tell you,” she said. 

Her tone sent chills trickling down my spine. 

“I’m pregnant,” she said flatly. 

My breath caught in my throat. I smiled. She did not. 
  
“I don’t understand,” I said, breathlessly. "Isn’t this good news?”

My wife’s lips pursed into a thin white line.

“It’s a girl,” she said. “I can feel it.”

I waited for her to explain why she was upset, but instead, she started talking nonsense. 

“The girls in my family…” she trailed off. “We all have a special…ability.”

I shook my head.  

“O-kay?” I said, my mind a question mark. “And what is that?”

My wife frowned. 

“It’s better if I show you.”

She lifted the steak knife from beside her plate. Before I could stop her, she violently slashed open her wrist. I sent my chair clattering to the floor behind me as I lunged for my wife. I grabbed her arm so hard. But what I saw did not make any sense. Her arm was slashed down to the bone, but the blood did not flow out.

“It won’t come out unless I let it,” said my wife. 

It was then the blood began to flow. Down her arm, then up, into a shape. It detached and rose up, forming itself into a face, floating in midair. My wife’s face. Then spiraling back down, like a funnel, into her open arm. The flesh knitted itself back together. 

That night, my dinner went untouched. 

What happened next was all my fault. But, in my defense, I felt my trust had been betrayed. I did not know where to turn. Weak and weary, I turned to the arms of another woman. Of course these things always come out.

When I came home that day, my wife was sitting in one of the wooden dining room chairs. She had moved it to the middle of the living room, so that she was facing the door when I came in. Our baby daughter was snoring gently in her room. I could hear our son as he watched cartoons in his own. As I looked into my wife’s eyes, I knew that she already knew.

She stood up. My blood ran cold. Then I realized that it wasn’t just a chill, my blood was actually getting colder. My wife walked slowly towards me.

“I can freeze you from the inside,” she said. “Burst all the blood vessels in your body. I can boil you alive. I can make you bleed from your eyes, your ears, and every pore. And next time, I will.”

My heart stopped, and I collapsed unconscious to the floor. By the time that I awoke, my wife had already found my lover, and done the last one she had threatened me with to her. After that we always fought, and my wife began to lose it. My mother died from a cerebral hemorrhage. My sister died from a stomach bleed. 

She never admitted it, but I knew that it was her. I had no choice, I had to kill her.

And now, I wondered if I should have killed my daughter, too. My heart throbbed with guilt as I thought back to the first time she had shown me her magic trick, all those many years ago. I knew I could have stopped this all with a pillow and some pills, just as I had done with my wife.

She said it was an accident. And maybe it was. But as I stared down at the body of my son, covered in blood that had exploded from every pore, I didn’t really care.

[x](https://Reddit.com/r/lifeisstrangemetoo)I have been married to Marie, my wife, for 15 years now. We have two kids together; Aaron (10) and Priscilla (8). I have always pictured us as the perfect family, you know. Nice, spacious house in a good neighborhood, barely any arguments, well-behaved, healthy kids with good grades. Everything seemed spotless.

&#x200B;

But lately I have been noticing things. Things that have made me question everything in my life.

&#x200B;

But let us start at the beginning. I have always been a workaholic. For the last twenty years I have averaged 150 yearly commuter days. I spend more time in airports than I do with my own family. So it is only to be expected that things change when I suddenly find myself stuck in the house 24/7, right? That is exactly how I was trying to justify the weirdness; I’ve hardly spent a full weekend with them in years, it is gonna take time to get used to me hanging around here constantly.

&#x200B;

I suffered a pretty serious neck-injury on the job a few months back, which kept me hospitalized for a good two weeks. I am mostly fine now, but because of the nature of the fracture I still have to wear a collar for stabilization, and there is at least a couple of months until I’m ready for work. So I spend my days just wandering around the house, not quite knowing what to do with myself.

&#x200B;

My wife is a stay-at-home-mom. She is the love of my life. We met at a company retreat seventeen years ago and we hit it off immediately. Soon we fell in love, got married, spawned the kids, you know the deal. She left the company when Aaron was born. I was making enough for the both of us, so I was happy to see her happy.

&#x200B;

But now things are different. I have no idea if she’s happy anymore. She always smiles, always laughs, but it feels so emotionless. Forced even. And she sneaks out when she thinks I’m napping. At first I thought she was having an affair or something, but I’m not so sure anymore.

&#x200B;

My kids are just weird around me. Aaron won’t look me in the eyes, and Priscilla seems to avoid me at all cost. I shrugged it off the first few weeks; maybe they just needed a little more time. But time didn’t help. Time only made it worse. My wife keeps sending them to her parents’ every weekend. They love it there, she says. She allows them to sleep over at their friends’ place too often as well, even on school nights. I’ve tried to set some boundaries, but my wife just ignores them. She knows them best, she says. Can’t argue with that.

&#x200B;

At night, when she thinks I’m sleeping, my wife sneaks out of bed and makes a phone call. Just one. She is away for maybe thirty minutes, before returning to bed. I have tried sneaking down after her, but I can never get close enough to listen in. I’ll get a few words and phrases, but nothing that makes any sense. She looks visibly upset, though, that much I have gathered. The first few times I confronted her about it, but she just said it was one of her friends needing some advice. I didn’t want to press matters too far, because of the way she looked at me. Cold and emotionless. I shudder at the thought of it.

&#x200B;

I tried driving my kids to soccer practice and gymnastics twice a week, hoping to get some conversation started. They seemed really upset at the idea of me taking them anywhere, and my wife desperately tried to get me to reconsider, but I insisted. I stopped taking them after a week. The look in their eyes scared me. It was like the very presence of me made them so uncomfortable that it nearly induced panic attacks in them. I was at my wits end at this point.

&#x200B;

Laying awake at night, my mind started drifting. I have always joked that I spend so much time away from them, that they could easily be replaced and I would hardly notice. And then I remembered the Aaron-incident. I sat up in bed, sweating. The Aaron-incident.

&#x200B;

When Aaron was 2, a few months before Priscilla was born, I had been spending months at the time on a job. When I got home for a much needed long-weekend, my wife and son greeted me at the airport. Only it wasn’t my son. I didn’t recognize him at all. I stood there frozen for minutes, before my wife, looking quite flustered, snapped me out of it.

&#x200B;

“Pick him up,” she said. “He just wants to hug his father.”

&#x200B;

I picked him up and just stared at him. He didn’t seem familiar at all. At this point I was starting to feel unwell, like I had to throw up or something. I couldn’t understand why I didn’t recognize him. When we got home, I told everything to my wife, and she said it was because I spent too much time away. Kids that age grow and change like crazy, she explained. It took me weeks to accept it, but at some point I just realised I was acting like a lunatic, and got on with my life.

&#x200B;

The thought of the Aaron-incident sparked something in me. I started thinking back to other strange, seemingly explainable, things that had happened. Like that I wasn’t present when my wife gave birth to any of the kids. That I was never around much the last trimester of her pregnancies. That I have never actually met any of her relatives, except for her parents, who’ve always been strange around me. I started feeling dizzy and nauseous just thinking about it.

&#x200B;

Was the last seventeen years of my life a lie? It seemed so impossible, but at the same time I couldn’t shake the feeling that something was terribly wrong. The only thing I knew for certain was that I had to get to the bottom of this. Otherwise I was afraid I was going to lose my mind.

&#x200B;

I started paying more attention to every little detail that went on in the house. Every conversation, every phone call, every movement; any little detail that could explain what was going on. There was always *something* that never quite made sense. Just a tiny, little thing that would catch my eye. How they always seem to talk in perfect order, like they were reading from a script. Like how they always seemed to know who was coming up the driveway just moments before they actually did. Like it all was some elaborate stage act. I was getting more paranoid by the minute, and I think they noticed something was wrong.

&#x200B;

That’s when my wife sent me to therapy. She said I needed it, that I had been acting different ever since I got home. Like everything was *my* fault. I tried explaining to her that I was probably just a bit anxious because I wasn’t used to *living* there, but she wouldn’t hear it.

&#x200B;

My first session went as I had suspected. The therapist was desperately trying to get me to question myself and my motives. I didn’t share anything with him. I simply couldn’t trust him. Maybe he was in on it? Maybe they were trying to label me insane? Lock me up in some godforsaken asylum? To what end? In any case, I couldn’t afford to spill my suspicions just yet. I needed some proof.

&#x200B;

I told my wife everything went great, and that I understood I might be coming on too hard. I was going to take it easy, and not force them. I would leave them to it, and learn as I went along. All that jazz. She smiled one of her obviously fake smiles and gave me a cold hug. She was so pleased, she told me. I was going to get better in no time.

&#x200B;

Sure lady.

&#x200B;

I had come to realise I approached the matter from the wrong angle. I shouldn’t have given away my suspicions so easily. Instead I should have followed the one trail they could not hide; the money. If they were indeed actors, they had to get paid, right? And there had to be some evidence of some transaction somewhere? Even if they got paid in cash, I could perhaps follow them and catch them in the act. Yes, this was a plan.

&#x200B;

I spent days without sleep going through bank records, receipts, the GPS of the car, without getting anywhere. Everything seemed just fine. Nothing out of the ordinary. I was tearing my hair out in despair, when fate suddenly intervened, and they slipped up. Just a tiny mistake, mind you. They could have easily gotten away with it if I wasn’t already in a state of complete awareness.

&#x200B;

One morning my wife was getting the kids ready for school. Everything normal. Eating breakfast, packing their lunches, ushering them into the car. The old “we’re gonna be late for school”.

&#x200B;

But it was just this one, tiny detail.

&#x200B;

The school was closed that day.

&#x200B;

My wife did not know this, but I had looked through all the papers I could get my hands on, one of them being the school calendar. And that day they were definitely closed.

&#x200B;

I don’t know if you have experienced such a feeling; it is like a mix of total relief and utter devastation all at once. To prove to myself that I wasn’t insane, but at the same time realise my life was a lie. And the day wasn’t about to get any less absurd.

&#x200B;

Not only did my wife not realise that the school was closed. She also forgot her purse. And in it I found the one thing I had been looking for the past few days; a paycheck.

&#x200B;

Now the paycheck wasn’t made out in her name, or the name I knew her by at least. It was made out to one Lisa Garon. But it wasn’t that little detail that threw me off. It was something else. Something extremely disturbing. Something impossible. It was the name listed as the employer.

&#x200B;

It was me.

&#x200B;

I was the [employer](https://www.reddit.com/user/hyperobscura).

&#x200B;
***
[Part 2](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/bwske9/i_think_my_wife_and_kids_are_actors_part_two/)

[Part 3](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/bxjte1/i_think_my_wife_and_kids_are_actors_part_three/)

[Final Part](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/byard1/i_think_my_wife_and_kids_are_actors_finale/)
***She was drenched from the rain, cold and shivering, as she edged toward my counter. She appeared to be about ten or twelve.

Her right hand grasped a slip of paper which immediately slipped out when she collapsed onto the floor. My coworker Janne and I rushed to her aid, wrapping her with our jackets and putting her in front of the heating system we had in our office. 

Janne and I were the only ones on shift, so we did our best to find any spare clothes and blankets for the girl. We also bandaged up her bruises from a first aid kit and notified the other officers from another station. 

A few minutes later, we were settled down and I handed the girl a cup of warm tea. 

“Are you alright kid?” I gently asked, “What happened?”

She remained silent. Her eyes looked like she had been crying the entire way there and her gaze was fixed on the steam rising from the cup. 

“You’re safe now, okay?” Janne intervened, putting her hand on the kid’s shoulder, “Everything is going to be fine. What’s your name?”

I wasn’t the best with kids, to be honest. I was glad Janne was with me to help sort it out.

“Kay,” The girl finally answered.

“Thank you, Kay,” Janne replied, “Now, we need you to tell us how you got hurt and what exactly happened.”

The girl paused. She looked at Janne, and without saying anything, handed her the piece of paper. Kay then started softly crying. Janne passed the folded paper to me and consoled the girl. I noticed that it was covered in dried blood as I opened it up. 

I started to read over it and realized that it was a handwritten letter. A letter addressed to Kay. 

\--- 

*Dear K,* 

*I’m sorry for misspelling your name. I can only hear your voice from the basement and the dim light down here does not help. I  managed to pick up your name from the conversations I have overheard.*  

*You don’t know me, but I know you. Ever since you met him. Ever since he started teaching you those piano lessons.*

*You play beautifully, and you’re a fast learner. It was nice to hear your music, a ray of light in my hopeless predicament.* 

*I soon found myself eagerly waiting for those Wednesdays to come around, just to hear your voice during the lessons.*

*But I knew deep down you weren’t safe with him around. He had plans for you, evil plans I can’t even begin to describe.*

*He acts nice, but it’s just a sinister façade for the real monster inside him.* 

*He feeds me scraps through a broken drainage pipe attached to the cemented wall, but he only sends food when he feels like it. I’ve degraded to only skin and bones. I don’t know how long I have left to live.*

*There’s a shower head attached next to the dim lightbulb and water only comes out of it at certain intervals. It’s either scorching hot or freezing cold but it’s my only source of hydration.*

*I have grown filthy in this unhygienic cage, but my only source of comfort is this paper and pencil. I have managed to grasp unto sanity through writing short stories and creating drawings. All of them about you.* 

*I knew, from the bottom of my heart, that I had to save you. No matter the cost. I could not let him manipulate you as he did to me. No one should have to go through this hell.* 

*So, I planned each day. I realized that if my weak body tries to shout a warning, he might attack you before you can escape. I then thought of a different way.*

*There is a weak spot in the wood on the ceiling from water leaking. I’ve managed to chip through it bit by bit with my pencil during your practices, careful to not be too loud. Your warm music kept me going, and because of that, I pushed myself to work harder despite the exhaustion that set in every time. But I didn’t give up. I never stopped.* 

*The hole I’ve created leads up to the first-floor guest room, right under the bed. He’ll never know about it until I’ve crawled through. I’m going to bring this letter to you when he takes a break in the middle of the lesson to use the bathroom. I know he always does.* 

*You might scream, but I will tell you to run. To never look back. To never stop.* 

*It’s been a while since I’ve seen the outside sun, but I remember the woods that surround this area. There are going to be thorns, rocks, and a sharp fence to get past. Though I am sure you will persevere and keep running. Just don’t pay attention to the pain. For after the hurt, there will be freedom.* 

*Find the police. Tell them about this monster. Tell them to search for this cruel place. Most importantly, do this when you are safe.* 

*I believe in you.*  

*Anyway, tomorrow is the big day. I better stop here. I don’t want him to find out what I’ve been up to.*

*I wish I got to know you more K. I think we would’ve been great friends.* 

*Sincerely from my heart,*

*Thank you for being the light in my darkness.* 

\---

I wiped a tear away from my eye before setting the letter down.

I slowly looked up at Kay, “Can you describe the place?” 

Minutes later, Janne and I were on our way to the location accompanied by several other sirens. We left Kay with other officers at the station after her family had been contacted. When we arrived at the house, it was cold and abandoned. Our torches illuminated tire tracks that dug into the dirt leading away from the structure. 

We ascended the porch steps and struck down the door. After making sure the hallway that led to the entrance was clear, I walked in first. I immediately pointed my light into the living room where the piano sat. I noticed that dark red blotches covered some of the white keys. I proceeded forward cautiously until the glow of my torch stumbled upon two bare feet.  

I stopped dead in my tracks and fell to my knees, fists clenched. 

Lying motionlessly there was a frail young boy, [with a heart as big as a giant.](https://www.reddit.com/r/RoyalStories/)Boogeymen are born from normal people; people who have let the evil enter and break their minds.

It starts with seemingly innocent bad thoughts. Someone has let their dog poop in your front yard and you half-jokingly wish they were hit by a bus.

You newborn son can’t get a whole night of sleep. You love him, but you wish just a little bit that he didn’t exist.

You look at your boss, yelling at you for being late and sleep-deprived, and imagine yourself twisting his neck, very, very slowly, until he cannot breathe.

You sometimes feel a lack of memory, like some minutes went by and you didn’t even notice, or someone had a whole conversation with you that you can’t remember, but you blame it to your stress and bad sleeping. Your boss is putting you through a lot this week.

Your neighbors don’t say good morning to you anymore. Even the overfriendly neighbor is different. He timidly waves at you, but in a colder way.

You say something that sounds normal to you when you’re mad, but the whole room is looking at you like you’re crazy.

The water and the food start to taste weird. And the smell. The sulfuric smell will never leave your nostrils anymore, although no one else feels it. Like your very soul is rotten. You go to the doctor and with a shaky voice he asks that you never come back again.

He won’t tell you what you have, he didn’t even charge you. You suspect the smell comes from inside, so there’s no amount of baths and lotions that can solve it.

You go to churches and temples and synagogues and mosques but no one can help you. No one can find what’s wrong. There’s no devil, no vengeful spirit. The poison is in your very being.

You realize nothing of it can ever go away again. You only had to feed **It** once or twice before **It** learned to feed **It**self on you.

You find yourself in the middle of the night in the living room. You don’t remember getting there. You’re fully dressed, covered in sweat and holding a butcher knife in your hand. There’s no blood, but it *could* have been bloodied moments ago.

The next day, you watch and read the local news, praying that none of the vicious actions they describe are yours.

You start a diary, because that’s what people descending into madness do. They write to document their decay.

But when you try to write, you notice you have no control over your hand anymore. You write what **It** wants, not what you intended to. You know **It** craves violence, unspeakable acts that make your stomach churn, so you lock yourself.

You know you’re dangerous and others will be safer without you around. But **It** controls your every move, so It unlocks all the big padlocks every night.

That’s the reason you can’t die. You’re not in control of your body anymore. You’re locked outside of yourself. **It** has taken over.

You’re not you anymore. Your friends abandon you, your family despises you.. Your eyes hurt and you hate the light. Your fingers are numb, everything is numb, because your body isn’t yours anymore.

Maybe Humanity’s greatest fears of all are Being Forgotten, Being Misunderstood and Powerlessness, and you get to experience all of them at once.

What you used to be – the real You – no longer exists in other people’s memories. Your loved ones suppressed every good time they had with you, and replaced any fond recollection of you by fearing what you are now. You must be left behind, because now you’re **It**, and **It** is evil. 

You try to explain **It** is not you, but your body won’t obey you. You’re finally kicked out of your shell, and now you’re just a disembodied shadow, living under some kid’s bed.

\*\*\*

I don’t know for sure how I ended up there. Everything was foggy and felt like nothingness. I was a shadow, could only move across the shadows, so I stayed under the bed or in the closet a lot. Despite having lost everything, at least I felt safe for the first time in a while.

I have no idea how long it took for me to be noticed. I tried to keep track of the time based on how many times the boy came to sleep above me, but I kept forgetting. I wanted to retain whatever information I could, but a shadow has no memory. So I don’t really know.

“Is anyone there?” he asked. I don’t know if I had seen him before that day or not, whether he was thin or chubby, or the color of his hair. I just remember thinking that judging by his voice he wasn’t older than 8.

He noticed me.

Amazed by having my existence acknowledge, I tried to talk. To tell him it was lonely and dusty and maddening to be what I was – something next to nothing. I was like a phantom limb of a mind, and even thought it couldn’t technically ache, it did. And it was excruciating.

I wanted and desperately needed to tell someone about it. 

Of course I had no vocal chords. Hell, I didn’t even have a body, or an entire mind. Everything came out as a terrifying growl, and kids can hear it.

The boy screamed for his mom. I cowered in the darkest shadows as she came, sleepy and grumpy, and turned on the light.

“I heard something under the bed”, he whimpered.

She checked on me. Even though I didn’t have eyes, I could somehow see her with my battered half-mind. She was older, probably in her mid-40s. She wasn’t mad or unkind, just exhausted.

“There’s nothing here, sweetie. Wanna come to my room? Mom is really tired today.”

The boy agreed.

I envied him. I wish more than anything that I had comforting arms to fall on and rest.

\*\*\*

I didn’t have a lot of story with this boy, or at least I can’t remember. He frightened easily so, no matter how much I wanted to communicate with someone, I refrained from scaring him. I guess I’m just bad at everything, including at being a boogeyman.

I heard conversation around the house, but for a long time, it was just the boy and his mother. I rarely ventured outside the bedroom, afraid there wouldn’t be enough shadows for me to come back before morning. I was completely sure that I was going to disappear if I stepped (and I use this word very loosely) into the light.

And even though everything was so bad I wanted to exist, so I was afraid and cautious.

The house was too big for only two people. I eventually learned that the mother had an older daughter – she apparently was in college and was the most frequent visitor. The daughter was a joyous young woman, I really liked when she was around.

I wish she was younger so she could hear me. She felt like she could bear to listen to my awful cries and not be scared, even when she was small.

As the boy aged, I understood that he couldn’t hear me anymore. So sometimes I would talk aloud and make those awful noises just because I could. Just to remember myself that I was still clinging to existence.

The zenith of my life with the boy was when I learned that I could manipulate objects to some extent if I really focused, right before he decided to move to the larger bedroom his sister used to occupy. He was a pre-teen by that time, and I heard him pacing around the room looking for something.

I didn’t really understand what it was, but it was some sort of memento of his late father. It was important.

Then I saw – once again, I use this term very loosely – something shinny close to me, under the bed. It was a reliquary, one of those you wear around your neck.

I really wished that I could give it to him in that moment. Really, really wished.

Then it happened. Slowly but surely, the thing moved. The boy sounded so relieved and happy when he finally found it with my happy.

I felt accomplished for the first time in my life as a boogeyman. 

\*\*\*

The next few years are a blurry of waiting and lurking around cautiously now. We boogeymen can only move on shadows, but we can’t squeeze through the cracks of windows or under doors. If I’m being scientific, we’re more like a slime made of shadow.

That’s why, no matter how much I considered relocating to another house and trying to talk to other children, it wasn’t easy. I was stuck with a teenager and a middle-aged woman who couldn’t hear me.

Then the boy went to college too and it was only me and the mother for a while. Not even the older daughter would come. It was boring and lonely.

After making a painstaking effort to remember, I finally recalled the daughter and the mother having a huge fight over the character of her boyfriend; I just don’t know when it was.

I was almost making up my mind about going through the risks to find another place when the mother started renovating the bedroom I lived in. the bed above me, now painted white and with pink sheets, was going to have a new occupant.

The day the daughter came back was full of tears. She cried, apologizing to her mother, while the older woman kept telling her that there was nothing to worry, and that despite everything, she was really happy.

She was now a grandmother.

\*\*\*

I, too, could barely contain my excitement. Lisbeth, the granddaughter, was a cute little thing; I think she was around 4 when they arrived. She sounded delighted with her new bedroom.

Both her mother and grandmother put her to bed that night. She asked to sleep with all the lights turned off like a big girl. Chuckling, they complied, and closed the door, in total darkness. Of course the two adults had a lot of talk after all these – I suppose – years.

“Hey, little monster! I know you’re in there. I’m not afraid of you”, she stated. If I could smile, that’s what I would have done. But I didn’t say anything; I was unsure whether she really felt my presence or just assumed there would be a monster.

This was an opportunity too precious to be ruined. I didn’t want to scare her off on the first day and lose her company.

“Seriously, little monster! Knock if you’re in there!”

I made whatever sound I could. She laughed in delight.

After that, we developed our system to communicate. I would make one noise for yes and two noises for no.

Lisbeth asked me all sorts of things. Silly things, from her little kid universe, like if I thought her doll was pretty, or if she should wear blue socks instead of white. Things about her family – if I knew her uncle who lived in this room before, if her mother was beautiful, if I could go to her dad’s house and hunt him. I replied everything, overjoyed to feel important and heard.

“Do you have big, scary eyes?”

*No.*

“Do you have nice eyes, then?”

*No.*

“Are you eyeless?”

*Yes.*

“Oooh, that’s scary! But not for me. Don’t worry, Poggy.”

*Yes.* And I still don’t know why she nicknamed me Poggy.

“Do you have hands?”

*No.*

“That must be hard, Poggy. So you have paws?”

*No.*

“It’s really hard to imagine you! Can I see you pretty please? I swear I won’t tell mom or nana.”

*No.*

“Aw. Are you ashamed?”

*No.*

She was deep in thought for a long time. 

“Oooh, so are you invisible?”

*Yes.*

“That’s so cool!”

Once again, she was quiet. I thought she was asleep. 

“Can you move things??”

\*\*\*

After learning that I could move things, Lisbeth came up with more ways to communicate. She would put many small objects (little balls, a Barbie shoe etc.) under the bed, and depending on what I moved I could answer things like “probably”, “I don’t know”, etc. That improved our communication a lot.

We talked for hours and hours every day. Despite being limited by her youth, she was a very clever girl. She was able to ask me a chain of questions that led her to conclude that I had been human before.

This fact seemed to scare her. She then asked if her mother or grandmother could become boogeymen too.

*I don’t think so*, I replied, moving a little replica of a racing car.

When she ran out of questions to ask me, she would ask her mom and nana: *what do you ask someone when you want to know them better?*

Luckily, they thought it was cute. They thought I was Lisbeth’s imaginary friend – and well, I was. I never meant to harm or scare her.

“Ask their profession and if they have kids”, her mother replied. Lisbeth came back happily, and for a long time, she tried to guess what I worked with.

Fireman? Policeman? Teacher? Scientist? Astronaut? Doctor? Lawyer? Nurse? Actor? The person who gives you a Happy Meal in the mall? Gardener? Cleaning lady? Lunch lady?

To all of them, I replied no. she wasn’t disappointed, though, just more fired up. I was a mere office worker, something kids never think of because it’s not glamorous or close to their reality. 

“Mom, tell me a profession!” “Uh, teacher.” “No, I already asked if Poggy is a teacher!”

When Lisbeth asked “secretary” I finally said yes. Close enough.

“Do you have kids?”

*Yes.*

“Are they like you?”

*No.*

“Do you love them?”

*Yes.*

“And they love you?”

*I don’t know.*

“Sorry, Poggy. You’re my friend and I love you!”

\*\*\*

I think I spent a year or so with Lisbeth. She healed my soul, if I had a soul to heal. No one had ever been that kind to me.

I know it’s my fault that I let **It** in and corrupt my very being. But I felt that if I had been treated so well before I would have never allowed it to happen.

For the people in the house, life went on. Lisbeth’s mother started dating another guy, someone the grandmother adored, so he was always there. The place was lively. It almost felt like we were all one big happy family.

I didn’t exact sleep, but I had some sort of dormancy period daily. 

I was abruptly awakened with the sound of someone entering the bedroom; I think it was from the window. A tall figure violently took Lisbeth from her bed, making her whimper, still in her sleep. It then moved to another room, Lisbeth in their arms, not turning on the lights.

Distressed, I followed. We entered the third bedroom, and I immediately moved to under the bed.

“You fucking b\*tch!” the person barked, turning on the lights. Lisbeth’s mother and her boyfriend were jerked awake.

“Luke! For Christ’s sake, what you’re doing?”

“Dad!”

Both sounded incredibly scared.

Lisbeth had told me a lot about her father. Even in her childish words, I was able to imagine a world of pain and fear. Lisbeth’s mother put up with a lot of verbal and physical violence, ashamed to admit that her marriage was a huge mistake.

*I heard Dad screaming to Mom a lot and breaking things, but he was nice to me. He told me she had been naughty so he had to ground her. I believed him at first, but Mom wasn’t naughty. She was good. She brought me here the day Dad hurt me and told me he never let her talk to my nana before.*

Lisbeth’s mother sobbed. Luke was pointing a gun to his own daughter’s head.

“How dare you sleep with another man, you fucking tramp! You’re my wife, I’ll never give you up”, he yelled. “We’re coming back home now.”

Lisbeth’s mother started moving meekly towards him, crestfallen and humiliated. Her boyfriend motioned to stop her, but Luke spoke again.

“Come on, you horny b\*tch! You’ll either obey your husband and be punished for your unfaithfulness or your life will be a living hell knowing that your daughter died because of you!”

“Dad! Please! It hurts!” Lisbeth pleaded, the metal barrel glued to her little forehead.

My heart ached. Everyone was so scared, the room was so bright.

I’d try to help anyone in that situation. Anyone.

But the sweet little girl who made me feel someone again, who healed me, who gave me hope and reason to exist? You can bet I’d give everything to save her, including what little of me still hadn’t evaporated.

So I wished with all my might that I moved the gun. And my non-body, the slime of darkness that I was, jumped towards the light.

It felt like I was a sieve, with light perforating every pore that I didn’t have. It hurt. It hurt but it also felt liberating, like I had finally atoned for my sins and was free, choosing to sacrifice happily for something that was worth all that I had.

I was fast, a flash of dark in the light. I was able to move the pistol from his hand, causing it to pirouette e hit him in the head with the butt of the gun.

Before disappearing I saw his body starting to fall unconscious, almost in slow-motion, and I heard Lisbeth’s frenetic voice. “Poggy saved us!”

\*\*\*

I abruptly woke up back in my own body, like when you dream of falling.

**It** was gone, or at least I couldn’t hear **Its** malicious thoughts anymore.

I tried moving my hands. Slowly, finger by finger, everything worked.

I laughed with joy. I almost couldn’t believe my luck. I thought I was gone forever.

I opened my eyes and saw my husband by my side. I smiled happily, opening my arms to hug him. Instead he looked scared and twitched, moving to the farther side of the bed.

“I’m so, so sorry. Did I snort? I should sleep in the guest’s room, but you insist…”

“Babe, it’s fine. It’s me”, I tried to explain, with the softest voice I could. But his eyes were full of panic. He was so washed-out, pale, thin and with swollen eyes, like he spent most of his life crying.

He probably did, considering what **It** kept talking about doing.

And he looked old. Really, really old. I was ready to dismiss everything as some sort of drug-induced dream, but clearly years had passed – based on Lisbeth’s uncle, at least a decade. I instinctively looked at the corner of our room where the crib of our newborn used to be, but there was nothing. The room was arranged somewhat differently too.

“Where are the kids?” I asked. Still looking terrified, he guided me to their rooms.

“Please don’t be so harsh, Rachel. I know they didn’t mean to say your cooking was bad”, he begged me.

My newborn was now a handsome 12-years-old little man. I cried as I hugged him for the first time in so long.

Being a boogeyman was so scary. But nothing is scarier than being back and having to pick up the pieces that **It** left. Nothing is scarier than knowing how hard it will be to be trusted and loved again. Still, I’m grateful I’m here. I want to spend the rest of my days redeeming myself with the ones I love for everything **It** did through my body while I was almost too far gone in a dark, dark place.From a early age I was told my father had “built” me and that I was built to help the family. Any feelings or thoughts that differed from his programming were to be reported to him as a malfunction that he would fix. It didn’t take me long to associate malfunctions with pain and I reported them less and less over the years.

I slept in the basement in a box with a thin layer of foam and a pillow. I didn’t go to school, I didn’t know school even existed. My education, if you can call it that was a list of books on topics to upload. Most of these books were on topics useful to my parents such as basic plumbing and electrical work, cooking, gardening and those written by my father on my programming.

My mother would then give me a list of questions to answer about these books to ensure the upload was successful. Sometimes, the questions would be tricks or I would answer them incorrectly in the eyes of my outraged father. My uploads were almost always successful, I had nothing but time and the intense fear of “corrupting my processors” if I didn’t properly concentrate.

Writing this now, so many years later it does sound ridiculous but as a child unexposed to the world, I only had my parents to guide me. Between uploads and maintenance, I had tasks to complete. This included mowing the lawn, tending the garden, cooking meals, cleaning and fixing things such as lawn mowers, washing machines, dryers and fridges.

There was no down time, I always had broken things to fix. I later found out my father would sell these once I had fixed them. When I was 17 years old (I didn’t know of birthdays or my age, but this is what police have told me) my father had to stop work and decided it was time for me to earn some money.

The thought scared me but I obeyed orders as I had been programmed to do. My father would send me to do cash jobs mowing lawns and doing general yard work. He would usually wait in the car until I was done or leave and come back if no one was home.

During these times he would put me on mute mode and said that he would know if I spoke with anyone. It was forbidden, if I malfunctioned there would be serious consequences. No one ever approached or spoke with me. Even if they had arrived home before my father returned, they would make their way inside without a word.

I discovered later that he had told his clients I was deaf and mute and liked to be left alone to finish the job. It was simple, he would drop me off on a large property, I would do my job and we would leave. One day I was mowing a regulars house, no cars were in the driveway so my father left me to do the job. Shortly after a girl came out with a drink. She looked the same age as me and for a moment I considered she may be an android to.

“It’s pretty hot outside, I thought you might want this” she said handing me a black drink. “Its Pepsi, I hope that’s okay” she smiled. I had no idea what Pepsi was, it was black like the oil mother made me drink so I thought it should be okay.

I still remember that first sip, it was the single greatest thing I had tasted. It didn’t leave my mind feeling scrambled like my mothers drink.  I wanted to ask what Pepsi was, where she got this drink from. Did she make it? “I haven’t seen you around, what school did you go to?” Pepsi girl asked. I put my head down and walked back to my mower. What was I supposed to do? “You’re not even going to say thank you?” She said following me.

I looked back at her, she made me nervous for reasons I was yet to know about. “I have to work” I replied to her. Without another word she huffed and walked away. I spent the rest of the day counting down the minutes until my father came to pick me up. I was convinced they would know I had gone off mute, that I had spoken to someone.

When my fathers dusty red wagon pulled up, I loaded my gear into the car and got in. No words were spoken, I felt a small sense of relief but a small voice in the back of my head spoke to me. *He may not know now but wait till you get home.* Nothing was out of the usual that night, I did my chores, worked on my uploads and recharged my batteries.

The rest of the week was business as usual, my father was in one of his moods that lasted from days to weeks. The longer the mood, the more aggressive he would get with me. The small voice in the back of my head spoke to me once more. *Maybe he really doesn’t know. Maybe he is lying.* Once this seed had been planted, over the next few months its roots took hold of me.

The rare moments I was left alone, I did something I’d never done before, I watched TV.

Though usually on mute and in short intervals, I started seeing images of the outside world.  Happy families, cartoons and animals, it was mesmerizing and terrifying at the same time. The day that changed my life however was the day I turned on the TV and caught a glimpse of *I, Robot.* Real androids that had sown real doubts within me.

Though I knew something was inherently wrong about my situation, I didn’t know what to do. Eventually, I was sent back to Pepsi girls house and got to work. I was really hoping she would bring me some more but didn’t get my hopes up. I was almost done mowing the lawn when she pulled into the property. I watched her drive up to the house and get out. A part of me screamed to talk to her.

I thought of the scenarios carefully

1. I would find out the truth about myself
2. She may tell my father and my malfunction would need to be fixed
3. I might get Pepsi

I caught her at the door almost out of breath from running and she turned to look at me with a glare. “Am I an android? Father says I’m an android.”  I blurted out.

“Android?” she asked raising her eyebrows.

I told her everything that I’ve told you and about the movie I’d seen with real androids. She stood quietly, I guessed she was trying to make sense of it all. I heard footsteps behind me and immediately lost all my courage. My father said nothing and grabbed my arm pulling me away. I looked back at her, still with the same perplexed look she wore when I first approached her.

*I had blown it.*

That night was the worst night of my life. The “fixing” my father did was worse then ever before and now I knew. *I am something, I’m someone.* The seams were splitting, my father no longer bothered with the usual half assed facade that had become so apparent to me now. It was just straight punishment.

Both my parents tried scaring me, telling me stories of police and the outside world. They were both furious but also shaken. I wasn’t allowed out of the basement after that, the days passed slowly and my parents screaming matches were the only form of stimulation I had. I would put my ear to the door to try hear what they were saying.

One sentence drove fear into me that I didn’t know I had. “I’m going to shut it down for good”. I was that “it”. I heard someone coming down the steps and fled from the door. My father pushed it opened but stayed outside. I stared at him from across the room, uncertain of what I was supposed to do. He threw a shovel into the room and it clanged against the floor breaking the silence.

“Come” he said motioning me out of the room. I obeyed his commands and was lead into the backyard. We walked further out onto the property before he ordered me to dig a hole.

“What am I digging for?” I asked him.

“What the fuck is with all these questions? What happened to you? I didn’t program you right?” My father had to be in his 60’s at least but this shriveled up man still terrified me.

“Are you going to shut me down?”

“Yeah, that’s right. Gonna shut you down and get a new one. One that can keep its fucking mouth shut” A half smile appeared on father's face, as if satisfied with himself.

That smile pissed me off, that man pissed me off. As much as he scared me, I thought of what I was missing. Though, I didn't even know what I was missing apart from the magical world I had put together through the TV shows I’d seen. I thought of Pepsi girl, I thought of the fucking Pepsi and then all the pain this man had caused me.

I clenched the shovel and swung at him connecting with the side of his face. The sound rung out into the night but no part of me was sticking around to enjoy it. My father hit the ground and I started running. There was no plan, I hadn’t intended for this to happen and had no clue where I was going or where I should be going.

After cutting through a few properties, I finally stopped running. I collapsed into some tall grass and caught my breath. The stars were beautiful, it was the first time I’d be out at night on my own and despite the fear and uncertainty it was the most beautiful night of my life.

I decided I would go to Pepsi girls house, I knew it was close and had an idea of where it was. I continued walking and found myself at the driveway just as the sun was coming up. I knocked on the door until a worried man came out to greet me. I told him everything I’d told his daughter and he believed me. *Thank god he believed me.*

The police arrived at the house to find my father with a gun in his mouth, he had already disposed of my mother. They told him to put it down but he pulled the trigger and it was over. Over for them but not for me, my life was just beginning.

It was revealed to me that they weren’t really my parents. They had stolen me, stolen my childhood, my mind and at times I wonder if they just might still steal my sanity. Thank god for malfunctions.

Note: Thank you Gary, Emily and Grace (Pepsi girl). Thank you.[Part 1](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/dlhqu6/ive_been_a_search_and_rescue_diver_for_12_years/)

I wanted to just forget about the things I saw. But, no matter how hard I try, I can’t erase them from my mind. I’d like to think that I’m a good man, but there comes a point where sheer terror outweighs one’s sense of decency no matter how good you are. I think I’ve reached that point.

I wasn’t planning on writing this, but more things have happened, and I found something…horrible. There’s no other way to explain it. I don’t know how much longer I can remain here. I can’t sleep anymore. I just keep dreaming about those fucking things I saw.

I’ve been plagued by nightmares about them for the past two nights. It always seems so real. At first, I’m asleep in my bed, then suddenly those arms are rising up from the darkness around me, pinning me down and covering my mouth. I struggle, but they’re so strong. I especially remember the fucking smell. It’s like old grass clippings and rotten fish mixed together. The next thing I know, I’m awake, retching with tears streaming down my face.

However, even those terrible dreams are nothing compared to what has happened in the past two days. Especially compared to what I saw last night. I don’t know what to make of it. I’ve packed my bags. I think I might leave soon. I need to get away from this fucking place.

A couple days ago, not long after my initial post, I received a call about a body found near the river. I felt a cold sensation in my gut when I got there and realized that it had been found right where the boy disappeared.

I approached the bank to see Moose and two others standing over what a body. Their backs were to me, and I could hear one of them speaking angrily. He was practically shouting.

“Shit. Shit. Shit.” It was Clyde, one of the other more experienced SAR divers. As I got closer, I saw that the other one was Ryan. I felt chills run down my spine. All three of the senior divers were in one place. I recalled the things Moose said to me last week as well as the knowing glances I’ve seen those three share. Something was up. “Do you think it was him?” Clyde asked.

“Let’s not jump to conclusions,” Moose said.

“I heard voices by the river last night.” Ryan said suddenly. The other two went silent and stared at him.

“The lures?” Clyde asked. His voice was hushed, and I could barely make it out.

Ryan nodded. “Almost definitely.”

“That breaks the agreement, though,” Clyde said. “He’s not supposed to use those anymore.”

“Well he is, for whatever reason.” Ryan turned to Moose. “Any idea what’s going on?”

Moose started to respond when a twig snapped beneath my weight. The three older men whirled around to look at me. That iciness was still in Moose’s eyes, but I also noted a twinge of fear.

“About time you got here,” Clyde said from beside him, seemingly unaware that I had been standing there for a while. “We’ve got bad news.” He stepped aside so I could see the body more clearly.

My blood ran cold the moment I laid my eyes on it. I was already reeling from the conversation I had just overheard, and the sight of the body only compounded that confusion. It was Michael, one of the new search and rescue divers. He laid on his back in full scuba gear minus a mask. I moved forward and knelt beside the body. Michael was new to search and rescue, and he had actually recently attended a few classes I taught. Tears stung my eyes as I stared down at him. What the fuck happened?

As if in response to my silent question, Moose spoke up. “For some reason he was diving in the river. We think he got swept up in a strong current and hit his face on a rock, knocking his air regulator off and causing him to drown. We haven’t found the regulator or his mask anywhere.”

I continued to stare down at the dead man in front of me. “Why was he in the water?” I asked.

The three men exchanged glances. “We don’t know,” Clyde said. “We think he may have been looking for that boy we never recovered.”

I knew they were lying. Michael was one of the most straight-edge divers I’d ever met. He would never break a minor safety regulation, let alone go diving alone in rough waters. It just didn’t add up.

Additionally, there was another reason their claim didn’t make sense. Michael had been out of town visiting family on the day the boy went missing. Why would he come back if he wasn’t even there for the initial search? He wouldn’t even know where to look.

I knew not to argue though. I didn’t want them to know I suspected anything. Clyde and Ryan were unaware I’d been to Badwater, assuming Moose kept his secret. From what I could tell, he had. They acted as they always had toward me.

Just then an ambulance pulled up. The others left me alone with Michael’s body while they talked to the driver. As I looked at the body, I realized something was off. There weren’t any contusions on his face. If the current had actually dashed him against a rock, there should at least be a bruise. But there was nothing. His face was completely unmarred.

At that moment I noticed something strange. A bruise peaked out from the neck of his dive suit. I pulled the rubber down to reveal a splotchy blue and black mark that circled his neck. It looked like he had been strangled. My thoughts immediately turned to those strange hand things I had seen at Badwater. But if that’s what killed him, then why did they let him go? Was it a warning?

A deep sense of dread settled into my stomach just then, and it’s only gotten worse ever since. After the ambulance took Michael’s body away, I returned home feeling drained. I couldn’t bring myself to do anything that day and only sat in cold silence. I slept fitfully that night, plagued by the nightmares I mentioned earlier.

Most of yesterday passed in the same cold silence as the day before. I felt numb. The conversation I had overheard between the older divers kept playing over and over in my head. What did they mean by lures? Who was this *him* that they kept referring to?

I recalled what Ryan had said about hearing voices near the river. That must be the lures they had been talking about. As I sat there, my numbness faded and was replaced with anger. Michael was dead and it had something to do with Moose and his secrets. It probably had something to do with those lures too. I grabbed my coat and headed out the door. I was going to see what Ryan had meant when he said he heard voices.

I wish I hadn’t gone. I should have just stayed home and let it go. There are some things in the world that should just remain unseen.

I wandered the riverbank for thirty minutes, hearing nothing but the sounds of nocturnal animals. I was about to head back when I heard something just out of earshot. It sounded like someone’s voice. The sound grew louder as I headed up the bank until I could finally make out what it was saying.

“Help! Please, I can’t swim.”

Instincts took over and I began to sprint in the direction of the voice. I eventually lost track of where I was and stumbled blindly through the underbrush, barely even using my flashlight and relying on my hearing. Finally, the voice came from the water right next to me. It sounded like a child. I was about to wade into the river when something stopped me in my tracks.

I listened to the voice carefully.

“Help! Please, I can’t swim.”

It was the exact same words, over and over again, as if it was being played on loop. The tone was exactly the same every time. It didn’t sound right. They were yelling, but it didn’t sound like someone who was actually scared. There was no urgency to their voice.

My heart pounding in my chest, I shined my flashlight along the river. That was when I saw it.

A face pressed out of the mud of the riverbank. Like the hands I’d seen, it was seaweed green and roots grew from its edges and into the surrounding earth. It was like someone had constructed a human head out of algae or moss. The mouth opened and closed, repeating the same call for help over and over again, while the rest of the face remained flat and emotionless.

My whole body shook as I stared at the thing. Just beyond it, in the water, I saw two of those hands reaching up from the shallows, grasping for anything and everything. A cold realization came upon me. Michael must have heard that thing’s calls for help and immediately suited up, only to dive in and find himself dragged under by those groping hands. This is what Ryan had meant by lures. I felt sick to my stomach as I watched the eerie face continue to yell.

The cries grew quieter and more spaced out until the face became completely silent. Then, without warning, it retreated into the earth, burying itself in a thin layer of mud. I shuddered to think about that thing just beneath the surface. Then I realized that there could be more. Who knew how many of them were lurking just below me?

I sprinted back to my car, disgust driving me more than fear. When I got home, I sat up all night thinking about what I saw. I managed to sleep for a couple of hours just before sunrise but was woken by the nightmares once again.

I don’t know what to do anymore. There are twisted things happening here and, even if I did have the power to stop them, I don’t think I want to face this darkness alone. It feels like some great puzzle and I’m missing the one or two pieces I need to bring everything together. I’ve packed the bare necessities into bags which now sit by my front door. I think I’m going to leave. Problem is, I don’t know where I would go. I don’t have family outside of town, and I don’t exactly have a fortune in my savings account.

Still, some part of me feels obligated to stay. Both out of curiosity and because I owe it to Michael. Hell, not just Michael. I owe it to the countless people who have likely fallen victim to those things in the river. Isn’t that why I took this job in the first place?

I have much to think about. If this is my last post, know that I moved away and never looked back. If I do investigate further, I’ll try to keep you guys updated, so long as those fucking hands don’t get me [first.](https://reddit.com/r/travisliebert)

[Part 3](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/dnh0yb/ive_been_a_search_and_rescue_diver_for_12_years/)When my older sister turned 19, my parents started looking at me with the deepest pity and grief I have ever seen; like I was going to crumble and disappear at any moment.

I was 16 and listening to music in my bedroom when my mother came to me with a beautiful portrait in her hands. It was of my great-grandmother Eleanor.

“Pat, you know how Eleanor used to say that when she was 18, a she-devil offered her some kind of paradise if she agreed to die immediately, right?”

It was a weird question; whenever my mother had a little more to drink, she’d retell this tale over and over. She came from a long line of spiritual but pragmatic women, women who fought to study and to work in male-dominated fields. Women who also found a good man to marry, women who had everything.

But then tragedy struck in their lives and they would lose a daughter or a niece. Always.

“Yes, mom," I replied, and we recited together: “And she said fuck off, I have 7 siblings to help raising."

And Eleanor did. She worked her ass off to send her younger brothers and sisters to good schools, became a college teacher herself, and kept teaching every new generation of women to be strong and stand up for themselves.

My mother always loved her to bits, and did her best to raise her kids the way her grandmother had taught. Eleanor peacefully died of old age when I was a baby, and overall lived a great, accomplished, loving life.

But grief knocked on her door periodically, as she had to bury a daughter and a granddaughter, both at age 18. My aunt Cecelia died years before I was born, and that took a huge toll on my mother and on my other aunt, Christa.

Eleanor didn’t believe it was a tragic coincidence. No.

She thinks that the same she-devil who invited her to go live in a better place came to claim her descendants.

After Cecelia, there were no deaths.

My sister and my cousins have all crossed the line to 19, and none of them reported anything weird happening to them.

I’m the only female in my family who is still 18.

Despite the fact that I always admired Eleanor, I confess that I thought that she was being superstitious, or even mocking us—she was known for her savage sense of humor. So this conversation I had with my mother had been completely brushed from my mind.

Then today a gorgeous, magnificent woman approached me.

I am a part-timer at a frozen yogurt joint. As you might expect, the small store was empty. The little bell on the door rang, and I raised my eyes to meet a stunning, elegant woman who seemed to be on her early 30s.

She was wearing a simple and unassuming dress, but the fit was flattering. It was impossible to take your eyes off of her.

“Hello, Patricia." Her voice was velvety and melodious. “I see Eleanor’s granddaughter told you about me."

I forgot how to breathe for a while. She was just… God, I had considered myself straight up to this point, but then I had found a woman that I both wanted to be like and have for myself.

“Come on, get yourself some *fro-yo* on me. Mine will be salted caramel and strawberry, if you please."

I mechanically filled two little cups as she graciously sat.

I stared at her intently.

“When you see Christa, tell her to see a doctor about that persistent headache. Unpleasant surprise on the way,” she said very casually. “So tell me about you, Pat."

“D-don’t you know all about me already?” I asked. She smiled kindly, but the warmth never reached her violet eyes; it wasn’t like they were cold, but they were neutral. Neutral and incredibly sharp.

“I know everything there is to know about everyone on your little planet, darling. But I’d still like to hear your version."

“I’m not actually interesting, you know?” I sighed. “I am only okay at everything. My sister is brilliant and she’s pretty too, while I’m too average and not even sure what I want to major in."

She smiled so brightly I thought I was gonna go blind.

“Don’t you want to be part of something bigger and easier?” she asked. “I’ll offer you a great deal, the same one I offered your ancestor Eleanor, her daughter Bettina, and your aunt Cecelia. You know the results."

“I’m listening," I said. I don’t know the circumstances of their deaths, but I know that both Bettina and Cecelia took the offer.

“Well, take a look around the world you live in. You’re young, but old enough to know. Do you feel safe walking the streets? Isn’t this world rotten? Sure, you can say there are good people; people that mind their own business, at least. But the rotten apples always spoil the whole barrel. And lately you mortals have seen that happening a lot of people you used to deem good, huh?”

“I don’t… feel safe. Two of my friends have been assaulted. I admit sometimes I’m scared to leave my bed," I replied. “Still, I’d feel so bad about how my mother would miss me."

She smiled.

“You’re a good girl, Patricia. I’m Lilith, by the way," she grabbed my hands. “Let me tell you something, although I’m sure you already know this in your heart. All the women in your family are fit for this deal, but I have to choose only one. I chose you because you won’t be missed as much." I recoiled, feeling hurt, but I knew that Lilith wasn’t lying. There was a spark of compassion in her eyes too. “It’s not that you’re not loved, it’s just that your cousins and your sister…”

“Are so much better than me in every sense. I know. I panic easily, I don’t trust my own decisions, and I don’t have any special talent. Sometimes my life feels like such a waste."

“It’s not, dear. It’s not. Because you were born for something greater. Greater than these girls you deem better than yourself. They are fit for this world. You are fit for the Utopia."

“What’s the Utopia?”

“It’s everything there is out there, the only eternal life in the universe, offered to a select few. All the great people on Earth are nothing but a heartbeat. They will fade to nothing, like all the unassuming lives."

“So you mean there’s no heaven and hell? And what about God?”

“Oh, God exists. God created great things. Imperfect, inferior beings like you humans are just the collateral damage of his masterpieces; the residuum of the creation. He never even turned His face to you, or batted an eyelash when we told him our plan. Lucifer and I see potential in you. Well, some of you. Most are truly garbage”.

I was utterly amazed. “Why do you only take young women?”

She smiled again.

“That’s a great question. [Lucifer likes to collect men in their 40s](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/d1u4kd/a_man_knocked_on_my_door_at_midnight_he_gave_me_a/), so he can laugh at their moral dilemmas. *How will my family live without me, the great provider?? What if Karen marries another man and Cody turns gay because he didn’t have a masculine figure?*” She did a great impersonation of a generic middle-aged man. “But I take my girls while they are still beautiful and not completely tired of how unfair this world is to them. I don’t want the morons in your society to make you forget what Eleanor taught you. She knew there would be only nothingness out there after she died, but she opted to stay and take care of her loved ones. It was a bold, admirable choice, and I decided to reward her for it. She was the only one I ever approached to refuse."

“So you can’t both live a great life here and go to this place you call Utopia?” I asked.

“Oh, one usually can’t have it all, no. But I picked two or three of those. Like Marilyn and Cleo. They were almost 40 but still young at heart and completely unfazed by how the world tried to break them. You have to admire that."

“How is that Utopia? Will I like it?”

Lilith snapped her fingers. The walls and furniture around us, and even the street across the door started to fold and fold and fold, like the reality was only a 3D draft, until they became minuscule pieces of cardboard, and then they fell into the infinite under us.

We were now surrounded by a stunning, futuristic place. There was no sense of feeling cold or hungry, we could move by floating around as we pleased, and there were amazing buildings everywhere, decorated with statues of pure white marble and paintings so beautiful I wanted to cry.

I could see colors I never imagined possible, and the sky was always a warm shade of blue, but dotted with stars, and an immense full moon.

Everything was shiny, symmetrical and felt right; peaceful, but far from boring. A perfect, ordered chaos.

“This place is constantly expanding, so you’ll always find new things to do. You’ll never live another tedious day."

She snapped her fingers again, and everything unfolded and rose back into place.

“And if I accept your offer, which I will… can I choose the way I die and do something first?”

“Oh, you have a few days to deal with all your stuff. I’m not a monster, you know?” the she-devil smiled again.

“Great!” I said. “There’s only one thing I need to do before I go with you. I want to kill the man who raped by best friend."

Lilith agreed to allow me to do it, and we talked some more before she left.

And that’s all I can remember clearly. The rest of the day was a blur; knowing that I would die, I wanted to quit my dead-end job immediately, but I had no one to quit to, and I couldn’t leave the store unattended. So I stayed, surrounded by weird ice cream, thinking about what awaited for me.

The she-devil told me that I couldn’t tell anyone I was about to die, but I was allowed to discreetly say my goodbyes. My family was really nice and had taught me a lot, and I had valuable friends, but none of that was reason enough to refuse an eternal life of happiness where I could even be friends with Cleopatra and Marilyn Monroe.

I spent some quality time with my loved ones, then two days later, I took my mother’s handgun and headed to see the one who hurt and destroyed my beloved friend, both physically and mentally.

I won’t describe the details of the torture I put him through. I’ll just say that I only stopped when it seemed to me that he went through at least ten times what he made her endure.

And then I killed him.

“Oh, shit," was my only reaction as I realized that punishing this disgusting man felt even better and even more right than living in a perfect Utopia.

It feels like I finally found my purpose. If this world is all that there is, the only thing we can do is enjoy it.

And we’ll only be able to enjoy it if we cleanse it.

I decided to take this mission upon myself.

But there’s only a problem: I already agreed with dying tomorrow.

I signed the contract and now I'm terrified of what Lilith will do to me when I say I changed my mind[.](https://www.reddit.com/r/PPoisoningTales/)

&#x200B;

[The Utopia - Index](https://www.reddit.com/r/richardsaxon/comments/d5kfdr/utopia_series/)It was stupid and immature. I'll be the first to admit that. But it's not like I killed anyone. And if you want to try to understand things from my perspective, there was really no way that I could *not* do it.

First, because his name was Mr. Hillrow. Second, because he *acted* like a dick, always calling on you the one day you didn't do the reading, and then dragging out the torture in front of the whole class. Third, he sort of *looked* like a dick, with his ring of puffy hair surrounding the bald top of his head.

It was like I *had* to do it. I got Billy's older brother (a previous student of Mr. Hillrow) to get me the dildo. Then, before class started, I stood it up on Mr. Hillrow's desk. I taped a pair of tiny glasses to the head, wrapped a tiny necktie around the shaft, and propped up a little name tag that read “Mr. Dilldow.”

At first, everyone laughed. Then Mr. Hillrow got *pissed* and started yelling in a scary way, demanding to know who had done it. The class got real quiet. Nobody ratted me out. I gave myself away. I took another look at Mr. Dilldow and started cracking up again.

So that's how I ended up in detention. But it was only supposed to be for three afternoons. Not three years.

\*

The school is different at night. It didn't take long at all for me to find that out.

The first afternoon of my detention went about like you'd expect. I had to sit there and read *Moby Dick.* It took everything I had not to make another dick joke, because Mr. Hillrow was sitting at his desk, just angrily glaring at me the whole time.

At 4:00 on the nose, Mr. Hillrow stood up. I grabbed my backpack, ready to get the hell out of there.

“Your actions are unspeakably vulgar,” said Mr. Hillrow.

I thought about Mr. Dilldow again and almost died from the effort of not cracking up.

Mr. Hillrow went on. “You will stay here through the night, and reflect upon the proper manner in which to conduct yourself while enrolled in this educational institution.”

Then he flicked off the light switch and left the room.

That threw me for a loop, but I shrugged it off, stood up, and went to get out of there.

The door was locked.

*The fuck?*

“Okay Mr. Hillrow!” I shouted through the door. I looked through the little window at the top and saw the back of his half-bald mushroom head as he walked down the hall. “You got me! Gotta hand it to you, that's a good one! I've definitely learned my lesson!”

Mr. Hillrow disappeared around the corner.

I stood staring out of that little window for about fifteen minutes before it started to dawn on me that the bastard really meant to keep me locked in that room all night.

I wasn't even mad at him. He’d got me. When I pulled out my phone to call my parents, it wasn't to rat him out, it was because I had no intention of staying in that damn room all night.

No reception.

I hadn't told my parents about detention, but knowing them, I figured they'd put the pieces together soon enough. They'd start calling my friends, who *did* know about detention. I just hoped my friends wouldn't feel like they were ratting me out by telling my parents where I was.

I walked over to the exterior window and held my phone up to it. Still no reception. I tried to open the window, but it was jammed shut. I looked down to the parking lot below. People were leaving for the day. I thought about breaking the window and jumping for it, but I was on the second floor and it was too far down onto the pavement. Plus, I knew I’d get in a bunch of shit for breaking school property.

I tried to flick on the light switch, but the light didn't come on. Then, for the next hour, I did something that I'll never forgive myself for. I burned through my phone's battery playing some dumbass game, I don't even remember what.

As my phone died, I looked up and noticed that the room was dark. The light coming through the window was getting dimmer and dimmer. It started to feel really eerie.

I banged on the door for a while, trying to get someone's attention. No one came.

As the last bit of light faded away, I took one last look outside, through the window. The parking lot was now empty.

Now the room was very dark. I started to panic. I did *not* want to spend the night in that room, but it was looking like I didn't have a choice.

After a bit of mindless pacing, I heard a *click* and the door to the classroom slowly swung open to the hallway, seemingly of its own accord.

“Hello?” I asked into the darkness. “Mr. Hillrow? Look, I've learned my lesson. Really, I have. I am truly sorry for setting up that dildo on your desk.”

It was dead quiet, and I didn't see anybody there. That creeped me out, but I was happy to get out of the room at least.

I walked down the hall, which was now lit up by a few dim lights up at the top of the wall. I knew where I was headed first: the bathroom.

I'd had to piss for like an hour, and it was killing me. I had thought about whipping it out and going all over Mr. Hillrow's desk, but figured that would only get me in more trouble.

I was walking past a long row of lockers when I heard it. It started as a slight rattle, coming from one of lockers. I tried to play it off as just the building settling or something, but then another locker door started to rattle. Then another, and another, and soon the whole row was rattling.

When I heard a scraping sound, like something sharp being dragged against the metal of the locker doors, followed by what sounded like a low growl, that’s when my urge to piss was suddenly relieved, right down my leg. It’s also when I started running like hell.

As I ran down the hall, the rattling turned into banging. Now I could see the locker doors shaking, straining against the hinges and latches. Whatever terrible things were inside were on the verge of breaking free.

All at once, the horrible sounds coming from the lockers stopped, just as I came to the end of the hall. I didn't slow down though. I booked it down the stairs and only felt the slightest bit of relief when I saw the entrance to (and more importantly, the exit from) the school in front of me.

I ran full speed towards the door, putting my hand in front of me to push it open. *Thunk.* My wrist twisted painfully as it impacted the unmoving door.

*Of course it's locked you idiot, it's night.*

I tried to find a deadbolt latch or something, but there wasn't one. Just a keyhole.

*Why the hell do all these doors lock from the outside*?! I wondered, as I slumped down to the ground in pain, fear, and what was beginning to look like utter defeat.

I pulled my phone out of my pocket. Now that I was by the front entrance, I might get reception. If I hadn't been a goddamn idiot and used up the battery.

I held the power button for a full five minutes straight before I gave up and put the useless thing back in my pocket.

I felt like crying. It was bad enough just being locked in there. Being locked in there with a bunch of locker monsters and who knows what else was much, much worse.

\*

I decided to stick by the front entrance and wait it out. I sat there in my pissy pants for hours. I would start to get bored and even a little sleepy, and then I'd hear a noise from somewhere in the school and I'd jolt into full alertness. Sometimes it was a soft rustling sound that I wasn't quite sure I was actually hearing, and sometimes it was a loud, unmistakable *bang*. Once, I was sure that I heard someone laughing.

Finally, it got to the point where I couldn't ignore how hungry I was. The cafeteria was right by the entrance, so I figured I could risk it. I didn't have any money for the vending machine, but I thought I might be able to get into the kitchen and scrounge up some food. I'd always wondered what the hell went on in there anyway.

I turned the corner and was surprised to see that the cafeteria was brightly lit. I could smell something delicious wafting out from there.

I took a cautious step in and was shocked to see Miss Hadley, aka The Lunch Lady, standing there behind the counter in her hairnet.

“Young man!” she said when she saw me. “You're just in time!”

“Miss Hadley… what are *you* doing here?” I asked. “It's the middle of the night.”

The Lunch Lady laughed. “Oh, sometimes when I can't sleep, I come down here and try out a new recipe. And tonight… ho boy! I've come up with something *out of this world!* I think the children will love it!”

Something clicked in my addled mind. “So you have a key?” I asked. “You can let me out of here?”

“Of course I have a key, silly! But before you go, won't you try my newest dish? You look hungry!”

She was right about that. I mean, I was ready to get the hell out of there, but at least now I knew that I *could* get out of there. I didn't see the harm in chowing down first, especially since it smelled so good.

I grabbed a tray and held it out to her. Behind the counter, she scooped some mashed potatoes onto a plate, and then put a cut of juicy steak on there too. She put the plate on my tray.

“Thanks!” I said.

“Let me know what you think!” she said, smiling.

I sat down and dug into the mashed potatoes. Damn, they were *good.* Just the right balance between fluffy and creamy, and a hint of garlic to top it off. Then I cut off a chunk of steak and put it in my mouth.

It was wonderful, but it didn't taste like any steak I'd ever had before.

“Mmm,” I said. “This is great. What is it?”

“Meat,” said The Lunch Lady.

“Yeah, I figured. What I meant was… what *kind* of…”

A scream coming from back in the kitchen cut me off.

“Uh… Miss Hadley, can I go now?”

“You don't like your meat, young man?” asked Ms. Hadley frowning.

“Oh, no, it's great. It's just, my parents are probably worried sick about me. I've been stuck here all night. Mr. Hillrow locked me in…”

Another scream.

“What's that screaming?” I asked.

“Oh, that'll be Lilly, my assistant,” said Miss Hadley. “She's forever burning herself, or if not that, it's a slip of the knife. Clumsy girl, but has a great instinct for cooking.”

“Miss Hadley? Can I please go?”

“Very well, young man. I'll see you to the door.”

Just what I wanted to hear! A way out of the nightmare. When I got home, I'd hug my parents, then get in bed where it was nice and safe and there were no weird sounds, or locker monsters, or mystery meats.

When we turned the corner and the entrance came into view, my heart first sank and then started beating like crazy.

Standing in front of the door, with his arms crossed, was The Janitor. Except, he didn't look like he looked during the day. During the day, he didn't have a bunch of spikes coming out of his head, for starters, and he also didn't have empty white holes where his eyes should be. He didn't have long claws during the day, either… at least none that I had ever noticed.

“Let the boy pass, Bob,” said Miss Hadley.

When Bob the Janitor spoke, the sound didn't come out his mouth. I was standing there facing him, and I heard his voice whispering *behind* me:

*“*‘Fraid I can't do that, Miss Hadley. *The boy shall not pass!* Direct orders from You-Know-Who.”

Everything started to spin, and I felt woozy. “Come on dude,” I groaned. “I gotta get home. I'm sorry about the dildo, if that's what this is about. I'll never do anything like that again, I promise.”

I looked past the janitor monster and saw that it was starting to get light out. Even if I didn't make it out right then, it would only be a few more hours until school opened.

Then I heard a *hiss* and looked up in horror to see some kind of gas coming out of the air vents in the ceiling. Then I was out cold.

\*

So much crazy shit has gone down in this crazy-ass school building over the past three years. If I ever make it out of here, I'll tell the full story, but dawn is approaching, and I don't have much time left. I'll give you the basics.

Every day around dawn, the gas pours in through the vents and knocks me out. There’s no way to stop it… I've tried. Next, I wake up in a dark room, which is actually a sort of sub basement dug into the basement floor and covered with a hidden hatch door during the day. At night, the hatch opens, and I am free to wander the halls of the school, if I choose.

I never *want* to, but I have needs. I need to eat, and use the bathroom. I need to shower in the locker room. I need to wash my clothes. I need to try to find a way out of this nightmare, even as it looks more and more like there is no way out. Plus, as bad as it out in the school, it's miserable in my dark little hole, too. If I stay there too long, I start to lose it.

I have some theories about what's going on, but I won't get into them. A bit of light is coming in through the windows now. It's almost time for *my* lights to go out for the day.

I'm at the computer lab now. I have very limited access to the internet, and it seems pretty random what sites I can and can't visit. I can't read any news, so I don't even know if anyone's out looking for me, or if my entire existence has been forgotten since I got trapped in this hell.

Lately, I've come across this forum. This is, for some reason, the only subreddit that I can read. I don't even know if I can post, but it's worth a shot. You guys seem like you've dealt with a lot of weird shit, so maybe you'll take this seriously.

Please help me. My name is Emmett Emerson. I am at CAHS in Clairmont, Maine, USA. During the day, I am in the sub basement, if you can find it. During the night, if you can somehow get in and make it past The Janitor, I am usually somewhere running away from monsters.

\*

[The second night](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/bhydt0/ive_been_stuck_in_school_detention_for_three/)

[The night I watched my buddy get his face eaten off](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/bib5s1/ive_been_stuck_in_student_detention_for_three/)

[The Janitor's closet](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/bjnqss/i_was_stuck_in_school_detention_for_three_years_i/)I was 10 years old when grandma came to live with us.

It was about six months after grandad passed away, and I guess, looking back, she must have been lonely in that big house of theirs. Rattling around with only the grief and memories for company. So despite a few protests from mum, my parents took her in.

There were no protests from me. None at all. Grandma was loud, and fun, and I loved her. She had an almost limitless supply of boiled sweets, and she’d always slip me a couple whenever she saw me. She was always the first to stick up for me when I got in trouble, too.

But it was her stories I loved best.

Grandma had all kinds of stories. Stories about growing up during WWII, and stories about the things she’d get up to with her friends on the south coast, after her family had been evacuated. Sad stories, funny stories, adventure stories.

But it was her scary stories that were my favourite.

Grandma had lots of scary stories. She told me she dabbled in the occult when she was a teenager, trying out ouija boards with her friends. Tarot cards, fortune telling. All that stuff.

Most of the stories I’d laugh off, or forget about not long after she was done telling them... but there were a couple that really did spook me a bit. I was only 10 at the time, you have to understand. And grandma certainly knew how to bring the stories to life.

She’d shut off the lights in my room so only the glow of the night sky shone through the curtains, and she’d shuffle in real close. Close enough so I could see the wrinkles on her face, and smell the boiled sweets on her breath. Close enough so her deep blue eyes could stare straight into mine.

She must have given me nightmares with a few of those tales, but now — years later — there’s only one that I can still remember. Only one that’s stuck with me.

The story about the shower, and Mr Long Fingers.

Grandma told me about Mr Long Fingers one night after I asked about her baths. Grandma used to love her baths. She’d spend ages in them: light candles and incense, and lie in the tub humming to herself until the water turned cold. It drove my mum crazy. But when I asked her why she loved them so much, she said it was the only place she could relax. It was the only place that was *safe* for her to relax.

"You know people like me, who are... well, more sensitive to certain things, we *have* to have baths," she told me seriously one night, shuffling closer on the bed. "I couldn’t possibly spend that long in the shower. It’d be far too risky."

Grandma stared at me with those blue eyes of hers, unsmiling, and I knew it was time for one of her stories. One of the scary ones. I shivered with pleasure and pulled the covers up to my chin.

"Why is it risky, grandma?"

She half turned to look out the window, watching me from the corner of her eye. Pausing for effect. I waited, feeling my heart rate pick up ever so slightly in my chest.

"Well," she said after a moment. "It’s only risky if you close your eyes, of course. If you close your eyes for longer than 10 seconds."

"What do you mean? Why?"

"Well, do you ever play that game in the playground with your friends? The one where someone turns their back, and the others sneak up on them when they're not looking?"

I nodded, and grandma nodded back.

"Exactly. So that’s what it’s like in the shower, when you have your eyes closed. That’s what it’s like with Mr Long Fingers."

A cold itch tickled back. "Who’s Mr Long Fingers, grandma?"

She let out a deep breath, as if she wished she hadn’t said anything. Turned her head back to face mine. When she next spoke, she'd lowered her voice.

"No one knows, exactly," grandma whispered. "Some think it’s a creature that’s attracted to the heat and smell we give off in there. Others think it’s a demon that finds a way into our realm through the dense steam clouds. No one can say for sure, because the only ones who have actually *seen* Mr Long Fingers aren’t ever going to be able to tell you."

I pulled in a breath. "Why not?"

Grandma shuffled closer along the bed and leaned towards me, leaving my question hanging in the air.

"Don’t you worry about it, sweetheart. Don’t worry your pretty head. As long as you remember the rules, you’ll be fine."

"What rules?"

"Well, when you’re in the shower, you try not to close your eyes for too long. Five seconds is fine, and 10 is just about okay, too. But any longer than that..."

"Yeah? Then what?"

"Well, any longer than that and you may just start to feel something in the room with you. Something *watching*. And if you ever go longer than 15 seconds, that’s when you might start to hear a noise, too."

"Hear what?"

"The soft *tap-tap-tap* of fingers on glass. Fingers drumming against the glass door of the shower. If you *do* ever hear that noise, God forbid, will you make me a promise?"

"What, grandma?"

"Promise me you'll never open your eyes."

\*

I barely slept that night. Hardly at all.

I’d close my eyes and try to relax, but every time I did I’d imagine a face pressed against my bedroom window, staring in at me.

And when I did finally get to sleep, I had nightmares. Bad ones. I had them all week, in fact. Dreams about disembodied eyes watching me in the dark, and long fingers reaching out to touch my exposed skin.

It wasn’t any better when I was awake, either. Not really.

The shower was the worst. That’s when grandma’s story really got to me. I’d never thought about it before, but suddenly I had trouble shutting my eyes in there. I’d be standing beneath the beating water, shampoo running down my face, and as soon as I squinted my eyelids closed I’d hear grandma’s words running through my head.

*Five seconds is fine, and 10 is just about okay, too. But any longer than that...*

I’d rub my hair fast, feeling the shampoo dripping off my chin, and as soon as I’d counted past five seconds I’d feel it.

A sort of... *pressure*. Not a feeling of being watched, exactly, but something close to that. I’d run my fingers faster and faster through my hair, frantically trying to get the suds out, and the reddy-blackness behind my closed eyes coupled with the rush of water in my ears would feel like a held breath. Like the silence before a scream. The seconds would race through my mind and I’d be so desperate to open my eyes again that I’d sometimes do it before my hair was rinsed fully clean, and my eyes would sting with shampoo.

But before I shut them again I’d always be sure to peer out through the steamed glass door of the shower cubicle.

Just to make sure I was still alone.

\*

It wasn’t long before mum realised something was up.

She heard me crying out in my sleep one night, and came in to comfort me. Asked me what the matter was, and it all came out.

I told her about grandma’s story’s, and about Mr Long Fingers. She got this look on her face when I was telling her like she used to get with me when I’d made her really mad. This wide-eyed, angry look.

Only this time she wasn’t angry with me. She was angry with grandma.

My parents room was next to mine, and sometimes, if I pressed my ear against the wall, I could hear them talking in there. Soft whispers. That night, though, after mum was satisfied I wasn’t scared anymore and she'd gone back to her room, the whispers weren't soft at all. Oh no.

I heard mum hissing to dad about grandma. About the story she'd told me. Mum's voice floated through the wall, sharp and crisp.

"You know what your fucking mother's said to him now, don't you, Simon?"

Dad's response was an unintelligible mutter.

"She's told him there's a monster that'll get him if he shuts his eyes in the shower. A *monster*. The poor kid's been having nightmares about it all week. Seriously, Simon, you'd better say something to her tomorrow morning, first thing. Or I will."

Grandma came to visit me in my room the following night.

That time, as she perched on the end of my bed, there were no stories. Nothing like that. Grandma just sat there and stared down at me, her blue eyes wide and sad. The light from the moon outside my window lit up her wrinkled face.

"You know I'd never let anything bad happen to you, don't you?" She said after a moment.

I nodded my head. "I know, grandma."

"You know I wouldn't let you come to any harm?"

I nodded again.

"Okay, good. That's good." She looked away from me for a moment, out the window. "You know, the things I tell you in the evening are meant to help you, sweetheart. They're meant to toughen you up a bit. Protect you." She paused and shook her head. "But maybe your mum's right. Maybe I went too far this time."

She looked down at me and smiled. But even then – even though I was only 10 years old – I could tell it didn't quite reach her eyes.

"I'll tell you what," grandma said. "You know what I told you about Mr Long Fingers, and the shower? Well, I'm going to make *sure* you're safe. I'll scare the bastard off, how about that? It won't come back in a hurry if it has to face me."

I stared up at grandma, watching her face glow in the moonlight. Watching her smile down at me.

I nodded my head, once.

\*

I was the one who found her.

I don't know when exactly it happened, but I'd guess it was about a week after we had that talk in my room. A week after she told me she wouldn't let me come to any harm.

I woke early that morning, from a bad dream, to a heavy *thumping* sound. I sat bolt upright in bed. My room was quiet around me, and I couldn't hear anything from the wall that joined my parents' room, either.

But the house wasn't entirely silent.

Floating down the hall, muffled by my closed door, I could hear the sound of rushing water.

The noise of the shower.

I leapt out of bed and ran down the upstairs hallway, heart already pounding in my chest. As soon as I reached the closed bathroom door, I started banging on it. A deep terror was welling up inside me like cold water from a well, something I couldn't place, and I kept banging and shouting "Grandma!" over and over again, even though she didn't respond.

Off to my right I was dimly aware of voices from my parents' room, the sleepy shuffle of footsteps, but before they had a chance to make it out onto the landing I'd lifted my hand to test out the door handle, more out of instinct than because I thought it might actually open.

But the door wasn't locked.

I kept banging with my free hand and it swung suddenly inwards, bringing me face-to-face with a wall of steam. Heat struck my skin. I squinted my eyes against the damp fog and peered into the bathroom.

And before dad pushed me to one side – before everything around me descended into shouting, and tears, and chaos – I saw her. I saw grandma.

She was lying naked on the floor in the shower cubicle, the water beating down around her. Blue eyes bulging from her face. One hand was curled against her chest, like a dead bird, while the other trailed against the glass of the shower cubicle – the flailing finger-marks she'd carved through the steam still clear and fresh.

\*

It was a heart attack that killed her.

That's what my dad told me. He said grandma was old, and the thing had struck her quickly and suddenly. She would have died fast and without pain, dad said. She wouldn't have suffered. 

I knew better, though. Even as a 10-year-old kid, I knew better.

And years later, writing this as an adult, I *still* know better.

I also know my wife and kids resent me for refusing to have a shower in the house. For insisting everyone take baths. They pretend it's okay, and they humour me, but I can tell they don't really understand it. Not at all. My wife *thinks* she does – she thinks I still carry the trauma of seeing my grandmother dying in front of me when I was little. I guess she's right, in a way.

But she doesn't know the full truth.

Nobody does.

And no-one would believe me even if I told them.

No one would believe me if I said the reason I don't take showers – the reason I haven't had one since I was 10 years old – isn't because I'm scarred from the sight of a dead body.

It's because all those years ago, when I crept back in to the still-hot bathroom after the paramedics had taken grandma's body downstairs, I made sure to check the marks her fingers had carved through the steamed glass of the shower cubicle.   

And those marks [weren't just on the inside](https://www.reddit.com/r/samhaysom/).

\*\*\*

[Story #2](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/fdw8v8/my_grandma_used_to_tell_me_scary_stories_when_i/) | [Story #3](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/fsbo0o/my_grandma_used_to_tell_me_scary_stories_when_i/)Update 1: https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/5wduaf/emergency_alert/

Hello everybody, and sorry for the wait. I know a lot of you have been waiting to hear more about my current situation. I have, however, been reading and responding to some of your comments, and I have some new insight into what may be going on. I still have access to the police radio channel, but I haven't had a good signal from it since my first attempt, and I haven't tried looking at it very much. About an hour ago, however, I did get into it. And I wrote down everything as I heard it.

-" Officer Jones? You there? Over." -"I am, who is this? Over." -"Officer Sloan, sir. Do you have any intel from HQ? Over." -" 'Fraid not. I just got done talking to McClellan and that SOB Kowalski. Any word over on your end? Over." -"Not since the last broadcast, about forty-five minutes ago. Last thing I heard was about the footage of the wreck. Over." -"Yeah. Suspected as much. How are you holding up, Sloan? Over." -"Alright, all things considering. And you, Jones? Over." -"Well enough. I'll tell you though, if 013 doesn't turn up fast...I might just end up like poor ol' Officer Brown--with my brains scattered on the ceiling. Over." -"Rest his soul. Over." (At this point, Jones and Sloan went silent for a good ten seconds at least.) -"Well, I guess I'd better get in touch with Kowalski--I put him in charge of examining the wreck footage. Wish me luck. Over." -"Yessir. Over." (Sloan disconnects and Jones waits a minute to call Kowalski.) -"Kowalski? This is Jones. Over." -"Jones, hey. I'm just starting on that wreck footage. I haven't noticed anything out of the ordinary yet, but...Time will tell. Over." -"Right. Look, Kowalski, I need you to focus. This is one of the weirdest parts of the whole ordeal. Think about it. A cop crashes into a telephone pole in a deserted road in broad daylight? Over." -"With all do respect, it might have been an honest mistake. I mean...Come on, it's pretty dark out, what with the disturbances we were trying to prevent 013 from releasing. Over." -"Look, we all know 013 is an anomaly. That's nothing new. But I'm telling you, either he found her and she got the upper hand...or...Let's just say I'm not ruling out suicide. Over." -"Whatever. Hey, let me get back to--" (The signal cut out.)

Also worth noting: the emergency broadcast I received has now been updated to say that emergency services have been suspended indefinitely and leaving one's house is punishable by law. Also, I toom a look of the format of the broadcast and the interface of it. It isn't one I've recognized before, but in my confused state I had been unable to tell. Weird, but what hasn't been lately?

I've been doing alright as of late, but I'm still paranoid at every sound I hear. As I started writing this, the wind picked up, and I can hear rain hitting the roof, getting harder by the minute. Looks like that weather warning wasn't entirely bullshit, huh?

So, I took my dogs up to the shower to do their business, as one of you suggested--I'll edit this after publishing it with his/her username. I haven't gone upstairs yet, but I have nothing else to report, and I don't want to give you a half-assed update, so I'm going to go take a gander out the window and document what I see as I see it.

I just went upstairs. I think I'll take the box of Samoas down with me when a go back down. Hell, I'll take the Samoas AND the Thin Mints. Desperate times call for desperate measures. As you maybe can tell, humor is how I deal with stress. Unhealthy, I know, but whatever. It is what it is.

I just went to the window. I don't see anything, but the neighbor's window is still very broken. The street is very dark and all the lights are very off. Now it's raining, though--the streets are overflowing with water, almost, and---there, the first flash of lightning. Thunder came immediately. The storm's right over us. Right over our little town. The girl doesn't seem to be outside anymore, but I'll be keeping my eyes open. Weird, after that first lightning strike, the sky's lighting up every few seconds. Like I said, nobody around here, including me, is very informed on severe weather, seeing as it never comes our way, but I'm pretty sure that isn't common.

Okay, I just--what the fuck? Okay, the neighbor's door just opened. The one with the broken window. Nobody's there, though. Must've been the wind. I hope he noticed. Come to think of it, maybe I should give him a call and see how he's doing. We used to talk sometimes, after all. It would be nice to hear from someone going through the same shit.

Wait.

I can see him. He's lying on the floor. Oh shit, the girl just came through the door. I ducked (haha, I changed it but autocorrect said fucked) under the window. I don't think she saw me. I'm going to peek out the window just to check.

No, okay, she's walking down the street now. She just passed my house. I don't know why she'd willingly go outside in weather like this. In a scenario like this. But whatever. I'm going back into the basement.

I called my brother earlier. He hasn't gone upstairs in a while. Good thing, too. He said he heard a crash from one of his neighbors' houses a little while earlier, but nothing too loud. Nothing loud enough to cause serious concern.

Weird, as I'm writing, my dogs look worried. Haha, without them I'd have lost my mind by now. Without you guys, too--it's nice having people to talk to in a time like this. Hmm, maybe they have to go do their business again. It's risky though, seeing as my bathroom is upstairs. I'm going to take them upstairs, but I'll take my phone with me.

We just entered the bathroom. Nothing out of the ordinary. Okay, they're done. We're going back downstairs. I'm going to duck past the window, though. Come to think of it, I should really invest in some blinds for that window.

FUCK.

I just went into the basement, but as I passed the window, I saw her pass it too on the other side. I don't think she saw me, but holy fuck. Why is she out there wandering like this? By now it's crossed my mind multiple times that she is "013." And from this close...that pillowcase looks a bit more hospital gown-esque. Shit, guys. I'd phone the cops, but I don't even know their number. I need to go. I'll update you guys soon. Until then, assume I'm alive.

UPDATE: Okay, guys, so by now I've figured out that 911 takes you to the police, buuuuuut I also remembered that bit about emergency services being suspended. So there's that.My friend Callie has the perfect life.

I mean, look at this shit. Posted on Instagram, a week ago:

**John made an impromptu campfire in our backyard tonight! We ate smores, stargazed, and fell asleep. I am so blessed! #happilyeverafter**

And underneath, a beautiful photo of Callie, John, and their two kids lit by a campfire. The kids were smiling and well-dressed. He was handsome as always, smiling, a shadow of stubble along his jaw. She had a full face of makeup, a cute dress.

I mean. Really. Do other moms have time for that? Because I sure as hell don't have time to put on makeup. I barely even have time to go to the bathroom.

Okay... maybe I was a *little* jealous. But I mean, come on. She was beautiful. Her husband was some hot-shot doctor. Their kids were perfectly behaved at playgroup. I was a total disaster compared to them.

The next day, there was another update.

**Even on my bad days, John is my sunshine. Today he made dinner, my favorite--#eggsbenedict! And he tells me I'm beautiful, even when I'm not wearing makeup. #lovemyhubby**

Underneath, another perfect photo. Although this one was even worse. *Trying* to look imperfect, down-to-earth. She was clearly wearing makeup, but natural enough that I couldn't argue her on it. I could make out the caked layers of foundation around her left eye--more than really seemed necessary. *I wonder if she's got super dark circles under her eyes. Or, ooh! A huuuuge pimple.*

Then I frowned. *You're being mean. Of course she has embarrassing imperfections. So do you, so does everyone.*

But I couldn't help but be jealous. Every day of parenting my two kids, I felt like I was spinning out of control. Barely keeping it together. Only one diaper blowout or threenager tantrum from going insane.

This woman… she was actually *enjoying* motherhood.

What. The. Fuck.

"Look at this woman," I complained to my husband one night. She'd just posted a new photo--her kids in a little fort John had built them in their finished basement. (**My husband is so talented! He built this fort for them in ONE DAY. It's absolutely #perfect and #magical. Look at the little doors! Omg.**)

"Nice fort," my husband said, through a mouthful of Doritos. "Do they sell those on Amazon?"

"No. He built it."

"That's awesome!"

I narrowed my eyes at him. "How do they have the time to do stuff like that? It's ridiculous. We're barely staying alive, here."

"Nannies," he said, shoving more chips in his mouth.

"What?"

"They got a nanny. Obviously. She does all the lousy work, like cleaning poop and doing laundry. Then they have time to fuck around and build forts."

Huh. That was a possibility I hadn't considered. I smiled, feeling a little better about myself. "Yeah. Maybe that's it."

I stared at the photo. The two kids stood inside the wooden fort, which looked expertly constructed. Inside, the little girl and little boy poked their heads out, smiling. The little girl's hair was perfectly pinned back with a bow, and the boy was wearing a fancy button-down shirt. Behind them, the basement was clean. Even their toys had all been put away. John crouched next to them, handsome with his wavy dark hair and brilliant, white smile.

Perfect. Magical.

I felt a pang of longing. Then I turned off my phone, rolled over, and went to sleep.

When I woke up, there was already a new post from her.

It was a selfie of her and him, standing together on a boat. Behind them, the sun rose, painting the sky in beautiful hues of red. The open sea glistened and sparkled.

**My hubby surprised me with a wonderful trip out in his boat! Feeling so blessed right now. I love him more than #everything--more than life itself.**

I stared at the photo.

Something seemed… a little off about it. For one, *he* was holding the camera. Usually when I saw couple selfies, the woman was holding the camera, because the man never really wanted to take a selfie in the first place.

And the way she was sitting was weird, too. Leaned up against him, her arms tucked behind her.

A horrible realization hit me. I scrolled up through her last few posts.

**#happilyeverafter. #eggsbenedict. #lovemyhubby. #perfect. #magical. #everything.**

Taking the first letter of each hashtag, they spelled something out--something horrible.

**h e l p   m e**

I glanced at the post. Of her, on the boat. 6:32 AM. A little over an hour ago.

*More than life itself.*

He was going to kill her.

I grabbed my phone and called the police. After hours of searching, they finally found them. Callie, tied up on her husband's boat. John, armed with a knife.

When the police searched the house, they found the two kids locked in the fort in the basement.

Scared, crying, but completely unharmed.

According to Callie, John started beating her months ago. He gave her a black eye--then, a few days later, took her on his boat. Planning throw her in the water, never to be seen again.

She knew he checked her phone. Read her texts, her emails. Wouldn't allow her to make a call without him in the room.

So she sent out a message through hashtags. Hoping he wouldn't catch on, and hoping that someone wouldn't hear her plea.

**Help me.**I should start off by explaining a couple things. Our park doesn't focus on one specific theme. We have four sections that are fenced off from one another. There's a spooky one, a western one, an old-timey hollywood one and one that looks like everything there is made of candy. We get a lot of visitors, mostly families and young couples. Every single one of us actors, the *actual* actors, is assigned to a specific one of the *other* things. The ones that aren't actors but pretend to be. 

Now, you might be wondering why a park would keep around non-human creatures that pose a potential threat to its visitors and of course, you'd have to ask management for an exact answer. My best guess however is that they are in fact good employees: they don't need to be payed, look extremely real and offer a way more authentic experience. Of course, the experience cannot be *too* authentic, if you catch my drift. That's what we, the actual actors, are here for.

Every section has two actors and two of the other ones. We don't have a specific name for them, but we refer to them as pretenders, not-actors or monsters most of the time. Our main objective is to keep the one we're assigned to under control. Make it seem like they're actors too, not strange beings we don't even know the origin of. 

Take my monster as an example. I work at the horror-themed section, that means my territory are the two funhouses, the larger of which is hospital-themed, the indoor rollercoaster and that other really cool outdoor one that winds around a gigantic skull. The rollercoaster goes in through its mouth, comes out of one eyehole and goes back in through the other. It's some genius design, really. 

I spend my day walking around in my costume, either chasing the visitors with my whip, which for clarification is part of my role, or leading *it* around by its chain that is attached to the iron collar around its neck. God help us if that thing ever comes off.

The one I have been assigned to is tall, broad and has black, surprisingly fluffy fur, a round, flat face and two big ram horns on top of its head. Its eyes are two large, red buttons and its mouth holds a set of long, shiny, sharp fangs. Its tongue usually hangs out of its maw, black drool dripping down from it constantly. It's official name is Mr Scratch on accord of its oversized claws, but I call it the *sock puppet*.

Mr Scratch is quite obviously a costume. He moves sluggishly and there are even seams and stitchings to be seen in some places. The costume itself however is a living, breathing thing. You wouldn't know if you'd just see it walk around by my side. I however found out pretty soon, on my first day actually. 

When they told me they had given me the acting job because of my physical strength and that they needed me to take care of a monster of sorts, I was dumbfounded. Then again, my job interview had included questions like "Would you describe yourself as relatively fearless?" and "If you were to get attacked by a wild animal, would you a. fend it off, b. run for your life and call for help or c. hide?" so... the warning signs were there.

But of course, my first reaction was disbelieve, which by the way was replaced with stern, cold realization in record time on the day I started working my "acting" job.

My manager Dale, a grumpy, douchy guy in his late twenties, had me dress up in the costume I have been wearing nearly every day for three years now. It's hard to describe, kind of like a goth monster hunter outfit which comes with a whip, but it looks really fancy and is agreeably comfortable.

He had then led me to a large cage in the horror-themed section. It was standing next to the bigger funhouse. Its door was held shut by a chain with an oversized lock on it. The sign above it read "Mr Scratch" in big, twisted red letters. 

Dale unloaded the large plastic bag he had been carrying from his shoulder and threw it onto the ground in front of me. "You'll find a lamb shank and the metal leash in there," he said curtly, nodding at the bag.

"A lamb shank?" I inquired.

Dale gave me a sleazy, yellow-teethed grin. "We've found out it likes lamb," he replied, as if that explained anything at all. He took out a small key from his pocket and walked over to the cage. "I'll let it out for you, but just this once so you can tame it. Once you've gotten that over with, I'll give you the key. Won't be wasting any more of my time doing your job then."

Part of me still thought he was messing with me, but I was beginning to have my doubts. He proceeded towards the cage and turned his key inside the lock. The door sprang open with a creaking noise and Dale stepped aside. 

At first, nothing happened. Then, from the part of the cage that had not yet been reached by the sparse early morning sunlight, the thing they called Mr Scratch emerged. It exited the cage at a slow, menacing pace on all fours, but once it was outside, it rose to its hind legs and raised its head, slowly opening its mouth only for its long, gooey tongue to drop out. 

I stared at the moving costume, then at Dale. I was very close to losing my composure. "Are you kidding?" I asked. "Tell that idiot in the costume to cut the crap. If you guys think you can mess with the new one..."

But the look on Dale's face was serious. He almost seemed a bit frightened. "Feed it," he hissed. "Feed it and then put on the leash."

I shook my head and rolled my eyes, but decided to play along. I bent down and picked up the plastic bag, produced the large lamb shank from inside and waved it at the moving costume. "Come and get it," I sang, feeling immensely stupid for talking to a person like I would to a dog.

The thing came bounding towards me at a surprising speed and ripped the shank out of my hand. When its teeth sank naturally into the meat and I watched the creature tear it to shreds and gobble it down, I realized that I was not looking at a person in a costume. Gripped by a sudden boldness, I slowly took a few steps towards it, reached out and let my palm travel over its shiny black fur. 

It was *warm*.

I could feel its chest rise and fall and the muscles underneath its skin pulsing, moving. I was staring at the thing with wide eyes, not believing what I was seeing. 

Finally, I sprang back into action and picked up the leash from the bag. I attached it to the metal choker and, after making sure I had a good grip on it, gave it an experimental pull. The beast's head jerked towards me and I stumbled backwards in shock, but quickly managed to regain my footing. Luckily, the thing still seemed to be more interested in its meal than in me.

Dale came strolling over and gave me a pat on the shoulder, which for the record is the only friendly gesture I've ever gotten from him. He handed me the key for Mr Scratch's cage and told me to make sure not to lose it. 

I later asked him jokingly if the creature had ever attacked any of its other caretakers, to which he let out a loud laugh before answering in a suddenly quite serious tone, "No. With one exception."

"Being...?" I offered.

Dale laughed once again before adding, "Just the guy before you. He was good at his job, but we had to let him go. You can't be the Monster Tamer if both your legs are missing." Upon seeing my startled expression, he smirked and told me not to let it get to me, he was sure Mr Scratch liked me better.

He's most certainly not reading this, so I feel safe here when I say that Dale's an *asshole*.

In regards to the monster, I've already mentioned that I've taken to calling him the *sock puppet*. After reading my description of him, I bet you can see where I'm coming from. The sock puppet and I are on pretty good terms by the way. He's never really caused me any problems. I usually walk him around the park and sometimes let him dash forward to "jumpscare" a visitor, only to then pull him back and hiss at the visitor not to get too close to him. That's our favorite trick.

He's run off on me twice before, but those are stories for another day. All in all, Mr Scratch and get along pretty well.

Too bad you can't say that about some of the other actors and *their* pretenders.

When talking about my co-workers, I guess it only makes sense to start with the one who works in the same part of the park as me. That would be Darius. He's very nice, but easily stressed. He talks a lot about wanting another job, but either that's just an empty phrase of his or he hasn't found one, because he's still around after three years of me working here. 

I met him on my second day on the job. Of course Dale had failed to introduce me to any of my colleagues, he had simply given me a short overview about who I was yet to meet and what I was to expect. He hadn't put very much effort into his explanation. 

I was on my to Mr Scratch's cage in the early morning about half an hour before the park's opening time that day. I was already dressed up and ready to release the sock puppet, carrying with me the metal leash and a bag of dog treats, both of which I dropped when I collided with the man in the doctor's outfit who had seemingly come out of nowhere. By his fake blood-smeared lab coat and the surgical face mask dangling around his neck, I determined him to be another actor. 

"Hey! I'm Darius. You must be the new tamer," he stammered, and without giving me time to answer, added, "I really need your help right now."

"Okay," I responded, taken aback. "What's going on?"

"Did Dale already tell you about... *them*?" he asked and I nodded. He seemed relieved. 

"Oh, thank god. Okay, so, I have to watch out for one myself. She's like, a zombie nurse, hard to describe, but you'll know when you see her! Either way, we can't really put her on a leash like Scratch so we let her roam around this part of the park freely... under my supervision of course. But I kind of lost track of her and now I don't know where she is! We can't have her stroll around the kid-friendly sections or the visitors will freak out! You've got to help me, please, we don't have much time!"

I abandoned the leash and dog treats and the two of us got on our way. Darius told me he had already looked for her in our section, so she had to be in one of the others. Our first guess was the hollywood one since it was pretty much right next to ours.

While we did not find her there, Darius made use of our time by informing me about the workings of the park in a bit more detail. All the not-actors are put into cages overnight to keep them from wandering off. Half an hour before opening time, they're being let out. He also told me a few bits about some of the other monsters, but said it would be best for me to find out myself. We didn't pass any on our way through the hollywood section, but we did find the nurse.

She was standing next to a food booth, the owner of which thankfully had not arrived yet. She had her back turned to us and was swaying slightly. Her thigh-length nurse costume was smeared with red stains, not unlike that of Darius, but something told me that no *fake* blood had been used on hers. 

"Thank god, there she is," Darius muttered. "Dale would've killed me."

"What now?" I asked.

"I'll just walk her back to our section. It's as easy as that," he replied. "She's basically braindead."

I watched as he approached her, grabbed her by the shoulders and turned her around. I nearly gagged upon seeing her face. Half of the lower portion of her jaw was missing, the other half was dangling loosely off her head. Blood was steadily dripping from her tongue, reminding me of that of Mr Scratch. She was completely unresponsive, her eyes staring past me and Darius into the distance. If she knew we were there, she wasn't letting it on. 

I followed Darius, who was leading the nurse by her shoulders, back to the entrance of the horror-themed section. There were still ten minutes left before the park would let in visitors. Upon realizing this, I hurried to release the sock puppet from its cage and put it on its leash. And that was that, basically. 

The sight of the undead nurse may have grossed me out for a little while, but I learned pretty soon that she wasn't the kind that I needed to fear. There are some much, much worse things in this park than her.

[Part 2: Cowboy & Fairy](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/fnqopv/working_at_an_amusement_park_the_laughing_cowboy/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share)

[Part 3: Stagecoach & Mime](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/fobzvh/working_at_an_amusement_park_the_stagecoach_and/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share)

[Part 4: manager](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/fox9my/working_at_an_amusement_park_my_shady_manager/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share)

[Part 5: Diva & Pianist](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/fpir40/working_at_an_amusement_park_the_aged_diva_and/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share)

[Part 6: Nurse](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/fq4r0d/working_at_an_amusement_park_the_nurse/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share)

[Part 7: letdown](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/fqs457/working_at_an_amusement_park_today_was_a_huge/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share)

[Part 8: Mr Scratch](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/frcx7v/working_at_an_amusement_park_mr_scratch/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share)

[Part 9: Firewater](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/frywfc/working_at_an_amusement_park_firewater/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share)

[Part 10: Ride on the Stagecoach](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/fsl117/working_at_an_amusement_park_i_hitched_a_ride_on/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share)

[Part 11: weird stuff on Halloween](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/ft8drn/working_at_an_amusement_park_our_manager_has_us/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share)

[Part 12: girls' night in](https://www.reddit.com/r/CrypticPark/comments/fujlap/working_at_an_amusement_park_girls_night_in/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share)

[Part 13: restroom](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/fugfsa/working_at_an_amusement_park_the_restroom/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share)

[Part 14: I passed out again](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/fv1gcj/working_at_an_amusement_park_i_passed_out_again/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share)

[Part 15: Twenty Questions](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/fvliz2/working_at_an_amusement_park_twenty_questions/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share)

[Part 16: connections](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/fw76ux/working_at_an_amusement_park_connections/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share)

[Part 17: iron](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/fwsv71/working_at_an_amusement_park_the_thing_about_iron/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share)

[Part 18: fired](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/fxf27u/working_at_an_amusement_park_i_got_fired/?utm_medium=android_app&utm_source=share)The view from our classroom windows is nothing but a murky white. I bet if I went outside and looked down, I wouldn’t be able to see past my knees. I won’t be going outside, though— I honestly don’t think I’ll leave this classroom for a while.


Our class (Gothic Literature) was supposed to end at 1:30. I remember just staring at the clock, watching the seconds tick by, feeling Mr. Samson’s voice drone through my body, the monotone sound killing me into a haze of sleepy existence. I didn’t get much sleep last night, and it certainly shows. The classroom was lit solely by the fluorescent bulbs flickering on the ceiling, Samson having closed the blinds to avoid ‘distracted glances’ about fifteen minutes in.

 I wonder now if we would have noticed the building fog outside had the blinds been open. Maybe we would have clamored together by the window, whispering in excitement to each other— anything that wasn’t hearing, for the tenth time that week, how revolutionary Mary Shelley was for that time. Or hearing Susan beg him to cover Carmilla, ‘just for half a lesson, Mr. Samson?’ It isn’t unusual for a mess of high schoolers to grow distracted and excited at any little change. I mean, who can blame us, with the constant repetition? Regardless, I’ve gone too far off topic.

It was about ten minutes before the bell was supposed to buzz, signifying the seven minute long break from our daily torture, that the intercom system crackled to life.


“We will now be having a lockdown drill. We request everyone stay calm, and follow the instructions of their current teacher. If you’re outside your classroom, we ask that you please make your way back in a timely manner. Thank you.” 

I heard the collective groans of students who didn’t want to crawl under their desks in the dark. Really, the only thing worse than this lecture is the singular sound of your deskmate’s breathing penetrating a heavy cover of silence. Nevertheless, we’re used to lock down drills by now. The class shuffled slowly, desks creaking as students stood and crouched. Susan shoved herself under the teachers desk, whilst Jaimee and Audrey stood shoulder to shoulder in the tiny alcove just behind the doorway. We all waited with frustrated bated breaths, knowing that in just a few seconds we’d hear someone try the doorknob (apparently to scare us— it never works) and then the intercom system announce the drill was over. But those sounds didn’t come. Instead, all there was? Silence. 

The reintroduction of sound started with a couple in the back corner whispering and giggling to each other. Students, growing more impatient, began talking to each other. It took ten minutes before Mr. Samson himself moved to his desk, shooing Susan out in the process, in an attempt to get some work done.

Ten more minutes passed. He grew frustrated, and motioned us back to our seats. That was when someone peeked outside. I’m not sure what they were looking for— maybe to see if this was a different sort of drill, or if maybe it wasn’t a drill at all. It didn’t take long for everyone else to be made aware of the oddity that was the outside world.

“Hey guys? I can’t see outside. It’s like, hella foggy.” I think her name was Ashley. I worked on a lab project with her once.

“Shit, she’s right.” A guy chimed in from across the room. “Jesus, that’s some massive blockage. Imagine driving in that.”

“It can’t be foggy, it’s not even humid out. Plus, already lunchtime. Way too late for fog.” Susan snorted. You know. Like a smartass.

“Well, it’s clearly something. Do you think it’s fucking with the cellphone towers? I don’t have any reception.” Ashley spoke again. 

“Guys, come on. No phones in class. We just touched on this day before yesterday.”

Despite Samson’s protests, there was a quiet murmur of agreement. People who’d either checked their phones prior and noticed the same thing, or those who were checking them now and...well, noticing the same thing.

“Weather does screwy things, guys. Who knows.” I finally interjected my own opinion, shrugging my shoulders. A few more murmurs, slowly growing louder in volume as friends and deskmates began talking to each other to alleviate the boredom.

Five minutes later, whatever the weather is doing to our phones clearly has done something else. Our electric went out. We could still connect to the WiFi (obviously, I’m writing this, aren’t I?) but nothing else. Lights burnt out, the projector wouldn’t turn on, even the hum of the air conditioner that we hardly notice anymore just...went silent. 

It was around 2:00 we heard the first scream. It was horrible and bloodcurdling, and It came from outside. We could hear it reverberate from the glass window, cold to the touch. As I’d find out later, the first of many screams to come. Some kid had decided to go outside. We didn’t know that yet, though. Mr. Samson had clearly had enough.

“I’m going to check with Ms. Young next door. Stay put. Lock the door behind me. I’ll be back shortly.” Standing from his desk, he took brisk steps to the classroom door, exiting with the confidence only an authority figure has. 

We followed his instructions. For a while, at least. Minutes ticked by. Finally, around 2:30, we decided to just leave. What were they going to do? We’d been left with no guidance. Just a bunch of kids who totally didn’t know better, right? 

It was cold outside as I passed the threshold. You know when you enter a Walmart at midnight, and everything is just...weird? Like you’re on a different plane? That’s kind of what this felt like. The halls were dark. Silent. The only light strewn in through the double doors in hall B, casting large shadows behind doorways. The fog pressed against the door, almost ominously. 

“I’m leaving.” The guy from earlier shrugged, headed towards the doorway.

“What if they turned the alarms on? The doors will sound. Especially if we’re on a lockdown.” Ashley pointed out.

“Powers out. I doubt they are.” He called from behind him. I only looked over at him when I heard the doors open.

Immediately, he began screaming. He jerked away from the door, as if he’d been burned. The air smelled like chlorine and bleach. Maybe a bit of formaldehyde that the zoology class uses during exams. The doors swung shut the second he’d let go, the fog quickly dissipating. Audrey rushed over to him, trying to help.

“What’s a matter? Josh?” She set a hand on his shoulder before jerking her own hand back, letting out a sharp exhale as if she’d been burned. Because she had. She seemed to notice the situation almost instantly, shrinking back from the cowering boy in front of her, now letting out raspy and crackling moans of pain. It reminded me of someone with pneumonia, the sound of it. 

Burning. His skin was burning. Bright red and blistering, and so was the palm of Audrey’s hand.

“It’s a chemical burn.”

“What touched them?”

“There’s a shower in the science lab, we should get them there.”

“How did this happen?”

Thirty voices, all at once. We split up, in the end. Five of them headed to 2-b, the lab with the supposed shower. The rest of us headed into the classroom, half of us eerily quiet, the other chattering in confusion and alarm.

And here we are, folks. A couple hours later, in a classroom surrounded by white. A fog of chemicals. We should find someone who knows what’s going on— we can’t just sit here, can we? And yet, that’s exactly what we’re doing. I’m posting this. You guys seem to know your way out of some...less than ideal situations. I’m at a loss. I’m...scared.

[Update](https://www.reddit.com/r/nosleep/comments/e5pd4y/theres_a_chemical_fog_outside_our_school_we_cant/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=ios_app&utm_name=iossmf)