This is a place for the PoliticalDiscussion community to ask questions that may not deserve their own post. 

Please observe the following rules:

**Top-level comments:**
-
1. **Must be a question asked in good faith.** Do not ask [loaded](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Loaded_question) or [rhetorical questions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rhetorical_question).

2. **Must be directly related to politics.** 
Non-politics content includes: Legal interpretation, sociology, philosophy, celebrities, news, surveys, etc.

3. **Avoid highly speculative questions.** All scenarios should within the realm of reasonable possibility.

-
[Link to old thread](https://www.reddit.com/r/PoliticalDiscussion/comments/o4l3yz/casual_questions_thread/)

Sort by new and please keep it clean in here!How do you think the West is handling this situation? If Russia invades, what do you think will happen after the sanctions are imposed and how do you think this will affect the rest of Eastern Europe? Mainly curious about your thoughts on Georgia.Given the protests by truckers demanding the removal of the vaccine mandate to cross the border, it is less likely the two governments will drop the requirement. Otherwise they would look like they are capitulating. Realistically, when will the requirement be dropped? Or is this one of those rules that will become permanent because there is no motivation to remove it?With an invasion imminent, the U.S. will have a difficult decision on how to handle the situation. Russia would likely be successful with no foreign ally interventions. How important is the Ukraine to the U.S.? How would a successful invasion impact the rest of Europe?National Security Advisor Jake Sullivan also said: 

"The risk is now high enough and the threat is now immediate enough that this is what prudence demands," he said. “If you stay, you are assuming risk with no guarantee that there will be any other opportunity to leave and no prospect of a U.S. military evacuation in the event of a Russian invasion.” Sullivan also suggested that major cities like Kyiv can be targeted and he anticipated it will start with an ariel invasion. 

"PBS Newshour" reported shortly before Sullivan briefed reporters that Western officials believe Putin has made up his mind, decided to invade Ukraine and communicated that decision to Russian military leaders.  PBS also reported officials said Russia will attack next week. 

Is it likely the U.S. Intelligence has a lot more information about an imminent attack? If not, why are they sounding the alarms and increasing a sense of urgency? 

[https://www.pbs.org/newshour/tag/russia-ukraine-conflict](https://www.pbs.org/newshour/tag/russia-ukraine-conflict)

[https://thehill.com/](https://thehill.com/)People complain that abortion has politicized the courts, and that federal legislation should settle the abortion question. But if this happened and federal law did something similar to what some states have tried, would it be any more likely to survive a test in the Supreme Court than state laws currently do?

What advantage does federal law have when being tested against the constitution? Why is federal law "better?"In a recent NYTimes OpEd piece by Thomas B. Edsall, [Status Anxiety Is Blowing Wind Into Trump’s Sails](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/02/09/opinion/trump-status-anxiety.html), Edsall talks about the plight of the white working class:

---

What is the role of status discontent in the emergence of right-wing populism? If it does play a key role, does it matter more where someone stands at any given moment or whether someone is moving up the ladder or down?

In the struggle for status, Michael Bang Petersen, a political scientist at Aarhus University, Denmark, and the lead author of “Beyond Populism: The Psychology of Status-Seeking and Extreme Political Discontent,” argues:

> Education has emerged as a clear cleavage in addition to more traditional indicators of social class. The highly educated fare better in a more globalized world that puts a premium on human capital. Since the 1980s the highly educated left in the U.S. and elsewhere have been forging alliances with minority groups (e.g., racial, ethnic and sexual minorities), who also have been increasing their status in society. This, in turn, pushes those with lower education or those who feel challenged by the new emerging groups towards the right.

It is hardly a secret that the white working class has struggled in recent decades — and clearly many factors play a role — but what happens to those without the skills and abilities needed to move up the education ladder to a position of prestige in an increasingly competitive world?

Petersen’s answer: They have become populism’s frontline troops.

Over the past six decades, according to Petersen, there has been a realignment of the parties in respect to their position as pro-establishment or anti-establishment: “In the 1960s and 1970s the left was associated with an anti-systemic stance but this position is now more aligned with the right wing.”

Those trapped in a downward spiral undergo a devastating experience.

Lea Hartwich, a social psychologist at the Institute for Migration Research and Intercultural Studies at Osnabrueck University in Germany, wrote in an email:


> Those falling behind face a serious threat to their self-worth and well-being: Not only are the societal markers of personal worth and status becoming unattainable but, according to the dominant cultural narrative of individual responsibility, this is supposedly the result of their own lack of hard work or merit.

Instead of focusing on the economic system and its elites, Hartwich continued,

> Right-wing populists usually identify what they call liberal elites in culture, politics and the media as the “enemies of the people.” Combined with the rejection of marginalized groups like immigrants, this creates targets to blame for dissatisfaction with one’s personal situation or the state of society as a whole while leaving a highly unequal economic system intact. Right-wing populists’ focus on the so-called culture wars, the narrative that one’s culture is under attack from liberal elites, is very effective because culture can be an important source of identity and self-worth for people. It is also effective in organizing political conflicts along cultural rather than economic lines.

---

* Do you agree with Hartwich's analysis of right wing populism? 

* If so how effective are right wing elites going to be at steering their coalitions in the future using culture war issues?

* And how much is the embrace of economic globalization responsible for left wing losses among the white working class?A common refrain when it comes to Biden and the Democrats underwater polling at this time is that with the next presidential election still years away, it is simply far too early to make any conclusive assumptions about their electoral chances. The hope Dems seem to have is that by 2024, Covid and inflation will largely be dealt with allowing for improved economic conditions to be felt by voters. Combined with Biden’s incumbency, and the prospect of Trump’s renewed candidacy helping to unite and energize Democrat voters, and there’s reason to believe the electoral environment will be much better for the Democrats in the near future compared to today. 

As such, some say it’s rather premature for people, particularly online “Twitter Democrats” presently hand-wringing over Biden’s polling and lack of major “wins” to already be waving the white flag for 2024 on the assumption polling, present economic conditions and voter sentiments will remain static. That the environment in 2022 is not guaranteed to be reflective of 2024.

However, history has often shown how events yet foreseen can prove disruptive when it comes to politics. Trump after all was favoured to win re-election in 2020 due to the Republican advantage in the electoral college, incumbency and a solid economy until Covid happened. It would be foolish to assume there would be no similar risk of black swan events that could derail Biden’s presidency, such as (hopefully not) a new Covid strain with high immune escape and increased mortality rate.

So the question to be asked is what would be the “point of no return” to where it is no longer appropriate to counter low polling for the Democrats with “It’s too early”? What conditions would serve to ensure there will be no polling recovery in time for Biden and the Democrats to be competitive with the Republicans in 2024?Of course, the worst is when both coexist, as in the 1970s stagflation.  Jimmy Carter became a one-term president, losing to Reagan in a landslide.

Fortunately, there is no stagflation today, just high inflation. And the inflation has an external/supply shock component as well as an excess demand/overheating component.  In this situation, the policy prescription is relatively simple: fiscal & monetary belt-tightening that reduces the excess demand. But finding the political will for unpopular austerity measures & higher interest rates is much harder. And never in history has there been a Federal Reserve more concerned about pleasing Wall St/the stock market & their personal investment portfolios, than this one.

When designing the American Rescue Plan, Democrats seem to have bet that a hot economy & competitive job market with above-average inflation would be more politically acceptable to the general public, than another weak 2009-2012 recovery with low inflation but years of elevated joblessness. Certainly they didn’t expect inflation to get this high. But approval ratings on the economy have been increasingly poor despite the otherwise positive data.

No post-WW2 president has ever been re-elected during an economic recession. Biden is the first president in decades to deal with a standalone inflation problem - historically they didn’t last long because central banks would rapidly tighten, turning the inflation into a recession. So there isn’t really a large sample size. But assuming that a trade-off exists between high inflation & unemployment (ie Phillips Curve theories), which is more politically damaging for incumbent presidents and their parties?This week in Brazil, a famous podcast host (Bruno Aiub) said in a live that in his opinion our country should allow the existence of a nazi party as a form of unconditional freedom of speech. He also believes that bringing nazi ideals to the public debate is an effective form of combating them.

He was immediately canceled by the internet, and is being sued by our D.A. Office. 

After this situation I made some superficial research on how other countries would deal with this situation, and it came to my attention that US have something called American Nazi Party, just like Bruno proposed.

Why is ANP legal in US and how people feel about it?Investors are purchasing an all-time record share of homes in the USA:
https://www.redfin.com/news/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/q3-investor-market-share.png

The recent surge in home prices feels for many like the American dream slipping away, and while there appear to be many driving factors, investor demand and speculation could be at least partially to blame.  

Questions to consider:

-Do you think investors are driving prices higher?

-Should regulations on investment in homes be imposed? 

-What kind of regulations? (Bans on securitization of homes like single family REITs, new taxes, taxes on unoccupied property)

-What are the benefits/risks avoided if regulated?

-What could be the unintended consequences of regulations?When it comes to protesting jabs, they are small in numbers; according to CTA \[Canadian Trucking Alliance\]; 90% of the cross-border drivers are already vaccinated. Nonetheless, this 10% vaccine protestors seems to have caused an oversized influence.  

[https://www.newsweek.com/canadian-freedom-truckers-protest-vaccines-90-percent-drivers-vaccinated-1674109](https://www.newsweek.com/canadian-freedom-truckers-protest-vaccines-90-percent-drivers-vaccinated-1674109) 

Since January 15 they can no longer cross back into Canada without quarantine. The CTA, along with other major industry organizations, has disavowed the protest. The protesters don’t represent the vast majority of lorry drivers, nor are they representative of public sentiment towards vaccines in Canada – a country where [84% of the population](https://health-infobase.canada.ca/covid-19/vaccination-coverage/), children included, have received at least one vaccine dose. 

Justin Trudeau has said, called them a [“small fringe”](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jan/28/canada-truckers-covid-vaccine-mandate-protest-government).  He also said: “A few people shouting and waving swastikas does not define who Canadians are.” Is Trudeau underestimating their overall influence?

While the federal government and trade groups have criticized the protest, the Freedom Convoy has also attracted a number of supporters, including podcast host Joe Rogan, Marvel actress Evangeline Lilly and several Canadian politicians; along with Donald Trump in the U.S. as well as Ted Cruz among others. Canadian government has pushed back. 

[https://www.businessinsider.com/canada-trump-calls-trudeau-far-left-lunatic-trucker-protests-continue-2022-2](https://www.businessinsider.com/canada-trump-calls-trudeau-far-left-lunatic-trucker-protests-continue-2022-2)

[https://www.local10.com/news/world/2022/02/08/canada-pushes-back-against-gop-support-for-covid-protests/](https://www.local10.com/news/world/2022/02/08/canada-pushes-back-against-gop-support-for-covid-protests/)

Here in the U.S. the number of participants on January 6, 2021 were small in numbers too, but have left a lasting impression in the U.S. What action can the Canadian government take, if any, to quell this protest?With the RNC stating that January 6th was a legitimate act of political grievance it seems as though the events of January 6th are going to become normalized in the minds of conservatives. Could we see similar events happen in local or state elections with close Democrat victories?Given the constantly growing tension between the countries, it seems inevitable that this will result in some type of conflict, but will that be a full-fledged war? What might this look like in both countries? Would a war between such large nations now look similar to the earlier World Wars?Thomas Jefferson suggested along the lines that the constitution should be rewritten every couple decades so the federal government’s framework and functionality can adapt to a changing world.

Obviously, that didn’t happen. In the history of the US, the constitution has only been amended 27 times (and the majority of them were implemented before the 20th century).

Nowadays, getting a new amendment passed seems outright impossible because you need either 2/3 of both chambers of Congress OR 2/3 of all 50 states to pass an amendment. Given how polarized this country is, any amendment proposal is virtually guaranteed to fail. That also means that getting people agree to a constitutional convention to rewrite the framework of this country is out of the question. 

But what if, in some alternate timeline, the delegates of the constitutional convention decided to go with Jefferson’s suggestion of rewriting the constitution every 20 years? And by now, there’s is a system where delegates are directly elected every 20 years for a new convention?

In that hypothetical situation, where do you think the country would be in if we could choose our delegates for this bi-decade convention? Would the country be in a better place as it’s foundations are better adapted for a changing world, or would polarization would be much worse to the point of causing the US to collapse?As the ARP approaches its one year mark, let's take a look back at some of the recent stimulus efforts to discuss what types of stimulus were most effective and which should be avoided next time.

For Covid, there were three major stimulus bills that included a variety of different measures:
*Direct payments to individuals
*Grants to states
*Various tax credits to individuals and businesses 
*Business loans
*Unemployment insurance
*Etc

If you want to go back to the financial crisis, there were efforts like TARP and social security tax reductions among other policies (like QE)

Which policies worked well and which were a waste of money? How much does the type of crisis affect the which policies should be considered?Politically speaking, what did Trump and GOP as a whole have to gain from their downplaying the severity of COVID and the effects of the pandemic? From opposing vaccination and mask mandates, to pushing the use of unproven treatments such as ivermectin instead of vaccines or even treatments that have been proven to work like pills and monoclonal antibodies? What was supposed to be the end goal of what the GOP does, especially when studies are showing that people who die of COVID disproportionately come from their voting base?Elizabeth II became Queen of the United Kingdom and the various Commonwealth realms on February 6, 1952, 70 years ago today.  At that time, the British Empire still existed, though it had already lost India and was in permanent decline elsewhere.  The House of Commons at that point had also become supreme in terms of government power, with the power of the House of Lords greatly reduced and the powers of the Monarch very, very limited.  My main questions here:

1. What kind of significance or power does the Queen really hold today?

2. What is the future trajectory of the power or significance of the British Monarchy?[U.S. national debt tops $30 trillion for the 1st time](https://bnonews.com/index.php/2022/02/u-s-national-debt-tops-30-trillion-for-the-1st-time/)



The public debt held by the United States has surpassed $30 trillion for the first time, an increase of nearly 10 trillion in less than five years, in part because of government spending due to the coronavirus pandemic.

The total public debt was $30,012,386,059,238.29 on Tuesday, of which $6.5 trillion are intragovernmental holdings and $23.5 trillion is debt held by the public. This is up by 1 trillion in just 1.5 month and more than 2 trillion in just over a year.

The national debt nearly doubled during Barack Obama’s presidency but accelerated even faster under President Donald Trump, in part because of the Republican overhaul of the U.S. tax code in 2017 but also because of the coronavirus pandemic.

The budget deficit totaled $2.77 trillion in 2021, second to only the prior year, when a massive surge in government spending as a result of the pandemic pushed the deficit to $3.13 trillion. Deficits are expected to add another $12 trillion to the national debt over the next decade.

2008: $10 trillion

2017: $20 trillion

2022: $30 trillionDo you guys think Bernie Sanders has a legitimate shot at beating Joe Biden as a Democratic candidate? If not, do you think Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez has a legitimate shot? Do you think either have a legitimate shot to beat Donald Trump (or another candidate) in the 2024 elections? Why or why not?Given that much of the facts seem credible, but that the MIC stands to make trillions from any resultant military buildup. Should we take everything the major news outlets tell us at face value or are there questions we should be asking?In the RNC's censure of Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzinger today, the RNC described the events of January 6th as "Legitimate political discourse: https://www.reuters.com/world/us/loyal-trump-republican-party-moves-censure-us-reps-cheney-kinzinger-2022-02-04/

The RNC also described Cheney and Kinzinger's participation in the January 6th probe as "participating in a Democrat-led persecution of ordinary citizens".

So what is the way forward now that opinions of January 6th are moving in such a partisan direction?China's Xi and Russia's Putin openly declare on world stage they stand together, and their partnership has no limits. 

"Friendship between the two States has no limits, there are no 'forbidden' areas of cooperation," they declared, announcing plans to collaborate in a host of areas including space, climate change, artificial intelligence and control of the Internet.

This is a rather bold declaration coming at a time of rising tensions in the South China Sea and Ukraine crisis; will this type of rhetoric hinder or unite the free world?   

 [Russia and China hail "no limits" partnership to stand up to U.S. | Reuters](https://www.reuters.com/world/europe/russia-china-tell-nato-stop-expansion-moscow-backs-beijing-taiwan-2022-02-04/)Donald Trump as of late has been insisting that Mike Pence could have easily overturned the election. With Pence publicly disavowing this he made a very public enemy of Trump. What is next?

https://news.yahoo.com/pence-says-trump-wrong-saying-204453145.htmlBoth Sen. Kyrsten Sinema and Rep. Liz. Cheney have earned strong rebukes by their fellow parties recently. They have been censured by their state parties in Arizona and Wyoming, respectively. Both have seen their support among their co-partisans drop significantly in the polls. Finally, they are expected to be challenged vigorously in their upcoming primaries in 2022 for Cheney  and 2024 for Sinema.

Do you see any differences in how their own parties have reacted to them or how they should have given their opposition to a significant issue backed by their base?

For, Cheney it was her acceptance to participate in the Democrat-led Jan. 6th commission. For Sinema, it was her refusal to get rid of the Senate filibuster rule.

What does this say about how heretics are handled by parties and voters?Simply put, lawyers cost money, they charge by the billable hour, and those who can buy more lawyer hours buy more legal hours. 

How do you solve for that simple fact that additional hours can result in a different legal outcome?

There exists symbolism of justice weighing the law and the sword of the law on a scale. It's supposed to be balanced, but on a case by case basis there exists an advantage of having purchased more legal services.I recently read Jonathan Alter's excellent biography of Jimmy Carter "His Very Best."  In it, he mentions the fact that Carter, after his presidency, proposed that American Presidents, instead of only serving two eight-year terms, should instead serve one six-year term.

I also read that Presidents Eisenhower and Reagan were both also critical of the 22nd amendment, and both believed that Presidents should be able to run for as many terms as they wished.

I'm also aware that in Virginia, Governors can run for a non-consecutive second term.

What would be the implications of any of the three proposals listed above?  Are you in favor of any of them?Both [Human Rights Watch](https://www.hrw.org/report/2021/04/27/threshold-crossed/israeli-authorities-and-crimes-apartheid-and-persecution) and [Amnesty International](https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2022/02/israels-apartheid-against-palestinians-a-cruel-system-of-domination-and-a-crime-against-humanity/) have declared Israel to be commiting the international criime of apartheid. In particular,  they point to:

* Israel passing a constituational law declaring that within Israel the right to self-determination "is unique to the Jewish people"

* Israelis treating Palestinians as a demographic threat and attempting to restrict the size of their population

* Refusal to grant Palestinians citizenship or to allow Palestinian refugees and their descendants to return

* Discrimination in planning laws and decisions against Palestinians

* Refusal to recognise Bedouin villages

* Expansion of Israeli settlements

* The strict controls on Palestinian movement

* The Gaza blockade

Are these accurate claims? Is the characterisation of these as amounting to the crime of apartheid correct?https://www.latimes.com/california/story/2022-01-31/single-payer-healthcare-proposal-fizzles-in-california-assembly

California has a larger population than Canada and the 5th largest GDP in the world. If a Single Payer aka Medicare for All bill can't pass in one of the most liberal states in the entire country with Democrats with a super majority in the legislature under Governor Newsom who actually promised it during his campaign then how realistic is it for it to pass in Congress?  Especially considering the reasons it failed was it's high cost that required it to raise taxes in a state that already have very high taxes.Ever since Iraq war fatigue kicked in with the American people, there has been a steady (and growing maybe?) group of people that don’t want war, or at least no wars that involve boots on the ground, or if I am being blunt, any real consequences back home. No major costs, no major casualties etc. in essence if it isn’t just lobbing Missiles at someone (and not getting hit back) they don’t want it. This is in direct contention with so many alliances and countries that expect and rely on US military support in the (no longer so unlikely) military threat against them. Beyond NATO, this includes Taiwan among others.

So what happens when the work starts to realize (as Russia seems to have figured) the big bad wolf can’t take a punch so won’t get involved unless it is punched directly?With Trump enjoying a near 30-40 point advantage in most polls over any competition, he will most likely be the nominee in 2024. Whether or not he wins the election, some sort of election interference by Trump, as was attempted in 2020 seems inevitable (overturning State level elections, trying to seize voting machines, etc).

It seems nothing he does has any negative impact on his core constituents, and we now see emulation of the behavior of his followers globally, from Canada to the U.K. and beyond (backing conspiracy theories on various topics, racism, extreme nationalism, etc).

Are we witnessing a ramp up to a new global authoritarian order similar to 100 years ago, or does this burn itself out? Will we see a president Trump in 2024 no matter what the election results are?To clarify Michael Brooks was referring to the Covid-19 pandemic as a crisis that exposed and exacerbated issues in the neoliberal orthodoxy and world order. This is similar to how the Chernobyl crisis exposed issues with the existing Soviet model of the early 80s. And ultimately served to delegitimize large portions of the ideological project of the Soviet Union over the next ten years.  

What aspects of the neoliberal world order have been upended because of Covid (and the cascading crisis which have come from the pandemic)  and what aspects do you think remain? 

For context I have attached the Brooks video from March 2020 here [https://youtu.be/DsPH9SToLfY](https://youtu.be/DsPH9SToLfY)

As well as the general wiki on neoliberalism for references [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neoliberalism#:\~:text=Neoliberalism%2C%20or%20neo%2Dliberalism%2C,associated%20with%20free%2Dmarket%20capitalism.&text=The%20term%20is%20rarely%20used%20by%20proponents%20of%20free%2Dmarket%20policies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Neoliberalism#:~:text=Neoliberalism%2C%20or%20neo%2Dliberalism%2C,associated%20with%20free%2Dmarket%20capitalism.&text=The%20term%20is%20rarely%20used%20by%20proponents%20of%20free%2Dmarket%20policies).Basically the title, what are in your opinion the best politicians that have made a significant or the most impact on their country revitalizing or just mantaining it and when they step down will be know for it?I am curious, as we rumble towards 2024. The Republican candidates have been closed mouth ( to me ) about who they want to run in 2024 for president. I have a question.

Assuming, Donald Trump does not run again or loses the party nomination. Who do the Republicans have waiting in the wings?Following the 2008 Global Financial Crisis, the collapse of commodity prices in Latin America, and the Arab Spring and its resulting migrant crises, Politics throughout much of the World has undeniably shifted to the right. 

However, the era of Covid has now left me wondering, has the pendulum swung back to the left?

In the past two years, I think we may have reason to believe this is the case. In the US, Biden defeated the populist right president, Trump who was roundly condemned for his Covid response. In Peru, Bolivia, Honduras, and Chile, socialists have all been elected president. Whilst in Germany and Norway, Social democratic parties have won their first election in over a decade. 

Whilst this is true, center-left parties have also won reelection too. In some cases, landslides have been seen in Portugal, South Korea, New Zealand, and Canada. 

By comparison, comparatively few examples can be found of right-wing parties winning in this environment. Two examples include the Netherlands and the Czech Republic, however, this is mitigated by the fact, both already had incumbent right-wing governments prior to their elections. Additionally, center-left parties appear poised for victory in Brazil and Australia this year.

If true, some possible reasons could include the following. Firstly the fact right-wing governments due to having the incumbency, may be more likely to face consequences from the Covid-recession. Secondly, the the fact people are now facing increasingly dire economic circumstances may mean they vote for parties that offer more social and economic support. 

Thirdly, unpopular positions in this political environment such as vaccine hesitancy are increasingly associated with political right. And fourthly, for some, the fallout from Covid may have radicalized to the left as it revealed the broken nature of many "Capitalist" institutions. 

This all leaves me wondering, has this occurred or is it too soon to say?In Federalist Nos. 28 and 46, Hamilton and Madison, respectively writing as *Publius*, argue that in the scenario of a national military despotism run amok, the principal safeguard (ie, check on governmental power) against such a despotic rule by standing army would be opposition by State and local militias.

My question is whether local militias remain a principal and ultimate legitimate “check” or threat to a national military despot in American democracy?

Granted, Congress alone can declare war and, as such, enjoys great military powers to check a military despot—read, president.

Furthermore, the people’s remedies for unconstitutional militaristic despotism would be political and legal.

But, in the event of a military coup enacted by political means, for example, from the executive branch, all political and legal methods of remedying despotic usurpation of the government and the military would (this is my question) finally and ultimately be checked by State and local militias, or some other force—but which other force?The current debate about strategy in the democratic party is about whether the party should move left to appeal to minorities or move right to appeal to centrists. The usual argument from progressives is that minorities deserve if not demand more liberal policies and more cultural awareness of social problems. The argument against is that progressive "wokeness" is a turnoff to more moderate voters.

I was thinking about this while I was also thinking about the Republican party.  The Republicans are also split between the new populist right and the old-school neoconservatives. What's interesting is that while the party has publicly endorsed the more combative populist wing they pursued basically the same policies they would have anyway, and the average voter didn't seem to care.

Can Democrats do the same thing?

Most of the "woke" things (pronoun usage, political correctness, canceling) that the moderates say are annoying to centrists have no real policy implications. while several policies that would arguably benefit minorties more (housing reform, education subsidies, infrastructure) could be presented without any culture war element at all. Currently, it seems like the Democrats are doing the opposite, taking fairly universal policies and making them more culturally focused (Like Kamala Harris calling her tax policy reparations).

Could democrats simply pursue an aggressively progressive agenda in policy and denounce "wokeness" in public? The vast majority of voters don't actually pay much attention to policy and that was essentially what the Republicans did. What do you think?

ADDENDUM: I have gotten some push back on the basis that minorities actually tend to be more moderate than whites. This is true. When I talk about the left's push for minorities i am talking about the "idea" of the young, multiethnic, liberal as represented by the likes of AOCFor over 20 years rents have been rising faster than incomes. Renters tend to have less income than home owners so at a certain point losing an ever increasing share of a monthly budget will become unsustainable.

First time home buyers are also struggling. Limited available housing supply is skewed towards the higher end market and there is a major lack of starter housing.

A historical Schillinger Index review shows that the average housing price to average income currently exceeds the height of even the housing bubble. Anecdotally, the supposed increase in the market price of my home for the last year is larger than the amount I earned in income for the entire year.

Federal Reserve policy had some impact over COVID times via injecting over $8 trillion dollars into the securities market while also drastically lowering the interest rate. Federal Reserve plans changes to this policy to help combat inflation in March 2022 

The lack of housing supply especially in the starter market for first time buyers has been an issue for many years predating the Federal Reserve policy.

New construction rates have long lagged population growth rates and for various reasons what is being built is not appropriate to what is actually needed on the lower end of the market.

Increased housing burdens and a sense of being worse off than earlier generations has a deep political impact both in terms of stability and legitimacy in the eyes of the governed. 

Quick legislative intervention to address issues of rising rents and housing scarcity is desperately needed. Actions could include both intervening more and intervening less in different areas.Somewhere around June this year, the SCOTUS is expected to take a decision on the 15 week abortion ban issued by the state of Mississippi. There is also a challenge ongoing against the 6 week abortion ban that Texas issued, the ban was even allowed to remain active while the decision is pending. 

Regardless of the people voting GOP because they oppose abortion, [the majority of US citizens seems to support abortion](https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2021/05/06/about-six-in-ten-americans-say-abortion-should-be-legal-in-all-or-most-cases/) as it stands. 

So imagine SCOTUS overturning or seriously tampering with Roe vs Wade, what will it result in when it comes to election results? Do you expect a Democratic surge or will little change?Recently, Russia has been rapidly increasing their military presence in the Black Sea. They also seem to be pretty unhappy about the fact that some Black Sea countries are NATO members. I live in Bulgaria and I am curious how would the other NATO states react in the off chance that Russia shows aggression towards us. As far as I am aware, Biden said that there would only be economic consequences if Russia invades Ukraine.

Of course, unlike Ukraine, we are actually a member of NATO and our military actively cooperates with other NATO forces, especially the USA, so I think that  we would definitely get military help. 

What is your opinion? Do you think that it is possible for NATO to try and solve the issue with diplomacy? If a war really takes place and NATO decides to send troops, would they send them only to our territory with the goal to defend us, or will they attack Russia also?To the best of my knowledge the imperial system is only used in the UK and America. With the increasing globalisation (and me personally not even understanding how many feet are in a yard or whatever) it raised the question for me if it's not easier and logical to switch to the metric system worldwide?

I'm considering people seeing the imperial system as part of their culture might be a problem, but I'm curious about your thoughtsUS has been the leader of the world since ww2. Though they might be heading downwards in recent years. 

Soviet Union had been the rival of US for some decades. But the dissolution of Soviet pretty much crippled them. Now Russia may have recovered some and no longer the weakest one?

UK had a strong start in UN at the end of WW2. The loss of colonies hurt them. But I feel like they also declined the most. Brexit kind of showed that. 

France also suffered from decolonization though they still hold much influence in those colonies and oversee territories. Kind of stable for now I guess? 

China may have been the weakest of them all at start. They improved gradually and now they are having an economic competition with USA.Whenever climate change is discussed or green power sources are brought up, people talk about nuclear power. The most recent plants approved were the expansion at Turkey Point in Florida and the plants at Votgle in Georgia. Turkey Point hasn't started, and it has been 4 years. A similar expansion in [South Carolina](https://theintercept.com/2019/02/06/south-caroline-green-new-deal-south-carolina-nuclear-energy/) was abandoned. Construction began at Votgle in 2009, to be finished in 2016 for the first reactor. The cost was estimated to be $14 billion. Now, it is expected the first reactor will be done the end of this year and the cost will be at least $28 billion, though they just found construction quality issues which will increase the cost and the length of time to finish. [These](https://www.ajc.com/news/business/how-georgia-nuclear-projects-big-finish-went-so-wrong/NWPE4XPG6NC5JJTMYTVJK4W2NQ/) have been a [disaster](https://www.gpb.org/news/2022/01/06/what-ratepayers-should-know-about-the-plant-vogtle-expansion). The cost of these are not going to be offset for a very very long time, if ever. If they had just put in place wind and solar, Georgia would actually have ended up far ahead.

Are we unable to build reactors anymore? What is going wrong with all of the projects? How do we fix this to be able to actually add more nuclear capacity if that is the best path forward?Would it be if Trump is installed in 2024 after losing but several GOP state legislatures flip the results claiming fraud and the GOP House certifies it thus installing Trump as president?

Or would it be

If Biden wins again and the Republican southern states ask permission to leave stating they want out and cite Texas vs White court case which said secession by consent of states is legal or through federal inaction.[Justice Breyer has announced his retirement](https://www.nytimes.com/live/2022/01/26/us/stephen-breyer-retirement )

On the campaign trail, [Joe Biden he indicated that he will nominate a Black woman to the court](https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/2020-election/problem-biden-s-pledge-black-woman-justice-n1200826). Who are possible nominees? What are the pros and cons of nominating them?Critical Race Theory (CRT) and LGBT/gender topics are currently under threat of being censored in American schools. The movements to censor these subjects as "[divisive](https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/blogs/stateline/2021/06/14/gop-lawmakers-intensify-effort-to-ban-critical-race-theory-in-schools)" and "[obscene](https://www.lgbtqnation.com/2021/05/republicans-refuse-repeal-law-says-books-gay-topics-obscene/)" are being spearheaded in [school boards](https://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/critical-race-theory-invades-school-boards-help-conservative-groups-n1270794) and [state governments](https://gov.texas.gov/news/post/governor-abbott-signs-hb-3979-into-law), and promoting bans on teaching CRT or LGBT/gender topics is becoming [increasingly popular](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2021/nov/03/republicans-critical-race-theory-winning-electoral-issue). Efforts to stop their teachings have resulted in [firings of teachers](https://www.washingtonpost.com/education/2021/12/06/tennessee-teacher-fired-critical-race-theory/), [book bannings](https://www.latimes.com/world-nation/story/2021-11-08/texas-schools-ordered-to-investigate-books), [loss of school funds](https://www.tennessean.com/story/news/politics/2021/05/05/tennessee-bans-critical-race-theory-schools-withhold-funding/4948306001/), and new legislation against schools from [Florida](https://www.miamiherald.com/news/local/news-columns-blogs/fabiola-santiago/article257696978.html) to [Alaska](https://mustreadalaska.com/rep-mckay-prefiles-bill-relating-to-critical-race-theory-in-alaska-schools/). What should Joe Biden and Congress do to address the censorship of these and possibly future education subjects?They have 100,000 troops standing by at the Ukrainian border for months while doing joint exercises in Belarus and the Crimean Peninsula, funding and supplying the Donetsk Oblast insurgency, poking the defenses around the Baltic Sea, doing operations in the Middle East and having warships and planes (and subs probably) hanging around the Nordic countries as usual.

How do they pay for all this, all while receiving increased economic sanctions from the west and dealing with the effects of the epidemic?

In addition they must be building a war chest in case the war turns hot, and that would probably increase their expenses tenfold. How are they not in trouble financially? Is GDP an inaccurate measurement of their economic capabilities?Biden is officially *way* underwater in Georgia, where he now has a 34% approval rating in the Peach State according to [the University of Georgia](https://thehill.com/homenews/campaign/591655-biden-approval-rating-drops-to-34-percent-in-georgia-poll). But that's not what this post is about. In the same poll, 53% of those who identify as conservative say that drop boxes should either stay inside early voting locations and be available during voting hours or should be widely accessible and available to voters. In contrast, 43% of self-identifying conservatives and 51% of self-identifying Republicans went with eliminating drop boxes entirely, something Trumpian conservatives have been pushing for. 45% of Peach State conservatives also oppose getting rid of touchscreens that print ballot papers and replace them with paper ballots filled out by hand, and 43% of the same group and 46% of Republicans in Georgia supported going through with it. This is also a change conservatives closest to Trump have been going all in on for months. As it turns out, Republicans are not as united behind all the voting law changes as some in the media might have you think. Do you think the GOP should nominate candidates who oppose eliminating both drop boxes and ballot-printing touchscreens in order for Team Red to form a firm and steady coalition that can reverse the Democrats' political gains in recent years?US President since 1980s: 

* Reagan  

* Bush Sr  

* Clinton  

* Bush Jr  

* Obama  

* Trump  

* Biden (might still be too early to evaluate)  


I will leave it to you to define "the best" since everyone will have different standards and consideration, however I would like to hear more on why and what the administration accomplished during his presidency.As far as I can tell from a cursory search of current AUMFs, it seems that the last one granted by Congress was in 2002 authorizing the invasion of Iraq. That legislation has provided blanket legal coverage for dozens of other operations under the GWOT umbrella, but I can't see it holding up if President Biden attempted to use it to deploy forces against Russia in Ukraine or any other Eastern European country. If the situation deteriorated to that point, would Congress finally take back its constitutional power to declare war, or would they simply push through another war powers act and hand authority back to the Executive?American state judges are chosen in a number of different ways. Texas elects them on partisan ballots with a primary election for each party. Michigan and Oregon elects them in a non partisan ballot with a runoff between the top two if nobody has a majority. States like Missouri choose their principal judges with the governor having appointed by the consent of the state senate some number of members of a nominating commission for a term longer than that of the governor, the bar association chooses an equal number, and the chief justice of the state, typically elected by the other judges on that court, chairs the commission and has a tie breaking vote, and the governor must choose from among a list of typically 3-7 candidates from it, maybe need the state senate to agree to the nomination, and they serve a probationary term and then the voters of the state choose whether or not to grant them additional terms, from 6 to 14 years, and most states have a retirement age from 65-90, typically 70-75. 

What is good and bad about each option and what would happen if the US federally adopted each of them?Joe would be 86 at the end of his 2nd term. Keeping in mind when Ronald Regan defeated Jimmy Carter, he was 69 years old. At the time of his first inauguration, Reagan was the oldest person to assume the U.S. presidency. People felt he was to old then. Regardless of whether you agree with Biden's policies, does his age factor into your decision?Until Trump, the last non-deceased president to not participate in their successor's inauguration was Richard Nixon (although he did meet Ford on that day and Ford wished him off), but you'd have to go all the way back to Andrew Johnson to find a US president who skipped their successor's scheduled inauguration on purpose (technically, Woodrow Wilson was unable to attend his successor's actual inauguration ceremony due to health reasons, although he still participated in the festivities including the drive to the capitol).

Now with Trump breaking the tradition, how likely is it that such breaks would become more common in the future? Or is what Trump did likely to be a one-off and Biden/subsequent presidents will return to attending their successor's scheduled inauguration?  And assuming that such cases do happen in the future, will they mostly be limited to Republican presidents, or could it happen to Democrat presidents as well?Russia's amassment of troops on the border with Ukraine has led the Biden Administration and NATO to promise ["severe consequences"](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2022/jan/23/blinken-swift-severe-united-response-russia-invades-ukraine-biden-putin-pompeo) for Russia in the event of an invasion. The Biden Administration's response would likely feature economic sanctions in addition to military support, and 8,500 US troops have been placed on alert for possible deployment to Eastern Europe. How do you think a President Trump would respond to the crisis facing Ukraine, considering his administration's [record of diplomacy](https://www.businessinsider.com/trump-says-ukraine-crisis-wouldnt-happen-under-him-ignoring-2019-impeachment-2022-1) in the region?It occurred to me a way to do away with the Electoral College would be to make each voter their own congressional district.

This way, each vote for president would be treated as a district vote, in the way Nebraska and Maine award their electoral votes.

This would mean voters wouldn't be bound to the outcome of the popular vote in their own states, making the vote for president effectively a popular vote contest.

It would require amending the 1912 Apportionment Acts for the purposes of Choosing electors in each state, which the Federal Government has constitutional authority to do. It doesn't mean we would have 330 million congressional districts, but we would have about 200 million 'single district' votes in the electoral college.

Sure the problem arises, what if nobody gets more than half of the EC vote, its then decided by the house? Well this system doesn't really deal with that, its merely a replacement of the winner-take-all system that 48 states use and extends the practice of what 2 states already do to every single voter.In 2019 Congress sanctioned Russia with regards to Nordstream 2, with a substantial amount of the vote from both republicans and democrats. The pipeline then halted construction. 

It began construction again on January 24th 2021. The US lifted the sanctions in may. Now Democrats are blocking new sanctions directly aimed at the pipeline, in favor of ones on individuals including Vlad. 


Can anybody explain why the sanctions on individuals are preferable to the ones on the pipeline that had already worked? 

Bill passing in 2019, CNBC thought it was too late, but as you’ll see next, doesn’t seem so: https://www.cnbc.com/2019/12/18/us-sanctions-on-nord-stream-2-pipeline.html

https://www.pipeline-journal.net/news/nord-stream-2-construction-stopped-russia-counts-eu


Construction resumes: https://www.uawire.org/russia-resumes-construction-of-nord-stream-2-pipeline

Sanctions lifted: https://www.msn.com/en-us/news/world/biden-lifts-us-sanctions-on-major-russian-pipeline/ar-AAKaRHA

Sanctions voted down: https://www.cnn.com/2022/01/13/politics/nord-stream-pipeline-democrats-defeat-cruz-bill/index.html

New Democrat proposal: https://abcnews.go.com/Politics/wireStory/democrats-push-rival-bill-sanctioning-russia-ukraine-82225628I commonly hear that the volume, quality, independence, and impact of investigative journalism in the United States have been declining since about 1970. **Is that true? How should I evaluate this claim? What pieces should I break this claim into, if any?**

The moderators suggested that I defend the idea that this is a political question. Here is my defense. Please let me know if you consider the following defense to be too opinion-based.

1. It's a common view (especially in the US) that the press is the "fourth branch of government," and investigative journalism is usually political.
2. Some of the reasons commonly given for the decline of investigative journalism are political in nature, as are some of the solutions that are commonly advocated.
3. In evaluating the reliability of claims that investigative journalism has declined, we are likely to include politics in our analysis.Today, there have been reports that Russia may intend to set up a puppet government in Ukraine following some sort of invasion.

With a potential conflict in Ukraine closer than ever, it seems like some very basic questions are not in mainstream discussion:

1. Why should we care? (to the point of military aid/intervention)
2. What are the pros and cons of western intervention?

&#x200B;

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Edit:

Some things that I have seen come up in discussion:

[Did NATO promise not to expand eastward?](https://www.jstor.org/stable/24483307) Tl:DR: No.

[Did the U.S. promise to defend Ukraine in the '90s?](https://treaties.un.org/doc/Publication/UNTS/Volume%203007/Part/volume-3007-I-52241.pdf)  TL:DR: Vaguely sort of, but not really. In this instance, no. (Read the 4th point)

Slightly longer explanation:

The U.S., Russia, and U.K., in certain terms, commit to "seek immediate United States Security Council action" if Ukraine should find itself, a victim, to aggression.

While there is something to be said about the vagueness of such a commitment, ultimately, in order for the UNSC to act, it would require Russian approval...an unlikely proposition.Joe Biden recently finished his first full year as president. Democrats have partisanly pushed lots of legislation since then, like COVID relief and verifying the 2020 election results. But what bipartisan legislating from Congress can you recall, where Republicans debated and voted with Democrats, that improved your community or houshold's quality of life?As of September 2021, the United States had 621 million barrels of oil in the Strategic Reserve. But we use almost 20 million barrels of oil a day.  

Therefore, we only have 31 days worth of oil at the current rate. Given that oil is still the lifeblood of a functioning Industrial nation and the supply of oil will inevitably run out some day. How much oil should should we have in reserve? A month, a year, a decade?2020 had the highest turn out in over a century with about 67% voter turnout. There were many things going for it as Trump was on the ticket and after Hillary's upset losses, Democrats were motivated to turn out. Additionally, the issues of the pandemic and racial justice/policing really turned people out. At that time, Biden was also looked as an anti-Trump option to many instead of being as defined as most presidential election challengers were. 

Do you think if there is a rematch in 2024, would voter turnout be higher or lower than 2020? 

&#x200B;

Some factors I could see as higher turnout than 2020 would be: HOPEFULLY lessened COVID situation so rallies/voter registration would be in full swing, narrative as a "final battle" with the conclusion of the Trump election saga (however 2020 already had this), perhaps Republicans and right leaning independents who didn't vote last time are eager to make sure it doesn't happen again, Trump as a "greater" threat to Democrats after January 6th.

Some factors I could see as lower turnout than 2020 would be: Unpopular candidates on both sides might want people to not vote (although they say this every election cycle), possibly less pressing issues (2020 was a perfect storm), I don't buy the Republicans think elections are rigged argument turning down voting turnout as much (Trump MAGA loyalists more likely to think this, but they're also more likely to want to help Trump).Recently alot has been on the news about Russia and Ukraine,  my question is why not other post soviet states ?
Was thinking probably it's an all year access to a warm water port or unlike Georgia,  Russia has had some previous success  annexing Ukraine territory  or there is more than meets the eye.It’s been one year since President Biden officially took office. How do you think his presidency has gone so far? Has it gone how you expected? How do you think his first year compares to other presidents? How do you think the country is comparatively since he was inaugurated? Do you feel that he has done a good job fulfilling his campaign promises?From what I understand, left and right are merely a spectrum for political ideologies. Liberal and conservative are political ideologies.  democrat and republican are political parties. But historically (and philosophically speaking), have their definitions changed over time? What were the original definitions? What are they now? How did left-wing become(associated with) liberal and right-wing become(associated with) conservative etc? Is one stance merely a reaction to the other?So basically equivalent to the Cuba embargo today with potentially harsher rules. Such as completely cutting them off from the American financial market; order VISA, Amex, and Mastercard to end service in Russia; ban any ship that delivers goods to Russia from porting in the US (similar to the 180 day rule in Cuba); ban the importation of all Russian goods into the US, and ban Russian owned services (including online) from operating in the US, etc.My question is fairly simple and straightforward, is there any mechanism in place that can be used to remove a state from the US? 

Obviously, in the US civil war a whole bunch of states got together and decided to leave, but if the US determined a particular state to no longer be worthy of statehood could it technically be done?

For instance, if there was a mass population decrease in a state that left it with only a few thousand people, would it still retain statehood? Or a state became completely uninhabitable from a nuclear war or climate disaster.Given president Biden's current unpopularity according to the polls (averaging around 42% at 538 and RCP), congressional Democrats in swing districts have to decide whether they want Biden to come to their district and campaign for the midterm elections them later this year.

Usually, popular presidents are welcomed and unpopular ones are shunned by Congressmen and would be hopefuls during election time, but for Biden it will be a unique decision. As a longtime creature of Congress as a senator he knows the ins and outs of campaigns and how to win congressional elections, unlike his immediate predecessors who had scant Washington experience during their first midterms.

So, do you think it would be more beneficial for Biden to campaign for Democrats in swing districts? Who exactly would be helped and who would be hurt? Aside from fundraising, should any candidate want to be tied to an unpopular president?There is talk of amending the existing Electoral Count Act to avoid subversion in the 2024 Presidential election. Leaders from both parties seem to have cracked the door to such a discussion. What could ostensibly be done? What changes could/should be made?The case was about the scope of executive privilege and whether a former president may invoke it when the current one has waived it. Court found power rests with the sitting president.  Only Justice Thomas dissenting.

Trump had sued to block release of the documents, saying that the committee was investigating possible criminal conduct, a line of inquiry that he said was improper, and that the panel had no valid legislative reason to seek the requested information.

The ruling is not particularly surprising given the rulings below and erosion of executive privileges during the Nixon presidency involving Watergate.

The Committee now will have access to most of the information that it sought to determine whether Trump's conduct, either before, during or after 1/6 \[if any\] rises to a level were Committee recommends charges to the DOJ for further action.

If Committee finds evidence of criminal wrongdoing, it may ask DOJ to review. What impact, if any, this may have in future for Trump?

Edited to include opinion of the Court. 

 [21A272 Trump v. Thompson (01/19/2022) (supremecourt.gov)](https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/21pdf/21a272_9p6b.pdf) Even during the 2020 election when the Democrats united against Trump, it was clear that there were cracks in the coalition and infighting remained relatively common. On the other hand, infighting seems less likely to happen among Republicans even when you take into account GOP members who aren't exactly fans of Trump (notably Romney). Why does it seem that Republicans (and indeed American conservatives) appear to be more united and dedicated to their goals compared to Democrats and other non-conservatives?In 1996, Bill Clinton won states like Arkansas, Louisiana, and Tennessee. In today's America, the thought of Arkansas, Louisiana, and Tennessee going Democrat would be unfathomable. Up until 2010, Democrats also controled the legislatures of states like Alabama, Missisippi, and Lousiana. Mary Landrieu controlled the senate seat of Lousisiana until 2014. When did the moderate/southern Democrats die?According to "[wits.worldbank.org](https://wits.worldbank.org)" - 50% of Chinese exports and imports are accounted for by the US, EU, Korea and Japan and their allies. For the USA itself - 18 and 6%. For Germany - 10 and 7%. In theory, for China, such a blow would be much stronger.

In addition, you can put an ultimatum to all other countries that account for the other 50%: Trade either with China or the US and its allies. For example, India has 20% more trade volume with the US than with China. In the theoretical division of the world market into a "Block of the West" and a "Block of China" - which side will developing countries like India take, and which block will suffer the most as a result?

I just recently created post an "Americans, why don't you destroy the regime in North Korea?" in AskReddit. That people's justified the impossibility of this mainly by China supporting the North Koreans. Can the economic actions from the text above undermine China's ability to defend and support the DPRK? And can the Chinese government make concessions when similar threats?

I wrote the text in google translator, sorry if there are literary errors.A recent survey by Convention of States Action found a sizable majority of United States citizens disapprove of members of Congress or their spouses trading stocks. The opinion held regardless of how individuals politically identified with 70% of Democrats, 78% of Republicans, and around 80% of Independents all saying Congress had an unfair advantage.

What other topics/ideas maintain that level of bipartisan citizen alignment but fail to be part of the national political discussion?It is never a good sign when an adversary starts evacuating its embassy while talk of an attack is making headlines.   

Even Britain’s defense secretary, Ben Wallace, announced in an [address to Parliament](https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/statement-by-the-defence-secretary-in-the-house-of-commons-17-january-2022?utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=govuk-notifications-topic&utm_source=bf2e6c40-445b-4e59-808b-bd3a60871808&utm_content=immediately) on Monday said that the country would begin providing Ukraine with light, anti-armor defensive weapons. 

Mr. Putin, therefore, may become tempted to act sooner rather than later. Officially, Russia maintains that it has no plan to attack Ukraine at this time. 

U.S. officials saw Russia’s embassy evacuations coming. “We have information that indicates the Russian government was preparing to evacuate their family members from the Russian Embassy in Ukraine in late December and early January,” a U.S. official said in a statement.

Although U.S. negotiations are still underway giving a glimmer of hope for a peaceful resolution, one must remember history and talks that where ongoing while the then Japanese Empire attacked Pearl Harbor.

Are we getting closer to a war in Ukraine with each passing day?

[https://www.nytimes.com/2022/01/17/us/politics/russia-ukraine-kyiv-embassy.html](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/01/17/us/politics/russia-ukraine-kyiv-embassy.html)For a few years, it seemed a given that China would overtake the US due to the US’s wealth gaps, enormous debt, social divides, and political gridlock but I am now wondering whether China has shot itself in its foot by reining in its private sector in the past year in addition to its aging population and debt. Analysts seem pretty divided on this subject nowadays.Given any political topic or point of contention people will (generally) attempt to defend their side using good arguments and (mostly) well researched facts, but how do you defend your position when the people that back you up don’t seem to align with your morals?

Is allying fact with less reputable sources and characters a useful tool in debate? Or too dangerous, as it could tarnish your reputability?There is currently much debate around the filibuster and whether or not it is appropriate to give a minority of Senators the ability to stop legislation. Proponents of the filibuster believe it [makes legislation more stable and predictable](https://www.yahoo.com/now/sinema-doubles-down-filibuster-defense-000858748.html). Opponents of the filibuster believe that its use gives an unfair advantage to [minority factions in government](https://gen.medium.com/the-filibuster-and-the-myth-of-radical-reversals-c43fb0d5bd3). The filibuster was first used in 1837 to block an expungement of Andrew Jackson's censure, and since the Civil War has been a [powerful barrier in Congress to civil rights legislation](https://apnews.com/article/joe-biden-race-and-ethnicity-senate-elections-filibusters-voting-rights-407aa6edeae59bb88c52f02b511bdc2e). Is the filibuster promoting a healthy debate in government that benefits regular people, or is it empowering the biased political factions James Madison [warned about](https://billofrightsinstitute.org/primary-sources/federalist-no-10)?Manchin came out publicly against it at the end of December, and the Biden administration responded with a press conference that was highly critical of him. Nevertheless, since then Manchin has made several public statements wherein he seems to be talking about his preferences for policies that would have been a part of the bill. For instance [see here](https://www.politico.com/minutes/congress/01-4-2022/taking-the-on-climate): he said on January 4th "I think that the climate thing is one that we probably can come to agreement much easier than anything else." 

Is Manchin hinting that he will come back to the negotiating table? Or is he simply speaking off the cuff? What could a compromise look like, and would the rest of the party get on board with it?A common hurdle for federal education reform is the ability to implement widespread reform across such a vast country. On a state level, how far can a state go into creating drastic education reforms to separate it from the rest of the country? What would be the political and financial consequences from trying to reform away from federal standards?

States have near absolute authority when it comes to in-state policies, with little to no ability for the federal government to encroach on them. Could a state go as far as remove standardized testing, eliminate charter/private schools, and have curriculums stronger lead by local teacher and student boards without fear of federal standards?

Would propositions like this lead to political suicide? Would it be financially practical, and what consequences could be expected on a voter base level and federal standards level?One thing I noticed about the adoption of socialism in the 20th century is that in developed countries like the US and Western Europe, socialism/communism has its roots and is more adopted by the intellectual class (ie: on college campuses, scientific/educational circles) while in less developed regions like Russia, Latin America, and parts of Asia, it was usually the farmers/peasants who made up the greatest support for communism while the intellectuals were against it.

For example, during the cold war, many self described socialists were highly educated and the only place socialism was able to live was on college campuses or in highly educated/prosperous cities like New York, DC, San Francisco, and Portland. I believe it was the same in Europe, where cities like London, Berlin, and Amsterdam harbored socialists. Meanwhile, in Cuba, it was mainly the rural farmers who embraced socialism while the wealthy urbanites/intellectual class favored capitalism. Same thing in Guatemala, where the poor Mayan/indigenous tribes widely embraced it (and also in Russia, where it sprung from serfs).As Russia is gathering a very large army at the border to Ukraine, I was wondering which Countries would support Russia in this Endeavor. Russia has expressed Interest in keeping the old Soviet States as well as the Scandinavian Countries free from the NATO. 

Russia has now started to move parts of their Military to Belarus, an Ally of theirs. 

Which other Countries would support Russia here?There have allegations of sex trafficking involving an unnamed 17 yo female. Thus far we have seen numerous news reports with the sources often remaining anonymous. Congressman Gaetz has stated that the entire affair is a plot to extort him. The FBI investigation apparently is ongoing.In this Axios article, Jonathan Swan lays out a potential rivalry between DeSantis and Trump: https://www.axios.com/trump-privately-slams-desantis-ba0ce3aa-839f-41c9-83a1-4b9dc26649d9.html

Trump is reportedly criticzing DeSantis. This comes after DeSantis recently said he regrets not speaking out sooner against Trumps's recommendation to stay home: https://www.cnn.com/2022/01/14/politics/desantis-trump-covid-response/index.html

The conventional wisdom has been that Trump is a lock for the nomination if he wants it. Trump retains very high approval ratings among Republicans. Polls show him currently leading in the 2024 GOP primaries. Parties usually push aside candidates who lose an election, but Trump seems to have avoided this by claiming he didn't lose. 

That said, Desantis may have found an angle he could attack Trump on. COVID restrictions are very unpopular among the GOP, and Desantis has been one of the leading figures opposing the restrictions. DeSantis could make the argument that he is more anti-lockdown then Trump. DeSantis could also make an electability argument given how polarizing Trump is.

Would that be enough though? Could DeSantis or another Republican actually beat Trump for the nomination? Or is it still safe to assume that the 2024 nomination is Trumps if he wants it?The US is a very large country geographically, so its court system is spread out over thousands of tiny localities. In part due to its size, American culture is highly disparate, so naturally there's a ton of local variance in the way laws, trials,  and sentencing are set up. It's not hard to imagine that a given defendant found guilty and sentenced brutally in one locality could hypothetically be acquitted somewhere else in the country. The appeal system is somewhat of a check to that, but it doesn't appear to address the following: 

I've noticed over the years of social media that it has created quite a powder keg out of the US justice system by, among other things, making it easier than ever to compare criminal case results from across the country and proliferating the most enraging inconsistencies like never before. What I find makes it uniquely problematic in the US is the combination of linguistic uniformity over such a large population, mass internet access, historical baggage of white supremacy, and mass incarceration. 

So then, is it time to consolidate the US court system? Could there be a better solution?Is it time that America sets up a Federal Elections Commission to standardize election rules and set up districts in a more equitable fashion much like Canada has Elections Canada, a federal agency that sets up polling stations and draws the parliamentary districts?

Edit: As many of you had pointed out, the FEC exists. For the record, I’m not American and was unaware. I am watching from the outside. My question was should federal elections be nationalized with a standard set of rules for polling stations, voter identification, and a counting process with verificationSeveral countries mention they have a democratic political system. However, the differences between practical systems are huge. 

Single party, two (major) parties and multiparty-systems all produce quite different situations. Some countries elect rather a small group of decision-makers with a strong core of civil servants, while some organize votes for rather minor positions amd the amount of tenured civil servants is smaller. In some countries the party decides on the order of their candidates on a card (i.e. the voter votes between cards) while in some the candidates are put into order in their respective party cards based on the amount of their votes. In some countries obliging referendums are held for very minor questions while in some there are no referendums at all, etc, etc.

So, what system would you define as the most democratic and why?Republican leadership removed Rep. Kinzinger and Chaney from their committee assignments for bucking the Republican agenda. Should Manchin be removed as chairman of the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources? And should Sinema be removed as chairman of the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation?In recent years, the EU has had an increasingly difficult time holding its member states to a common line, most notably there's now a deep rift between eastern member states and western ones.

Poland and Hungary are the two most prominent cases where they now openly conflict with Brussels' institutions and narrative but they certainly aren't the only ones in the east.

The refugee crisis of the mid-2010s has turned them increasingly hostile to the narrative coming from western member states and from Brussels. National and ethnic identity issues have come swinging, prompting Hungary and a lot of other countries in the east to act independently of the EU and common western member states' approaches and more forcefully to refugees and migrants from outside.

Both Poland and Hungary have also made moves away from the consensus of western EU states on what a liberal democracy should look like:

Poland has changed certain rules of its surpreme court to which Brussels instutions have become skeptical of its supposed judiciary independence and question the upholding of the rule of law. The commission has opened infringement proceedings against Poland on multiple things but Poland's position has not changed.

The ruling of the Polish constitutional tribunal recently with regards to the relationship between the EU treaty with Polands constitution has added even more fuel to the fire. It questioned the constitutionality of EU treaty articles, the jurisdiction of the ECJ and thus can be seen as challanging the primacy of EU law which questions one of the foundations of the EU project.

Hungary on the other hand has experienced increasingly monopolistic media ownership and shows other oligarchic and openly corrupt tendencies tied to political parties in power. Since the refugee crisis, the EU has also become a punching bag of Hungarian populist politicians and movements.

Art. 7 proceedings were used against both but the EU institutions have failed to achieve anything due to the fear of ultimately breaking consensus and Poland and Hungary covering each other.

Merkel was often seen as the broker and consensus maker on the EU level but now that she's gone, consensus is harder to achieve, with Germany most likely taking a slightly passive role in the EU with Scholz at the helm.

With the French presidency of the Council and the retirement of Merkel, the EU now drifts towards France and French positions shaped by Macron but he has had difficulties reaching any of the eastern EU states or changing any of their positions during visits and summits.

His proposals of dialogue with Russia has alienated Baltic member states and Poland from further committing to any of his more strategic proposals of military alignment of the EU or supporting the more radical/bold proposals in terms of further integration.

What could be done to prevent Poland and Hungary (and other eastern members) from drifting further apart and mend the conflicts?A source on the racial wealth gap:

* https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2020/06/04/economic-divide-black-households/

Furthermore, if we look at the African diaspora across the world in general:

* https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/African_diaspora#Populations_and_estimated_distribution

and cross reference it with The World Bank/U.N’s chart on wealth disparities in different global regions: 

* https://ourworldindata.org/uploads/2021/03/The-global-inc-distribution-190-10-30-1536x959.png

we can see that the overwhelming vast majority of black people either live in **Africa** where 95%+ of the population lives on less than the equivalent to $10 a day and 85% live on less than $5.50 a day (https://blogs.worldbank.org/opendata/85-africans-live-less-550-day) or the **Caribbean** where 70% of people are food insecure (https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-11-30/hunger-in-latin-america-hit-20-year-high-last-year-amid-pandemic), with **North America** being the only other region where black people make up 10% or more of the overall population. As such, seeing as North America is by far the most prosperous out of all the regions where black people primarily live, to what extent does it have a unique moral burden to create a better life for its black residents and generally serve as a beacon of hope for black people across the world?Winston Churchill Said - "Democracy is the worst form of government, except for all the others." Despite being a system that values its citizens' rights to choose their representative, I see two major weakness that a democratic system of government suffers from: 1) uninformed or disengaged voters, and 2) no practical way to get a truly unbiased judiciary system. What other weaknesses do you see in democratic systems. What are the changes needed for a democratic system to be sustainable over a long period of time?In contemporary American politics, the mainstream ideologies can be divided between the blue liberal progressives Democrats and the red conservative Republicans. Many states are dominated by a single party. Idaho, Arkansas and Florida are controlled by Republican trifectas. These states tend to pass legislation favoring business interests, property rights, lessening the social safety net, and keeping traditional Judeo-Christian family values. Then there are the blue Democratic states such as California, Illinois and New York. These states tend to pass legislation that increases social spending, greater civil liberties, and minority representation. Finally there are the purple states, to me, a complete enigma, what is the middle ground between wanting something and not wanting something? Sure you could offer half of something, but that’s still something and thus wouldn’t be agreed upon. So what is the common solution, what is a purple ideology?I'm from Europe and interested in American politics, so please excuse me if I make any spelling errors.

So basically, as the title states.

\-    Young people are way more likely to be Democrat than Republican. They    are replacing older voters, that are more likely Republican.

\-    Texas is/was turning blue, as more and more people move in from blue    states like California. Without Texas, the GOP can't possibly win a    Presidential election.

\- The population is turning more diverse, which usually favors the democrats.

\-    Trump is/was very unpopular with moderate voters and still has lots  of   influence, which should be turning moderate voters away from the  GOP.

Despite   this, the GOP looks  to be gaining ground. Unless something shocking   happens, they will  grab control of the Senate in the midterms.

So, why? If so many things go in the favor of Democrats, why don't they see this translated into (bigger) election victories?Should Guantanamo Bay be closed down?

Today, 39 detainees remain at Gitmo. Nearly half are cleared for release/transfer, and haven't had charges or a trial, or are recommended for indefinite detention.

Should they shut down Guantanamo Bay?

Plus, it’ll be a LONG time before that happens. In September, 2017, it had 55 detainees remaining. And now in November, 2021, 39 detainees remain. And the process is long because while we had a detainee transferred out of Gitmo in July, 2021, that was the first time since January, 2018, we had someone released.

NOTE: 11/39 detainees have been charged with a crime.When he was reviewing the 2018 election results in each state, I looked over two lesser covered states in AR and ID. Most people probably couldn’t name the candidates or their platform. The Idaho Democrats for example (who by the way have an amazing mascot) are pro mining, fishing, and logging. At odds with a more pro-environment platform. Paulette Jordan, the Democrat who faces Brad Little, made a valiant effort for a state that is so rigidly red historically speaking. Ultimately she lost by around 100,000 votes. Most people probably didn’t think about this governor’s race at all. They didn’t look at polling data as it was updated, didn’t follow it in the news, and so forth. Because a state like Idaho is historically red, the climb seems to make people disengage and loose interest in the election. Writing Jordan’s loss off as inevitable and such makes me wonder how the race might have gone if the Idaho gubernatorial race was part of the national discussion. Might doing this spur or alter turnout?I an definitely not an expert on the topic, but have come lately up with several historical books that describe ancient societies. While conclusions are hard to make, it seems that there have been several situations, when the legistlators or decision makers have been selected by some type of lottery. I think there were even some comments in the older texts that speak against voting, as it would only benefit the most eloquent or charismatic ones.

How do you see using this approach would change the society in which you live?Biden’s polling is underwater, with the [latest Qunnipiac poll showing him at 33% approval and with Hispanic voters shifting away from the Democrats](https://thehill.com/homenews/administration/589450-quinnipiac-poll-shows-biden-with-33-percent-approval-rating).

His ambitious legislative agenda on climate change, social spending and voting rights appears dead in the water, which along with the chaos of the Afghanistan withdrawal have solidified perceptions of him as a flailing incompetent that cannot govern or deliver his promises. 

Both Covid and inflation appears to show no signs of letting up, with even voices from the left becoming critical of Biden’s handling of the pandemic.

Republican efforts to tilt the electoral balance in their favour in swing states through voter suppression laws appear set to erase whatever gains the Democrats made in 2020 in places such as Georgia. 

And it appears the Republicans are all but guaranteed to win in this year’s Congressional elections, denying anymore meaningful political achievements that could generate turnout enthusiasm for the Dems.

All the while the Republican Party’s political apparatus and their ability to continue winning elections thanks to their structural advantages appears to be completely invincible and immune to events. I’ve seen some polls suggest Trump would defeat Biden handily in a [hypothetical 2024 matchup](https://www.newsweek.com/trump-widens-lead-over-biden-6-points-hypothetical-2024-matchup-poll-1662708).

With all that painting an incredibly dire situation for the Democrats, it is looking increasingly like the 2024 election will be all but guaranteed for the Republicans to win. While some still point to their being three more years remaining for the Dems to shift their fortunes, more than a few people I know have compared Biden’s situation to that of Jimmy Carter’s. In that his polling never recovered and that he entered 1980 with deep unpopularity with all relevant demographics and no incumbency advantage. I’ve heard one mention that it’s very rare for a president and his party’s polling to ever recover once it starts dropping. 

To say nothing of how the idea of the Republicans overturning the election results if the Democrats win is becoming increasingly normalised. 

If there is indeed a possibility that the Dems fortunes can change in time for 2024, where, what and how will that take shape?

Conversely, if you believe there is no chance whatsoever of the Democrats and Biden recovering their polling in time, explain why.The indictments mark the Justice Department's first Jan. 6 use of the seditious conspiracy charge, which accuses Oath Keepers leader Stewart Rhodes and other members of the group of conspiring to "oppose by force the execution of the laws governing the transfer of presidential power" from outgoing President Donald Trump to incoming President Joe Biden.

Rhodes, who is not believed to have entered the Capitol but was seen with several of the defendants gathered outside on Capitol grounds both before and after they entered the building, has denied any involvement in urging the group to storm the building and has said he believes it was wrong for the members of the group to do so.

A former senior counterterrorism director at the National Security Council and a former FBI and DHS official, told ABC News. "While there is no crime of domestic terrorism under U.S. law, the seditious conspiracy charge that Rhodes and others will now face is one of dozens of crimes under the terrorism enhancement statute, which could boost the amount of years he and other defendants face if these cases go to trial and the US government wins."

The charge of seditious conspiracy can have far reaching affect and could include many others; Will this indictment lay to rest criticism against the DOJ that evidence was lacking for the more serious crimes?[NYT: Biden Campaign to Push Voting Rights Protections Appears All but Dead. Senator Kyrsten Sinema stunned colleagues by declaring that she would not support undermining the filibuster to pass legislation under any circumstances. President Biden made his case to senators in person at the Capitol but left empty-handed, leaving him without a path forward on the voting rights measures.](https://www.nytimes.com/2022/01/13/us/politics/sinema-voting-rights-bill.html)

With Senator Kirsten Sinema (D-AZ) having declared her opposition to abolishing the filibuster to allow the Senate to pass voting rights reform without 60 votes, the White House's voting rights push is all but dead. President Biden's speech was for nothing. One may lament a time when fiery speeches could change minds, but that doesn't seem to be the case anymore, for some reason. Words have lost their power and it seems everyone is set in their ways forever. This applies to both sides.

Manchin's opposition to Build Back Better's price tag only leaves open the possibility of passing a mini BBB, containing a small fraction of the original package. It might be better than nothing.

What is the path forward for the White House? Where does Joe Biden go from there? 

Should the Biden administration move to the right and start embracing some of the GOP agenda?

Should the White House move its focus to foreign policy?

Should the White House just ... give up?

A crazy and potentially insane idea:

Should the Biden admin give a full-throated embrace of the GOP agenda on voting rights, at the risk of betraying their entire campaign program? Should the White House just give Republicans what they want? Should Joe Biden come out for states rights, voter Id requirements, and voting restrictions?I've seen a lot of news talking about the Republican strategy of filling electoral offices with people who believe the 2022 election was stolen. There are also laws being passed to allow a state legislature or government to override electoral results, sending their own delegates to Congress.

If it comes to pass that the Democratic party wins the presidency in 2024, what happens next?

Will the Republicans in those oversight positions allege fraud again, and throw out results now they have the power to do so?

Where does that end? Will the Democratic party just roll over and accept permanent defeat? Will the supreme court rule one way or another, and will Republicans accept rulings that aren't in their favour? Will the next presidency even be considered legitimate?

What is the end goal of the Republican party?

(I don't think civil war should even be discussed, it just devolves into an extremely polarizing: "X could kick Y's ass" "but but but the military" etc etc, over and over.)In light of the RNC's letter today demanding changes to the Commission on Presidential Debates, wherein they threated to have their candidates boycott in the event changes are not made, how can Presidential Debates be improved? What would make them better? How could they be a more effective tool for candidates? For undecided voters?With the rise of popular progressives politicians in the United States such as Bernie Sanders over the past 5 years many remarkably left leaning policies have been brought back to mainstream politics. Calls for universal healthcare, higher wages and labor representation have been growing especially within the blue states. But with the deadlock in congress and even moderate acts such as Build Back Better dying in committee, it has been incredibly apparent that progressive policy has the best possibility of passing on the local level. With all that in mind, is there a chance that blue states will pass welfare policies comparable to European social democracies such as universal healthcare, and will these policies create an internal divide within the country between states with these social safety nets and states without?For organizational purposes, let's break it up into sections(additional section recommendations welcome):

1. Historical context
2. What does the government of Russia want?
3. What does NATO want?
4. What does the government of Ukraine want?
5. Can NATO deter Russia from achieving their goals?
6. Can Russia pressure NATO into conceding to (some of) their demands?
7. What could the result of these discussions look like?
8. If NATO concedes to some of Russia's demands, what impact will that have on global relations / balance of power?
9. Is the status quo reasonable or maintainable?Lesley Stahl from 60 Minutes last year had a great interview with Pelosi about future Democratic leaders in the House of Representatives—Stahl’s contention was that there was no succession plan and that all the Democratic leaders were old. Once Pelosi retires, who will be the next Leaders in the House for the Dems? Will AOC or Schiff or someone else take Pelosi’s leadership role. Thoughts? Cheers.The common answer would be no, obviously. No first world nations today are monarchies besides constitutional ones that don’t have any real power in the monarch. Depending on your definition of ‘second world’, the examples you could pick are few there as well. Beyond traditional ceremonial purposes, having a monarch with actual government power seems to be a remnant of a time gone by.

However, there are arguments that are occasionally made. Some theories posit that democracy is simply in feasible in some countries that are so racially and ethnically divided that people just vote on tribe. So for those countries it’s sometimes said that the answer is either the country falling apart, or a strong head pulling it together through force of will.

This has usually been a dictator, but those hardly ever last past the dictator’s lifespan itself. In the modern day only really North Korea has survived as a dictatorship with leaders dying and being successfully replaced. Then again those leaders are children of the past one; in fact some may make a case that North Korea is in fact a monarchy.

Unlike a dictatorship a monarchy seems to promote actually improving the country. Because you have the knowledge that your own child will succeed you, you are promoted to succeed yourself. Sort of like the family business model South Korea adopted after independence, but on a political grander scale.

So the question remains. Are monarchy’s feasible or capable of success in the 21st century? Why or why not?It’s been just about 2 years since the pandemic officially started. It’s tested us, sown division, and repeated the lives of many people. However, my interest lies in the immense polarization of Dr. Anthony Fauci, a physician who, up until March 2020, was a widely renowned and celebrated figure in the federal government as a *scientist* and *physician* since 1984, when he was appointed director of the NIAID. Of course, the institute helped the United States out of a lot of epidemics, most notably the AIDS epidemic, which got him the Presidential Medal of Freedom from George W. Bush in 2008. 

One important thing to acknowledge is Dr. Fauci is non-partisan. He has served under multiple presidents of both parties. He has never stated his political identity, nor has he induced any sort of political agenda, other than conquering epidemics in America. Of course, some could view this as a political ploy, but for someone who refuses to state their partisan affiliation, it’s highly unlikely. Fauci currently serves as President Biden’s Chief Medical Advisor, an important role in the Presidency and one established in 2019 by President Trump, meaning Fauci is only one of two people to ever hold the position. 

So, why does a man like Dr. Fauci, a strictly non-partisan award winning physician-scientist suddenly become a icon of hate and remorse for people? While they may not agree with his advice, it certainly isn’t backed by any political pundit. It has interested me for a long time and I’m curious to hear what you all have to say about it.

EDIT: I like the discussion yall brought here. I am neither defending nor supporting Fauci by writing this. I just want opinions on why Fauci has become a polarizing figure in America.Social security is the elephant in the room that politicians refuse to discuss. Many voters are far older, which makes it impossible to suggest anything to scale back on people's retirement funds. In which case, we have a problem of there not being enough workers to meet the needs of SS. What are some solutions for overhaul reform for social security, both in the most extreme cases or the most plausible solutions for social security?Justice Ginsberg found herself in the minority in the voting rights case, [*Shelby County v. Holder*,](https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/12pdf/12-96_6k47.pdf) joined by Justices Breyer, Sotomayor and Kagan. Ginsberg asserted in her dissent: The majority opinion rolled back the 1965 Voting Rights Act’s protections and permitted states, including those with histories of racially motivated voter suppression, to change their voting procedures without any outside oversight. Justice Ginsburg knew what that meant and refused to pretend it wouldn’t erode the advances made under the act. 

...  “Throwing out preclearance when it has worked and is continuing to work to stop discriminatory changes is like throwing away your umbrella in a rainstorm because you are not getting wet.” 

Ginsberg Dissent covers the last 37 pages of Shelby. 

Democrats claim various states \[including the original who required preclearance\] have since implemented restrictive measures that make it difficult for certain groups of people to cast ballots. 

The legislative action taken by the Democrats have failed multiple times; unable to overcome the filibuster. Do the Democrats have a better chance at accomplishing a voting right legislation this time around?  How would that be possible?Democracy relies on consensus, debate, and often good-faith compromise within a defined political framework.

What happens when segments of the same constituency have interests so radically opposed to each other, that to give one their way means to inherently harm the other?

What happens when the gap between different ideals and different identities becomes too large to reconcile?

Finally, what steps can be taken towards unity in a country or community where voters have little in common and much opposed to each other?If Republicans want to flip both the House and the Senate, they're going to have to rely on the Youngkin/Ciattarelli strategy of not making Trump mad while also not invoking him either. This means that in some red districts, those seen as being really close to 45 may face tough primary challenges from those who want to win the same way Youngkin did. Rural districts will no doubt go for the Trump loyalist, but suburban districts, particularly those held by Democrats, might find a candidate who doesn't ever talk about the former president more appealing. Trump will still have a tight grip on the GOP, but perhaps this strategy will show signs of slipping. Could this be how the GOP can eventually break free of Trump?Ahh federal policies. Some of the most influential things in our day-to-day lives… that nobody can agree on. Money usually goes to less than ideal places, it’s impossible to predict where we’re gonna end up in 4-8 years; and in the rare circumstance where an attempt is made towards progress, a buncha people are up in arms over the possibility of a rise in taxes… which isn’t an invalid concern.

So let’s say we take that last part out of the picture. We have what we have; no rise in taxes, but no decrease either. With that out of the way, **where do you want all this money to go?**The three major expenses a given household will deal with are: Healthcare, Housing, and Education. 

Those are all uniquely expensive in the American system when compared to most OECD countries, they all also exhibit a significant amount of rent seeking.

Rent seeking is essentially when someone is able to get income not by producing more goods and services, but by manipulating the political and social situation to essentially force people to pay "rents" they other would not.

Within the healthcare industry the US has about half as many doctors per capita as many other OECD countries, mainly due to restriction on professional licensing and immigration. This drives up the cost of healthcare providers salaries, not just physicians, but their substitutes like NP and PAs. 

As the US population ages, the healthcare expenses threatens to swallow its economy already accounting for almost 20 percent of GDP.

With housing zoning policies makes it's impossible to build high density housing in urban areas, these are also unfortunately the areas where most of the economic opportunity is in the modern economy. This benefits the existing tentents, but hurts lower income and younger people.

The college education system is another uniquely expensive American institution. There's little evidence college is education is actually adding skills to most of its graduates, rather providing a social signal that the kids are hardworking and disciplined enough to be worth training for an actual job. Germany is one of the highest tech economies in the world and has a significantly smaller percentage of it's young people graduating from college. 

Young people are essentially forced to pay tribute to educational institutions, and in return to receive a stamp of approval that they're ready to undergo the actual training. The economic pressure of this hurts Americans, likely delays family formation. 

Over and over again we've seen a pattern of institutions, sometimes healthcare, sometime educational, sometimes housing owners, find a way to capture to regulatory/social condition of the country to ensure worker are forced to pay an increasing amount of income towards them, in the form of healthcare insurance, rents, or student loans.

While this happens in other countries, it seems to happen to a greater extent in the US compared to elsewhere in the OECD. Is there something unique about American political institutions/culture that leads to this divide?By polls anti vaxers are both politically active and very right leaning and this shows up in the Covid fatality figures with many more deaths in Trump voting districts.

Since the beginning of vaccinations this would indicate a disparity of hundreds of thousands of covid deaths among Republican voters. These numbers are likely significantly higher based on the year to year excess death figures.  https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/the-pandemics-hidden-toll-is-revealed-in-excess-death-counts/

Additionally, I can imagine there would be some significant disalusion among the families of the Covid dead or hospitalized who were told by Republicans that "it is no worse than the flu" among other unwise statements.

With redistricting efforts like Project Redmap heavily Democratic cities are being designed to have as many Democrats as possible and outlying areas are being gerrymandered to create as many Republican districts as possible with remaining democratic votes divided up  into a close minority in a number of districts.  This scheme is known as "Packing and Cracking".

With narrow demographic numbers in narrow cracked districts, will this result in some surprising results in this year's election.The Left-Right Political Paradigm always seemed reductive to me. I saw the [Nolan Chart](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nolan_Chart) and that helped a little. Politicians need to be appealing, so they end up mostly in the middle of the (authoritarian to libertarian) spectrum. Then it's a matter of sorting out where they stand along the Left-Center-Right spectrum. 

It's still reductive, but adds another dimension to think about. But are there better maps out there? Other ways of mentally organizing the issues? 

I've been thinking of [Haidt's moral matrix](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moral_foundations_theory) (moral priority of harm reduction vs authority/sanctity) and [Bueno de Mesquita's The Dictator’s Handbook](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Dictator%27s_Handbook) (the number of relevant voting constituents). I think that those "axes" might be a more interesting way to map things. Other ideas?I was reading an article that reminded me that both Republicans and Democrats have large religious constituencies. On the Right, you have a vocal social conservative wing of White Evangelicals. On the Left, you have Black Protestants.

But, when you look at how the parties are discussed, religion really seems to be something only associated with Republicans. 

To those smarter than me, what explains the difference in political religiosity between White Evangelicals and Black Protestants? Why is one far more "muscular" and loud than the other?Ron Johnson has just [announced another term.](https://thehill.com/homenews/campaign/588872-ron-johnson-announces-run-for-third-senate-term-in-wisconsin). A few things to note,   he pledged in 2016 that he'd retire if he won his term. Also, his approval rating is only at 36%. Obviously this doesn't mean he will lose but it doesn't help either.

Can ron Johnson win even though he broke a promise to not run a third term?I have a question that is silly for a few reasons: 1. It is based on a very constrained policy space (2 options). 2. It is based on airy-fairy speculation that isn't tied to any political constituency or social movement that I know of. So I invite responses that engage with current political realities, and also those that don't. I've also never applied for Section 8, so I'm coming from a place of ignorance.

Imagine the section 8 program. Now imagine that it was an entitlement, e.g. everyone who qualifies gets it (instead of the lottery system we have now). Now, consider this question: Would you prefer section 8 to be a cash benefit of equal value to the housing voucher people would otherwise get? Use whatever value system you want.According to 538, Biden’s approval rating is at 42.9%. Most of his legislation promises have been blocked by Republicans and moderate Democrats in the Senate. The pandemic is still going on and issues like inflation are currently present. Is there anything in his arsenal that could give him a boost? Would something like canceling student debt have an impact?In 2003, Texas republicans, having secured a trifecta in the state government, passed bills to change it the court-ordered districts of 2001, which were largely unchanged from the democratic gerrymander of the 1990s, resulting in a 21R-11D split after the 2004 elections.

If Democrats in Texas or Georgia gain control of a chamber in the legislature or the governor's mansion this decade, could they do something similar, force a mid-decade redistricting cycle and have the courts draw the map, which wouldn't be as gerrymandered as the current republican-drawn maps?Currently, duties considered to belong to a *head of government* and those belonging to a *head of state* belong to the same office in the United States: the Presidency. However, U.S. politics have grown increasingly polarized in recent years, making it hard for Americans to unite over much of anything.

A potential remedy would be a non-partisan head of state, someone not mired in the day-to-day struggles of partisan politics or profit seeking. Largely a ceremonial role, the head of state would need to be a broadly uniting figure: palatable enough to individuals across political parties and ideologies, races, genders, generations, occupations, income levels, regions or states, and religions or lack thereof. They would need to exemplify virtues that earn them the respect and fondness of most Americans.

1. Is this an option Americans would be willing to consider?
2. Would such a head of state actually be able to succeed in keeping most Americans of diverse backgrounds and opinions relatively united—or at least tolerant of one another?
3. Would such a split introduce weaknesses elsewhere?Why hasn't any predominantly Muslim country raised the issue of China's treatment of Uyghur Muslims.  The western countries are saying more, but none of the Muslim countries have said anything.  Are Muslim countries scared of China?  No demonstration of any sort on the streets.  Nothing.  Why?1. If the US descends into real political disturbance after the next election, how does foreign policy proceed? Projection forces such as the Navy and Airforce will have little ability to enact domestic will, unlike the Army which will have a considerable role. 


2. Current doctrine is the capacity to run complete war on two fronts, but if one front is domestic, where does that leave Russian aggression and/or the South China Sea. 

3. Does the military have guidance that transcends what happens domestically (i.e. Protect oil [prices] and freight waterways) or will those inherent foreign policy concerns become overwhelmed by domestic concerns? 


Long question short:


What happens to Taiwan etc if the US takes a "serious break to refocus"?Semiconductor technology has driven productivity growth for the last few decades, to the point that pretty much all manufacturing relies on semiconductors. We can see a lack of said semiconductor causing inflation in numerous industries. 

Currently most of the world's semiconductors are made in few Asian countries, Singapore, South Korea, and Taiwan. China is on the rise.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semiconductor_industry#/media/File:Who_exported_Electronic_integrated_circuits_in_2016.svg

Each of these countries achieved dominance in their industry through industrial policies, that is, instead of relying on the free market, their government applied specific policies to invest and support the various companies until they were dominating their industries. 

The US has relied on a more free market approach for the last few decades, but as tensions heat up in the pacific rim, is it wise to lead one of the most valuable economic resources in the hands of one region. It's not beyond reason imagine a war in Asia which could effectively limit America supplies to semiconductors from most of the countries, due to a disruption of shipping, export bans, or a destruction of foundries.

The Congress has already acted with the CHIPS act in the NDAA, and more are pushing for the FABS act would would further boost incentives.I was reading a discussion on left vs right libertarians this morning and they veered into capitalism. I’ve read we’re entering a post-capitalist era (maybe into corporatist?) and I wondered about the relationship between capitalism and colonization - profit requires efficiency in labour and sourced materials which in the West often come through resource extraction and cheap labour. Is there a country in which capitalism hasn’t required colonization to some degree?-Allow a little more time in office to really make a difference and/or clean up the mess from a previous administration.

-If an impeachment is warranted, congress may actually follow through with it and take the steps to remove them from office, instead of using the “wait and let the voters decide in a few months” excuse. 

-The president could focus on actually doing their job without concern or distractions about a re-election.  

(Usually the last 1-1/2 to 2 yrs of a first term is spent campaigning for a second term) 


I’m interested to hear everyone’s thoughts and if you can come up with any other pros or possibly cons to this idea.I'm from Ghana, an African country where the government is trying to impose an ***e-levy which would be a 1.75% charge on all electronic transactions covering mobile money payments, bank transfers, merchant payments, and inward remittances to be borne by the sender except inward remittances, which will be borne by the recipient.***

[Bill Document Here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Yym8vSkhhEhMNLVf7xXMBE3tV2M71ywM/view)

*The object of this Bill is to impose a levy to be known as the Electronic Transfer Levy and to provide for related matters. Out of about 18 million potential taxpayers only 2.4 million persons (approximately 8% of the total population) were registered as personal income tax payers as at August, 2021: 45,109 entities were registered as corporate taxpayers while 54,364 persons were registered as self-employed taxpayers. Recent economic data further suggests that the overall tax to GDP for SSA in 2018 was 16.5%, while the tax to GDP for Ghana in 2019 was estimated to be 12.2% which is one of the lowest among our peer middle income countries. Digital transactions have experienced steady growth over the past five years. Between 2017 to 2021, mobile money transactions increased from Ghc155million to 986million in Ghana. More importantly, the convenience of the platform has created efficiencies and enhanced productivity. This expansion in mobile money transactions has supported growth in e-commerce, social media shopping and the use of digital payments. This expansion, while positive for financial inclusion and economic growth, also presents an opportunity to extend government's ability to mobilise tax revenue. Digital payment systems are currently largely untaxed, and while the industry grows, several government tax revenue sources are experiencing a decline in growth. Revenue sources like VAT and NI-IIL are directly impacted by the increasing use of digital payment systems which facilitate alternative shopping avenues that do not apply the said taxes. Government is determined to take the needed steps to steadily improve on domestic resources mobilization and strengthen GRAS competence in electronic tax handles without compromising its pro-poor interventions. The Levy is a key mechanism that the Government of Ghana will use to help ensure that more Ghanaians and the public contribute their fair share towards the development of our country. It will be used to tackle the intractable problems of rising debt, high youth unemployment, inadequate digital infrastructure, a diminished entrepreneurship culture while maintaining the flagship programs. It is our conviction that with all of us 'Burden Sharing' to contribute our fair share of taxes, the GhanaCares Obaatanpa program will successfully transform our economy to realise the President's vision of a WISER Society (Wealthy, Inclusive, Sustainable, Empowered and Resilient), that is a Ghana Beyond Aid.*Illegal immigration has been a controversial political issue in many countries. Politicians have proposed anything from legalising to mass deportations. If you were king…

How would you solve illegal immigration to your country? How would you deal with people in the country illegally? What factors would you take into account in forming your policy? What if their countries refused to take them back? Would you let some or all stay? Would you return some or all?With all that’s happened to Rudy Giuliani within the last few years, it’s crazy to think he was once considered America’s mayor and widely liked by so many people. In fact, he was practically the front runner in 2007 for the Republican nomination. However, when the first round of the primaries(Iowa) came around his support eroded and his campaign crashed which lead to him dropping out a few months later. What happened on the campaign trail that lead to Rudy losing the Republican nomination? 

PS: I have no idea what to flair this.There have been multiple articles and some hints on the dysfunction behind the Biden/Harris Administration staff. The two biggest notable examples are multiple staff leaving Kamala Harris and Manchin squarely blaming Biden's staff for his refusal to back BBB. At best there seems to be a disconnect in communication between what Biden understands/knows and the reality his staff  face, or at worst Biden has a serious lack of management over his staff. I've also seen multiple times where Biden gave optimistic outlooks only to backtrack quickly because of negative outcomes. Notable examples are Afghanistan withdrawal*, inflation, and supply chain issues.

*To be clear, I am not blaming Biden for the Afghanistan government collapse but giving a false optimistic outlook and timeline when it was clear the evidence said otherwise. Afghanistan collapse is a blame shared by all Presidents.US Covid cases have hit an all-time record of more than 1 million new infections a day, far above last year’s peak, though thanks to vaccines & the milder Omicron variant, there are fewer fatalities.

Biden & the Democrats campaigned on “beating the virus.” ( [https://joebiden.com/beat-covid19/](https://joebiden.com/beat-covid19/) ) In 2020, multiple Democratic governors instituted lockdowns (aka shelter-at-home orders.) Last year, as vaccinations became available, they moved away from lockdowns and switched to vaccine passports (requiring private businesses to check immunization records before allowing entry) & vaccine mandates (requiring government workers, then private employers, to require vaccinations.)  
Coming into 2022, Democrats’ primary strategy appears to be doubling down on vaccinations, especially booster shots / third doses which were recently approved by the FDA.

But is this a sustainable strategy going forward? While many Americans are willing to get a shot or two or three (I got mine last week), there may be increasing resistance to indefinite semiannual/annual shots for the foreseeable future, especially if mandated. And mandates are being hit with legal challenges - there’s a certain percentage of Americans who refuse to even get their FIRST shots. It’s also not a certainty the FDA will approve further booster shots. (Informative article here: [https://www.statnews.com/2021/12/15/will-we-always-need-covid-19-boosters-experts-have-theories/](https://www.statnews.com/2021/12/15/will-we-always-need-covid-19-boosters-experts-have-theories/) )

In contrast, since last year or even late 2020, Republicans have mostly begun shifting their messaging to “this virus is endemic, so we should learn to live with it, minimize economic disruption, and avoid eroding personal freedoms.”

Of course, there are plenty of possible scenarios where the situation could end favorably for Democrats. The virus could mutate into far less deadly variants or even dissipate altogether, and this discussion would be moot. But imagine the virus doesn’t go away, and this coming spring/summer, there’s a new variant tearing across the country. What do Democrats do next: mandate a fourth shot?The [Federal Reserve added $4.5 trillion](https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_recenttrends.htm) to its balance sheet during the pandemic as part of its bond buying program, without congressional approval. This injected tremendenous amounts of liquidity in capital markets. As part of monetary policy / quantitative easing, the Federal Reserve is supposed to offload the funds over time, though has repeatedly failed to do so in the past because of ramifications in equity markets. Take the example of Ben Bernanke attempting to do so at the end of 2008. Holdings in the Fed's balance sheet were offloaded, this coincided with a steep drop in equity markets, and purchases were resumed thereafter by the Fed. Therefore, I question the ability of the Fed to ever be able to get the close to 9 trillion total that it has accumulated in the last 13 years or so off of its balance sheet. In my mind, this then begs the question and sets the tone for the discussion. Are the Fed's actions here actually monetary policy? If they forever keep these funds on their balance sheet, does this constitute government spending without congressional approval?

Central question:  Do you feel that the Federal Reserve should have the authority to add $4.5 trillion to its balance sheet without congressional approval as it did during the pandemic?The Replacement Theory holds that liberals are intent on adding minorities to the voting rosters with the goal of replacing conservative values as the organizing structure in American society. The claim that "they are out to replace you" is a powerful motivator compelling to action those Americans who already feel marginalized and disrespected.

You can see this if you replace the fiery word *replace* with the more moderate word *displace* Replacing some implies they he is gone, displacing him implies that he is still there but in a different role.

Is fear the main motivator in all this?  How can we weaken the fear of replacement?  Is there a fearful sense of threatened entitlement at work?

If a large swath of the population on either side of the spectrum is fearful of the future, how can we keep that fear manageable?With the BBB plan essentially being dead right now, the chances for climate change legislation at the federal level is much lower. However, I was wondering if state governments would be able to step in and start attacking the problem if the federal government can't do it. Obviously, this would be much less likely in more conservative states.

What type of policies would a state be able to enforce to combat climate change? 

Are there already some good examples of states that have recently passed legislation like this?Given the political climate, what is not political anymore? Seems like every since the covid pandemic, there's a democratic and republican side to every issue. Whether it's vaccine, mandates, lockdowns, school, etc.

Is there anything we can agree on anymore?It seems that a common critique of both Donald Trump and Joe Biden during the 2020 election was that both candidates were far too old (both in their own ways). And after re-watching the Facebook/Google/Amazon/Apple senate hearings, it's kind of clear that old politicians are out of touch with reality - that is, more so than the average middle-aged US politician.

I'm curious if anyone has thoughts about putting an age cap on members of congress and on presidential candidates. We already have a lower bound (35yo for POTUS, 30 for Senators, 25 for Congressmen), why or why not an upper bound as well? 

To be clear, I'm not trying to start a political argument. I'm just curious if there are arguments for or against this proposition, or if there are ideas as to what the oldest acceptable age of a politician might be.There is a growing amongst both liberals and conservatives that the Supreme Court will overturn Roe vs Wade.  Would a national binding referendum on abortion end the abortion wars?

Give Americans 3 options:

1) Illegal always
2) Legal until 16 weeks and in the case of rape, incest, or life of the mother.
3) Always Legal

I noticed that such referendums have worked in other countries such as Ireland and Italy. Do you think one like this would work in the US?Italians living outside of Italy, not even can vote in the Italian election but have representatives in both chambers. Do you know about any other place that does this? Do you think it is a good practice?  
(Sorry for bad english)The United States spends more than Europe on infrastructure, on average, while getting lower grades on the quality of our infrastructure. Europe is also much more densely populated. Should municipalities charge more taxes on communities with low density and costly infrastructure? Is the current US infrastructure sustainable if the US losses growth or borrowing gets tougher?The thing with Manchin made me start wandering.  I can think of five things it could be.
1.  To do what those he represents wants him to do
2.  To do what he think is the best for his people
3.  Simply to get reelected
4.  To serve and obey the commands of his party.
5.  some combination of the aboveAmericans have either condemend the 1/6 attack as a threat to Democracy or equated it to just another street violence. Views tends to correlate with party affliliation. Latest polls show partisan splits have hardened over time. 

ABC News using Ipsos' KnowledgePanel shows Democrats hold Trump's responsible for the attack, with 91% believing Trump bears either "a great deal" or "a good amount" of responsibility for it. However, 78% of Republicans believe the former president bears "just some" or no responsibility for the day's events. 

The poll also found 72% of Americans believe the people involved in the attack on the Capitol were "threatening democracy," while 1 in 4 Americans believes that the individuals involved were "protecting democracy." 

Broken down by party identification, Democrats are nearly unanimous at 96% in believing that those involved in the attacks were threatening democracy. Republicans are more split, with 45% saying it was a threat and 52% saying those involved in the riot were "protecting democracy." 

Many of these contested issues of participants action is ultimately being settled by the courts as are the subpoenas issued by the 1/6 Investigative Committee. Courts will ultinatley rule on charges and consider validity of 1/6 related subpoenas. Will the court rulings lead to acceptance and decrease division and how might the midterms position that politicians take impact the division?  

[https://www.ipsos.com/sites/default/files/ct/news/documents/2021-12/Topline%20ABC\_Ipsos%20Poll%20January%202%202022%20for%201.2.pdf](https://www.ipsos.com/sites/default/files/ct/news/documents/2021-12/Topline%20ABC_Ipsos%20Poll%20January%202%202022%20for%201.2.pdf)In the 2010s before “Bridgegate”, Chris Christie the governor of New Jersey was admired for being a bully. Pundits on the right and left loved how he got in the face of his own constituents and called them idiots. His combative behavior was seen as a plus and perhaps even a pathway to the presidency. All you have to do is look at clips from 7 years ago when he told a voter to [“sit down and shut up”](https://youtu.be/Nr1T2XwDGlU); or a reporter [“numb nuts”](https://youtu.be/D_h4tAku2n0); or sarcastically calling a heckler [“fabulous”](https://youtu.be/E24WERUmtIA). 

Do you think today that the media, pundits, or voters would admire this behavior from a politician? 

Have we move past it or have we double downed? 

Would you vote for a candidate like this?This isn't really a discussion of hyperbolic or even exaggerated political rhetoric, but when things are mislabelled completely incorrectly.

Prominent examples include the over use of socialism, communism and fascism to describe political opponents. This doesn't mean they can't be used when applicable but their common usage seems to extend beyond literal definitions. When polled on individual policies majorities of American's tend to agree but it's when political/ideological language is attached that division occurs.

If removing language changes support levels for the same piece of legislation, does that mean language is being used incorrectly, whether intentionally or unintentionally?Granted, issue polling can be pretty unreliable so being definitive about what one change each party would most want to make is hypothetical at best. But based on best polling we have and intuition from media and society, what changes might those be, and would the US be better or worse off on balance if they were made?

A parameter to keep someone from proposing something like, “Only Republicans May run for office,” should be that those changes must be possible with the constitution in its current form.If you aren't from the U.S.. The 22nd Amendment limits the president to two 4 year terms. It was passed in 1947 and it was signed by Harry S. Truman who was the vice president to F.D.R.. F.D.R. served 4 terms but died really early on in his 4th term.So I see two sides to this argument. On one side, a lot of really bad misinformation (especially about the pandemic and 2020 election) have come out of Facebook, and it seems as though Facebook is the only one who can solve that (due to it being their platform). However, I can also see how this could be dangerous because then you are essentially letting Facebook decide what's true and what isn't. While Truth isn't actually subjective, what's presented as truth is, which can be abused. What do you guys think?Link to a report detailing the state of things in 2021:

* https://ourworldindata.org/higher-poverty-global-line

Link to a picture from the report zooming in on particular wealth disparities in different regions:

* https://ourworldindata.org/uploads/2021/03/The-global-inc-distribution-190-10-30-1536x959.png

There’s also the fact that the disproportionately poorer regions include:

* virtually all living in Black areas 

* virtually all living in Brown (Middle East, India) areas 

* most living in Asian areas 

* most living in Hispanic/Mestizo areas

As such, do you think that predominantly wealthy white countries have a moral burden to help out, whether through forgiving any debts poorer countries may owe, through reparations for things like slavery, through funding infrastructure projects etc? 

Let me know your thoughts.

*Note:* this is referring to the equivalent of $20 of U.S. purchasing power, not $20 converted into whatever currency.It have mentioned that China is following the Same Route as Japan but on a far larger Scale ; they are some similarities both had a rocketing rise with Japan being hailed as the prodigious child who will inevitably replace U.S as the primary economic powerhouse .

The  rise was stopped by a Financial estate bubble crashing in Japan. In China , we have an Estate Financial crisis brewing of epic proportion with entire blocks and cities being build for the sole purpose of being resold and not lived in . The problem is compounded with Estates being the few sectors that ordinary people can invest in freely in China.

The second similarities is Demographics in both nations getting older and fewer younger generations to pay the cost of their retirement.  Here Also the one child policy exacerbate the problem.

Thirdly , both nations share an export based economy which make more venerable to crises and tarrifs . 

Here another problem in china , is the CCP overregulating everything and being more hostile to free enterprises and their big companies which is causing Capital flight .

So how much is comparable both Trajectory to say China on this course will be stuck in Economic Purgatory like Japan.In a recent article Larry Shapiro of the Rockefeller Family Fund opines that the Biden should take "bold presidential action" on climate change. He proposes a few (limits on oil and gas industries, renewables, federal procurement of climate-friendly tech) and leaves a few out (more international agreements, limits on animal agriculture, specific limits on climate-intensive products). 

What bold actions would you recommend Biden (or other presidents) take to turn climate change around?Rome is a good example, as the empire that basically owned Europe for 500 years before only half of it collapsed, but in those years they developed many systems in use today, swapping several times.

Try to keep this to system changes. Sure you might want to make abortions illegal, but that kind of thing is what changes the quickest over time. Plus that's kinda difficult to discuss.

In addition, try to write expected outcomes for decisions, so that discussion of the ideas themselves can be easier to go through. Also, expected consequences in such a world would also be in fit with the prompt such as future empires/anything along those lines.Prosecutors turned to a provision in the 2002 Sarbanes-Oxley Act, enacted after the accounting-fraud scandal and collapse of Enron, which imposes a potential 20-year sentence on those convicted of obstructing an “official proceeding.” 

One of the three judges \[Amit B. Mehta\], had previosuly expressed concerns that it was unclear what conduct counted as felony “obstruction of an official proceeding” as opposed to misdemeanor disruption of a congressional hearing — a difference between a potential sentence of six months and 20 years behind bars. However, after months of consideration and legal arguments on both sides, Mehta ruled that the government had it right \[in filing the charges.\]

“Their alleged actions were no mere political protest,” he wrote. “They stand accused of combining, among themselves and with others, to force their way into the Capitol building, past security barricades and law enforcement, to ‘Stop, delay, and hinder the Certification of the Electoral College vote.”

Defendants had argued that it was unclear whether the certification of President Biden’s victory counted as an “official proceeding.” Charging participants in the Jan. 6 riot with obstruction, they warned, could turn even peaceful protesters into potential felons. Mehta said the “plain text” of the obstruction law covered the group’s actions, and that “even if there were a line of ambiguity ... their alleged acts went well beyond it.” Because the law requires the obstruction to be undertaken “corruptly,” he added, it does not imperil constitutionally protected free speech.

Another judge ruled the First Amendment right to free speech doesn’t protect four leaders of the right-wing Proud Boys group from criminal charges over their participation in the Jan. 6 U.S. Capitol riot. The men were properly charged with conduct that isn’t protected by the Constitution, including trespassing, destruction of property and interference with law enforcement -- all with the intention of obstructing Congress, U.S. District Judge Timothy Kelly in Washington ruled Tuesday.

The ruling also has broader implications. Rep. Liz Cheney (R-Wyo.) has suggested former president Donald Trump could be charged with obstruction of an official proceeding.

Is it looking more likely that DOJ has a bigger goal than just charging the rioters and thniking about possibly charging the former president himself?

[Capitol Riot: Proud Boys’ Free-Speech Defense Rejected by Judge - Bloomberg](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-12-28/proud-boys-free-speech-capitol-riot-defense-rejected-by-judge)

[https://www.lawfareblog.com/government-wins-key-ruling-issue-affecting-hundreds-capitol-riot-cases-0](https://www.lawfareblog.com/government-wins-key-ruling-issue-affecting-hundreds-capitol-riot-cases-0)

[*What crime might Trump have committed on Jan. 6? Liz Cheney points to one.*](https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2021/12/14/liz-cheney-trump-crime/?itid=lk_interstitial_manual_9)

[https://www.wsj.com/articles/to-prosecute-jan-6-capitol-rioters-government-tests-novel-legal-strategy-11640786405](https://www.wsj.com/articles/to-prosecute-jan-6-capitol-rioters-government-tests-novel-legal-strategy-11640786405)This post was inspired by recent statements from Ted Cruz about his chances at nomination in 2024.  Specifically, this comment here:

[‘The runner-up is almost always the next nominee’](https://www.politico.com/news/2021/12/22/cruz-2024-republican-presidential-nomination-525973)

How true exactly is this? I took a look through the last seven decades to verify the success rates for second vs first place. Surprisingly, Cruz seems to have a point; but uniquely for *Republican* nominations.

* In 2008 Hillary Clinton(D) was the runner-up, and became nominee in 2016.
* In 2008 Mitt Romney(R) was the runner-up, and became nominee in 2012.
* In 2000 John McCain(R) was the runner-up, and became nominee in 2008.
* In 1988, Bob Dole(R) was runner-up and won nomination in 1996
* In 1980, George H.W. Bush(R) was runner-up and won the election in 1988
* In 1976, Ronald Reagan(R) was the runner-up and would win two terms starting in 1980

On the flip side:

* In 2012, Rick Santorum(R) was the runner-up and bombed in 2016 early on
* In 2004, John Edwards(D) was the runner-up but his political career bombed after several scandals
* In 2000, Bill Bradley(D) was the runner-up and never ran for president again
* In 1992 and 1976, Jerry Brown(D) was the runner-up both times and lost nomination both times
* In 1996 and 1992, Pat Buchanan(R) was the runner-up both times but never became a nominee
* In 1988, Jesse Jackson(D) was the runner-up and never ran for president again
* In 1984 Gary Hart(D) was the runner-up and dropped out of the 1988 election
* In 1980 Ted Kennedy(D) was the runner-up and never ran for president again
* In 1972 and 1960 Hubert Humphrey(D) was the runner-up both times and lost nomination both times
* In 1968 Robert F. Kennedy(D) was the runner-up and was assassinated
* In 1960, Nelson Rockefeller(R) was the runner-up and became runner-up again in 1964 and 1968, but never won nomination against Nixon or Goldwater.
* In 1962 George Wallace(D) was the runner-up and never won a runner-up or nominee position again
* In 1952 Estes Kefauver(D) was the nominee and fell to the runner-up in 1956, but never ran for president again after his "switchblade bill" bombed

&#x200B;

In my analysis, the *vast* majority of Republicans who received second place in the nomination went on to either become nominee 4-8 years later or ended up winning the election. On the other side, Democrats runner-up or election winners overwhelmingly had little experience running for president or had little success beforehand.

Do you agree or disagree with this breakdown? What do you think about the history of runner-ups seemingly being specific to one party? What does this say about the values of the individual groups, and does this hold into the modern era?[Earlier this month on December 3, France signed an arms deal worth $19.20 billion with the United Arab Emirates supplying the latter with 80 Rafale fighter jets and 12 military helicopters.](https://www.reuters.com/business/aerospace-defense/frances-macron-nears-uae-rafale-fighter-jet-deal-2021-12-03/)

[Also on December 7, the United States Senate defeated bipartisan effort to stop the $650 million arms sale to Saudi Arabia that would supply the latter with air-to-air missiles and missile launchers.](https://apnews.com/article/joe-biden-saudi-arabia-middle-east-rand-paul-yemen-1440cc97a0304f20ca080062a24ca001) The deal was criticized by progressives in Congress due to Saudi Arabia's heavy involvement in the ongoing Yemeni Civil War and contradicted the promise to end all arms sales to the Saudis Biden made while he was a presidential candidate.

**Should the United States and other Western democracies be selling weapons to authoritarian regimes with poor human right record?**With lots of the discussions around 2024 circulating who could run, something I thought of, is we often see a lot of vice presidents go to win the presidency. It's almost natural, and like a launching pad. Joe Biden for example. Is it possible that Joe Biden theoretically though could have chosen Barack Obama as his running mate, vice-president?

If Ron De Santis runs, could he choose Donald Trump as his running mate?A lot of people on this site have been doom and gloom over redistributing and how voting rights are actively under attack. Many go as far as to say the Democrats won’t win elections in the future due to some new laws which change the state’s certification powers. These are a concern which demand a response, and to that end many have turned to bills such as HR 1 to protect voting rights. 

But at the same time I wonder how effective these laws would be in practice. Like the non-partisan redistributing requirement, how will that work out? We’ve seen in both Virginia and Utah how what is meant to be an independent process gets hijacked by partisan hijinks. At the same time, voter access abs vote counting are large operations that would require something g pretty size able to enforce. Even long after the Civil Rights Act passed minorities still struggle to vote due to the state. Still, one could argue that even partial benefit is superior to the alternative of doing nothing. 

While this legislation has superb intentions, my question is would it actually pan out in practice and is there precedence to support either notion?On Wednesday, Russian President Vladimir Putin asked if he and President Biden could have a phone call, and they will speak today, December 30, 2021...it strikes many laypersons, myself included, as highly unusual...the manner of asking, the timing at the very end of the year, outside of the diplomatic channels and summits that have occurred all year, why this would happen now? Why would Putin ask first? With the increasing tensions with NATO, Ukraine, and the US, Russia continues to make military advancements and strategic buildups, for which the US has vowed sanctions. 

So now there this pesky phone call...what is it about, and why now?Public opinion is obviously crucial in a democracy, but representatives often have to guess at what people want, interpreting either the results of their own elections or private polling. Would regular, official, non-binding referendums on the issues be helpful? For the representatives or for the people?The Transportation Security Administration (TSA) was created in 2001 as a response to the 9/11 terrorist attacks. While its purpose is to ensure the safety of (primarily) air travel, its actual effectiveness is [dubious at best](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transportation_Security_Administration#Effectiveness_of_screening_procedures). The agency is often associated with the term "security theater," i.e. it provides a sense of security while doing nothing to achieve it.

Do you believe that TSA security lines, still around more than 20 years after their inception, are a permanent part of U.S. airports for the foreseeable future? The answer seems like an obvious & emphatic *yes*, but are there any realistic off-ramps for the influence of an agency that is [often regarded with disdain](https://latimesblogs.latimes.com/money_co/2010/11/new-poll-says-61-oppose-new-airport-security-measures.html)? Can public opinion & political will ever coalesce into effective opposition of the TSA's presence at airports, or are concerns about security simply too potent?Hello, 

on Wikipedia you can find the following: "Additionally, Generation Z challenges the left-ward trend in many countries, especially in Europe." 

And that is true.

In Germany, young first-time voters have voted for the “FDP” party, which is very capitalist. 

In addition, things like gender pronouns are often ridiculed by young people in Germany. 

Of course there is this in Germany too, but it's not as normal as in the USA. 

The further we go to the east, i.e. Poland, Serbia or Russia, the more one sees even very right-wing young people, where even gays are beaten up on the street.  

Why are young people very different depending on the country?

For the mods:

https://amp.dw.com/en/young-people-vote-far-right-in-europe/a-18917193

https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generation_ZI recently saw a poll from Gallup discussing Americans' opinions of capitalism and socialism. I think you'd be interested to know that a sizable plurality of Americans see room for some kind of mix of the two. Also the part that I find most intriguing is that 20% of the population have faith in neither socialism or capitalism. 

Clearly some people don't care what economic system we use as long as they can make a living and so some of the people responding in the latter two categories may fall into this subgroup, but I was wondering about those who are the final group distrustful of both systems for ideological or other substantial reasons. What sort of economic system do you think they would be interested in pursuing given we are clearly in some sort of period of grand economic transition? 

Also here's a link to the poll for anyone who's interested: [https://news.gallup.com/poll/357755/socialism-capitalism-ratings-unchanged.aspx](https://news.gallup.com/poll/357755/socialism-capitalism-ratings-unchanged.aspx)President Biden's Build Back Better Bill passed the House of Representatives on 19th November and moved up to the Senate. The BBB Bill has a significant effect on everyone's personal life. The BBB bill proposes the following:

\- Universal and free preschool for kids aged 3-4 years old.

\- Affordable and high-quality elder care.

\- Provides 39 million households up to 3,600USD per year by extending the American Rescue Plan's expanded Child Tax Credit.

\- Ensuring new clean energy technology, including wind turbine blades to solar panels.

\- Reduces drug prescription cost.

\- Decreasing the insulin to 35USD per month.

And many more. 

Recently, Democratic Senator Manchin made it public that he would vote AGAINST the Build Back Better Bill. And this makes the President's chances in the Senate much lower.

In the 117th Congress (2021-2023), there are 48 Democratic Senators, 50 Republican Senators, and 2 Independent Senators leaning towards Democrats. So that makes a 50-50 ratio. With Senator Manchin's Nay, that makes 51 NAY's to 49 AYE's which turns down the BBB Bill. 

The Congressional Leadership and Administration MUST find a way to make Manchin vote YES to BBB, or try as hard as they can to get a Republican vote for the bill, which is more likely not to happen.

With the public's interest at the stake, what will the Congressional Leadership and Biden Administration do to avoid this? 

We will watch and see.Congress created a [Permanent UAP Research Office](https://www.gillibrand.senate.gov/news/press/release/gillibrands-groundbreaking-unidentified-aerial-phenomena-amendment-included-in-final-ndaa_) and have updated the definition of what they consider to be a UAP.

[Source:](https://thehill.com/opinion/national-security/580698-sen-gillibrands-historic-legislation-would-revolutionize-study-of)

>At the same time, the amendment significantly broadens the definition of UFOs to include “[transmedium](https://www.carolinacoastonline.com/national/article_a1822934-b577-11eb-a44f-6f72df9fe196.html)” craft, which the legislation defines as “objects or devices that are observed to transition between space and the atmosphere, or between the atmosphere and bodies of water.”

Senator Gillibrand [tweeted this week:](https://twitter.com/gillibrandny/status/1473395474090672133)

>If we want to defend our airspace and maintain our strategic edge, we need to investigate Unidentified Aerial Phenomena and determine if they belong to a foreign entity or something else altogether. It's a national security issue — and we can't bury our heads in the sand.

Bill Nelson [this week:](https://www.theguardian.com/science/2021/dec/24/bill-nelson-nasa-administrator-interview)

>Another subject that has gone increasingly mainstream in Washington is unidentified flying objects. In June a report found that although intelligence officials do not believe aliens are responsible for dozens of accounts of unidentified aerial phenomena (UAP), they cannot fully explain what is.  
>  
>Nelson comments: “You’ve seen those films now made public. They \[navy pilots\] know they saw something. What is it? I don’t know. Is it an adversary on Earth that has that kind of technology? I hope not.  
>  
>“Do I think that there is life in the universe? The answer to that is clearly I do and we are searching for it. How can I limit a universe that is so big that I cannot see how big it is, where we are in a galaxy with billions if not trillions of stars and there are additional billions if not trillions of galaxies, and the universe is expanding?”  
>  
>He adds with a chuckle: “Like people that tried to limit Copernicus and Galileo that the Earth didn’t revolve about the sun, that everything revolved around the Earth. So, you get the drift.”  
>  
>What first contact with an alien civilisation would mean for humanity has long been the stuff of science fiction. But politicians take it seriously. After a conversation with his American counterpart in 1985, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev recalled: “President Reagan suddenly said to me, ‘What would you do if the United States were suddenly attacked by someone from outer space? Would you help us?’ I said, ‘No doubt about it.’ He said, ‘We too.’ So that’s interesting.”

[James Webb Telescope](https://www.quantamagazine.org/why-nasas-james-webb-space-telescope-matters-so-much-20211203/) is expected to: 

>Webb telescope will be powerful enough to probe the atmospheres and climates of other Earths — or even, if we’re very lucky, find evidence of an actual alien biosphere.  
>  
>“Infrared is fantastic for exoplanets,” Batalha said.

[NASA hired 24 theologians](https://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-10343387/NASA-enlists-24-theologians-assess-world-react-discovery-alien-life.html) to assess how the world would react to the discovery of alien life on distant planets and how it might change our perception of gods and creation but **how would this impact our global political structure?**President Recep Tayyip Erdogan and Minister of Finance Nureddin Nebati announced Turkey's new 'Economic Model'. 

Even though inflation is peaking in Turkey at 23% (Real inflation is estimated to be approx. 80% by Economist Steve Hanke), the 'Unbiased' Central Bank continues to decrease the interest rates after Erdogan's pressure. The Central Bank aims to increase investments in Turkey by decreasing the interest rates.

Decreasing the interest rates ended up increasing USD/TRY  up to 17 Turkish Liras. 

However, on 19th December, USD/TRY decreased to 13,48 Turkish Lira from 16,66 Turkish Liras. The USD/TRY is 11 Turkish Liras as of 25th December. So what caused this **MAJOR** decrease? Erdogan's bald but stupid move did. 

"The Turkish central bank said on Tuesday it has decided to support foreign currency deposit accounts converted to lira deposit accounts in a move to encourage reverse dollarization. In the event that resident real persons, who already had an FX deposit account ... convert their accounts into Turkish lira time deposit accounts will be eligible to benefit from the incentive," the central bank said.In a statement, the central bank also said it will cover the gap after interest rate and exchange rate difference at the opening and closing of lira deposit accounts are calculated. The account owner will be paid whichever is the highest, it said. The accounts that are converted to lira deposit accounts can have three, six, or 12-month maturities, the central bank said." Reuters.

&#x200B;

What do you think about this plan? Is it going to stop USD from increasing? Is it going to stop the spiking inflation? Is it going to affect the interest rates?

We will watch and see.Nowadays, everyone's got endorsements. On both sides. People are getting it left and right. So it leaves the question to be asked, which endorsements actually matter. Is it more helpful to the endorser, for their resume and track record. Or do they actually help sway public opinion for the endorsee? Of course it's best to have some endorsements then none, but what percentage does an endorsement translate to? Are they even meaningful anymore in today's political climate?To those who may not know, Johnson is facing record low unpopularity following revelations that he repeatedly breached COVID rules by hosting parties on Downing Street in the middle of a pandemic, and to add to that, the Conservative Party lost a by-election for North Shropshire constituency, which the Tories had held for 200 years. Because of these incidents, Johnson is now facing increasing internal challenges and there may be a party leadership election after the holidays. The frontrunners are Rishi Sunak, the current Chancellor, which is the second highest position in the UK following Prime Minister, and Liz Truss, the current Foreign Minister. Who do you think should be the next leader of the Conservative Party if at all?Context: Putin gave a press conference 12/23/2021 and basically said: "What is unclear? Russia wants immediate guarantees that NATO will not expand eastward." 

Obviously he's specifically talking about a unilateral guarantee of permanent moratirum for Ukraine and Georgia ever being able to join the NATO alliance.

My question is, how likely is it that NATO would cave to this demand? And a follow up question would be, would this even work to deter Russian aggression against Ukraine if it were offered? Ukraine is a sovereign country, should NATO really entertain the idea of a different nation deciding its foreign policy?

I'm curious if the NATO leadership sees a Russian invasion as likely, and if they would view the offering of guarantees to prohibit Ukraine and Georgia's membership as a legitimate diplomatic solution?If you look at the 2018 Senate Election in Ohio, Sherrod Brown won by a pretty comfortable margin of 6.8 percentage points. However, looking at the Ohio 2016 presidential election and 2020 presidential election, Trump won the state by around 8 percentage points and Rob Portman won re-election by 21 percentage points. So, how exactly did Sherrod Brown win in what seems to be a more and more Republican-leaning state?

Granted 2018 was a somewhat "blue-wave" year but if you look at a state like Florida, which was MUCH closer than Ohio on the presidential level (1.5 points in 2016 and 3.3 in 2020), Florida voted for Rick Scott in a blue-wave year by a very narrow 0.2% margin. Both Scott and Brown were democratic incumbents that won their previous election by double digits and seeing how Ohio is shifting way further to the right than Florida, it raises the question how Sherrod Brown was able to pull off his 2018 win and what that may mean for 2024 if he decides to run again.By now many of you have probably had the opportunity to [see an interview](https://thehill.com/policy/healthcare/public-global-health/587079-trump-pushes-back-on-candace-owens-people-arent-dying) with former president Trump and noted anti-vaccine political pundit, Candace Owens.

In this interview, Trump says the following:

>"Oh no, the vaccines work, but some people aren’t the ones. The ones who get very sick and go to the hospital are the ones that don’t take the vaccine. But it’s still their choice. And if you take the vaccine, you’re protected,” 

>“Look, the results of the vaccine are very good, and if you do get it, it’s a very minor form,” Trump continued. “People aren’t dying when they take the vaccine.”

Trump has never spoken against the vaccine and has volunteered information on his vaccine status. This being said, Trump was previously quoted calling the booster a ["money making operation"](https://www.businessinsider.com/trump-dismisses-covid-19-booster-shots-as-money-making-operation-2021-8), and anti-vaccine sentiment has proliferated among his ardent supporters since the beginning of the pandemic.

Trump is now facing a certain level of [rebuke from higher-profile supporters](https://www.rollingstone.com/politics/politics-news/trump-booster-shot-anti-vax-reaction-1275660/) and a certain level of confusion about his remarks. 

What are the political implications of Trump's statements on the booster? Specifically, I'd like to know:

* will this action cause his base to turn on him?
* what could his motivation be for speaking positively on the booster knowing his base has embraced anti-vaccine sentiment?
* how does this change the narrative for democrats and liberals who feel the former president hasn't done enough to encourage vaccination for his supporters?
* Is this move a political strategy by conservatives to move away from the anti-vaccine activism in their populist ranks?
* does this interview help republicans in 2022?There’s talk of Biden running for re-election (way too early to be talking about this btw). Having an incumbent not run for re-election voluntarily is usually seen as a dangerous move for that party because it shows a "weakness". However, if Biden did it, it could be viewed as a responsible move and Democrat voters *could* appreciate the Dems thinking of the nation over their own party.

Between [age related diseases](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aging-associated_diseases#:~:text=Examples%20of%20aging%2Dassociated%20diseases,diseases%20increases%20exponentially%20with%20age) (Alzheimers, dementia, etc.) and general vulnerability of dying from a relatively recoverable virus like the flu, Trump and Biden are statistically higher liabilities.

If Biden were to call out the elephant in the room and state (more eloquently than what I'm writing out here) that he thinks it's in the nation's best interest, in the long run, to put their weight behind a younger candidate, **would this be disastrous for the Dems or could this be a positive for Dems in 2024?** 

Additionally, assuming Biden doesn’t run, which I doubt he will, does him stepping down due to age highlight how old Trump would be and cause it to influence the GOP to prop up a younger candidate in Trump’s place?What did they do well, and what did they do poorly? Did any aspects stand out as unique or interesting by comparison to the messaging and decisions of past administrations?

Specific topics I'm interested in learning more about:

* Reaction time, intensity of initial response, and how they compared to those of past epidemics/pandemics

* Operation Warp Speed

* To the extent that they're corroborated by facts, allegations of deliberate harm or neglect to blue states for political purposes

* Allegations that the administration had intentionally rolled back pandemic preparedness measures put in place by prior administrations

* Overall effectiveness of public health messaging and leadership

* The overall implications on our present of the decisions they made as compared to alternative strategies being offered to the administration at that time (in terms of numbers of deaths, the impact on our healthcare system, economic consequences, etc.)The Biden administration has announced [yet another pause on federal student loans going into May 1st](https://apnews.com/article/federal-student-loan-moratorium-extended-256eec88f8dbdaf24e276bff699ebfb4). This has been popular with those currently holding federal student loans, while others seem to think that impacts of the pandemic in relation to employment has been solved, and that the pause is unnecessary. The policy was started by Trump at the beginning of the pandemic, and has been extended by Biden's admin.

Do you see this policy being too popular to let expire? Could either letting the moratorium expire or continue on impact 2022 midterms?This is something I think about from time-to-time. Aside from your views of the previous president and whether or not you like him, or not, or how you identify as a Democrat or republican, would you say, President Trump was treated unfairly?

For example, they used to talk about his hair and whether or not it was fake, or he wore a toupee. I can't remember the last time we spoke about Obama or Clinton in such regard.

There's been mockery of his diet, which consists of fast food, McDonald's, 12 cans of diet coke, etc. Since when did we ever make fun of our leader for what he ate? Or any leader for that matter.

He's been made fun of for his walk, or inability to balance. Is there any reasonable amount of doubt that he can't walk?

I guess the point I'm trying to make is, did Donald Trump really get treated unfairly, or was that just a narrative that he made up, and was spread by media and mainstream news outlet?

Is there any reasonable suspiciousion that he was ever incapable of running the country?Mandela is know globally as an icon of the anti apartheid movement in South Africa. But the means by which he sought to pursue his goals is one that seemed to involve a lot of pragmatism. Seems to I say, because sometimes it can be a little difficult to figure whether some of his decisions were made more because of idealism or realism.

Take for example his civil disobedience. In the initial stages of the struggle he chose civil disobedience modeled off Gandhi. But then he chose to move to armed resistance after civil disobedience didn't seem to work and especially after the Sharpeville Massacre. Part of that could be seen as a pragmatic decision. But one could also look at it from an idealistic perspective. When he formed the armed wing of the ANC in 1962 it was at the time when you had anti colonial struggles happening. The Algerian Revolution from 54 to 62. The Kenyan War of Independence, etc. Mandela at the time did idealise the armed resistance of those struggles.

When one looks at the alliances that Mandela formed locally and internationally, this is also an interesting case when talking about idealism vs pragmatism. On the one had he had the alliance of some Western political leaders like the Canadian government(interestingly under conservative governments) as well as the Swedish government and others. On the other hand he had the alliance of other governments and leaders that the West did not look favourably on. Castro and Cuba are one. Arafat and the Palestinians are another example. Nasser's Egypt as well as the Soviet Union are other examples. These alliances themselves were formed because, even though some Western leaders like Canadian ones supported his cause, some of the crucial ones like the U.S , the U.K and Israel continued to support the Apartheid regime for Cold War purposes.

Now one could look at this as a pragmatic decision on his and the ANC's part. And it definitely was one that deepened their relationship with these governments and leaders. Cuba for instance literally intervened in Africa and helped ANC forces. Arafat and the Palestinian political leadership(something I did not know) set up training camps in places like Mozambique and the Lebanon for the the ANC's armed wing. It could also be looked at from an idealistic perspective due to the fact that he did admire the Cuban Revolution for example. Castro's Speech before he was imprisoned by Batista was a model for Mandela's own speech before he was put in jail. These alliance of course caused massive controversy

An interesting case study of where these complicated alliances came to a head was in the early 90s just right after his release. When he was questioned about this in front of an American audience he defended his relationship with Arafat and the Palestinians, saying they were "comrades in arms". That was a very risky move, especially in front of an American audience at a time when the ANC needed the West to maintain sanctions on the Apartheid regime. He could have easily alienated his Western support but despite this he remained uncompromisingly loyal to Arafat. At the same paradoxically he also had many Jewish supporters in the anti apartheid movement. Many of them were strong zionists themselves. When he was in front of Arab leaders he also remained firm in his loyalty to his Jewish supporters. There was actually an incident where Gaddafi in Libya would not let the ANC open offices for decades because of Mandela's strong support for the Jewish community. Furthermore Mandela explicitly defended Zionism as an ideology despite his strong disagreement with Israeli policy in Palestine. So he was willing to risk alienating Western support for his movement over his strong loyalty to Arafat and the Palestinians. On the other hand he was also willing to alienate Arab support for his movement by defending the Jewish activists in his movement who were zionists, and defending Israel's right to exist. Adding an even further twist to this, while Arafat and the Palestinians trained the ANC forces in the 70s and 80s, in the 60s the ANC and Mandela received training from the Israelis when David Ben Gurion was Prime Minister and even studied the tactics of Israeli leaders during their war of independence.

When he became president on the one hand he pursued a new constitution that enshrined his ideals such as racial and religious equality as well as probably the first constitution in the globe that enshrined LGBTQ rights. On the other hand on economic policy he pursued a neoliberal one modelled of the Washington Consensus. This was partly to re-attract investors to come back to South Africa in the aftermath of the sanctions. And an interesting paradox here too was that it was the Chinese and Vietnamese communist leaders who convinced him to adopt a more free market economic model, despite his socialist beliefs. This was a fairly long post but based off what I said where would Mandela lean more when talking about pragmatism vs idealism?There's been a lot of talk about how long a presidential election campaign has been in recent elections. Other countries have just a couple months, some couple weeks to decide on their next leader. But we draw it out to primaries, caucuses, super Tuesdays, etc.

Would Americans benefit from a shorter election cycle? Aside from the larger fields of candidates every cycle, could having a less condensed cycle be better for selecting or leader?

It seems as if just having a longer cycle allows for extra mistakes to be made. Like somehow, the longer election cycle is a test for the American public to judge a candidate if they were in the oval office, and for the candidate to show leadership, when in actuality, most campaigns do experience some sort of form of blunder, after all.

Campaigns can save money. Americans don't have to experience with so much stress. Candidates can get to the point. Would a shorter election cycle benefit the united States of America?Im genuinely curiously on what amount of power the government should have in your life in the words of ordinary people. Where would you want the government to step in? and what area of the goverment is off limits on all accounts?Last month Glenn Youngkin won the Virginia gubernatorial election. He was selected through convention, otherwise  they may have selected the more  controversial Amanda Chase. 

The GOP base seemed to have chosen more radical candidates as   primary winners which may have costed them a few senate seats. They chose Trump, and had Ted Cruz as second place in 2016 primaries. The democratic base seems to be a moderating influence on the more culturally left establishment.

In 2022 elections there are more  controvertial candidates for senate/ govenor/ house primaries

Since the canidates have more controversies,  do you think the GOP should get rid of primaries for congressional and  govenor election?  

How bad of a backlash would there be to getting rid of primaries?The US as a nation is facing many issues that rival the challenges of the World Wars, Cold War, and Post 9-11 climate. Coronavirus, inflation, political gridlock and polarization, decreasing standards of living,  defeat in Afghanistan, predatory and exploitative capitalism and Chinese authoritarian encroachment all are at the forefront of American Public. 

Usually during troubling times, the U.S. has elected candidates into office that are able to rally the public and become inspiring figureheads for the nation and restore a sense of optimism and patriotism. Instead, Trump and Biden have largely failed to be inspiring Presidents.

Both Trump and Biden are very unpopular and polarizing Presidents, with very low approval ratings. At a time with high political polarization, it is a wonder whether or not there is anyone that can obtain office of the President and not be immediately distasteful to the opposing side. Because of high degree of polarization, it is likely that both Trump and Biden will be relegated in the history books as either unpopular, or uninspiring Presidents.

So the question I pose today - do any prominent figures in either political party stand out as being able to rise up and meet the challenges of our time, with a majority standing behind them? Or does increase political polarization mean that it is impossible for someone like FDR, JFK, or Dwight D Eisenhower to ever take office again?So the Omicron variant of Covid-19 has gone from not being detected in the United States to now being detected in all fifty states. In only three (3) weeks. 

 Many right-wing candidates are making pledges of "No mask mandates!" "No vaccine mandates!" "No fear tactics!" And the like. 

Are these candidates shooting themselves in the foot with such rhetoric?[67%](https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2021/10/06/two-thirds-of-republicans-want-trump-to-retain-major-political-role-44-want-him-to-run-again-in-2024/) of GOP supporters wish to see Trump remain an important political figure in American politics, with a plurality of 44% desiring that Trump run again for office of the President in 2024.

Meanwhile, Joe Biden's Administration has confirmed that [the President will in fact seek re-election in 2024.](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2021/nov/22/joe-biden-intends-to-run-again-2024-white-house)

This makes the odds of a 2024 presidential election rematch of Joe Biden and Donald Trump not insignificant, and potentially very likely to occur should Trump maintain his popularity and another Republican figure as equal  or more influential than Trump fail to emerge.

What would the implications of the American electorate propagating another Presidential race between President Biden and former President Trump mean for the nation? What would this say about the current state of Politics? How would such another face off between Trump and Biden differ from the 2020 election?In the last few days Putin has made increasingly aggressive comments that make it seem like an invasion of Ukraine is entirely possible.

&#x200B;

>President Vladimir Putin said on Tuesday that Russia had no room to retreat in a standoff with the United States over Ukraine and would be forced into a tough response unless the West dropped its "aggressive line".  
>  
>“We have nowhere further to retreat,”Putin says in meeting at defense ministry. “Do they really think we’ll sit idly as they create threats against us?”  
>  
>Putin did not spell out the nature of these measures but his phrasing mirrored that used previously by Deputy Foreign Minister Sergei Ryabkov, who has warned that Russia may redeploy intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Europe in response to what it regards as NATO plans to do the same.  
>  
>It says it needs pledges from the West - including a promise not to conduct NATO military activity in Eastern Europe - because its security is threatened by Ukraine's growing ties with the Western alliance and the possibility of NATO missiles being deployed against it on Ukrainian territory.

&#x200B;

If Russia does invade Ukraine, what should the response from the United States be? What about from the EU and NATO?Multi ethnic or multi language describes both of these states, yet one of them (🇧🇪), seems to have insanely long coalition talks, minority governments, stalemates all over politics, and substantial divides in its society.

Which part of the 🇨🇭Swiss system could help stabilize 🇧🇪 Belgium, stop the "secession" talks, and give its citizen something like an identity.Kentucky ranks [41st](https://www.usnews.com/news/best-states/kentucky) overall and West Virginia ranks [47th](https://www.usnews.com/news/best-states/west-virginia). I've read many times that both these states , as do most red states, pull in more federal aid money than they pay in taxes. 

I understand these may not be the most accurate references, but I think it at least highlights common facts that's Kentucky and West Virginia are in trouble. 

I'm genuinely confused how these men can continue to get elected when their own constituents are having do much trouble getting getting educated, finding and maintaining quality work, and generally paying their bills while all three of these men have zero trouble with any of that. 

What are they saying and doing to convince their communities that they are performing in a way that benefits who they represent?

This isn't a jab post, I'm genuinely curious. I find this so perplexing looking at it from the outside.So it appears that the Biden Administration has shifted its messaging to be more clear or at least firm on Covid and the Omicron variant. 

https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/press-briefings/2021/12/17/press-briefing-by-white-house-covid-19-response-team-and-public-health-officials-74/

These four paragraphs in particular seem to signal a shift in tone, similar to that of Colorado Governor Polis.

> Our vaccines work against Omicron, especially for people who get booster shots when they are eligible.  If you are vaccinated, you could test positive.  But if you do get COVID, your case will likely be asymptomatic or mild.

> We are intent on not letting Omicron disrupt work and school for the vaccinated.  You’ve done the right thing, and we will get through this.

> For the unvaccinated, you’re looking at a winter of severe illness and death for yourselves, your families, and the hospitals you may soon overwhelm.

> So, our message to every American is clear: There is action you can take to protect yourself and your family.  Wear a mask in public indoor settings.  Get vaccinated, get your kids vaccinated, and get a booster shot when you’re eligible.

Is this a shift in policy and messaging and if so do you think it might change either the behavior of unvaccinated Americans or have an electoral benefit for Democrats?Pragmatism is known as the American Philosophy. Philosophers such as William James, C S Peirce, John Dewey, etc. developed and defined the philosophical school. All were Americans. Later came philosophers like Putnam and Rorty. There is, however, a strong anarchist philosophical trend in the US, from Benjamin Tucker to Robert Nozick. Libertarians are a kind of anarchist, too. The question is how do these two philosophical schools affect today’s turbulent political arena in the US?In 2016, it was clearly a swing state, but ultimately Donald Trump won Ohio by large margins. Florida he won by close to 2%. In 2020, he won Ohio by even larger of a margin but lost the election. So many times, I've heard as Ohio goes, so does the election. It seems Ohio is less of a foreshadowing to how the election would play out. Republicans can't win without Ohio, but Democrats can. 

  
Also, Florida was decisively called early in the 2020 election. Is this reason to suppose that the state is going more red or Republican, due to policies and the governance of Governor Ron De Santis? Is there reason to believe that Florida is going red?

&#x200B;

We've seen in this election of 2020 and the census and southern states have increased their electoral votes. Is this reason to believe that people are turning more conservative as a result?Chile is often referred to as the Switzerland of South America; it is one of the most prosperous nation in the region.  Decades ago \[1970\] Chile had elected another leftist president, Salvador Allende.  After a rise in inflation and other economic problems in the country, military officers demanded his resignation. On Sept. 11, 1973, the Chilean Air Force bombed the presidential palace, and the military junta seized power. The coup was led by Augusto Pinochet, who had been appointed commander in chief of the military by Allende, and was backed by the U.S. government as part of Operation Condor. 

Augusto Pinochet coup against President Salvador Allende, was the start of nearly two decades of government repression in Chile. Thousands of people disappeared, tortured and killed. As for Allende, he did not leave the presidential palace alive. Some say, he was killed by the military, others say, he killed himself.

The present race was the most polarizing and acrimonious in recent history, presenting Chileans with starkly different visions on issues including the role of the state in the economy, the rights of historically marginalized groups and public safety. 

Boric will be the nation’s youngest leader \[a former student activist\] and by far its most liberal since President Salvador Allende. Boric will assume office at the final stage of a years long initiative to draft a new Constitution, an effort that is likely to bring about profound legal and political changes on issues including gender equality, Indigenous rights and environmental protections.

Capitalizing on widespread discontent with the political factions \[left and right\] that have traded power in recent decades, Mr. Boric attracted voters by pledging to reduce inequality and promising to raise taxes on the rich to fund a substantial expansion of the social safety net, more generous pensions and a greener economy.

Mr. Boric referred to Kast and assailed several of his plans, which including expanding the prison system and empowering the security forces to more forcefully crack down on Indigenous challenges to land rights in the south of the country. 

Kast, however, was quick to concede" "From today he is the elected President of Chile and deserves all our respect and constructive collaboration. Chile is always first."

 Is Chile ready for change and will this be sustained this time around?Months ago there were two legislative bills.  Originally the infrastructure bill was fully tied to the social BBB bill. In order to get the infrastructure bill passed the progressive caucus said they trust Biden when he said he will get Manchin on board and get the bill across the finish line.  Since then progressives passed the infrastructure bill and Biden was unable to keep Manchin on board for the BBB.

The question and Point of discussion is where to now between core democrats and progressives? Does this change the relationship between democrats and the progressive caucus?  Will progresssives demand alternative measures from Biden to make up for the lack of the BBB?  Will Biden provide the progressive caucus anything to win back their trust?  Do democrats run the risk of losing progressive trust and their voters?  How progressives should handle this?  How should Biden?You wouldn't even have to like the person. Could be somebody you dislike but you acknowledge his/her political skills.

For example: I've often seen people, including liberals, saying they acknowledge how good Mitch McConnell plays the game.I was watching an interview, many interviews actually, by former FBI director James Comey in the events leading up to the election of 2016. The FBI in James Comey's words is an apolitical intuition, one  that must be separate from the political parties vying for the higher office. James Comey when asked if he regrets his decision and whether or not he would change anything, said no, that he was proud of his decision and the way in which he handled it. 

&#x200B;

Could James Comey's decision to re-open the investigation into Hillary Clinton sway public opinion? Did it sway your opinion? Did it make you vote for Donald Trump instead? Or not vote at all? 

&#x200B;

Was James Comey right to have done that?I'm reading a lot lately about the history of immigration waves into the U.S., and most importnatly, how past immigrations handled so much better than today. How immigrant back then see their new home as a welcoming place they should love, but today, they feel like they arrived at a place that despises them. I asked myself, how can a nation do assimilation well? What are the tricks, the dos and don'ts that create a new harmonious society, instead of the highly divided, radicalized groups you hear almost every day? But when it came to the techniques of assimilation and policies regarding assimilation, I found almost nothing. So I'm turning to Reddit now. Can you list me a couple of key things?As we all know this morning, Sen. Joe Manchin says he will not vote for BBB. Given the scope of the bill, how should Democrats recover from this and what can they do to ensure they hold their majorities for the midterms?It is almost crazy to think how a year ago, Andrew Cuomo was hailed as a savior of the pandemic, and the face of New York. He was delivering speeches and COVID-19 briefings almost every day. He was being hailed as a potential vice-president, and even almost at one point, in discussion to be a potential president. He was uplifted by his good fortune, good family name, brother who works for CNN, and hailed as the person closest to Speaker Pelosi, and Joe Biden.   


Now, a year later, he's a disgraced governor, resigned, and didn't get to serve out the rest of his term as a governor. He's presumably ruined his family name, had to defend his record, and living in shame.   


Can we ever see Andrew Cuomo ever in politics again? What does this mean for his political future? Would we see Chris Cuomo ever in television again? What does this mean for the Cuomo family?We have always heard that political polrization is happening increasing along educational lines. I have heard   that we are polarizatioing along trust and other personality charecterisitcs, that correrlate with education and age.  Does this agree with this from your experience?

Polls in 2020 were wrong in how much they expected white working class voter would return to the democratic party. They may have sampled the wrong white working class voter? Going forward how will this effect polling, you can't caterogize people with how grumpy they are? 

How will thie effect persuation, unlike income or class peoples personalities don't change that much overtime?[After a series of negotiations between house progressives and Democratic congressional leadership, the $1.2T physical infrastructure bill passed the House in early November.](https://www.vox.com/2021/11/5/22766086/infrastructure-biden-house-democrats-vote-pass-bbb-spending-bill) 

Progressives long considered holding up this physical and bipartisan negotiated infrastructure bill as their main leverage to ensuring passage of their larger social safety net and climate bill. [Senator Bernie Sanders \(I-VT\) had expressed interest in the house holding up the bill until budget reconciliation of the social spending bill passed.](https://thehill.com/homenews/senate/574347-sanders-urges-house-democrats-to-vote-against-infrastructure-bill-before) However, the democratic gamesmanship over the bills continued as [Sen. Sinema \(D-AZ\) matched the rhetoric and committed to rejecting any vote on the social spending \(BBB\) bill until the physical infrastructure bill passed the house.](https://www.reuters.com/world/us/us-senator-sinema-rejects-vote-big-biden-package-before-infrastructure-source-2021-10-14/)


Ipso facto, a poorly polling democratic caucus rallied the physical infrastructure bill and today Joe Manchin (D-WV), from his +40 R state, went on Fox New Sunday and said he cannot not vote for BBB, killing the social spending bill. [Manchin reportedly gave the WH a heads-up beforehand but refused any of their communications afterward](https://www.politico.com/newsletters/playbook/2021/12/19/scoop-manchin-refused-a-call-from-wh-before-killing-bbb-495521) 

[Today, the White House lights up Manchin after he crushes Biden's megabill: "If his comments on FOX and written statement indicate an end to that effort, they represent a sudden and inexplicable reversal in his position, and a breach of his commitments to the president and the senator’s colleagues in the House and Senate," Psaki said. "Just as Senator Manchin reversed his position on Build Back Better this morning, we will continue to press him to see if he will reverse his position yet again, to honor his prior commitments and be true to his word."](https://www.politico.com/news/2021/12/19/manchin-says-he-wont-support-bidens-social-spending-bill-525458)


How will the progressives now react to their fears of getting their priorities left behind after giving up the leverage of passing the physical infrastructure bill? Can the [big tent](https://am13.mediaite.com/med/cnt/uploads/2021/10/Screen-Shot-2021-10-18-at-3.54.54-PM.jpg) survive? Will house progressives have confidence in their more moderate congressional leaders? Will the party be able to come together (as they did to pass the physical infrastructure and Biden's first budget reconciliation stimulus package) again for big bills this legislative session?West Virginia senator Joe Manchin went on Fox News Business on Sunday and announced that he was a firm no on voting for Joe Biden's signature social spending and climate package, the Build Back Better bill. This comes after months of negotiations between Manchin, The White House and Senate Leadership were put on pause at the end of the week with plans to resume after the holidays. Additionally, he did it without informing Biden or Schumer beforehand. So far the White House has issued some strong statements condemning Manchin's decision and messaging but done little else publicly. 

What can be done to pressure Manchin into resuming negotiations and ultimately voting for the bill? Alternatively, what tools do Biden and the Democratic Caucus have for punishing Manchin and potentially others for torpedoing the bulk of the party's legislative agenda? Without consequences, this move by Manchin could set a precedent that will make it even more difficult for Schumer to keep Senate Democrats in line.I'm curious how government policies actually come about - politicians may have ideas and agendas, but the politically neutral staff who have been working in their departments may have a stronger grasp of the actual issues and how to address them.

So do most bills come from the top-down, or are they more presented to the relevant politician for their approval?Take Manchin at his word: he wants a bill under 2 trillion dollars in the long term, not a 2 trillion dollar stimulus that is mostly spent in the first year or two. That means you need to cut Build Back Better about in half, then extend the benefits to last longer. See here for the big budget chunks:
[Build Back Better expenditures](https://www.crfb.org/blogs/full-estimates-house-build-back-better-act)

What half of the expenditures would you cut?I was wondering whether the changing internet and media culture will affect how people of individual nations digest media meant to be seen by the international community.

With countries now creating their own acclaimed media and restructuring their cultures around their respective entertainment industries, will we see a growth in nationalism in the media released by our own domestic industries?

I see this happening in China, which is something you'd expect... but it seems like China had become more nationalist-oriented after they had the means and market to create and consume the media they produce, which values nationalist sentiment.

Will this phenomenon become more commonplace in Western state as well? Where Americanisation will decline, and their own cultural perspectives will be bolstered by a combination of their political climate and their values?

I see nationalism on the rise in Europe and South-Asian countries such as India... trade is also increasingly regionalised so Globalisation has recently come to a decline.

Is this only the start? Will we see media enterprises and domestic title-pieces turn into anti-something-pro-something propagations?The French Republic is an officially **colorblind** country in which [the government is legally prohibited from compiling statistics on citizens’ race, ethnicity, and religion since 1978](https://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/loda/article_lc/LEGIARTI000037090124/2019-03-18/). This has left France without clear data on its racial and ethnic makeup even as waves of immigration have reshaped the country into a multiethnic mosaic of cultures. This law reflects a model in public policy rooted in the ideal of strict [**universalism**](https://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universalisme_r%C3%A9publicain) in which citizens are expected to identify with the nation over any other particular ethnic or religious identity. The French belief in universalism stemmed from the idea that human nature is not influenced by cultural distinctions or historical variations. It is an ideal intended to unite all French citizens under a single French identity, regardless of country of origin or ancestral roots The model’s proponents consider multiculturalism and hyphenated identities *communautariste*, a pejorative term to describe identity politics— harmful to social cohesion.

[In fact, the National Assembly voted unanimously in 2018 to remove the word “race” from the constitution after arguing that the term was outdated](https://www.connexionfrance.com/French-news/france-assembly-votes-to-remove-race-French-constitution). Rather than implementing policies that would directly address minority communities, the government chooses to implement policies guided by geographic and socioeconomic factors, with the goal of improving lives in all regions and neighborhoods.

As the French ambassador Gerard Araud said in response to Trevor Noah's joke that "Africa won the World Cup": ["Unlike in the United States of America, France does not refer to its citizens based on race, religion or origin. To us, there is no hyphenated identity, roots are an individual reality."](https://i.redd.it/3anbyw6iosa11.jpg)

[Meanwhile, the French government has declared an all-out war on "wokeism" (wokisme) as well over the past year. Politicians and prominent intellectuals say social theories from the United States on race, gender and post-colonialism are a threat to French identity and the French republic](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/02/09/world/europe/france-threat-american-universities.html). [The French government even launched an investigation into social science research to scour universities for ideas that "corrupt society".](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/02/18/world/europe/france-universities-culture-wars.html) [President Emmanuel Macron](https://www.spectator.co.uk/article/macron-steps-up-his-war-on-identity-politics/amp) himself has repeatedly warned [that France is becoming increasingly racialised and that invasion of US-style racial and identity politics could fracture French society](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2021/07/01/emmanuel-macron-france-becoming-increasingly-racialised-outburst/). [Across the political spectrum, politicians have expressed concern over the threats of woke culture](https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2021/11/01/france-blanquer-woke-war-education/). [In October 2021, French Education Minister Jean-Michel Blanquer launched a new think tank Laboratory of the Republic to coordinate a fightback against the messages of wokeism and cancel culture](https://www.politico.eu/article/macron-education-minister-jean-michel-blanquer-anti-woke/).

**Should the United States embrace France's model and become colorblind and anti-woke as well?**Excerpt from an article on the “Economic Policy” journal’s website (linked to below):

“A new research report proposes the institution of a new tax on the shares of all publicly listed companies headquartered in G20 countries.  
  
The study by Emmanuel Saez and Gabriel Zucman (University of California, Berkeley) suggests that every year, each company would have to pay 0.2% of the value of its stock in taxes. As the G20 stock market capitalisation is around $90 trillion, the tax would raise approximately $180 billion each year.  
  
Because stock ownership is highly concentrated among the rich, this global tax would be progressive, the authors argue. The tax could be paid in-kind by corporations (by issuing new stock) so that the tax does not raise liquidity issue or affect business operations.  
  
Professor Zucman, who is presenting the report at the Economic Policy public panel on 15 April, says:
‘Large multinational companies have been the largest winners of globalisation and yet can easily avoid paying corporate taxes by shifting profits to tax havens. This fiscal injustice undermines support for our modern and open global economy.’”  
  
For a more in-depth summary and discussion of the proposed policy, visit the following link on the Economic Policy journal’s website: [https://www.economic-policy.org/73rd-economic-policy-panel/wealth-tax-on-giant-corporations/](https://www.economic-policy.org/73rd-economic-policy-panel/wealth-tax-on-giant-corporations/)  
  
The full paper can be found here: [https://eml.berkeley.edu/~saez/SaezZucman2021EP.pdf](https://eml.berkeley.edu/~saez/SaezZucman2021EP.pdf)
The anti-vax community makes statements that cite bodily autonomy as their rational for opposing vaccine mandates (e.g. anti-vax sign-wavers saying “My body my choice”). While some claim they are mainly trolls, I had the thought the other day that, while this is might be a view promoted in bad faith, is there actually any inconsistency in holding different views on vaccine mandates and abortion restrictions? That is, would somebody be inconsistent in favoring vaccine mandates while disfavoring restrictions on abortion (and vice versa of course) on the basis of the idea that nobody should tell somebody else what to do with their body (or, “medical decisions are between a person and their doctor”)? If there is a contradiction, how might it be reconciled?Link to the CBO report:

* https://www.peoplespolicyproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/CBOTable.pdf

Link to Tweet from a White House economics reporter summarizing the findings:

* https://twitter.com/JStein_WaPo/status/1468969623899017216

The pandemic has already been cited as a factor for why female employment is the lowest since the 1980s:

* https://www.salon.com/2021/02/19/womens-participation-in-the-workforce-hasnt-been-this-low-since-1988/

And globally why just 43.2% of working-age women are now employed compared to 70% of working-age men:

* https://www.ilo.org/global/about-the-ilo/newsroom/news/WCMS_813449/lang--en/index.htm

Do you think this is also a case of Republicans using the pandemic and its effects to supercharge a push towards a return to traditional gender and household dynamics? Because virtually all of the states that won’t be taking up the programs if Build Back Better passes will be Republican-led ones.Very broad topic and I'd like to keep it relatively open to foster various perspectives. But the general question is if lobbying hinders or badly influences US legislation, elections, and the general political climate. Do lobbyists control policy by influencing politicians' values through money  or are politicians with particular values "rewarded" through money (and is there a difference)? I'm not talking about specific interest groups, just in a broad sense.I think it’s fair to say that Trump may not choose Pence as his running mate. Trump was unhappy with his performance post-election and has said little good of him since. In addition, speculation about a Pence run has been common. 

Who else would Trump choose? Would he try to entice voters with a woman or POC condidate? If so, who would be among his top choices?Earlier this week, the autonomous region of the Bosnian Serbian Republic voted to split key institutions that were governed by Bosnia & Herzegovina to being governed by the autonomous region. This has widely been criticized as being a step closer to succession from Bosnia & Herzegovina with the EU, UK, US, France, and Italy expressing that this is a concern for stability in the Balkans. On the other hand, this has been lauded and encouraged by Russian President Vladmir Putin and Xi Jingping from China.

If the 1995 Dayton Accords is effectively rescinded by further succession, what impact will this have on the region? EU membership? Russian vs West proxy war? Further sanctions and escalations? 

[https://www.reuters.com/world/europe/serbs-vote-start-quitting-bosnias-key-institutions-secessionist-move-2021-12-10/](https://www.reuters.com/world/europe/serbs-vote-start-quitting-bosnias-key-institutions-secessionist-move-2021-12-10/) 

[https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/nov/29/bosnian-serb-leader-putin-and-china-will-help-if-west-imposes-sanctions](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/nov/29/bosnian-serb-leader-putin-and-china-will-help-if-west-imposes-sanctions)* There are many changes that people wish would be made to the election process and politics in general in the U.S., such as reforms relating to term limits, campaign finance, lobbying, the supreme court, voting rights, etc.
* However, while many people say that they wish that changes to areas like these would happen, they don't usually say how they think it should get done. The biggest problem I believe that there is is regards to making changes to elections and politics is that the people and groups that have the ability to make changes are very reason that changes need to be made in the first place, meaning that they are very unlikely to try and make any meaningful changes.
* Taking that into consideration, what do you believe is the best way for people to go about trying to make the changes that they wish to see?Initially the plan was to have a Bipartisan Commission in the style of 9/11;  Although all House Democrats and 35 Republicans voted in favor of a bill that would set up a Blue Ribbon Commission; it did not garner sufficient support of Republican senators and the vote in the Senate was 54 to 35, showing the bill had a bipartisan majority of support with six Republicans voting with Democrats. However, the bill needed 60 votes to advance or overcome the filibuster. Thereafter, instead, a House Select Committee was established where of the 9 House members only two are Republicans.

The Committee, nonetheless, is pursing all avenues available to it and so far has obtained various documents; it is also fighting privileged communication claims which the former president has raised \[along with his various aides\]; former president lost at the district court and appeal levels; Supreme Court may or may not hear the appeal and the the former president has less than 14 days left to request review.

The various \[non-privileged\]  text messages turned over to the Select Committee by Meadows includes text messages to Meadows from Trump Jr. stating  "He's got to condemn this sh\*t ASAP."  Ingham in her text said: “Mark, the president needs to tell people in the Capitol to go home." “This is hurting all of us. He is destroying his legacy.” Sean Hannity asked Meadows if Trump could “make a statement” and “ask people to leave the Capitol.”

Cheney detailed that when Meadows had texted back he agreed with what Trump Jr. said: "We need an Oval office address. He has to lead now. It has gone too far and gotten out of hand." Although Cheney's comments were directed towards why Meadows must be held in contempt; \[unanimously agreeing to hold former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows in contempt of Congress for refusing to cooperate with its work.\] Her remarks about Trump himself and his conduct makes one wonder if eventually the Committee  intends to gather evidence of possible sedition or evidence of other criminal wrong doing by Trump himself.

If so, and if they find evidence against the former president for conduct while he was in office? Would this precedent be problematic for all future presidents; particularly, if it eventually leads to charges by DOJ?From the Supreme Court oral arguments, it sounds very possible that abortion will be able to be banned after Dobbs is decided. This is not the foregone conclusion, but it is a very possible outcome. I wanted to look at what comes next...

Twelve states have laws that will trigger into existence and completely ban abortion, if Roe/Casey is overturned. There are another nine states that have laws still on their books from before Roe was decided.

Quote from Wikipedia...

In the United States, twelve states — Arkansas, Idaho, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, North Dakota, Oklahoma,[1] South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas,[2] and Utah have trigger laws that would automatically ban abortion in the first and second trimesters if the landmark case Roe v. Wade were overturned.[3][4][5] Illinois formerly had a trigger law (enacted in 1975), but repealed it in 2017.[6][7][8] Also, nine states — Alabama, Arizona, Michigan, West Virginia, and Wisconsin as well as the already mentioned Arkansas, Mississippi, Oklahoma, and Texas, still have their unenforced pre-Roe abortion bans on the law books. Those laws are not currently enforceable due to Roe, but could be enforced if Roe were overturned.

So, nearly instantly upon a decision in Dobbs it is possible that abortion could be made illegal in twenty-one states.

There are many reasons that people seek out an abortion. Money. Time. Health. Ability.

Going through a pregnancy is expensive. It can end up in an inability to work. Someone that is pregnant needs checkups and to maintain the correct nutrition. Bed rest is not uncommon. A delivery is very expensive. Health complications on the part of the mother or fetus can increase all of these problems multiple times over.

Raising a child is very expensive.

Which of these problems should these states address? Increased funding for foster care? Aid/subsidies for pregnant mothers putting their children into foster care or for all expectant mothers?Poverty has been rampant in all societies since the dawn of history, it has grown even more worrying during the pandemic as unemployment skyrocketed and now inflation is increasing. Government stimulus tried to remedy the problem however if it was effective is a whole other question. Should a social welfare program be enacted specifically to help people get employment and or education so then they can be reintegrated into the market? 

 For example a focused UBI like Friedman’s NIT, which, while in practice has seen dubious effects, could be a great tool for social mobility. Unemployment benefits is another example, already heavily used in western societies.There is debate over whether someone who was born and/or lives in Puerto Rico is eligible to run for the presidency. They have been appointed as ambassadors, but never yet to a cabinet-level position. [This report](https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/RL/RL30527/2) by the Congressional Research Service claims that Puerto Ricans are considered natural-born American citizens, but residency there does not count for the 14 years in the US needed to become president. Keep in mind that this is only a congressional report, not law, so it would almost certainly go to court if a Puerto Rican were to run and gain traction. With this in mind, the first and simpler question is, **would a Puerto Rican be eligible to run for president**?

If so, the second and main question here is: **would they actually be capable of winning**? Puerto Rico is something of an odd duck in American politics: its government structure is quite different from a state's, and it has no voting representation in Congress. The hypothetical candidate could likely gain a huge chunk of the Hispanic and Spanish-speaking vote, but wouldn't enjoy a home state advantage. Would voters look at such a candidate as a complete outsider to American politics, for better or for worse? Could they realistically get the name recognition, funding, endorsements, etc. to make a competitive run, and how would they want to tailor their campaign to do so?

I'd love to hear about the viability of a candidate from other US territories as well.Pakistan's nuclear force only serves as a deterrent for India since they are both nuclear powers and India is a huge threat to them due to its pure size. 

As the tensions with India do not seem to be easing anytime soon, it would be extremely unlikely that Pakistan would denuclearise without foreign intervention.

However, since China is another nuclear power that is best friends with Pakistan, if it hypothetically signs a legally binding contract to defend Pakistan like its own country in the case of an attack, will Pakistan be willing to let go of its nuclear force?

(I know that China is unlikely to sign the treaty, but I'm just wondering what will Pakistan's stand be on this situation)So yeah, recently I've been hearing about statues and memorials of past Confederate soldiers being removed by demand of some people.

The Confederate states fought against the Union in the American civil war (1861 – 1865) and was later defeated. They've kept some statues of Confederate generals as memorial such as the one of Robert E. Lee In Virginia. 

This statue in particular was recently removed, what are some arguments on the subject? Should these be kept as they are history? Or something else? What do you guys think?Progressives have been campaigning for free college and student loan forgiveness by citing European countries and saying that a more educated population would benefit the country and pay for itself in the long run.

However, we can safely assume that paying for someone who fails most/all of their classes is not a wise investment. Likewise, not all majors are created equal. Some will land better jobs/contribute more to society than others.

As such, in order to make sure money isn't wasted, should free college/student loan forgiveness come with stipulations such as a minimum GPA and/or only apply to certain majors?In my view, we see that the current political system(s) is/are increasingly struggling while dealing with "modern" challenges. If you had the power to single-handedly change something, what would it be? Please be as **specific** and **solution oriented** as possible.

Don't just state what you don't want anymore but also what the specific alternative solution would be (e.g. "getting rid of all politicians" lacks of a specific alternative solution).Unlike many countries, the Unites States does not require philosophy as a subject for high school students, and American "social studies" courses, which can include political philosophy, have also declined in importance in recent years. 

To what extent does the diminishing respect for and understanding of democracy among American citizens result from a lack of attention to the theory and practice of democratic governance in the American educational system?I've been thinking a lot about 2024. And who would be a candidate for the president of the United States. That being said, it appears to be a stacked field, with senators and governors. Very rarely do we see House of Representatives try to put their name in the pool. Is there a reason? Is the senate more prestigious then the House of Representatives? Why do we not see more candidates for presidency from this body? It appears that the House is more of a launching pad, then a career boost.[Updated Newsweek link at bottom with more releveant 2020 coup attempt information]

With the GOP now controlling most swing states' local and state level legislatures, combined with the presumed GOP control of the House of Representatives by 2023, multiple journalistic pieces have been circulating recently discussing the real possibility of the overturning of the (State run) National elections in 2024. With newly uncovered GOP plots and initiatives attempting to do this during the 2020 post-election, the apparatus will be in place in 2024 to see these plan through (of overturning results of elections not won by presumed Presidential candidate Trump). 

It should also be noted there's also a narrative circulating by the GOP to deal with a presumed escalated Supreme Court handling of the matter by leveraging the 12th Amendment in a way that supports the notion that the Constitution outlines in basic form, State legislatures have the ultimate authority to decide National elections or to not participate in them at all (under presumption the State preferred candidate isn't the election winner).

What will be the resultant civil result and national response if the GOP overturns a Presidential election for the first time where both the popular and electoral vote is cast aside and overridden by State level officials and a GOP controlled House?

Ref: 

https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2022/01/january-6-insurrection-trump-coup-2024-election/620843/

https://www.rollingstone.com/politics/politics-news/mark-meadows-overturn-election-results-jan-6-committee-1269532/

https://www.newsweek.com/mark-meadows-trump-fake-electoral-college-january-6-committee-panel-report-1658634Everyone is talking about the defense budget, and it got me thinking - there are whole regions that are massively (if not entirely) dependent on the military industrial complex such as small regions where the main source of income for the population is from a defense contractor such as Lockheed Martin (I think Columbine is an example?). Thus the defense budget is more than simply giving money to the military, it is also a way to ensure these regions are sustainable. 

Thus what % of the budget is actually towards this application? 

In my mind, while not at all an expert of US politics and US military politics, if such % were considerable then I’d be more understanding of the budget.

Also, given inflation of 6.8% and possibly stabilizing in the near future at 5% (or heavens forbid a repeat of the late 70s), how much is the true YoY delta for the military budget?

Also also, in my mind an increase in military budget also makes sense somewhat given semiconductors as a national security (China x Taiwan tensions peaking) + cybersecurity.

Just to be clear, I am of course open-minded and non-partisan (I am not even 🇺🇸, just really like US politics and financial markets). I am more than happy to receive contrasting viewpoints and attempt to understand them. This isn’t a debate rather than a discussionDespite taking place in a pandemic, the 2020 election saw record-breaking turnout among Democratic voters, which allowed Joe Biden to defeat Donald Trump. At least some of this turnout, it has been argued, was driven not by support for Biden himself but by dislike of Trump and what he had done. Here an important distinction must be made between the 2020 election and the 2016 one. In 2016, Trump's qualities as President were unknown, and Hillary Clinton-- herself a decidedly unpopular candidate-- was running against the *image* of him. Biden, on the other hand, was running against the *reality* of him. 

So if it happens that Trump should decide to run for President again in 2024, would the specter of his Presidency be sufficient to serve as a motivator for Democratic turnout in the same way it did in 2020?Among US presidents who only served a single term (this excludes presidents who served one full term and one partial term, such as Lincoln, Nixon, and LBJ, but includes presidents who only served part of one term, like JFK or John Tyler), who has changed the course of history or been the most influential to world history, and why? Is it Donald Trump, John F. Kennedy, George H. W. Bush, or someone else?Just some quick context Congressional oversight refers to oversight by the United States Congress of the Executive Branch, including the numerous U.S. federal agencies. Congressional oversight refers to the review, monitoring, and supervision of federal agencies, programs, activities, and policy implementation. This ovrsight occurs in a wide variety of congressional activities and contexts. These include authorization, appropriations, investigative, and legislative hearings by standing committees; specialized investigations by select committees; and reviews and studies by congressional support agencies and staff. 

Do people like the current setup or think the legislative branch should have more oversight?There are two schools of thought on how to defeat Trump for the 2024 presidential election.

The first is to run a Never Trumper in the GOP primary like Wyoming Rep. Liz Cheney or Maryland Governor Larry Hogan, who while they would presumably fail to get the nomination would sufficiently tar Trump so that he'd lose the general election to Biden or someone other Democrat. This strategy is one anti-Trump folks like the Lincoln Project would favor.

An alternative choice would be to back a governor Ron DeSantis or maybe a Glenn Youngkin-type candidate who could defeat Trump in the primary itself and then go on to win the general election. The primary focus of the campaign would be a generational change message a la Bill Clinton in 1992 against president GHW Bush rather than a denounce Trump at every turn message of the Never Trump candidate.

Which strategy do you think would be more effective if your aim is to lessen the influence of Trump the person in the Republican party in particular and in the public at large going forward? How would Trump respond to either strategy and would he be effective thwarting it?As I know there are negotiations between Iran and 5+1. They have been such negotiations before, for many years and even when US and Iran negotiated directly, everything was annuled with a signature. 

Now, it seems that there are more tensions between them. What's going to happen?Reviving JCPOA and waiting for the next US president? What's the goal of all these long  negotiations when everyone knows any agreement won't last long?A lot of talk about whose going to take over the midterms and potential candidates of 2024. Let's just imagine, for one second, that it went the way we think it does right now. 

Midterm elections have passed, the senate goes back to Republican control. The House of Representatives also shifts back to Republicans. 

Donald J. Trump is the presumed Republican nominee.

&#x200B;

Who do we think he'll choose as his running mate? How would the debates fare out? Would the moderator refer to Donald Trump as Mr. President as well? or just Mr. Trump?

What can we expect if Donald Trump is the nominee and Joe Biden runs a second term?

Who wins on election night?Can someone provide historical/political info on how Christian supremacy and white supremacy are related/different from one another? 

These are the (basic) arguments I’ve heard people give on the topic:

1) white supremacy = Christian supremacy 

2) white supremacy and Christian supremacy are two different entities, but often intertwined due to overlapping agendas. An example of this would be white supremacy “infecting” Christian churches in the US. 

3) Christian supremacy set the foundation for white supremacy. White supremacy is a form of Christian supremacy (but the reverse  is not true, which sets this apart from #1)

Just trying to get a grasp of how this all works. I’m not sure which of the above  statements is most accurate. Did one give rise to the other? Also is it possible to make an overarching claim about white and Christian supremacy or does it depend on the country?

Edit: Hey everyone, just wanted to say thanks for those that took the time to respond! I had a busy day so I'm just starting to go through the responses now and will reply for follow up points/questionsPresident Joe Biden created the bipartisan commission in April to study proposals to reform the Supreme Court. Its membership consisted largely of law professors. The report stated there was “profound disagreement” among commissioners over adding justices to the Supreme Court.

Supporters of the idea that wanted reform “contended that court expansion is necessary to address serious violations of norms governing the confirmation process and troubling developments in the Supreme Court’s jurisprudence that they see as undermining the democratic system.” 

“Opponents contended that expanding—or ‘packing’—the court would significantly diminish its independence and legitimacy and establish a dangerous precedent that could be used by any future political force as a means of pressuring or intimidating the court.”

President of the American Bar Association said he applauds the work of the Presidential Commission on the Supreme Court of the United States. The comprehensive report it has issued presents important context on the complex and critical issues surrounding the structure of the Court.

The Commission was tasked by President Joe Biden to provide an account of the current debate over the “role and operation of the Supreme Court in our constitutional system,” and to analyze arguments for and against Supreme Court reform...An independent judiciary is necessary to ensure respect for the rule of law and confidence in our courts. The ABA remains committed to upholding the Constitution, the judicial process and equal justice under the law.

Could the Commission have done more or taken a stronger position with respect to term limits and or expansion and was that even possible given the Constitution?

[https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/SCOTUS-Report-Final.pdf](https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/12/SCOTUS-Report-Final.pdf)* I have read a lot of articles and comments from both sides of the political spectrum that claim that the other is trying to rig elections in their favor through the use of gerrymandering and other unscrupulous methods. What evidence is there to back up these claims? And if gerrymandering is indeed happening, how much of an impact has it had on elections, on a local, state, and/or a federal level?[https://www.politico.com/video/2021/12/08/schumer-says-congress-is-on-track-to-vote-on-build-back-better-before-christmas-431275](https://www.politico.com/video/2021/12/08/schumer-says-congress-is-on-track-to-vote-on-build-back-better-before-christmas-431275)

Some possible prompts for discussion:

* What do you think of the bill *as is* \- the price tag (the bill that passed the House is \~$1.9 trillion), what's still in it as of today, what's been stripped of it since the original $3.5 Biden plan, etc.?
* What do you think might be stripped in the coming future, if anything?
* Is there a point at which the package will have been so stripped down from its original scope that it becomes a political negative to even pass at all?The former Bush (43) speechwriter and token conservative on the Atlantic staff today [published an essay](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2022/01/brooks-true-conservatism-dead-fox-news-voter-suppression/620853/) outlining how modern Trumpian conservatism differs from the historical intellectual tradition of conservatism as defined by Edmund Burke. 

Brooks' idea is that classic Burkean conservatism is based on community, family and tradition, and that strong social institutions do a better job of creating good citizens and societies than ambitious plans concocted by technocratic elites. 

However, he also admits that the seeds of the type of authoritarian conservatism practiced by Trump and Fox News are also present in traditional conservatism. The conservative emphasis on community can turn into xenophobia; its reverence for the past can stifle necessary social and economic change.

I've personally long though that the intellectual tradition of conservatism as described by Brooks was created by Buckley et al. in the 1960s in an attempt to smooth the rough edges from the burgeoning American conservative movement and make it more palatable to the American political establishment. 

On the other hand, Brooks' descriptions of traditional conservative values have given me an insight into conservative communities (especially the rural communities that are the backbone of modern conservatism) that I had not previously considered. His arguments for the virtues of community and tradition are very persuasive.

Was the decline of Burkean/Buckleyan conservative ideals into Trumpism inevitable? Is it possible to have traditional, community-centered politics based on classical liberal ideals without xenophobia, anti-intellectualism and authoritarianism?In the context of a world that has differences in regions. Where race is broadly assigned to certain regions. The environments in those regions will inevitably produce or effect different cultures, religions, histories, and industries because of the difference in natural environments and access to resources.  All of which might effect the financial wealth or choices of their descendents to some degree. 

For example, members of an inherited religion that does not support the use of protection during sex will statistically have more children than a religion does accept protection. 

Do you think that within the United States there would be a racial wealth Gap without racism? On a world scale would the same apply?It wasn't that long ago that the President of France was from the Socialist Party.  Then in 2017, Emmanuel Macron basically formed a new centrist party and then got elected President.  Right now, the top three candidates in the current election is Macron, Le Pen, and Zemmour.  Le Pen used to be considered far-right in France but Zemmour is even more to the right and has been convicted of hate crimes in the past.  So right now the election is currently a three way between a centrist, a far-right candidate, and an even more far-right candidate, with all three candidates including the centrist supporting anti-immigrant policies towards Muslim minorities (ie. closing mosques, hijab bans, against naming kids Muhammed, etc.) and hostile towards the left.  For example, Macron recently spoke out against "woke culture" and using inclusive gender neutral vocabulary.  

So what happened to the left wing parties in France and why are they completely irrelevant right now?  What do they need to do to make themselves relevant again?U.S. and Israeli defense chiefs are expected on Thursday to discuss possible military exercises that would prepare for a worst-case scenario to destroy Iran's nuclear facilities should [**diplomacy**](https://www.reuters.com/world/us-envoy-malley-return-vienna-resumed-iran-nuclear-talks-over-weekend-state-dept-2021-12-08) fail and if their nations' leaders request it, a senior U.S. official told Reuters. 

 The U.S.-Israeli preparations underscore Western concern about difficult nuclear talks with Iran that President Joe Biden had hoped would revive a 2015 nuclear deal abandoned by his predecessor Donald Trump. 

President Biden has previously stated Iran will never get a nuclear weapon, Central Intelligence Agency Director Bill Burns said on Monday that the CIA does not believe Iran's supreme leader has decided to take steps to weaponize a nuclear device but noted advances in its ability to enrich uranium, one pathway to the fissile material for a bomb. 

How likely is this attack scenario and how may the Iranians respond?Its been in the news alot recently that Russia is building troops close to its border with Ukraine, all intelligence is pointing towards Russia planning some kind of attack or even full blown invasion potentially as early as next year;

[Why Russia-Ukraine tensions have again reached a boiling point](https://www.npr.org/2021/12/07/1062092373/why-russia-ukraine-tensions-have-again-reached-a-boiling-point) \- NPR

[Russian military capacity on Ukraine's border is on a 'more lethal scale' than 2014 Crimea invasion, US official says](https://www.cnn.com/2021/12/07/politics/nuland-sfrc-us-russia-ukraine/index.html) \- CNN

[Biden voices 'deep concerns' with Putin on Russian aggression against Ukraine](https://www.foxnews.com/politics/biden-voices-deep-concerns-with-putin-on-russian-aggression-against-ukraine) \- Fox News

Now in US politics, Russia hasn't really been a very important issue in most Americans minds since the late 80s with the end of the cold war, do you think a Russian invasion of Ukraine will be a catalyst for reigniting cold war era fears about Russian global aggression? How could this effect candidates often viewed as pro Russia or soft on Russia such as Donald Trump? Do you think this would be a good issue for Biden to show strong leadership on, or will he end up showing weak leadership?

What are the chances that China is cooperating with Russia on an invasion of Ukraine and is planning on invading Taiwan at the same time? What could be the global political implications of this?

If Russia were to successfully invade Ukraine, would policy on Russia become a large issue for the 2022 midterms? A successful invasion of Ukraine could get Russia to Polands borders, do you think fears of Russia could push western politics to a more left wing nationalism? Would western countries become more right wing anyway? Will right wingers readopt a hard anti Russia stance?

Will western countries pursue ways of becoming more energy independent via green energy to combat Russian influence? Will western countries regulate social media to combat global Russian influence? What are your thoughts?As a proposed reform, how would this work in the larger context of the contemporary system of institutional power? 

Specifically in terms of the effectiveness or ineffectiveness of the US gov in this era of partisan polarization?

***New follow-up question: making legislation more effective by giving more power to president? Or by eliminating filibuster? Here’s a [new post](https://www.reddit.com/r/PoliticalDiscussion/comments/rbg00y/fast_track_authority_vs_eliminating_the_senate/?utm_source=share&amp;utm_medium=ios_app&amp;utm_name=iossmf) that compares these two reform ideas. Open to hearing thoughts on this too.I read many articles that put together socialists, social democrats and liberals against conservatives which to me does not make sense. I do not see that division anywhere else.

In most countries liberals tend to vote for conservatives candidates if it is between social democrats and conservatives because they believe that social dems economical policies will hinder their business and progress as a whole.

From what I understand liberals defend individual freedom (pro-choice, gay marriage, equal gender pay) in that sense one could say they are progressive but economically they defend also free market (privatization, laissez faire, no interventionism and lower taxes) which goes against social dems.

Socialists and social democrats defend the same or similar individual freedoms as liberals but they also believe in the role of the state to actively ensure equal opportunities (tax-payed education and healthcare, welfare state and so on) they are much closer to keynesianism and also attack on racist institutions like movements defund the police.  That makes them totally different from liberals from the economical perspective and if we see the economy as the infrastructure of a country, they couldnt be further apart from each other.

However socialists are a completely different breed that does not fit in, since it advocates for a takeover of the means of production by the workers and then a state controlled planned economy. but one can argue that these policies that support health care and education and higher living wages and worker's right might be an absorption of socialist ideas in a capitalist system.

Now, that's the part I just do not get. Conservatives, they tend to defend traditional values, religion, restrict immigration and belives in a strong national identity that must be preserved. But what is their economical agenda? At the same time they want lower taxes and small government but they want also a big state that defends this identity and this agressive exceptionalism in the case of USA.

If I'm wrong about these definitions, please correct me.Once upon a time, we had feudalism. But when the industrial revolution came along, society had to rely on a big number on (unskilled) workers that suddenly were in a position of power. Therefore, the old megapolitical system (feudalism) didn't work anymore. They had to give these workers some kind of power and it was only a matter of time until the megapolitical landscape changed in order to account for this new reality (i.e. to a democracy).

In my view, we are at such a critical intersection again. Never before in history has our economy and our society changed at a faster pace. Power is shifting. In the long term, this inevitably has to lead to a new megapolitical system. How will it look like in your opinion? Will it be more decentralized than the one we encounter today (i.e. we'll have more governing "bodies" in the future) or more centralized (i.e. less governing "bodies"? Do we still have politicians or do we outsource this to an AI? What are the new basic values our society chooses to live by?Hypothetical take: basically what the title says. And no, the other side would not be able to reverse it the moment they got on power if they won the elections and NO, your party wouldn't be able to simply "go it alone" if they won the elections instead. 
It'd be more of a "now or never" "take it leave it" kind of moment/thing. So no clever ways around it.He was previously fined \[in 2011\], and convicted for incitement of hatred and another case is pending before EU Human Rights Commission for hate against Muslin charges \[2018\]. He was acquitted six times of similar charges, in 2008, 2014 (twice), 2016, 2017 and 2019. Convictions in 2015 and 2020 were overturned on appeal.

Zemnour announced his candidacy November 30, 2021 claiming he is running to save France to ominous music and footage of street violence, he said he wanted to save France from decadence and minorities that "oppress the majority."  As footage showed women with headscarves, Black men in the metro and CCTV footage of fights, he told voters that watching movies, walking on the street or going to hospital: "You feel like you are no longer in the country you once knew ... you are foreigners in your own country."

A Reuters poll already indicates he will make it to the second round of French presidential vote along with Macron. He has already jumped ahead of Marine Le Pen \[another right wing firebrand.\]

His platform consists of supporting the "great replacement," theory; largely dubbed a conspiracy theory contending that France's native population will be replaced by non-European people. He has advocated for vast reforms to France's political system.  

\[The Great Replacement Theory is an ethno-nationalist theory warning that an indigenous European—e.g., white—population is being replaced by non-European immigrants. The Great Replacement concept was popularized by French writer Renaud Camus in his 2012 book, *Le Grand Remplacement* (“The Great Replacement”). Camus postulated that black and brown immigrants were reverse-colonizing native “white” Europeans.\] 

Generally, he has a long history of controversial remarks, in his latest round of controversial remarks, Zemmour said in an interview that women earned less than men because they chose low-paying professions.  Eric Zemmour, \[formerly right-wing talk-show star\], also says Mohammed should be banned as a first name in France; Zemmour faces a trial for remarks a year ago when he called unaccompanied child migrants "thieves, killers, rapists".

Are French people getting divided just like US did in 2020; what are the chances of Zemmour, becoming leader of France in April 2022?I recently made a post on whether or not eliminating the filibuster was a politically viable solution for making the US gov more effective or not, and I got an overwhelming number of responses. 


I also read an article that offered another solution/reform plan for making the government more effective in addressing national problems, and it focused more on the president’s role. It was argued that Congress, by design, isn’t wired to solve national issues in the national interest, but the president (by design) is. 

And with 40 years of positive experience with fast track in international trade, this article argued to apply this same model across all legislation: the president would craft policy proposals and then Congress would vote up or down on them (in a specified time &amp;amp; on majoritarian basis). 

Congress would still retain its authority to pass legislation on its own, while presidents would still be able to veto them. So this reform plan would not be as constitutionally or politically offensive  as eliminating the filibuster is to some people, but the question is: what seems to be more effective?


Eliminating the filibuster [reddit post](https://www.reddit.com/r/PoliticalDiscussion/comments/rb8u9h/getting_rid_of_the_senate_filibusterthoughts/?utm_source=share&amp;amp;utm_medium=ios_app&amp;amp;utm_name=iossmf).

Fast track authority [article](https://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/world/americas-antiquated-constitution-united-states-constitution-donald-trump-electoral-college)The Supreme Court seems to be more and more controversial with every passing year. In the light of the possible Roe v Wade overturning, it’s brought up the question of whether or not the Supreme Court requires major reform. And if so, how?

Like it or not the Supreme Court is a very political institution, which perhaps isn’t the best option of what should be a non-biased court. Highly influenced by whatever random president is in charge whenever an old judge chooses to step down or kicks the bucket.

However, what system is better? What system could replace this presidential appointment? If the system should be reformed; how so?Do you think there’s a place in public schools for armed officials at any level? This could be anything from security guards that are specifically trained to be armed in school, to as lax as letting teachers carry guys with minimal oversight. I’m just curious to see if there’s any situation where public schools have armed personnel that you’d be comfortable with, with the purpose of being able to defend students and staff in the event of a school shooting.

I also want to point out that this question is not proposing this solution as a replacement for other policies that you may or may not believe will prevent school shootings. The question is only in regard to this solution proposed by some folks across the political spectrum.What are your thoughts on the government regulates misinformation, false information, or political bias in the media? If it were to happen what benefits and downsides would occur? I’m very interested in this one.EDIT: People seem to be missing the part that these alternative punishments are entirely **OPTIONAL!**

Judge Michael Cicconetti is famous for giving criminals two choices. They can either take the standard punishment for their crimes (usually jail) or take an alternative punishment that relates to their crime.

For example, when one woman skipped out on cab fare, she chose to walk the same 30 mile route that she had taken from the cab. A different individual was forced to spend one day homeless as punishment for stealing one of the red buckets from the Salvation Army.

The recidivism rate for people that choose these alternative punishments is as low as 10% (vs nearly 75% for the rest of the country) These punishments are also cheaper for the tax payer since it is cheaper to have someone perform an act of community service than it is to lock them up in jail.

Should these alternative punishments be adopted in more places around the country?

Source: https://abcnews.go.com/US/ohio-judge-unusual-punishments-people-jail/story?id=33440871Jeffersons words act of the ideas of John Locke, who put for the concept of “the consent of the governed.” If the will of the people is the foundation of government, in what ways can a government accurately discern turn the will of the people? What are Some possible problems with this principle?Tracking also shows the higher the vote share for Trump, the lower the vaccination rate. 

Tracking looked at deaths per 100,000 people in roughly 3,000 counties across the U.S. from May 2021, the point at which vaccinations widely became available. People living in counties that went 60% or higher for Trump in November 2020 had 2.7 times the death rates of those that went for Biden. Counties with an even higher share of the vote for Trump saw higher COVID-19 mortality rates.

In October, the reddest tenth of the country saw death rates that were six times higher than the bluest tenth, according to Charles Gaba, an independent health care analyst who's been[ tracking partisanship trends during the pandemic](https://acasignups.net/21/12/02/weekly-update-covid19-casedeath-rates-county-partisan-lean-vaccination-rate) and helped to review NPR's methodology. Those numbers have dropped slightly in recent weeks, Gaba says: "It's back down to around 5.5 times higher."

The analysis only looked at the geographic location of COVID-19 deaths. The exact political views of each person taken by the disease remains unknowable. But the strength of the association, combined with polling information about vaccination, strongly suggests that Republicans are being disproportionately affected.

Recent polling data that show [Republicans are now the largest group of unvaccinated individuals](https://www.kff.org/coronavirus-covid-19/poll-finding/importance-of-partisanship-predicting-vaccination-status/) in the United States, more than any other single demographic group. Polling [also shows](https://www.kff.org/coronavirus-covid-19/poll-finding/kff-covid-19-vaccine-monitor-media-and-misinformation/) that mistrust in official sources of information and exposure to misinformation, about both COVID-19 and the vaccines, run high among Republicans.

What may be the causes of disparity in COVID related death between those who supported Trump and those that who did not?McConnell wants the midterms to be a “referendum on the incumbents” by pointing out the damages a Democratic agenda has done to America. McCarthy and others believe they should lay out an agenda, such as the 1994  “Contract with America” idea that swung the Legislative branch to the GOP’s favor under Clinton. [Source Here](https://www.businessinsider.com/mcconnell-no-republican-legislative-agenda-before-2022-midterm-elections-2021-12?amp)


Which will be the better the strategy for Republicans in 2022 midterms? Attack the Democrat legislative agenda (McConnell) or laying out an agenda of their own (McCarthy)?There have been alot of reports going around that Democrats are expected to lose the House of representatives to Republicans at the 2022 midterm elections. Looking back at the history of the House of Representatives post WW2, its interesting to see that the Democrats were able to maintain control of the House from 1954 to 1994; a period of 40 years straight. Following the Republican revolution at the 1994 midterm elections, the House came under Republican control, and Republicans have since held the house for 20 out of 28 years. How were Democrats able to hold the house for so long, and why did that all change in favour of the Republicans in 1994?  This pandemic has definitely caused a political uproar on both sides of the isle. I'm curious how you think the President should be handling America in response to Covid-19. 


  What legislation would you like to see implemented or changed?


  Should there be a law mandating vaccines or no? 

   Let's talk about this in a civil manner and maybe we will contribute something worthwhile and meaningful to the discussion of this crisis.The deceased victims are Hana St. Juliana, 14; Tate Myre, 16; Madisyn Baldwin, 17, and Justin Shilling, 17; Shooter also injured eight others during the Oakland school attack.

The shooter's father purchased the gun under his own name a few days prior \[but is alleged to have intended for his 15 year old son as a gift\]; who was present at the time purchase was made.  A post on his social media later that day showed off his dad's new weapon as "my new beauty." \[per one of the  prosecutors.\] As to the mother the prosecutor asserted  Mother called pistol 'his new Christmas present' on social media.

Oakland County lead prosecutor, Karen McDonald acknowledged that charging parents in a child's alleged crime was highly unusual. Referring to the conduct of the parents prior to the shooting as egregious and that the charges were warranted for accountability and sending a message.

Law enforcement identified the weapon as a 9mm Sig Sauer SP 2022 pistol. The shooter had three, 15-round magazines. That includes 11 rounds in the handgun and magazine and another seven in his pocket when authorities apprehended the suspect. 

Just one day before the shooting, a teacher said she saw shooter searching online for ammunition, which prompted notification to the parents. The prosecutor stated: After being informed of the incident, the mother texted her son: "LOL I'm not mad at you. You have to learn not to get caught."

Additionally, at school earlier on the day of the shooting the parents were summoned to an urgent  school meeting because a teacher discovered a disturbing note. Their son had drawn a picture of a gun, a victim with a gunshot wound, bleeding and an emoji that was laughing. It also said. I need help.

At this meeting the parents did not reveal anything to the school officials about the gun and according to the prosecutor the parents were reluctant to take their son home. Hence he was allowed to keep his backpack \[which apparently had the gun\] and return to class. A video shows the shooter entering the bathroom with his backpack and emerging back out without the back pack, but with a gun, right before he began shooting students in the hallway \[at random\].

At the time charges were announced the parents whereabouts were unknown \[so could not be booked/arrested\]  Authorities in Oakland County have told US media they are currently searching for the pair after their  lawyers were unable to reach them by phone.

However, lawyers Shannon Smith and Mariell Lehman said the Crumbleys "are not fleeing from law enforcement" and had left town on the night of the shooting "for their own safety." They added the pair would return for their arraignment, which was expected to be take place later on Friday.

Although it is not uncommon for parents to be found liable for the criminal conduct of their child in torts \[civil damages\];  Criminal charges are rare and generally requires a reckless degree of negligence instead of an ordinary lack of care.

Will parents successful prosecution serve as a deterrence?I came across [this](https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2021-03-31/abortion-and-the-constitution-what-if-a-fetus-has-14th-amendment-rights) article today that discusses the small but growing legal view that fetuses should be considered persons and given constitutional rights, contrary to the longtime mainstream conservative position that the constitution "says nothing about abortion and implies nothing about abortion."  Is fetal personhood a fringe legal perspective that will never cross over into mainstream pro-life activism, or will it become the next chapter in the movement? How strong are the legal arguments for constitutional rights, and how many, if any, current justices would be open to at least some elements of the idea?* I understand that there are many different people in the U.S. with a wide variety of beliefs and opinions that they feel strongly about. What I don't understand is why it is so hard for both politicians and regular people to have civil conversations and discussions about the issues without resorting to insults, overreactions, and various other things that seem to accompany any debate about politics?
* Has it always been this way, or have things gotten steadily worse over the years? If things have gotten worse, what do you think have been the main contributors?Hello guys,

Senator Gillibrand has created legislation to create a transparent facing UFO research office after members of the US Senate Intelligence Committee received classified briefings, classified report, and were shown high-quality films and picture. One of the videos is said to have been as long as 23 minutes that left everyone in the room shocked.

The proposed legislation is going to be asking for **Unclassified Reports** from the Pentagon at a yearly basis until 2026 and has upgraded the definition of what is a UFO.

>At the same time, the amendment significantly broadens the definition of UFOs to include “[transmedium](https://www.carolinacoastonline.com/national/article_a1822934-b577-11eb-a44f-6f72df9fe196.html)” craft, which the legislation defines as “objects or devices that are observed to transition between space and the atmosphere, or between the atmosphere and bodies of water.”

The office is tasked with answering the following questions:  


1. Have UFOs interacted with Nuclear Weapons or facilities? 
2. Are we in possession of any vehicles? 
3. Are there attempts to reverse engineer? 
4. Are their attempts to capture them? 
5. Are their health effects if a person gets near a flying saucer?

How could discovering we aren't alone within the near future impact our society?  


[https://thehill.com/opinion/national-security/580698-sen-gillibrands-historic-legislation-would-revolutionize-study-of](https://thehill.com/opinion/national-security/580698-sen-gillibrands-historic-legislation-would-revolutionize-study-of)Pretty much the title. My understanding is that incumbent presidents enter reelection campaigns with a massive advantage, yet the party in control of congress frequently loses seats during the midterm. Is the president’s office held to a different standard than the legislature?

I’m not the most knowledgeable person regarding the American political process so please let me know if I’m missing anything. Thank you for any clarification!A case being considered by the Supreme Court, [American Hospital Association v. Becerra](https://www.scotusblog.com/2021/11/chevron-deference-at-stake-in-fight-over-payments-for-hospital-drugs/), has opened the door for the Supreme Court revisiting the [Chevron deference](https://ballotpedia.org/Chevron_deference_(doctrine)), which allows Congress to delegate regulatory authority to federal agencies in the executive branch.  


The doctrine is useful in that it allows agencies which can be staffed with experts to write better regulations than a Congress which has less training and expertise in these matters, but some object on the basis that it's allowing unelected bureaucrats to pass rules and regulations that affect society without public approval.

&#x200B;

Should the Supreme Court revisit the Chevron deference and change it in some manner?The supreme court has recently indicated an interest in reexamining abortion laws in the United States. As the federal government has challenged state laws restricting abortions, the federal court appears ready to side with the states. The court has even stated that reversing the Roe v. Wade decision is a possibility.

[Justices' abortion remarks: Is it time to overturn Roe?](https://apnews.com/article/abortion-justices-remarks-a080dd81bb09bf6be48454f199831fd8)

Central to the question the court is considering is if there is a stage in fetal development when the fetus has rights and abortion should become illegal. The court appears ready to throw out the previously accepted standard of fetal viability.

Democrats have been quick to seize on the issue, criticizing the court as partisan and its views as a violation of women's rights. In a post-Trump political landscape, some Democrats see the issue of abortion as an opportunity to appeal to their base and save the Democratic party's apparently floundering popular approval.

However, public sentiment on abortion has begun to sour. A 2021 poll conducted by the AP-NORC indicates that Americans are *less* likely to support abortion in June of 2021 than they were in December of 2017.

[Public Holds Nuanced Views about Access to Legal Abortion](https://apnorc.org/projects/public-holds-nuanced-views-about-access-to-legal-abortion/)

The study showed that belief that abortion should be legal in all or most cases fell from 64% to 57%. The belief that abortion should be illegal in all or most cases rose from 36% to 43%.

The study also indicates that just 15% of Americans believe that abortion in the second trimester should always be legal. The support for "always legal" drops even further to 8% for the third trimester.

Democrats have recently faced a spate of internal conflict over ideological purity. Debates over whether bills did enough or too much have divided the party that united to oust a common enemy, Trump, in 2020. The party appears to be caught between moderates fighting for broad appeal and progressives working to change the system.

With Americans apparently souring on abortion rights, would a pro-choice rallying cry help, or hurt democratic efforts to win public approval and secure seats in upcoming elections? Will American suburbanites and moderates who voted against trump in 2020 support a pro-choice democratic party platform?Massachusetts governor Charlie Baker, a moderate Republican and one of the most popular governors in the country, has said that he will not be running for reelection in 2022. His lieutenent governor Karyn Polito has similarly indicated that she will not run for governor in 2022.

Announced candidates for the 2022 race include on the Republican side Trump Massachusetts campaign chair Geoff Diehl who has declared his intention to run in the Republican primary and no other major candidates so far. For the Democrats former Berkshire state senator Ben Downing, Boston state senator Sonia Chang Diaz, and political science professor Danielle Allen have each announced their campaigns for governor. Massachusetts Attorney General Maura Healey and Secretaty of Labor Marty Walsh have also been rumored to be considering entering the race but so far have not made any announcements. Additionally it is speculated that Shiva Ayyadurai may enter the race either in the Republican primary or as an independent. 

How does the exit of Baker help or hinder the chances of these candidates and how do you think this will this affect the race moving forward?* Recent polls such as [this one](https://thehill.com/homenews/administration/583736-one-half-of-young-americans-in-new-poll-say-democracy-in-us-is-either) indicate that a growing number of people are losing their trust in the integrity and fairness of democracy and elections in the United States. I often read about people and politicians trying to push for various democratic and voting reforms, but what are some specific reforms that could help improve the people's trust, and why? 
* Examples-Electoral college reform, campaign finance, term limits, etc.* A big debate that I tend to see a lot is about the Electoral College and whether or not it should be replaced with a popular voting system instead. This way, instead of the President being decided by whoever gets the most electoral votes, it would be decided by whoever gets the most individual votes from the people.
* This would no doubt have a significant impact on the future of the U.S., as the last two Republican presidents were elected despite the fact that they did not win the popular vote.
* Proponents argue that a popular voting system is more fair because it corresponds to what the majority of the people want, but opponents argue that it is unfair to smaller states that don't have as many people living in them as bigger states.
* If someone or a group of people decided to try and change the voting system from an Electoral College one to a Popular one, what are the various ways that they could go about doing it?In 2 hours of oral arguments before the Supreme Court and questions by the justices the divisions amongst the justices and their leanings became very obvious. The Mississippi case before the court at issue  \[Dobbs v. Jackson\]  is where a 2018 law would ban abortions after 15 weeks of pregnancy, well before viability \[the current national holding\].

The Supreme Court has never allowed states to ban abortion on the merits before the point at roughly 24 weeks when a fetus can survive outside the womb. \[A Texas case, limited to state of Texas with an earlier ban on abortion of six weeks in a 5-4 vote in September, on procedural grounds, allowed the Texas law to stand temporarily, was heard on the merits this November 1, 2021; the court has yet to issue a ruling on that case.\]

In 1992, the court, asked to reconsider Roe, ditched the trimester approach but kept the viability standard, though it shortened it from about 28 weeks to about 24 weeks. It said the new standard should be on whether a regulation puts an "undue burden" on a woman seeking an abortion. That phrase has been litigated over ever since.

Based on the justices questioning in the Dobbs case, all six conservative justices appeared in favor of upholding the Mississippi law and at least 5 also appeared to go so far as to overrule Roe and Casey. \[Kavanagh had assured Susan Collins that Roe was law of the land and that he would not overturn Roe, he seems to have been having second thoughts now.\]

Both parties before the court, when questioned seems to tell the Supreme Court there’s no middle ground. The justices can either reaffirm the constitutional right to an abortion or wipe it away altogether. \[Leaving it to the states to do so as they please.\]

After Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg’s death last year and her replacement by Justice Amy Coney Barrett, the third of Trump’s appointees, the court said it would take up the case.

Trump had pledged to appoint “pro-life justices” and predicted they would lead the way in overturning the abortion rulings. Only one justice, Clarence Thomas, has publicly called for Roe to be overruled.

A ruling that overturned Roe and the 1992 case of Casey would lead to outright bans or severe restrictions on abortion in 26 states, [**according to the Guttmacher Institute**](https://states.guttmacher.org/), a research organization that supports abortion rights.

Is the court likely to curtail women's right or choices?

Edited: Typo Stare Decisis * Given that she is the current VP, a lot of people would probably say that Kamala Harris would be an obvious candidate. However, while I agree that the chances of her running are decent, I am not so sure about her chances of actually winning, as I seem to read a lot of comments by people from all sides of the political spectrum that don't seem to like her very much.
* Are there any current up-and-coming Democrats that you think would have a good shot?From looking at the election results, it seems that there is a very clear divide here, but what confuses me is that it is completely switched around from what I'm used to here in Norway.

Here in Norway, out biggest city (Oslo) has historically been a center-right stronghold and most urban areas on the west and south of the country are the decisively biggest contributors to the Right party, Progress party and the Christian-People-Party. (Trondheim is probably the biggest outlier)  
On the other side, basically all of North-Norway and the middle of our country almost always vote for the Labour party, Agrarian party or the Socialist party. These areas are mostly small, rural and full of mountains. 

I think the biggest reason is that our Labour Party has traditionally built up the country and provided jobs over all of Norway after world war 2, and that both the socialist party and the agrarian party are very much against centralisation with bigger budgets for subsidies to these areas.

I wonder why is is so different in the US, where the democrats seem to win almost all of the big cities, while the republicans do the opposite.

Is it something to do with the differences between the political parties (norwegian left and right vs american left and right), differences in the citizens, differences in voting systems, historically different roles, different political issues or something else entirely?

Please enlighten meI recently listened to [this](https://anchor.fm/moedt/episodes/Would-it-be-ethically-justifiable-to-make-the-covid-vaccine-mandatory-eolf9k) podcast discussing the morality of compulsory vaccinations, which inspired this question. Link provided as per Rule 2.

Covid has had a substantial affect on the world in the last couple of years. With a new, more infectious "Variant of Interest" (omicron) \[defined by WHO as having one or more of the following characteristics;  

* increase in transmissibility or detrimental change in COVID-19 epidemiology; OR
* increase in virulence or change in clinical disease presentation; OR
* decrease in effectiveness of public health and social measures or available diagnostics, vaccines, therapeutics\]

a question arises pertaining to the ethics of mandated vaccination.

Governments over the world had/have implemented legal mandates in response to the Covid virus, ranging from businesses being shut down to restricted travel, to required testing, to mandated rent reductions while people could not travel to work.

In a similar vain, subnational organisations, such as schools and hospitals, have mandated that their students and employees respectively, receive a vaccination in order to physically attend.

Recently, Austria has become the first European country to make receiving a vaccine mandatory (with medical exemptions) on pain of administrative fines and potentially prison time if the fines are not paid. ([Link](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/nov/19/austria-plans-compulsory-covid-vaccination-for-all) as per Rule 2.)

Is it ethically justifiable for a government to make people undergo medical procedures under threat of fine or prison, if it is in the name of reducing casualties?

Is such a mandate necessary in countries with high vaccination rates?

Are there better ways to ensure wider immunisation than punitive measures?

Could this be the beginning of a trend where personal liberties are sacrificed for the greater good, leading to a more collectivist West, or is Covid exceptional, not sufficing as a predictor for broader societal change?Is Macau's gambling syndicates simply out of control and Mainland China reigning in these off the book operations? Or is this another instance of China tightening it's grip on sectors and geographies formerly in its periphery? I am not a Macau/China follower at all so this is not a rhetorical question. 

[https://www.yahoo.com/finance/news/macau-casino-stocks-lose-almost-093000687.html](https://www.yahoo.com/finance/news/macau-casino-stocks-lose-almost-093000687.html)* As a kid, I assumed that the later that someone is born, the more liberal they tend to be, meaning that the population would gradually get more liberal as time goes on. However, now I am not so sure. Is there any data or research that shows how the the population of the U.S. has changed in regards to getting more conservative or liberal? If so, what has it shown, and do you believe that these trends will continue?So we know there are bonafide racial gaps in education, wealth and income in the US. We know they exist. Why they exist or if we should care are separate debates. 

https://www.brookings.edu/essay/homeownership-racial-segregation-and-policies-for-racial-wealth-equity/

It’s fair enough to say “equal opportunity doesn’t mean equal outcome” Great. But the gaps are not just flukes, they’ve been this way for long before Civil Rights and Voting Rights Acts. There must be an explanation.

Tennessee just passed a law that’s supposed to target teaching Critical Race Theory ideas in school. They have these 14 rules. Assuming that opponents of CRT endorse most of these rules. 

Let’s check out the rules:

a. One (1) race or sex is inherently superior to another race or sex;

b. An individual, by virtue of the individual’s race or sex, is inherently privileged, racist, sexist, or oppressive, whether consciously or subconsciously;

c. An individual should be discriminated against or receive adverse treatment because of the individual’s race or sex;

d. An individual’s moral character is determined by the individual’s race or sex;

e. An individual, by virtue of the individual’s race or sex, bears responsibility for actions committed in the past by other members of the same race or sex;

f. An individual should feel discomfort, guilt, anguish, or another form of psychological distress solely because of the individual’s race or sex;

g. A meritocracy is inherently racist or sexist, or designed by a particular race or sex to oppress members of another race or sex;

h. This state or the United States is fundamentally or irredeemably racist or sexist;

i. Promoting or advocating the violent overthrow of the United States government;

j. Promoting division between, or resentment of, a race, sex, religion, creed, nonviolent political affiliation, social class, or class of people;

k. Ascribing character traits, values, moral or ethical codes, privileges, or beliefs to a race or sex, or to an individual because of the individual’s race or sex;

l. The rule of law does not exist, but instead is series of power relationships and struggles among racial or other groups;

m. All Americans are not created equal and are not endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights, including, life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; or

n. Governments should deny to any person within the government’s jurisdiction the equal protection of the law.

These 14 rules say that we cant explain  these gaps are caused by “inherent privilege based on race”.

But we also can’t “ascribe traits, values, moral or ethical codes to a race or sex” 

So we can’t say a racial gap is there for cultural reasons either. We can’t say a race acts a certain way. 

How would you explain the gaps without breaking these 14 rules? 

What’s a good way to explain these very real racial gaps without using CRT?* I know that there is a lot of controversy over the drawing of districts for a variety of state and even local elections, with many claiming that the maps that are drawn are purposely created to give one party an unfair advantage over the other.
* If this is true, what do you think is the fairest way for election districts to be drawn, and why?
* On a similar note, I’m wondering if someone could explain to me what exactly the guidelines and process is for drawing electoral maps, because whenever I look at a state’s district map, it looks like a lot of them are basically just drawn randomly. What am I missing here?After watching this [interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rMsKLVmZJK8&t=35&ab_channel=RichRoll) regarding the Forward Party. It's became clear that they are first working on systemic changes before the 2024 Presidential Election.

These are some of the Key points:

1. The Forward Party alongside other third parties are working on volunteer efforts to obtain the necessary signatures to get Ranked Choice Voting and Open Primaries in the 2022 Election in 24 states.
2. Andrew Yang needs to obtain 15% polling to get on the Presidential Debate Stage. Andrew is currently polling at 5%.
3. The first candidate to obtain 51%  the votes will win each state. Andrew has mentioned he doesn't need to be first choice for Republican or Democrat Voters, he can be their second or third choice.
4. [62% of Americans want a Third Party.](https://thehill.com/blogs/blog-briefing-room/news/538889-62-percent-say-third-political-party-is-needed-in-us)
5. [44% of Americans are independents.](https://news.gallup.com/poll/15370/party-affiliation.aspx)
6. [40%+ of Andrew Yang supporters](https://www.newsweek.com/over-40-andrew-yang-supporters-refuse-support-democratic-nominee-that-isnt-him-poll-shows-1485458) are not Democrats according to Yang.

Forward Party Platform:

1. Universal Basic Income
2. Universal Healthcare
3. Transitioning from GDP to the American Scorecard.
4. Ranked Choice Voting and Open Primaries

How would the Presidential Election be impacted if a third party candidate with Name Recognition, a solid platform, and ranked choice voting impact the Presidential Election?As of right now, it looks like there won't be. If Trump runs (and it seems that he will) then it's very unlikely that he'll face serious opposition. If Biden runs (and it also seems he will) then he should easily secure the nomination even if someone from the Left challenges him. 

It seems that the health of Trump and Biden is the only thing that can cause a situation in which we will have primaries. Does anyone agree with this or do you think we'll have primaries in one or both parties?After Dems stripped MTG and Gosar of committee assignments several Republicans have hinted on a potential "payback" if they were to retake control of the House after the midterm elections in 2022.

Now, unless something unforeseen were to happen, a republican takeover seems inevitable given the already slim majority Democrats hold.

My question is: what are the odds that the  republican attitude ends up being just rhetoric aimed to win elections, and that they will "settle down" after that is accomplished and become more cooperative?
Or are they fully bent on retaliation and will embark on a "revenge tour"?

Because if that was the case, it could potentially turn the House into a complete circus: think a committee investigating Fauci or ties between Dems and BLM or antifa, or a weekly impeachment of Biden or censuring of democratic colleagues for the slightest of reasons etc... 

Is there any sign or historical evidence that they would take a more moderate approach once in control of the House?Liz Cheney, the GOP Congresswoman from Wyoming's At-large District (and the daughter of former VP Dick Cheney) is one of the most high-profile Republicans to have voted to impeach former President Donald Trump following the January 6th Capitol Insurrection. [Trump has since endorsed one of Cheney's four challengers, Harriet Hageman](https://apnews.com/article/donald-trump-campaigns-wyoming-impeachments-election-2020-46b4ee6613388e6c74b894409f059058) ahead of the August 16th, 2022 Republican primary, and prominent GOP donors such as [Peter Theil have followed suit](https://www.politico.com/news/2021/10/13/liz-cheney-trump-fundraisers-515857). Meanwhile, traditional Republican leaders like [Mitt Romney and former President George W. Bush have expressed their support for Cheney](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-09-22/bush-sides-with-cheney-in-her-re-election-bid-opposed-by-trump).

Given the extraordinary influence of Trump in the current Republican Party, can Cheney survive next year's primary (and subsequent general) election? If so, is she likely to be successful in her efforts?I'm a student in storytelling (In Belgium, sorry for any spelling mistakes), 

last class I accidentaly started a debate about the showing of pictures or illustrations when telling about the Holocaust (or other genocides). 

What position do you want to take in this debate? 

Do you think illustration does justice to the grueling things that happened? Will it maybe take away from how it really was in the concentration camps? 

If you use pictures, is it disrespectful towards de victims and their families? Is it a violation to show the dead people? 

Or is your opinion that you can't talk about subjects like this because you weren't there?I recently read [this](https://www.businessinsider.com/trump-biden-counties-covid-death-rate-3-times-higher-vaccines-2021-11) article and was wondering what everyone thought on how covid deaths would effect the U.S. political landscape moving forward.The entire south was a one party region from the end of reconstruction till the civil rights movement. However Democrats continued to dominate in state elections from the 70s to the 90s. What was the reason for this?       

&nbsp;

After Republicans won in Arkansas in 1966, Republicans held the governorship just 2 years from 1971 to 1996. In Mississippi Democrats didn't lose the governorship until 1992 and in Georgia until 2003. How did they continue to dominate state politics decades after the civil rights movement?This is not talking about state senators but rather representatives from the house.

In 1929, Congress capped the house’s size at 435. The 1930 census stated 122,775,046 citizens. Meaning each Representative would (evenly) represent 282,241 people.

Now there are about 333,000,000 citizens in the US. Meaning at 435, each Representative would (evenly) represent 765,517 people. About 2.7x more than what it did in 1929.

The original 1788/89 house had 59 seats. The US had about 4~ million people then. Meaning each Representative represented about 67,796 people. 

If that trend has continued to today, there would be a 4,912 person House of Representatives. If the 1929 trend had continued today, there would be a 1180 person House of Representatives.

How many representatives should be in the house? What are some problems with a very big VS very small house? How many people should each Representative represent?9/11 brought on the patriot act which allowed the government to take a step further in surveillance. COVID regulations have been evolving to allow the government to do more as well (such as OSHA mandates) but is mostly leaving power to the states. What do you think?An article from the New York Times titled "Russian Disinformation Targets Vaccines and the Biden Administration" https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08/05/us/politics/covid-vaccines-russian-disinformation.html mentions that both the Chinese and the Russian governments are spreading false information about the vaccine with the goal of getting less people in the US to take the vaccine.

I'm wondering what the Biden administration has done about this if anything and what the Biden administration could do about this.Michelle Grisham, Governor of New Mexico stated she thinks three doses should be considered fully vaccinated, and was exploring implementing some general mandate \[which currently does not have any sort of mandates\].  The Governor of Connecticut, Ned Lamont, similarly said that he thinks booster shots are needed to qualify a person as fully vaccinated.

Amesh Adalja, a senior scholar at the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, said the debate over boosters and changing what it means to be fully vaccinated just further obscures the primary purpose of the coronavirus vaccines.

"It's first and second doses that change the trajectory of the pandemic, that protect hospital capacity. It's not boosters. Our hospitals are not getting pressure from people who are fully vaccinated and having breakthrough infections." 

CDC Director said during a recent White House briefing explained:  The definition of fully vaccinated is two doses of a Moderna or a Pfizer vaccine, as well as one dose of a J&J vaccine."  This week, Fauci said: the definition may change.

Some people are starting to wonder if any of us will ever be considered fully vaccinated; is that even possible with variants emerging \[like the recent South African variant\] the already existing division and with this changing definitions?Looking back on the last two years, it *feels* like we're in an actual world war: heavy casualties, front lines, supply chain disruption, shortage of common supplies (computer chips and food, not just toilet paper). While it is completely different from an armed conflict, the result seems eerily similar. Has anyone tried to frame their public policy in the context of a global conflict?

E.g. Lockdown vs no-lockdown would be weighed as "martial law" vs "acceptable loss of life" 
Or
Mask-mandate or no would be as whether Covid represents a "clear and present danger"
Or
War fatigue as whether or not to continue sending troops and supplies to the front lines

I was just thinking that it would be nice if we could somehow apply the wisdom of the past (e.g. Sun Tzu's "Art of War") towards our present predicament.I’ve heard a lot of talk of ending the filibuster to push voting rights reform through. My question is, what does that do? Could the other party just reverse it if they take back the House/Senate/White House?Travis McMichael \[man who shot a black jogger Ahmaud Arbery\], of all counts, his son  Gregory of 7 out of 8 counts including felony murder; William Bryan 6 out of 8, including Felony murder.

There were initially no arrests made of any of the three who now stand convicted of murder; they were not charged until months later. One of the two DAs who initially handled the case and did not bring charges is now herself facing felony charges.

The former Georgia prosecutor \[Jackie Johnson\], was indicted recently on misconduct charges alleging she used her position to shield the men who chased and killed Ahmaud Arbery from being charged with crimes immediately after the shootings. Attorney is now charged with a felony count of violating her oath of office and hindering a law enforcement officer, a misdemeanor.

Another prosecutor involved initially \[Barnhill\], later recused himself as well, after Arbery's family learned his son worked for Johnson as an assistant prosecutor. But before he stepped aside, Barnhill wrote a letter to a Glynn County police captain saying the McMichaels "were following, in 'hot pursuit,' a burglary suspect, with solid first hand probable cause, in their neighborhood, and asking/ telling him to stop."

With this backdrop, a racially mixed crowd of people outside the court house cheered the lead prosecutor and the jury for courage and doing the right thing. Separately, the federal government is bringing charges against the three this coming February for violation of the black jogger's civil rights.

Because of the racial undertones of this case, an acquittal would likely have further divided this country; Georgia is calm today. Will the guilty verdicts composed of predominantly white jury go a long way in soothing the current racial divide?I know Americans almost always blame high gas prices on whoever is the sitting president. It's extremely common amongst my Republican friends to blame Biden for the high gas/oil prices, but I haven't really heard of any policies he's implemented that can be blamed for the increase in prices. 

I was looking at the 5Y chart [here](https://tradingeconomics.com/united-states/crude-oil-production) and saw that US oil production did drop off in 2020, but most of what I've read has attributed that to the Coronavirus pandemic and falling oil demand. Oil demand dropped significantly so oil prices dropped off a cliff. Thus, there was less incentive for oil producers in the US (and around the world) to continue producing high volumes of oil, so they cut back. Obviously, demand came roaring back, leading to an increase in prices. I know most of the oil we use is imported, but is there any new policy which hurts existing US oil production?

Since the cost of energy has been highly politicized lately, has there been any specific policy that can be blamed or is it fair to say this is simply supply/demand at work?The numerous finding of liability is based on Virginia state statutes on multiple counts for conspiracy; seeking compensatory and punitive damages.  Liability was found on all state counts, but deadlocked on two federal conspiracy count charges over whether organizers conspired to commit racially motivated violence or whether they had knowledge of it and failed to prevent it \[under Federal civil statute known as the KKK Act.\]

The nonprofit Integrity First for America backed the plaintiffs in the lawsuit.  Plaintiffs are nine current and former Charlottesville residents who were injured during the rally. 

 Almost half of the damages awarded by the jury was against Fields \[driver that ran his car into crowd\], Kessler, an organizer, white supremacists Spencer, Anglin, Heimbach and some others. 

 Lawyers for the plaintiffs had a stated goal \[among others\] to diminish the ability of white supremacists to spread their message and influence by draining them financially.

 Spencer, the Alt Right leader who represented himself called the trial a “weapon against free speech.” 

The NAACP Legal Defense Fund issued a statement thanking the nonprofit Integrity First for America for representing the plaintiffs.   [https://www.naacpldf.org/wp-content/uploads/11.23.2021-Charlottesville-Trial-Statement-FINAL.pdf](https://www.naacpldf.org/wp-content/uploads/11.23.2021-Charlottesville-Trial-Statement-FINAL.pdf)

Is there a danger now for some nonviolent groups that rally for social justice, which has been occasionally known to get out of hand, though violence has never been their stated purpose?According to [2017 statistics](https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/ohim/onh00/onh2p11.htm), there is roughly one mile of urban road in the United States for every 220 people in metropolitan areas with over 50,000 people, and roughly one mile of freeway for every 8170 people. There are similar statistics for water systems, electrical wire, waste water pipes, and more.

How do we pay for these?  By and large, we don't.

We defer the costs, treat the infrastructure as an asset, and eschew paying the bill when maintenance comes up.  The [Volkner Alliance in 2017](https://www.volckeralliance.org/sites/default/files/attachments/Americas%20Trillion-Dollar%20Repair%20Bill%20-%20Capital%20Budgeting%20and%20the%20Disclosure%20of%20State%20Infrastructure%20Needs.pdf) found that America had a total investment need of $4.6T and a $2.6T funding gap.

The largest contributor to this is indeed transportation, and in specific cars.  For instance, Volkner's report included that Michigan's 21st Century Infrastructure Commission's finding that the state had an annual $4.2B investment gap, with $2.7B of that in transportation alone. In 2014, less than half (44 percent) of all highway funding came from fees and taxes paid by motorists according to the DOT's [biennial report.](https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/policy/23cpr/)  

The issue is simple.  The median American household makes $67,521, contributing roughly $2000 to states, counties, and municipalities.  However, they live in an a sprawl that limits productive space and requires substantial infrastructure, which is not being properly maintained.  

[By my napkin math] the cost to resurface our urban roads and freeways every 10 years is $240B per year, or roughly $2700 per household, more than our entire non-federal tax contribution.  This leaves out other road work, bridge repair, water system maintenance, waste water treatment plants, and other necessary maintenance items which may more than double that number.  

Tripling the median local tax burden is simply out of the question, but how else should America pay for its urban sprawl or work towards a less crushing burden?Last year, practically no one knew who Glenn Youngkin was. Then, a year later, he's governor of Virginia. That of course isn't news to any of you in the U.S. and is not what this post is about. This may be a wildly inaccurate observation of mine, but I actually think that in next year's elections, I can see the GOP nominating several unknowns who can distance themselves from Trump as a way to take back the House and Senate and take back all the governorships they lost 3 years ago. If an unknown like Youngkin can do it, anybody could. But I'd like to know what you think about all this. Could the GOP rely on unsung figures to carry themselves to victory?* Why don’t people get mad at the other party for slowing things down?
* Also, if Presidents have ever blamed the opposing party as to why they are struggling to accomplish things, how has that worked out for them?I've heard a lot of discussion about political postmodernist circles having criticisms of Marxism for being a strictly modern institution that should be left in the past. Why is this conclusion come to, how much of Marxism do postmodernists disagree with, and what do they propose as the ideals to go forward in the future in the stead of Marxism?Hi! I'm from Spain, and politicians are talking a lot about mental health in the Parlament, but the solutions they propose are the same old speech. What actions do you think are best to address the serious problem of mental health?* Such as the U.S., U.K., China, Canada, France, etc.?
* I imagine that many of them will issue statements condemning the invasion of it did happen, but how likely is it that they will go any further than that?
* And if certain countries do go further, how far do you think they will be willing to go?When asking this question, I have in mind that economic theory, for example, is heavily based on mathematics. Another example is chemistry, which has many of its principles rooted in physics. But what is the equivalent relationship for political science? Some fields I can think of that could potentially answer this question are history, sociology, psychology, and philosophy.The case was decided unanimously by a group of jurors but is still a lightening rod for division.  Some claim that it will result in increased "vigilantism" and put the lives of minorities at risk.  Others claim that it is a vindication for self-defense and property rights.  Still others claim that it was the city's fault for abdicating their responsibility to protect business owners.  I think we call agree that the loss of life is tragic.  Does this case change anything going forward?  Who is ultimately responsible for this loss of life?A lot of people believe that the old deduction cap of $80k is too high, and others believe the 10k cap is too low. There have been discussions on what a good middle ground or limitations would be. 

SALT cap deductions going up are not going to help the most poor people in the country, opponents say, and believe government money should go to the most poor. The middle class in their argument is well enough off to not need more aid. 

Student loan forgiveness is a highly desired policy by progressives. But data suggests this would also be helping those who are more well off versus not:

https://www.northeastern.edu/bachelors-completion/news/average-salary-by-education-level/

This graphic is sourced with data from the US Bureau of Labor statistics. For those with a high school diploma as their highest level of education, the median salary is $38,792 and 3.7% unemployment. A bachelor's degree in comparison has a median salary of $64,896 and 2.2% unemployment. 

This data would suggest that student loan forgiveness would be benefiting the middle class, and not the most poor people in the country. 

Is this comparison well-warranted and the two very similar policies economically, or is there a significant difference that would suggest instead one of the policies helps the poorer parts of the country far more than the other? 

Interestingly, it seems most politicians are in favor of one, but not the other, despite the surface level similarities.An interesting article popped up on The Atlantic basically discussing how the SALT tax cuts advocated by moderate Democrats from deep blue states could end up being a political poison pill for the party:  [https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2021/11/salt-tax-cut-democrats-build-back-better/620754/](https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2021/11/salt-tax-cut-democrats-build-back-better/620754/).

SALT tax deductions, originally capped at $80,000, were initially reduced by the Trump Administration's Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA) of 2017 to a value of $10,000 as a means of partially funding their tax cuts - and arguably, also to punish wealthy liberals in deep blue states that disapprove of the Trump Administration. Therefore, moderate Congressional Democrats - particularly those representing wealthy suburban areas in states like NY, NJ, CA etc. - have pushed to repeal the TCJA's SALT tax deductions to their original value as part of the Build-Back-Better reconciliation bill. This has proven deeply unpopular to progressives i.e. Sen. Sanders (D-VT). Currently, Sen. Sanders (D-VT) and Sen. Menendez (D-NJ) are considering incorporating a family income-cap between $400,000-500,000 for SALT tax deduction eligibility. That being said, Speaker Pelosi (D-CA) has taken painful steps the past several months in convincing her caucus that she would not compel them to vote for legislation that would have no chance of passing in the Senate, and thus the SALT tax cuts were likely critical towards securing the votes of moderate Democrats in the narrowly-passed BBB bill in the House.

**Therefore, what would the impact of repealing the SALT tax deductions be on voters' impression of the Democratic Party and their performance in the 2022 midterms?**

\-As an implicit question, it also remains to be seen whether the SALT tax cuts could be successfully removed from the bill.

**Some key points of the SALT tax cuts** (from The Atlantic and NYT - [https://www.nytimes.com/2021/11/18/us/politics/salt-tax-deduction-democrats.html](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/11/18/us/politics/salt-tax-deduction-democrats.html)):

\-The CBO estimated funding the repeal of the SALT tax deductions would increase the deficit by roughly $270B.

\-"Households making several million dollars a year “could get a $25,900 tax cut,” [wrote](https://www.cbpp.org/blog/senate-should-improve-salt-provision-in-house-bbb-bill) Chuck Marr of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a liberal think tank." - The Atlantic

\- According to the nonpartisan [Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget](https://www.crfb.org/blogs/two-thirds-millionaires-get-tax-cut-under-build-back-better-due-salt-relief),  a family of four in Washington making $1 million per year would receive  10 times as much tax relief next year from expanding the state and  local tax deduction as a middle-class family would receive from another  provision in the social policy package, an expansion of the child tax  credit.  - NYT

**Points for consideration:**

\-The SALT tax deductions may prove to be especially popular in wealthy suburban areas in VA, NJ, NY, CT, CA etc. where Democrats were routed in the recent November elections, and would provide key cover for vulnerable moderate Democrats to hold on to their seats.

\-Passing tax cuts for the wealthy, even if not exactly for the ultra-wealthy, does tarnish the Democratic Party's image in advocating for the working class and reducing income inequality - not to mention their chastisement of Trump's tax cuts for the rich.

\-Additional tax cuts in a period of massive economic inflation are likely to worsen the situation, making it difficult for Democrats to push a narrative of a robust economic recovery come November 2022. Not to mention, it worsens the national debt by incurring negative deficits on the BBB bill.

\-The SALT tax deductions, even while providing disproportionate benefit to wealthier households ($500,000+), would still bring noticeable relief to relatively lower but still high income earners ($100,000+) in high CoL areas.of course i’m not suggesting a totalitarian dictatorship, but in terms of political stability and efficiency, could a political system with a hybrid model where a (ideally) trustworthy government with the people’s mandate rule more effectively if it has authoritarian characteristics?What would be the impact of removing the executive's ability to appoint heads of various departments within the government, instead allowing for department leadership to be elected directly from within? 

A similar thing has been proposed before with regards to the judiciary and the supreme Court where each federal circuit could directly elect for a vacancy and tie the supreme Court to the federal districts.  

Are there any significant downsides to this?The title says it all. 

Right now it seems clear to me that DeSantis is looking to possibly split the GOP ticket in 2024. If anything it's highly likely that Trump and DeSantis are going to be the major candidates on the GOP side in 2024. 

Right now it's likely that Trump is going to be the presumptive nominee, but conservative voters are warming to DeSantis. So things can change. 

My questions are:
1. What are the chances DeSantis manages to win the nominee in 2024?
2. What are the chances that Trump or DeSantis wins against the Democrat in 2024?
3. Do you believe GOP voters will all fall in line behind DeSantis if Trump loses?
4. What do you think will happen if Trump does lose the primary (considering his actions in 2020)?
5. What are the chances of a split GOP ticket? Young people are heavily underrepresented in parliament. UK Parliament members and EU parliament members average at 53 and Congress averages 57 years with the Senate averaging 63 years. Globally, 6% of politicians are younger than 35, and fewer than 2% are younger than 30.

It could be argued that this results in political short-sightedness. As a result some have argued for Youth Quotas, where for instance 20% of all seats would be occupied by those under 30.

What are your general thoughts on such as proposal?

Do you feel that youth quotas are anti-democratic?

Can they help to represent a group who are massively under-represented in parliament?

Would they result in increased stigma for these politicians?

Should youth quotas be implemented?

Or do you have any other thoughts on youth quotas.I was reading this article and that's basically what it says. It paints a bleak/grim picture for the Democrats' House majority. If gerrymandering was ended at the Federal level before the midterm elections would this help?

https://www.nytimes.com/2021/11/15/us/politics/republicans-2022-redistricting-maps.htmlObviously, this has zero chance of happening.  I still think it is an interesting thing to think about.

Suppose that within each state, congressional districts were divided up by taking the voting-age population distribution by age, and dividing up the electorate into equal parts based on age brackets.   So no more geographical congressional districts, no more gerrymandering.  

So to give an example, lets say that based on existing population-based formula, a state gets 4 members in Congress.   Instead of 4 geographical congressional districts, it was like:

Seat 1 represents 18-24yr olds

Seat 2 represents 25-35yr olds

Seat 3 represents 36-50yr olds

Seat 4 represents 51+ year olds

In this example we're stipulating that each of those age brackets contains an equal number of people in that state, based on the census or whatever.

A person's age on the day of the election is what determines what race they are voting for.

Lets also assume that whatever practical, logistical hurdles that might impede the implementation of this in the real world would be solved.

**How do you think this would change elections?**  For example, it might help reduce the gerontocracy (how many 18-24yr old districts are going to elect a 75 year old as their representative)

**How do you think this would change policy?**   What sorts of issues would rise or lower in importance?  Would there be in changes to what could or couldn't get done, or the policy platforms of the major parties?The CBO released its much-awaited score for Joe Biden's "Build Back Better" bill that has stalled in the Senate: https://www.cbo.gov/publication/57627.

The score estimates a cost of $367 billion total, over the period from 2022 - 2031. It does not account for additional revenue generated by IRS enforcement, which it estimated at $127 billion (net) through 2031, for a roughly $240 billion total cost over the next ten years.

The White House, in contract, projects the IRS enforcement measures to generate $400 billion, which would fully pay for the BBB bill.

Previously, Manchin and other Senate moderates have said they wanted to see a CBO score before passing. Manchin specifically has intimated that he'd like the bill to be fully paid for.

Reports are there may be a vote on the bill tonight: https://twitter.com/bresreports/status/1461457715239309322.

What are the impacts on the national discourse and the bill's potential to pass? Any qualms with the CBO's calculation?

EDIT: Evidently the price tag includes the $80 billion of IRS enforcement funding, but not the projected revenue, so the CBO's projected cost is about $160 billion over ten years.Recently with all of the discussion about affirmative action programs and merit-based awards, titles, and honors being discussed as part of the current political climate in America, I seem to notice something interesting.

There seems to be a whole controversy over positions and titles being given to people based on "performance vs minority status" to seems to mirror the whole "salvation through good works vs salvation through grace". On one side, there are those who argue that people who work hard professionally, academically, or personally deserve to get the awards and positions they apply for. Then there are those who argue that due to what some call "structural inequalities", those people don't have the same opportunities to succeed as someone and therefore their minority status should be considered in employment to "level the playing field".

This seems to mirror the salvation through works or grace argument. Are people saved by their good works, or are people saved by the grace of a higher power, regardless of effort?The anime video was violent in nature, depicted AOC and Biden along with immigrants who were presented as monsters. Republicans minimized it as cartoonish and stylized \[one claiming anime is very popular in Japan (and that he even speaks Japanese)\]. Others on the Republican side argued the standards for removal have become lopsided and that Democrats will face retaliation when they take over the House. They urged Republicans to vote against censure and committee removal.  Adam Kinzinger and Liz Cheney joined Democrats in passing the Resolution. 

Democrats justified the move as necessary for setting a standard of behavior for members of Congress who have in recent months received an elevated number of threats to their safety and in the aftermath of the Jan. 6 attack on the U.S. Capitol that left lawmakers fleeing in fear for their lives.

"Is there no decorum around here anymore?" House Rules Committee Chairman Jim McGovern, a Massachusetts Democrat, asked, opening a hearing on the Gosar measure. "Is there no decency? Congresswoman Ocasio-Cortez has to pay for her own security, and the threats that she gets come as a result of behavior like we have seen with Mr. Gosar."

Rep. Gosar would be the first member of the House to face the punishment since Democrat Rep. Charles B. Rangel (D-NY) in 2010 over improper solicitation of funds. According to the House of Representatives website, more than two dozen members have been censured since 1832.

Is this censure appropriate and justified? Was the anime over the top? Can it come back to haunt Democrats?

[https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/21111517-gosar-censure](https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/21111517-gosar-censure)Following criticism that the 2008 rescue packages were too narrowly focused on the wealthy, the 2021 American Rescue Plan (along with its 2020 predecessor the CARES Act), included direct cash payments to the bottom \~80% of the income distribution. (The rest of this post focuses on the economic side of these rescue packages, since most recessions are not caused by contagious diseases.)

1) Conservatives have criticized the stimulus checks and enhanced unemployment benefits for fueling inflation, fueling labor shortages, and being inefficient & wasteful spending, as many who weren’t financially impacted by Covid received stimulus checks. Liberals disagree with these arguments, instead believing these payments were much-needed lifelines for struggling families. **What do you think were the lessons learned, and how would rescue packages for future recessions change as a result?**

2) **Do you think Joe Biden made the right decision by pushing through the ARP at the time he did?** It was a significant victory early in his presidency and showed that he could get things done. However, it also burnt up a certain amount of political capital, which has made passing infrastructure & Build Back Better more challenging. (Most newly-elected presidents tend to get one blank-check bill before their honeymoons end & their approvals decline.) While the ARP was initially broadly popular, some of its potential negative effects (eg inflation) have only surfaced after its passage, though not everyone agrees the ARP drove up inflation. **What do you think will be the ARP’s long-term legacy?*** To be clear, I am not asking **who** you think would be the best candidate; rather, I am asking **what kind** of candidate you think would have the best chance of getting elected in 2024.
* **Examples of Potential Kinds of Candidates**
* A moderate, middle of the road type of Democrat
* A more liberal, even potentially radical Democrat
* A candidate who focuses on certain types of issues over others, such as economic over social, domestic over foreign, etc.In a recent summit between Joe Biden and Xi Jinping, the Chinese President [warned his American counterpart](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-china-59301167) against encouraging the independence of Taiwan (AKA the Republic of China). 

Over the last year, the potential for conflict between the United States and China in the South China Sea has received growing attention, with the Economist describing the region as “[the most dangerous place on Earth](https://www.economist.com/leaders/2021/05/01/the-most-dangerous-place-on-earth)” for this reason. Likewise, the possibility of war appears frequently in the [latest issue of Foreign Affairs Magazine](https://www.foreignaffairs.com/issues/2021/100/6), and [The Washington Post has reported](https://www.washingtonpost.com/national-security/2021/10/26/us-taiwan-china/) on the popularity of the scenario amongst military planners. A war of this nature was even the subject of a [recent novel](https://www.penguinrandomhouse.ca/books/635212/2034-by-elliot-ackerman-and-admiral-james-stavridis/9781984881250) co-authored by Admiral James Stavridis.

Though the United States remains the top dog in terms of global military clout, China has greatly expanded its offensive capabilities over the last decade, and [recent Pentagon war games have predicted that the United States would lose such a conflict](https://news.yahoo.com/were-going-to-lose-fast-us-air-force-held-a-war-game-that-started-with-a-chinese-biological-attack-170003936.html?__twitter_impression=true). Further, Admiral Phil Davidson (former head of U.S. Indo-Pacific Command) has warned that China could attempt to take Taiwan “in this decade, in fact within the next six years.”

At the same time, many factors discourage war. The U.S. and China are both nuclear armed powers with heavily intertwined economies, making direct conflict extremely costly.

All things considered, is the United States willing and able to defend Taiwan from a Chinese invasion? How can the U.S and its allies (as well as Taiwan itself) best prevent and/or prepare for conflict with the PRC in the South China Sea?I believe that there is apparent polarization, partisanship, and civic fracture in the United States. I'm trying to piece together how research and theory from across the fields of psychology, political science, philosophy, and educational practices offer insights about partisan identity decisions. 

**So I'm wondering, how much do you think our partisan identity affects the way we discuss and decide on decisions? Decisions relating to topics like critical race theory and vaccine mandates in schools.**[Joe Biden's oval office](https://i.imgur.com/zJCYL4A.jpg)

[Donald Trump's oval office](https://i.imgur.com/zU2bhKX.png)

[Vladimir Putin's office (pre-covid)](https://i.imgur.com/H61HUm2.jpg)

[Vladimir Putin's office (covid)](https://i.imgur.com/Qf5oq6J.jpg)

[Xi Jinping's office](https://i.imgur.com/OlCc3bZ.jpg)

[Recep Tayyip Erdogan's office](https://i.imgur.com/okD4Ay3.jpg)

[Angela Merkel's office](https://i.imgur.com/fsIVxpM.jpg)

[Moon Jae In's office](https://i.imgur.com/TLnK5hJ.jpg) (Moon Jae In is the president of South Korea)

[Shinzo Abe's office](https://i.imgur.com/57g25jY.jpg)

[Boris Johnson's office](https://i.imgur.com/8jx84Ry.jpg)

A few superficial observations about each of them.

Joe Biden's oval office: 

- Light colors all around. Lots of white, yellow and light brown
- The floor is covered by a large dark blue rug bearing the presidential seal at the center. It's the same rug as [Bill Clinton used.](https://hips.hearstapps.com/hmg-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/images/gettyimages-50334192-master-1503595849.jpg)  
- The Oval Office is a mostly symmetrical room  
- There are two flags in the room, the US flag and the presidential falg  
- Two phones on the desk  
- Sparse walls, apart from a few paintings
- Yellow drapes on the windows
- The office has two couches and a coffee table on the opposite side of the Resolute Desk. There are also two chairs on either side of the desk.

Donald Trump's oval office:  


- Mostly the same as Biden, and other presidents  
- A lot more flags, including at least 3 US flags and 3 presidential flags
- Twice as many chairs next to the Resolute Desk (four)
- A cream colored rug, which fits better with the couches

Vladimir Putin's office (pre-covid):

- Tasteful wainscoating on the walls
- Overhead chandelier
- Two flags: the Russian national flag and the flag of the Russian presidency
- Smaller room than the Oval Office
- Simple grey rug covering most of the floor
- Ceiling decorations
- A computer screen on the desk, unlike the oval office
- Beautiful wooden desk

Vladimir Putin's office (covid):

- At least four telephones (the oval office has two)
- Smaller room than Putin's pre-covid office at the Kremlin
- Angled desk
- A computer and a television screen for teleconferences with government officials and other people
- A lot more lighting than the pre-covid office
- Cream colored floor and walls
- Beautiful wooden desk

Xi Jinping's office:

- The walls are lined with books, neatly arranged and sorted by color scheme
- At least one flag, the PRC flag
- Small room
- Simple desk and chair compared to Putin or Biden/Trump
- A painting of the Great Wall just behind Xi
- No computer on the desk
- Three phones, two red colored and one white colored
- A can of sharpened pencils
- Softer lighting
- Lots of brown and brownish red
- Xi's office gives the overall feel of a private library study room

Recep Tayyip Erdogan's office:

- Large overhead lighting
- Largest of the offices seen until now, larger than the Oval Office
- There is a portrait of Ataturk (Turkey's founder) behind Erdogan
- At least one flag, the Turkish flag
- A lounge area in the middle, with a wall mounted tv screen
- One phone on Erdogan's desk. No computer in sight.
- At least two small rugs for various parts of the room but no single large rug covering most of the room, like Biden and Putin (pre-covid)
- Lots of creams, browns, with some whites and darker browns

Angela Merkel's office:

- Highly asymmetrical. Looks like the work of a modern designer.
- Non flat ceiling
- Largest of the offices seen until now
- At least one phone and two computer screens on the desk
- Light colors. Lots of white and light browns.
- Small lounge area by the window
- Two flags. The German flag and the EU flag.
- Some bookshelves
- Lots of open space. Not a lot of furniture.

Moon Jae In's office:
- High contrast in colors. Whites and creams mixed with dark browns.
- Some bookshelves.
- At least one flag, the ROK flag.
- No computer or phone visible on the desk, but there's probably at least one phone out of sight of the camera.
- Very simple office in general. Large room.
- A square window with a wooden geometrical pattern
- Gold plated low relief animal figures behind the desk. No paintings in sight.

Shinzo Abe's office:

- Average sized room
- Darker colors than most offices seen so far. Mix of reddish browns, creams, and greys.
- A wall of bookshelves
- At least one flag, the Japanese flag
- A drape covering a large portion of a wall, so there's probably a wide window
- A single phone on the desk. No visible computer.
- Soft lighting.

Boris Johnson's office:

- Average sized room
- Mostly light colors. Lots of whites and creams.
- A large mirror on the wall
- At least one phone and two computers on the desk, plus a tv screen behind.
- One flag, the UK flag.

All in all, things world leaders offices seem to have in common:

- Flags
- A wooden desk (most desk workers work at metal and plastic desks; why do politicians have a preference for wooden desks, across countries as different as these?)
- Art on the walls
- Windows and drapes 
- Phones on the desk (despite the fact that landlines are disappearing from consumer households, and politicians have secure smartphones with encrypted communications; so why keep corded phones?)

Where they tend to differ:  
- Computers on the desk (are Putin and Johnson more fond of modern technology or more comfortable with it than Biden and Abe?)  
- Tv screens in the room (same)  
- Bookshelves, and their extent (are they for show, or do they read them? Xi is known to read as a pastime, but Mao's office, when he was alive, was also covered with books from floor to ceiling, so there may be a tradition of portraying Chinese leaders as erudite scholars)  
- Color schemes (some things, like wall and ceiling colors, can't easily be changed, given the fact that heads of state's offices are often official facilities used from one incumbent to another)Im wondering about this from the angle that Washington warned against parties in his farewell address. And we normally associate that with a democratic, harmonious call to action. 

But the Cuban legislature doesn't allow parties, not even the communist party, and we call that a single party state. 

Would a state without political parties just be a one party state, or just a state with unofficial parties?I've always been a bit fascinated with the great plains. Surely the culture and lifestyle there differs quite a bit from the Ozarks and the deep south, and from coastal conservatives too. I've driven through there and walked around towns, but wasn't around nearly long enough to experience the culture.

**Can anyone tell me some things that might distinguish a Wyoming/North Dakota/etc. conservative from a deep south one?**  I'd probably throw Nebraska in the mix too.

edit: I'm equally fascinated with how the "liberals" in those states would compare with other regions too. I just immediately jumped to the red side because those states are obviously deep red.It is obvious that many around the world are unhappy with the status quo if you look at outcomes of worldwide elections and the rise of left and right wing populism. We as humanity need an alternative that would benefit all of us as we are more interconnected then ever. My personal suggestion is some form of Distributism that is unique to localized communities. 

Under this ideology, there would be a push for democratization of the workplace, decentralization of large governments to states and communities for all issues that do not involve trade, military, or public well being, freedom of expression on a more localized level, nationalization of key industries such as healthcare, transportation, and the military while maintaining the privatization of nonessential enterprises, a salary and benefit reduction for politicians based upon the average prosperity of their constituents, an emphasis on the protection of natural resources, a return to a more traditional family unit and policies to promote this transition, and protection of small and middle businesses through low interest rates for startups and revitalization of worker power in large businesses.

What are your thoughts on this ideology and improving it or your alternative that would best compromise with our "left vs right" division going forward?

The basis of Traditional Distributism:
https://www.vatican.va/content/leo-xiii/en/encyclicals/documents/hf_l-xiii_enc_15051891_rerum-novarum.html

A more modern take with Social Distributism:
https://acenturyofchange.medium.com/what-is-social-distributism-an-introduction-98b3af6e6542

TLDR: we need a new way forward into the 21st century and beyond. Distributism or some form of it is my choice. I believe there is a little bit for everyone in here and could be a good compromise for our more interconnected world.It’s safe to say voter discontent with inflation, Covid and the chaotic withdrawal from Afghanistan have damaged Biden and the Democrats popularity to the point that voters, particularly independents in metropolitan subuegsm are starting to flock back to the Republicans if the results in Virginia are an indicator.

The question I suppose should be asked is where do the Republicans come off as appealing to voters discontent with the country’s present direction under Biden and the Democrats? Is it purely protest voting as a means of punishing the Democrats for perceived failures, as is common with governing parties when things go wrong? (See the Tories current polling slide in the UK) 

Or are their certain policies and messaging from the Republican side that make them a genuine alternative who voters see as able to do better when it comes to tackling the issues, inflation especially, that have plagued Biden thus far?Wall Street keeps breaking records; Employment looks good, Infrastructure is to be signed Monday Morning and Build Back Better is coming. Biden is traveling highlighting his plans, but everything seems to be falling on deaf ears including within margins of his own party.

Some in the Republican leadership are starting to feel giddy already talking about landslide victories in the House and Senate in 2022 and the White House in 2024.

So far the White House officials have largely dismissed the inflation numbers as a temporary byproduct of an economy that grounded to a halt by Covid-19. However, most Americans are not buying it.

Should the Democrats start bracing themselves for losses because no matter what they accomplish it does not appear to sway the Public opinion much?I am curious how much of the current inflation pressures can be attributed to tariffs that begin during the [Trump Administration in 2018](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/China%E2%80%93United_States_trade_war).  It would obviously directly lead to higher prices of imported end user goods, as well as higher prices for input raw materials and intermediate goods, possibly leading to a vicious cycle.

Biden could negotiate with the Chinese to bilaterally lower or eliminate tariffs.  What are the pros and cons and why haven't the US started to move in that direction?

There has been some limited discussion in the media:

* May 30, 2021 WSJ: [U.S. Manufacturers Blame Tariffs for Swelling Inflation](https://archive.md/gkBaW)

* June 18, 2021 Bloomberg: [China Has Some Advice for the U.S. on Inflation: Remove Tariffs](https://archive.md/XQylG)

* Nov 1, 2021 Reuters: [Yellen says reciprocal lowering of tariffs could help ease inflation](https://www.reuters.com/business/yellen-says-reciprocal-lowering-tariffs-could-help-ease-inflation-2021-11-01/)

* Nov 15, 2021 CNN:
[Get rid of tariffs on China to help ease inflation, two dozen business groups tell Biden](https://www.cnn.com/2021/11/15/investing/china-tariffs-biden/index.html)






With regard to the fight over the Jan 6th related information that Trump is claiming executive privilege on, that he is currently appealing, here is my question.  

Should we give the President the power to order the Supreme Court to take up a case immediately, with no option to kick back to a lower court, no option for further appeals, for cases of significant national interest? 

This would help block using appeals as a delay tactic in critical cases, but how could it be abused?

edit:  As has been pointed out, a President could flood the sc with unrelated cases in order to block them from hearing one the President might not like.  Perhaps we could limit the number of times that power could be used.  

Or - what other ideas do you have on how to stop abuse of the appeals process?Poland is one of the worst places in the world to live as a member of the LGBTQ+ community. Multiple parts in Poland are labeled as LGBT free zones,where law enforcement can kick people out for being gay. Since Poland is apart of the EU is there anything that the EU can do about it?I understand that this isn't feasible for someone if they think that abortion is murder. It's kind of like "why not let people own slaves in their own state" that's why this question is mostly for people who perceive these issues as largely subjective and are concerned about the utilitarian aspect of the policies.

If states have the opportunity to run diverse sets of laws that the majority of people in those states want to live under then why not let them run their own experiment in order to find out more about the policy and its outcomes. Is the principle certainty that the policy will work better for every state or is it just a deontological belief about freedom or something else I'm missing?  


Edit: This turned into a battlefield very quickly.From the news , Russia is amassing large contingent of troops on Ukrain border . In the same time , we have a crisis of immigrants on Poland Belarusian border and Russian blackmail on gaz supply to Europe .

Can Russia attempt a full invasion and annexion of Ukraine and what are consequences of it ?For example, besides the bipartisan infrastructure bill, what other things can be done in a bipartisan fashion, with a GOP House and Senate?  Maybe combating the problems of so called Big Tech perhaps?Basically the header.  It seems like former Trump admin officials are just going to completely ignore any congressional subpoenas, but also the DoJ doesn't seem like they're keen on enforcing them in any way either... Have we just reached a new normal where the GOP is going to categorically ignore legal enforcement actions and seemingly face little to no repurcussions for it?For example, did they dump too much of the Afganistan withdrawl on him, even though it was Trump that signed that agreement with the Taliban?  Also, the media seems to be blaming him for inflation, when that is due to the pandemic from last year, causing supply chain issues, along with demand increasing this year?  What are your thoughts?I don’t know how popular golf is in the eastern world but it’s been a game presidents, businessmen, and politicians alike seem to share as a hobby. Trump spent a lot of time golfing at Mar-a-Lago, where he controversially played and discussed trade deals with Xi Jinping. Obama, Biden, and Bush also ply golf. 

It’s clearly a sport of the business and political world, and is typically associated as a “rich man’s sport” (though even the poor play golf too). So my question, beyond just US politics, is how important is golf in the world of politics? Is it a lubricant for facilitating deal making by providing a recreational outlet to negotiate? Is it merely a status symbol? Or does it represent something different?In his 1976 Yale Law Review article "Serving Two Masters: Ideals and Client Interests In School Desegregation Litigation," Derrick Bell (father of Critical Race Theory) criticizes the NAACP's approach to fighting the "separate but equal doctrine."

The article focuses on an interesting conflict of interests and legal ethics question, but this post is about the more substantive issue of whether the civil rights movement went in the wrong direction.

The argument is that instead of focusing on integrating schools to fix the deeply flawed "separate but equal" doctrine, we could have instead focused on improving the quality of segregated black schools. Instead of removing "separate," instead focus on "but equal." As King would say, cash the promissory note of equality.

Obviously this would run into practical hurdles just as desegregation did. But, **what if we accept *in arguendo* Bell's proposition** -- quality-oriented policy rather than integrationist-oriented policy may have created better educational outcomes for black schoolchildren?

If that were the case, would our desegregation approach still be justified? Should we uphold the desegregationist moral ideology even if it means young black kids (at least in the near/mid term) have worse educational outcomes than if we pursued Bell's alternative?For anybody unfamiliar with how a shareholder dilution tax would work, here is a brief example where the dilution rate is set at 2% per year:  
  
Suppose Apple Inc. has 100 million shares outstanding at the end of a particular year.  The end of year tax would require Apple to create 2 million new shares and transfer ownership of those shares to the government.  (Now, the total number of shares of Apple Inc. has increased by 2% to 102 million shares outstanding).  The government would be required to slowly sell these 2 million newly created shares on the open market over the course of the following year, thereby generating billions in federal revenue.  Theoretically, the selling would cause Apple’s price per share to decrease by 2% over the course of the year (absent all of the other factors that typically affect a stock’s price over the course of a year, of course), while Apple’s market cap would stay the same.  
  
Are there any features of such a tax that would make it worthy to be considered alongside or as a replacement to other types of federal taxation?  What would be the downsides of such a tax?I wonder with the president elects massive clout going into their inauguration and with the lame duck president. Could the president elect create so much controversy they would have legal grounds not to let them being sworn in? For instance if they were to contradict the current president on foreign war policy during the lame duck period. To the point other countries didnt know where the U.S stood. For instance if a massive war was raging and the Presidnet Elect contradicted everything the current president says. Or if they tried something radical like using their clout to annex Canada before they where sworn in. Or made their interests in the matter very intense before they actually held office. I'm just curious can a president elect cross the line so much in going against the lame duck president and critical foreign policy. Since the Presidnet Elect doesnt actually hold the office yet they are the future. So could they create in that two month transition process so much conflict abroad that its determinetial to the nation? That there is a way to impeach and remove them before they even are sworn in. Also how would this process happen? Would they just not certify the election how would the VP elect be made the new President elect during this process? Would Congress be so afraid of an outlast form he American public they simply wouldnt act? Considering they just elected this person  it may be perceived as political. Bascially is there process for this since the presidency is awkward in these transitions time?With the recent census data, I noticed for the first time in a few Decades my home town actually grew (by 8%!). This got me wondering if it could be the start of a larger trend.

Rural Areas have been on the decline for decades, but If you are working from home anyway, why spend more than twice as much on housing in the city, when you could live in a smaller town and pocket the extra cash, or stretch your dollar further? 

for an example of how much further your dollar can go, check out these two listings for the exact same price in my home town of Paducah, KY (about 27k population/96k micropolitan population, 2 hours from Nashville) vs one in Nashville, TN

Paducah listing 725k: https://www.realtor.com/realestateandhomes-detail/165-Corbett-Dr_Paducah_KY_42001_M91218-03953

Nashville listing 725k: https://www.realtor.com/realestateandhomes-detail/102-Stoneway-Close_Nashville_TN_37209_M82315-39316

census data:
http://paducahky.gov/demographics


Edit: I feel like I should clarify: by rural areas I really mean non major metropolitan/suburban areas. A lot of commentators seem to think your options are a major metro area or a one horse town. Living in a town of 20-100 thousand people is still way more affordable than a big city. And yes… we have high speed internet, hospitals, grocery stores, restaurants, etc. 

Many towns of this size have been on the decline as populations have trended towards major metro areas, and these are the areas I think could start seeing some growth.This is inspired by the current Rittenhouse trial. I've linked Wisconsin's self defence laws for others:

https://docs.legis.wisconsin.gov/statutes/statutes/939/iii/48

Do you think that the conversation should be moved from whether or not Rittenhouse is guilty of murder, to, is this legislation poorly formulated?

It seems that in Wisconsin a person A can initially provoke someone by pointing a gun at person B, B can then perceive themselves to be under threat of death, attempt to lawfully engage person A under self defence, B can be lawfully shot by person A who can also claim self defence, and then person A can continue to lawfully shoot other persons C, D, E etc. who engage person A if they perceive them to be a threat to themselves or others, all under the guise of self defence?

Even initial criminal activity doesn't abrogate person A's claim to self defence.

This could lead to a worrying development where people are legally allowed to take guns to protests, provoke people and then shoot them if attacked. It also leads to the possibility that both sides can take guns legally to protests and then legally shoot others if they perceive threat to life to themselves or others.

Do you think laws around self defence should be changed? Do you think gun laws should be changed, or do you think that laws around guns at protests should be changed? Or do you think that the status quo is necessary to protect the 2nd amendment?With housing costs and rent rising increasingly young people are being squeezed and priced out. Older homeowners see their assets rise. It seems like both groups have opposing interests as lower house prices would diminish the value of housing assets. 

One of the main driving forces is a shortage of houses. In 1946 and 1947 congress took direct action to increase the supply of housing. 
Another issue is housing prices being increasingly being used as investment properties.The so-called “Build Back Better” Act appears to be Biden’s attempt at a landmark piece of legislature similar to the Affordable Care Act, introducing a level of spending on social programs from paid leave to childcare not seen since the New Deal. As well as provisions to address climate change.

However, the bill appears to be stuck in limbo due to opposition from the more conservative elements of the Democratic Party in Congress, particularly Senator Joe Manchin of West Virginia, who have argued for the bill to be trimmed down considerably, citing concerns over debt and inflation, to the anger of the more liberal/progressive wing of the party who argue their opposition is in part thanks to lobbying from certain interests and sectors opposed to the bill, especially the fossil fuel industry and Manchin’s connections to the coal industry in his state.

What’s more, progressives have begun to raise alarm bells at how Manchin in  appears to be constantly shifting the goalposts over what is needed to gain his support for the bill instead of committing to a final position, dragging out negotiations in the process that has arguably weakened the Democrats by portraying then as a party wracked by infighting and incapable of governing, contrasted with the more disciplined and unified Republicans who are exploiting voter discontent over inflation and other issues to great effect. A similar dynamic here in the UK would be Labour and the Conservative Party respectively.

This has raised suspicions that Manchin has no intention of ever passing the social bill, and that for all intents and purposes “Build Back Better” is dead. Any negotiation at this point from Biden and Schumer would be a waste of time.

The fear the Democrats have is that without the social bill, and the damage caused by the public infighting over it, Biden’s already weak polling will go permanently underwater for the remainder of his term with turnout for the Democrats weakening in the process due to perceived failure to get any meaningful legislation done, and voter discontent over inflation becoming baked in. Thus leading to the Republicans recapturing Congress next year,  and leaving them in a *very* favourable position to win the White House in 2024.

Overall, the majority consensus from what I gather appears to be very pessimistic, even downright fatalistic in some observed corners, in the social bill ever passing at this stage. Still, others appear hopeful that some form of the bill will eventually pass and that the opposition from Manchin and other conservative Democrats is simply performative theatre in order to save face before their constituents. Many have cited that Manchin still largely votes party line despite his reputation as a conservative Democrat. And that once the bill passes, any public distaste over the infighting will gradually fade from memory as the supply chain situation stabilises and the Dems polling can recover.

TL;DR, what reasons do you have to believe that the Build Back Better Act will pass/fail to pass?To be brief, there is very little political freedom in Cuba. Most authorities on this subject seem to agree. A lot of Cubans emigrate or want to for political reasons. Quality of life is in general quite low although exactly how good or bad it is when compared to other Latin American countries in particular depends a lot on the political orientation of the observer.

Cuba also seems politically aligned with other countries worldwide that are generally viewed as authoritarian at best e.g. Russia, the PRC, North Korea, Venezuela, Iran, and so forth.

On the other hand, you have the US embargo with which almost nobody agrees except a political élite in the US who are in a position to maintain it. Should this influence anybody's view of the Cuban government?

Also you have a large community dating from the Cold War era who have always openly admired Cuba for its willingness to stand up to the American bully. These people dismiss most criticism of Cuba as evidence of US propaganda being sheepishly believed by those unable to think for themselves.

Last time I looked at the Wikipedia article on Fulgencio Batista, it appeared to me the entire article was written as a justification for the Cuban Revolution and thus a vote of confidence for today's Cuban government which hasn't significantly changed since then. I don't think Wikipedia usually tolerates such bias so that really stuck out in my mind.

In particular consider Pierre Elliott Trudeau's bromance with Fidel in the late 70s. Ever since, some Canadians seem to have considered admiration for the Cuban revolution as part of their native political culture. Are those Canadians (I don't try to estimate what per cent of the total Canadian population they represent) intellectually dishonest or simply more open-minded than Americans?

I also think of dissident Cuban blogger Yoani Sánchez visiting a university in Brazil. She was surrounded by protesters who apparently thought she was some sort of Yankee stooge for criticizing her country's government.

Not to mention the huge amount of admiration the Argentine Che Guevara receives from "intellectuals". Consider the Motorcycle Diaries if you want to understand what I mean by that.

Is it wrong to wish for the Cuban government to change in some way? Is it especially wrong for an American, who does not consider themselves Conservative, to have such thoughts given the apparent moral debt the US owes to Cuba for the factors that led to the Revolution?

EDIT: I forgot to mention that the Cuban government does seem to promote domestic policies aimed at improving the basic quality of life for average citizens as well as promoting culture, equal rights, etc., making it appear different from what we generally think of as a typical fascist régime. Some commenters may wish to point to specific government programs in Cuba that they admire. I for one don't know how to judge given the lack of press freedom there.I've recently watched this [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l4FQTglHwZ0) where two police officers were conducting a road stop for speeding and subsequently decided whether or not to arrest or merely cite the deiver by means of a coin flip. Following the documented interaction, which the officers also attempted to perform hidden from their body cam, the officers were ultimately fired, but for violating departmental policy on public image and good behavior, not for acting outside of their authority.

Police officers in the US have a wide range of freedom in choosing whether or not they are going to arrest or merely warn or cite someone for various minor offenses and suspicion thereof. These considerations may or may not be influenced by an officer's particular mood, their personal fondness or lack thereof for the detainee, and other potentially unprofessional sentiments not strictly related to their duties or the maintenance of public order.

As public servants acting on behalf of the state, and in their capacity as such ( To be distinguished from private individuals deciding whether to pursue charges for a crime they have been the victim of ), should poloce officers continue to wield that authority, or should the law be changed to firmly regulate a universal standard for when a violation should result in arrest and when it should not ( Depending on the person's previous track record, a clear and concise threat evaluation submitted into the report, and other factors as well of course)? What is your opinion? So, back in April, 2018, police used GEDMatch in order to catch one of the most infamous serial killers/rapists out there: The Golden State Killer. And since then, police started using GEDMatch to solve cold case rapes and murders solving 10-15 cases a month. But in May, 2019. GEDMatch decided to give users the choice whether or where or not they want Law Enforcement to have access to their DNA. They did this because they believed that it invaded users privacy. and out of the 1M users, only 250,000 agreed. Do you think that it invaded their privacy? I would say no because these people willingly put their DNA out there! They went from solving 10-15 cases a month to 2-3.I ask this because when I think of the root definition of populism (Wikipedia: Populism refers to a range of political stances that emphasize the idea of "the people" and often juxtapose this group against "the elite" or "the establishment".), isn’t this what all politicians already are? They promise to represent the common people, stand up to the powers that be in Washington, bla bla bla.

I don’t think I’ve known a single politician who runs on being “the man of elites”. Not Lincoln, not Kennedy, not Reagan, not Clinton, not Bush, not Obama, not Trump, not Biden, and so on.

So what separates a populist from a “non-populist”?A few parallels:
An intently mixed economy
Unapologetically nationalistic
Certain ethnic policies...

Could/would a political scientist argue that China's current structure is an authentic form of Nazism? Is it enough for them to advance their national interests above all else, or does there have to be an actual assertion of racial supremacy?From what I understand, Biden’s approval rating has been underwater throughout the length of autumn, with most pointing towards the chaotic withdrawal from Afghanistan, the impact of the Delta variant, lack of meaningful legislative action, and inflation caused by high demand and strained supply chains. The last part in particular seems to be beyond his control to manage in ways that can mollify voter discontent. I believe I saw one poll today that says his approval is now at 38%, nearing Trump’s own polling lows. Obviously, you cannot extrapolate from one poll alone, but it doesn’t seem to suggest his polling will be going up anytime soon. Some are already drawing parallels with Jimmy Carter’s “malaise” presidency and how his unpopularity led to Reagan’s landslide victory in 1980.

This from what I can tell is leading to an enormous amount of panic among the Democrats ranks, contrasted with buoyant optimism from the Republican Party. With most expecting the 2022 midterms to be in favour of the Republicans capturing the House and Senate, Democrats fear/Republicans hope that by 2024, Biden will be entering his re-election campaign as an enormous underdog, with no incumbency advantage due to permanent unpopularity, lack of political achievements or “wins” and an apathetic Democrat base. While Trump, DeSantis or whoever the Republicans nominate will be the odds-on favourite with lots of momentum and an energized Republican base plus the structural advantage of the Electoral College.

On the other hand, some have suggested Biden might be able to recover in time to give the Democrats hope of retaining the White House in 2024. This scenario assumes that by then, both Covid and inflation will be under control, and that Biden can ride a more positive economic and social environment to win re-election. 

Thoughts?McConnell said among other things: “I’m very optimistic. We have 50 Republican senators. I know what a real minority looks like. We had 40 after President Obama got elected. And so I think the wind is going to be at our back in both the House and Senate. I think there’s a great likelihood of a pretty good election next year.”  Referring to his old age McConnell noted he has been around for a while: 71% of the American people say we’re going in the wrong direction,  I don’t remember 71 percent wrong track before.”

House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy similarly has been asserting he thinks it’s possible House Republicans pick up 60 or more seats. \[This midterm election year, all 435 seats are up for grab.\]

There are 34 U.S. Senate seats up for regular election in 2022—14 seats held by Democrats and 20 held by Republicans.

Is this outlook a little over the top for the Republicans. Does their confident predictions overlook the fact that there are presently 20 Republican seats up for re-election next year while only 14 Democratic seats are up for grabs?Little to nothing has been done on the campaign promises regarding Student Loans. There are a couple of different amounts that were, and still are, being mentioned. With regard to serious pen-to-paper however, I can’t find anything in the Congressional Record as moving out of Committee. Even those bills in committee are somewhat contradictory in terms of amount and process. For that matter, I can’t see where any of the bills that are there have even been scheduled for discussion within their respective Committees.

That, and if you check the Federal Register, they just let another contract to providers to “resume collections early next year”. So, the Biden Administration is apparently doing the opposite of cancellation/forgiveness.

Where do you think this is going ? Will it lay dormant until it, once again, becomes a campaign talking point ? 

How much relief do you think we’ll get and in what form ? 

Eligibility requirements maybe ? I’ve seen something like “non useful” degrees not being eligible for relief and/or forgiveness. So anything STEM would be OK, education, finance, business, etc BUT things like underwater basket weaving (you know what I mean here) would not be. If your degree does not have a legitimate path to financially supporting you, it would not qualify. This particular aspect is not mentioned in the “official” threads but it does show up in some of the “what if” threads.

https://www.ed.gov/news/press-releases/us-department-education-increases-servicer-performance-transparency-and-accountability-loan-payments-restartForgive my ignorance here.. Just a thought I had.

Would a party that ran strictly on a you vote for issues then I vote based on the popular outcome of that vote work in congress?

So, instead of an area electing a D or an R this party would essentially act as a constant middleman for any and all congressional votes. 

Each person gets to vote (or abstain) on issues they care about. 

Want to introduce a new bill? Have the electorate propose and introduce their own. Get enough votes and your rep introduces the bill. Kind of like feature request that i've seen on some popular applications. Each person gets x number of votes a year to use whenever and however they want.  With the goal being that the most popular are the ones worked on. 

Instead of getting 1 vote every 2-6 years for a position - you'd get multiple votes yearly with the ability to directly influence what your elected representative focuses on.We're all familiar with what's going on right now. Biden's popularity is going down the tubes, the Republican party pulled off a shocking win in Virginia, and in general Democrats are at a loss regarding what to do moving forward if they're to have a prayer next year. A lot of explanations have been put forward for this, but there's one I find particularly interesting. I'll just let Derek Thompson of The Atlantic [do the talking](https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2021/11/democrats-economy-election/620626/). 

Long story short, even though things *have* been improving since Biden took office, a lot of Americans don't really *feel* like there's been any sufficient improvement in any of the areas where it was promised. And naturally, this is resulting in a lot of frustration towards those in power. But no matter how much things actually get improved, can the Democrats win the "vibe war"?So it is hard to argue that EU is completely succesful in having support throughout it´s member countries. Whilist many member countries prefers to be a part of the EU still, it´s elections appear far from attractive (in the end of the thread, I have included turnout numbers for each country, for the EU Elections in 2019).

I believe I heard at some point, that EU were considering making an election with the same candidates throughout EU. 

Currently, we just elect national parties into EU. These parties declares themselves to be a part of an EU political group. The issue (if to be believed by turnout numbers) probably is that people are simply just not very interested in that type of election. This might be, that people in less populated countries would believe that their vote would have a very low impact on the parliament. For example if you as a voter, know that you are only voting for 6/705 (Cyprus example, 0.9% of the total seats), maybe it doesn´t seem attractive at all. 

Apart from that, Ursula von der Leyen is not as known, as some would argue someone with such a powerful position should be. Her political affiliations are for instance not talked about very often (not where I am, at least)

To add another thing, EU election nights are extremely boring, as in the elections from your country, will only be a very small part of the overall vote. If they added an election for who should be president, the election nights could become much more exciting, which could result in more people being interested in the elections.

The downside of this is of course, that someone could argue that it would be hard to prevent Germany, Spain, France, not having the presidential candidates, and could end up in the lesser populated countries being "forced" into electing based on German politics. 

    () means latest national election turnout
    Austria - 59.8% (75.6%)
    Belgium - 88.5% (90.0%)
    Bulgaria - 32.9% (40.4%)
    Croatia - 29.9% (46.4%)
    Cyprus - 45.0% (65.7%)
    Denmark - 66.1% (84.6%)
    Estonia - 37.6% (63.7%)
    Finland - 40.7% (72.8%)
    France - 50.1% (74.6%)
    Germany - 61.4% (76.6%)
    Greece - 58.7% (57.9%)
    Hungary - 43.5% (70.2%
    Ireland - 49.7% (62.9%)
    Italy - 54.5% (72.9%)
    Latvia - 33.3% (54.6%)
    Lithuania - 53.5% (47.8%)
    Luxembourg - 84.1% (89.7%)
    Malta - 74.8% (92.1%)
    Netherlands - 41.9% (78.7%)
    Poland - 45.7% (61.7%)
    Portugal - 30.7% (48.6%)
    Romania - 51.2% (31.9%)
    Slovakia - 22.7% (65.8%)
    Slovenia - 28.3% (52.6%)
    Spain - 60.7% (66.2%)
    Sweden - 55.3% (87.1%)The predictions if we don't the world's temperature rise are dire. I've heard many solutions, costs, and negotiation issues brought up in the last few weeks. but I haven't heard anyone mention population reduction. Not from any country or protester. Why not?For those of you who don’t know, the FEC just ruled that [foreign companies, organizations, and individuals can fund committees that can place ballot measures on federal elections](https://www.msnbc.com/the-reidout/reidout-blog/fecs-jaw-dropping-ruling-gives-foreign-nationals-approval-influence-us-rcna4571). Is there something I’m missing here, or is this the green light to direct foreign intervention into US politics? It seems that the country has been headed this way since Citizens United, but that case was a Supreme Court case and not a FEC ruling; obviously however, this might be taken to the Supreme Court and therefore enacted into law. I’m not very knowledgeable in this field, however. What do you all think?As mentioned, the infrastructure bill is heading to Biden’s desk without a deal on the Build Back Better reconciliation bill. Democrats seemed to have a deal to pass these two in tandem to assuage concerns over mistrust among factions in the party. Is the BBB dead in the water now that moderates like Manchin and Sinema have free reign to vote against reconciliation? Manchin has expressed renewed issues with the new version of the House BBB bill and could very well kill it entirely. Given the immense challenges of bridging moderate and progressive views on the legislation, what is the future of both the bill and Democratic legislation on these topics?Each of these bills was larger in top-line dollar amount than the Build Back Better Act. Beyond their immediate goals of mitigating the effects of the pandemic on the economy, will either or both be considered historically significant in hindsight?

Not just bailouts and abstract monetary policy, but I mean in the sense of establishing important social programs, infrastructure investments, vaccination-related investments, etc. For example, the ARP's expanded child tax credit that BBB is extending could become permanent, the ARP's leftover funds landed in the bipartisan infrastructure bill, and both' bills direct payments to citizens could ultimately be considered to have seeded the concept of UBI among the public.

Edit: Whoops, I somehow forgot about the Consolidated Appropriations Act from December (also larger than Build Back Better).* A lot of people are saying that if the Democrats keep going at things the same way they have been for awhile now, they are very likely to get crushed in the midterms. But exactly what changes should they make and what actions should they pursue in order to prevent this from happening?The US split different regions into little administrative groups under one governor. For example, The Pacific northwest region would have one leader. New England would have its own. Hawaii and Alaska would stay somewhat the same. The us would have littler power over them as they become their own little "empire". The US would still have some say so a land-grab doesn't happen. Thanks to 
My friend for helping with the idea :)Since the president’s party usually loses seats in the midterms (though the senate is different I feel), and the GOP does retake the House and/or senate, what can we expect from the latter half of Biden’s term? Like Obama post-2014, what would it look like if he had to go it alone and pursue initiatives without Congress? Executive Orders only go so far legally, but Biden isn’t powerless.The 2nd amendment states that "A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed."

I'm wondering what a free state is, and what security means. Put differently,  for what purposes can a militia be used? Can a governor use a well regulated militia to ensure the security of his free state, even he's going after a private entity?**Edit: it seems some responses are confusing democratic as in democracy with democratic as in the Democratic party. This post is tal koi ing about democracy not the Democratic Party. Sorry for the confusion**


I read [this study](https://www.pnas.org/content/117/37/22752) from Larry Bartels (of *unequal democracy* fame) a few weeks ago. The abstract is as follows

>Most Republicans in a January 2020 survey agreed that “the traditional American way of life is disappearing so fast that we may have to use force to save it.” More than 40% agreed that “a time will come when patriotic Americans have to take the law into their own hands.” (In both cases, most of the rest said they were unsure; only one in four or five disagreed.) I use 127 survey items to measure six potential bases of these and other antidemocratic sentiments: partisan affect, enthusiasm for President Trump, political cynicism, economic conservatism, cultural conservatism, and ethnic antagonism. The strongest predictor by far, for the Republican rank-and-file as a whole and for a variety of subgroups defined by education, locale, sex, and political attitudes, is ethnic antagonism—especially concerns about the political power and claims on government resources of immigrants, African-Americans, and Latinos. The corrosive impact of ethnic antagonism on Republicans’ commitment to democracy underlines the significance of ethnic conflict in contemporary US politics.

His study found a deep connection between ethnic antagonism and a loss of commitment to democracy.

I thought I'd share a few discussion questions with political discussion on this topic

1. What should be done about democratic backsliding?

2. What responsibility does/should the electorate have for maintaining a commitment to democracy

3. Electorally, what do you think has been/will be the effects of this backsliding motivated by ethnic antagonism?

4. Would this trend reverse if ethnic antagonism was mitigated? (Think truth and reconciliation initiatives in Northern Ireland, South Africa and Rwanda).

5. Is this trend a passing moment in the political zeitgeist or indicative of something deeper?The 22nd Amendment of the U.S. Constitution put in place the two-term limit for the presidency. It was enacted in 1951 in response to President Franklin D. Roosevelt's unprecedented four-term\* presidency, after Republicans won control of Congress in the 1946 midterm elections, running in part on a promise to enact formal term limits for the presidency. Prior to FDR, it was an informal tradition for presidents to only seek two terms in office, a precedent set by President George Washington.

Since the enactment of the Amendment, there have been six presidents who became term-limited: Dwight Eisenhower (elected 1952, re-elected 1956); Richard Nixon (elected 1968, re-elected 1972); Ronald Reagan (elected 1980, re-elected 1984); Bill Clinton (elected 1992, re-elected 1996); George W. Bush (elected 2000, re-elected 2004); and Barack Obama (elected 2008, re-elected 2012).

However, assuming the 22nd Amendment was never ratified, how would the course of presidential elections, and relatedly, U.S. politics, have played out? Is there really anything he could have done to stop the oncoming war other than start it sooner? Why is he blamed for the civil war? When the south was already threatning to succeed. I'm just curious if there was something drastic or politically savvy to save the situation at the last second therefore preserving the union?Today, 39 detainees remain at Gitmo. Some are cleared for release/transfer, haven't had charges or a trial, or are recommended for indefinite detention.



Should they shut down Guantanamo Bay?

I think it should stay open. And my guess is that the prison will stay open until all the remaining 39 detainees are ether released, transferred, or die in custody. 

Plus, it’ll be a LONG time before that happens. In September, 2017, it had 55 detainees remaining. And now in November, 2021, 39 detainees remain. And the process is long because while we had a detainee transferred out of Gitmo in July, 2021, that was the first time since January, 2018, we had someone released.

EDIT: 9/39 detainees have been charged with a crime.A post on another sub got me thinking about protests, and how their nature and efficacy may have changed throughout time.  I have attended some protests in my time, but I don't like the ones which block roads and disrupt people's days. I live in a very environmentalist city, which is good, but some of the climate action protests have prevented people from seeing loved ones in hospital, going to funerals, and so on. They often don't even target government buildings, just march down busy streets waving signs and getting pics taken.

There was one case where a man was prevented from saying goodbye to his dying father in hospital because Extinction Rebellion had blocked his route:  [Man unable to reach dying father’s bedside after getting stuck in Extinction Rebellion traffic (telegraph.co.uk)](https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2019/07/18/man-unable-reach-dying-fathers-bedside-getting-stuck-extinction/)

The common response to this, is that disrupting people's days is the whole point. Disruption brings attention to an issue. Well, I'd challenge anyone saying that to put yourself in that bereaved man's shoes, or the shoes of a pregnant woman who can't get to the hospital, or someone in critical need of A&E, or someone getting to a funeral, etc etc.

A possible counter-point is a utilitarian one: these grave cases are anomalous and may be worth the outcome of the protest. Another way of phrasing this is: "the suffering caused by the protest is less than the suffering that would be caused if the protest had not taken place". Obviously this seems wrong when applied to an individual protest - lets say for argument's sake it's Extinction Rebellion - so let's apply it to the global movement as a whole. Measuring suffering will always be difficult given the lack of objective metrics but, even considering that, the proposition seems lofty. Would you confidently say, for example, "100 people who can't get to emergency treatment in A&E is worth the global run of XR protests taking place"?

There is also the argument that disruption may actually turn people \*against\* the cause that the protest is promoting. So then you get into tricky territory of measuring "those awakened by the protest" to "those turned off by the protest"...

Another counter-point is that this is the fault of the police and/or municipal government (rather than the protestors) for not organising proper traffic diversions. I suppose this would be region-dependent. Some places mandate for protests to inform the government of their "where and whens" and for the government/police to divert traffic accordingly. Counter-counter-point: the ordinary person (say, trying to get to A&E) cannot be faulted for not being aware of the planned diversions.

3 more questions:

1. Do you think protests actually work? By "work" I mean "cause at least some positive impact toward their stated goal, either directly or indirectly". Please explain why you believe this to be the case or not *(I will talk about one case example in the comments)*.
2. Do you think the efficacy of protest has changed over time? For the better or for the worse? Like, were protests more or less impactful in the civil rights era than they are now?
3. If you disagree that protests have meaningful efficacy, what do you think are some effective means of enacting political change in lieu of them?

I will leave you with this recent quote from the British documentary-maker Adam Curtis:

>"The civil rights movement was the last time that young activists went down to the south of America and went through incredible danger for years (because it did take years). Many got beaten up, some were killed and we still don’t know their names. They gave themselves up to something. We know some of the leaders but the majority of people, we don’t know them but they gave themselves up to something good.  
>  
>Then came individualism. I remember the march against the Iraq invasion in my country – its slogan was “Not in My Name”. I don’t care whether it’s in your name or not! I just don’t want the war. It had this narcissistic shroud over it and that was the moment at which you think “How can collectivism really work when you’re dealing with millions and millions of squealing piglets who want to “express themselves”. That’s the real problem – radicalism always has to “express itself” these days. Maybe real radicalism is not about expressing yourself, it’s giving yourself up to something that you believe in." 

A small boat carrying at least 35 people, including some women and children is involved. A Coastguard helicopter has also been sent to the scene.

Local sources have told GB News that more than 800 migrants were intercepted in at least thirty separate incidents throughout the day.

This is migrant crisis and the international communities must act and resolve the issue.This "Blue Dog" network, Joe Manchin and everything else. There are a lot of Democrats who could be percieved as a bit conservative or able to really work  well with Republican leadership. It can have an explanation of southern states being more Democratic once, and thus the only chance to being re-elected is to show that they are well-grounded in their electorate. 

In the Republican Party, there was something called "Rockefeller Republicans", who had a more liberal outlook.  And I guess there are Republican governors who are more centre-oriented, and is able to win like Larry Hogan in liberal states even in California and Vermont. But seldomly they win house or senate seats. Well, there was some people like McCain who was against repealing Obamacare, but it seems like the current Democratic majority is having more problems to further their agenda than the Republicans had during the Trump administration. 

**Is centrism more common in the Democratic Party than in the Republican Party? Why? Do you think this is good or bad?**

**Will this change at any point? Will there be more "moderate" Republicans and lesser moderate Democrats in the future?**In the two major governor races democrats are significantly under performing.  The three leading theories for this is are 1. It is a natural rebound after 2020, 2. The democrats are too far left, 3. People feel that the economy, covid, education, and the Democratic Party are in chaos with no real control and can’t govern.

While some people may say this is just a natural rebound, there’s reasons it could be one of the other two.  Across the board progressive candidates and ballot measures have failed.  The ballot measure to defund the police in Minneapolis failed and multiple progressive mayors have lost.  On the other hand, even though Youngkin is outperforming trump by hefty margins, citarelli is also over performing in New Jersey.  While education and cultural issues were more of a focus in Virginia, the Republican candidate in New Jersey ran on economic issues.  This suggests that this backlash is not due any policy but instead a general backlash against the Democratic Party as a whole.  Since taking power, the democrats have struggled tremendously to get covid, the economy, and their own party under control.  Biden ran primarily on a return to normalcy and stability and some may feel we are far from it.

What do you think are the main reasons for the poor performance in this election?The Republican candidate will likely be Lee Zeldin who has been representing NY-1 for 6 years. For the Democrats the primary is expected to be a three way race between Letitia James, Kathy Hochul, and Bill De Blasio.      

&nbsp;

Lee Zeldin is one of two Jewish Republicans in congress. New York is home to the largest Jewish population in the United States with 1.7 million residents. Zeldin has also proven to be a strong fundraiser thus far. Virginia and New Jersey have shown that Democrats continue to bleed support from Hispanic Americans, African Americans, and Asian Americans as well with a continued decline in white working class support. Factor in what will likely be a divisive Democratic primary and a brutal national environment do Republicans have a chance to take the governor's office for the first time since 2006?I’ve heard an argument that a major reason Democrats don’t want to change the senate filibuster is because it would remove protections from bad GOP policy should the GOP ever re-take the senate. So, why can’t Democrats change the rules of the filibuster while they have power, and, should the GOP win the senate in the 2022 midterms, change it back to what the rules are now before the new GOP senators get sworn in?Issues surrounding gender and race in education played a central role in the GOP sweep tonight in Virginia. What do Democrats need to change in their messaging to avoid backlash on culture war issues (without capitulating entirely on those same issues)?

Edit: most people are not answering the question. I’m not looking to argue the merits. This was a question about strategy.Right now, Joe Biden‘s average approval rating is 43%, the lowest of any first-term President other than Donal Trump—and with the trajectory of his approval, it’s entirely possible it could soon be worse than Trump’s. The conventional wisdom seems to be that Biden’s low approval is due to the resurgence of the COVID-19 pandemic and the Afghanistan withdrawal.

But what if it has less to do with any of those things, and more to do simply with people’s dislike of him as an individual? Even when he first took office, Biden’s approval numbers were noticeably low compared to previous Democratic President Barack Obama, which suggests to me that, outside of his policies, people simply dislike him. 

If the poor approval were entirely due to specific events, such as the pandemic or the Afghanistan withdrawal, that could theoretically be corrected over time. But if it is the result of people’s pre-conceived dislike of Biden as a person, that will be much more difficult to overcome—and could damage him in the 2024 election.Historically in the US, its pretty rare for a party leader running again after losing. For a rare example, William Jennings Bryan ran for the Democratic Party for the first time in 1896. Even after losing he again ran in 1900 and 1908. But that’s really the only major example.

In other countries this still happens today if there are strong party leaders. For example, Canadian NDP leader Singh has run in 2015, 2019 and 2021. Gilles Duceppe from the Bloc Québécois in the same country was the leader of his party from 1997-2011. If the party leader works enough, why change them?The past two Presidents were able to pass at least one large objective from their campaigns in their first terms. Obama with healthcare reform and Trump with his tax cuts. In both instances, their parties were still punished in the midterms. Currently, Democrats are blaming the 2022 midterm projections on the lack of action on Biden's agenda.

If Biden passed a major part of his agenda would Democrats actually be rewarded in the 2022 ballot box or would the basic midterm rules of the party in power losing seats still prevail? Is there an example of a party getting rewarded for meeting their campaign promises?I think Bill Maher's recent video does a great job outlining a possible situation that goes awry. https://youtu.be/7cR4fXcsu9w

In the video, Maher proposes that the battle for election integrity will create a scenario in 2024 where both sides claim victory and massive unrest occurs. Beyond that, unrest can be used to further reify power within the ranks of whatever party takes control. 

Thinking further out, over the next decade, democracy might erode even further. The vilified tech sector, offering mediums of communication, might become targeted. Google, Facebook, and other major aggregators of personal information and online presence may become compromised into playing a "Big Brother" like role.

I don't think we should discuss whether or not that will happen, we have lots of discussions like that alrrady. 

Let's suppose for sake of discussion that it will happen, that the US is taken over by an authoritarian, autocratic rule, and our personal freedom and lives are threatened by it.

Instead of talking about how to avoid that future, my question is, what can we do now to plan for that future?I’ve been trying to find economic data on the matter but have been struggling to do so. I was wondering what your opinions are on the matter, especially regarding the effects on small businesses and unemployment.

Thank youThose on Social Security Disability have been acknowledged by the government to be unable to support themselves. The idea is to help those who can get better to do so, so they can then contribute. Those who cannot, the idea is to meet their basic needs and perhaps maintain some dignity.

What do you think about the cost to society? The cost of compassion? The cost to dignity? What is the right thing to do? And, do the disabled deserve better?

Many people have a strong, if often silent, opinion about how (not) to help the disabled. Is there a better way? Whatever you believe 'the better' to be, tell us.

[DisabledLife.org](http://disabledlife.org/) inspired me to spark this discussion. (Yes, this is a "blog" link. But how many of these sad stories ever reach the mainstream?) Summary: "That's not my department." "There's nothing we can do." "Maybe next year" 9 years running. Make it overly complicated and many will give up. Ignore 'the problem' and they will go away, eventually.Given that we are exiting an economy that virtually shut down and where travel was limited (little to no need for travel = low demand for oil during a pandemic) and people are going back to normal lives and traveling much more, the supply for oil has spiked. The logistics for going from low demand to high demand is obviously going to cause logistical issues for those providing the oil and for those receiving the oil.

Record amounts of money was spent [by the Trump admin](https://ctmirror.org/2021/01/17/donald-trump-built-a-national-debt-so-big-even-before-the-pandemic-that-itll-weigh-down-the-economy-for-years/) to help counter the effects of the pandemic. Which was needed to keep people afloat. Good on Trump and his team. However, it should be obvious that inflation will occur with this kind of spending.

And [Trump's Afghanistan exit plan](https://www.npr.org/2021/03/04/973604904/trumps-deal-to-end-war-in-afghanistan-leaves-biden-with-a-terrible-situation) didn't have much substance or thought to it. I genuinely am interested in seeing how Trump would have completed the transition, but unfortunately we don't get to see his plan play through in his eyes.

Given all the blame Biden is getting for inflation, high gas prices, and his exit from Afghanistan, why would it be any different under Trump?

How would it have been different under Trump?Across the country local school board elections are happening. These tend to normally be sleepy nonpartisan affairs focused on budgetary issues or occasionally local scandals, but this year are much more focused on issues that have become a part of the "culture wars" like Covid masking/vaccines, "CRT"/racial issues, and LGBT issues. Schools have been a focal point in the VA Governor's race, as well as messaging from prominent national and state politicians, and PACs like the 1776 Project. The atmosphere at many school board meetings has been more reminiscent of the 2009-2010 "Tea Party" town halls.

How significantly different is this year to years prior? Will this continue?

Is this merely because due to being an off-year it is the only place for most of these issues to be "fought"? Is this just a way for people to air their grievances in an electoral context, or perhaps a way for political operatives to test out messaging for next year?

It seems to be an issue where conservatives are on the offense and very fired up, while liberals are more defensive, quiet, unaware, or even ambivalent. Is this true? Is this a winning issue for conservatives?

If conservatives are broadly successful in changing the composition of school boards, what will be the implications? Will there be changes to school curriculum? How significant will they be? Are there significant things that would or can change in school curriculum regarding these issues, or is this mostly about messaging (perception vs reality of the teaching of these issues)? Do liberals even have more control currently? Will winning more control/using that power backfire? Are we likely to see this issue expand further to states trying to exert more control over college courses?

Do conservatives believe that school curriculum is a significant reason for young people's more liberal views (about social issues in particular)? If so, are they correct? Would having more control of school boards actually be a useful "weapon" in the "culture wars"?With the rise of "Trumpism" it would seem that the republican party has an ever growing divide. Even among elected officials, there are those that whole heartedly support the Trump movement and some Republicans that have pushed back against it.

Should there be a MAGA party and a GOP?
Or conversely is is possible that the devide will close with time?For example in NYC you can look up your voting location by your house number and street. When you arrive at the voting booth you provide them with that information and your name. They find your name in the system and ask you to sign in. There isn't a signature matching in place that is checked. No other information is needed or any form of ID. You then are given your ballot and told to go to a private booth to vote. You scan in your voting paper in front of the inspectors. 

What is the system in your own state/city? Do you believe this system is strong enough or not strong enough to protect voting integrity and why?At a Youngkin rally on Friday, a group of "protestors" showed up with tiki torches, pretending to be youngkin supporters and taking pictures in front of his campaign bus. 

After the media picked up the story and started highlighting the pictures, people noticed something was off about them, and social media sleuths ended up figuring out who they were and that they all had ties to democrat activists groups. After this happened, the Lincoln Project (an anti-trump group associated with democrats) claimed responsibility for the hoax.

[Article about the incident.](https://www.businessinsider.com/lincoln-project-sends-fake-white-supremacists-to-virginia-gop-event-2021-10)

Does anyone think this will impact the election one way or the other, either:

1. Negative backlash against McAuliffe for the hoax
2. Negative backlash against Youngkin from people who only see the image and don't realize it's a hoaxIt has become common recently among the opponents of the incumbent president to come up with what they think are clever insults about him that have gotten traction in social media and popular culture.

The most recent insult has been against president Biden with the chant "Let's go Brandon" as a cleaner version of "F..., Joe Biden". 

The two previous presidents also had insults spread by their foes. For Trump, among the most notable was changing his last name to "Drumpf" that was first popularized by HBO's John Oliver.

For Obama, the phrase "Thanks, Obama" was a backhanded "compliment" used by conservatives after what they perceived as screw ups happening under Obama like the Benghazi incident.

What do you make of the use of and viral spread of these kinds of insults directed at incumbent presidents? Is it effective for the opposition to keep using them or will it turn off the electorate more than it rallies the base?People are increasingly writing Florida off as no longer a swing state and increasingly red. After all, Trump won there by a substantial margin in 2020 and the GOP won big in a blue wave year. Yet the margins themselves leave much to be desired. Though we have yet to see how conservatives flocking yo Florida to escape lockdowns will fully shape out, and in spite of their follies, the votes for the Dems are there. 

Both Trump and Biden cleared the 5 million vote hurdle in 2020, with a different of 383,00. The Latino swing in South Florida is part of this, but the area still leans Democratic. So Florida can’t entirely be written off. Despite gerrymandering FL still sends plenty of Democrats to Congress. 

So the question remains broadly what will it take for the Democrats to make inroads in Florida again?When it comes to investments like stocks, people are usually only taxed when they sell the investments. However, people have to pay property taxes even if they aren't selling the property. Is this different from an unrealized capital gains tax? Or is it that property taxes are such an old concept that we make an exception for them?Human mortality is a fact of life, and the Queen is no exception. So could the monarchy be mortal, too?

Queen Elizabeth [seems to be having some health issues](https://www.cnn.com/2021/10/29/europe/queen-elizabeth-ii-rest-two-weeks-intl-gbr/index.html) of late, now taking two more weeks off from public life after cancelling several public appearances, [using a cane at church](https://www.usatoday.com/story/entertainment/celebrities/2021/10/13/queen-elizabeth-ii-cane-first-time-royal-british-legion-event/8433955002/), and ultimately [a brief hospitalization](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/10/21/world/europe/queen-elizabeth-health-hospital.html). She is 95, has been reigning for seven decades, and has otherwise been in good health. Her mother lived to be 102, so she has obviously been blessed with good genes, and I wish her a speedy recovery and good health, but wonder about the inevitable: What will happen after her death?

Her death will be a massive world event, and will be [potentially cataclysmic](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QDRF8jdVFC0): markets will suspend trading, businesses and schools will close, countries and citizens will mourn, and national leaders will flock to London for her funeral. 

Culturally and politically, her death will produce plenty of critical questions to the public and to Parliament: Will the UK reevaluate it's attachment to the Royal Family? Will they still receive state funding? Will the Monarchy continue at all? Will Charles succeed his mother? Will his image replace her on all money? Or will someone/something else? Will other countries declare themselves independent of the UK? Are we on the cusp of witnessing the last royal figure after almost 1000 years?How would democrats go about defeating him? Which candidates could they run. Do you think if the election was held today he would win? By how much? What would the implications be if he lost his re-election?As you may know, anti-government sentiment in Russia seems to be at an all-time high. Besides the protests calling for the release of President Vladimir Putin's most vocal critic Alexei Navalny, there has been pushback against Russia's high levels of corruption, unfair elections, and use of political repression.

Which has me wondering, what if this all culminates in a violent revolution much like the one in Ukraine back in 2014? Where the people rise up against their autocratic government? Granted, the Kremlin would just try to subdue them as they always had with dissenters, but what if the unrest grows to the point where it eventually puts Putin's life in danger? The end result would be Putin either being forced out of Russia, imprisoned, or even executed by the opposition.

From that point a transitional government would be established. Who do you think would be the winner of the elections held by it? What would be the new ruling party and what new direction would they take Russia in? Not to mention how would the rest of the world react to all this?For anyone who hasn't been keeping up, Canada has been going through a whole process of Truth and Reconciliation regarding its First Nations communities after the horrors of the residential school system where thousands of indigenous children were involve. The Catholic Church, as well as other Churches, were involved in operating this system that was established by the Canadian government under Canada's first Prime Minister John A Macdonald. 

One of the calls of Canada's TRC is that the Pope visit Canada and apologise on Canadian soil for the harms of residential schools(Canada's federal government has also apologised). Initially the Pope declined visiting Canada in 2018 but this year in 2021 he finally accepted the invitation. Now watching this whole drama unfold there were many who were saying "Well he doesn't want to apologise because he's afraid of the financial repercussions" or "he doesn't care about indigenous issues". 

As someone who has Pope Francis's career since he became Pope.....those explanations aren't satisfying in part because he's apologised to indigenous communities in other contexts before. When he visited Bolivia in 2015 he apologised to the indigenous communities their while standing on a stage with Evo Morales, the first indigenous president of Latin America. When he visited Mexico in 2016 he gave another apology to the indigenous communities. He reiterated that apology again in 2021 which angered right wing political figures in Spain. When he visited Peru in 2018 he apologised there as well, and when he released his Papal Document Querida Amazonia which deals with justice issues in the Amazon he apologised again. So it doesn't seem to be to have been a question of his "not being willing" to apologise. 

I am wondering if it had to do with scheduling a Papal visit to Canada. Because I noticed in 2018, the same year that he declined to visit Canada, he also declined invitations to visit South Sudan(in the middle of a Civil War the Vatican is mediating), Argentina(his home country), Spain and other countries. This year, he was invited again to visit Canada(which he accepted this time) but was also invited to visit India, North Korea(by both the North and South Korean leaders) and Scotland for COP26(which he declined). The pattern I am noticing is that he receives a lot of invitations from different parts of the globe to visit different countries. And the Vatican seems to accept some at a time, and either postpone or decline others. I am wondering if that's what initially happened with Canada, before he finally accepted.There is a lot of talk recently about student loan forgiveness, college costs, and general burden this all has on students, families, and the economy as a whole. I would like to get people's opinion about a program that I believe caused college costs to rise while also get more people to go to college in the first place.

# The Good

College enrollment has been going up every year since the federal student loan guarantee program went into effect. Millions of mostly poor and underserved students and families could finally afford to get higher education and get another tool to leave generational poverty while at the same time making the US workforce more educated and more productive.

# The Bad

Costs. It is not news to anyone that college is expensive and as a follow-up lots of people are deeply into debt because they went to college. But how does college become so expensive after more students can take on debt? Lets look at historic numbers for reference:

Yale annual tuition in 1970 was $2550 and the minimum wage age was $1.45 an hour while the median household salary was $9,870. I did the math this means tuition for four years at Yale, one of the best and most expensive universities, requires $10,000, or roughly one year of the median income. A family can save 5% of their income (assuming no interest accrued) for 18 years to pay for over 90% of one child’s four year tuition. The rest the child can fund using a part time minimum wage job over the summer or have one-off jobs throughout high school to save up a little too. The numbers get crazy low for state schools which would have tuition at around $500-$700.

Schools cannot charge more than what parents and students had in savings so prices for the average school was kept low enough for middle income parents to afford directly. Today schools can charge more every year (and they do) because no matter what happens the student is approved for a loan and that loan is guaranteed by the government. This is leading to even middle class families being forced to take out loans.

# The Ugly

Its only getting worse. College costs are still rising, and will continue to rise, plus government liabilities for this grow. However any political changes are impossible.

1. Impossible political change: nationalize all colleges to
2. Impossible political change: forgive all debt. This won't fix the problem for future students and it will create a lot of inflation as money that would have went to pay the debt is now able to be spent chasing goods and services (raising their prices)
3. Impossible political change: get rid of the student loan program, forcing parents and students to pay for college directly or take out private loans

Thoughts anyone?There are a lot of really interesting studies confirming the phenomenon of tax migration in the US and the EU. Because mobility is so high, a lot of people, especially high earners, uproot and move to lower-tax environments. This can happen if their place of origin raises taxes, or if the place they’re moving into establishes a low-tax scheme to attract migration (like what Denmark did in the ‘90s, for instance).

The fact that the US and EU have such high mobility, combined with the ability of governments within them to create their own tax systems, undermines any unilateral attempts at tax progressivity. If one government decides to create a more equitable tax system, then high earners will easily just flee to a place that lets them keep more of their money. This results in a hard hit on tax revenue in the more progressive system, creating a lose-lose situation between income inequality with high earners in-state and progressive taxes with poor public revenue.

As a resident of California who’s hearing about tax migration from businesses and individuals all the time, this is especially interesting to me. What do we do to resolve the consequences that it has for state governments? Is a mostly federal tax system a good solution? Is it politically feasible?I been reading and analyzing crime news stories for the last few years via google news and I've noticed what seems to be an uptick in teens being charged as adults.  
 there are still states that have processes to charge teens as adults for many felonies and that many people in the U.S. did not necessarily agree on going soft on teens in court (and crime generally) or even see teens like children.

For example I believe in North Carolina if a 14 year old sells MDMA he/she could be tried as adult through a prosecutorial motion at judicial hearing
 Does anyone think some states will go back on tough on crime initiatives on juveniles like in the early 00's?

Which states do you see this happening first?[Draft legislative text](https://rules.house.gov/sites/democrats.rules.house.gov/files/BILLS-117HR5376RH-RCP117-17.pdf) of the Build Back Better Act was released alongside the [final framework announced by the White House](https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-releases/2021/10/28/president-biden-announces-the-build-back-better-framework). How closely does this represent the description in the framework, and how much is it likely to be changed before it's passed?

More specifically, is there any realistic chance of this making it out of the Senate before the gubernatorial elections on November 2? If not, how about before the end of COP26 on November 13?

As an aside, is the president able to sign bills while abroad?"Hong Kong" passed a  new film censorship law to 'safeguard national security'. Prior to this Hong Kong passed and enacted the Hong Kong National Security Law. We've seen the National Security Law effectively give the Hong Kong law enforcement, and by derivative the CCP, free reign to suppress individuals and movements that are against the CCP. With the new film censorship law, it gives the government free reign to revoke a film's license, and punish violators with fines and prison time. 

One of the obvious distinction between Hong Kong and PRC was Hong Kong had the right to freedom of expression. With the passage of these two laws it seems Hong Kong has lost their right to freedom of expression. From an outsider perspective, it looks like CCP has thrown out the 50-year agreement and beginning the process of making Hong Kong another PRC province.  

Is there currently anything left of Hong Kong that sustains it as a separate system from the PRC? 
Does Hong Kong have any leverage to maintain their Special administrative status?  Where it is not inevitable Hong Kong becomes another PRC province.Hey guys. I’m currently studying the independency movement of Québec at university. A question about sovereignty was raised, and has had me questioning it for some days now.

Is it possible to modify sovereignty? I think it is, because it is already possible to modify the Constitution of a country (taking into account the difficulty of doing so, of course). But I would like to hear more opinions, and of course to see some debate about it. 

Also, is the modification of the sovereignty tied to any material or formal aspects?

I am excited to read your opinions.It seems to me that bills take months or more to pass, so long that a sitting president only gets a chance at a few per term. The stuff that seems to be the cause of that amount of time is that pieces of the bill that have nothing to do with the primary cause of the bill are included, so reps end up voting against legislature because one un-related segment runs counter to their agenda.

I get that part of the reason they put all these extra items in is because they want to pass unpopular stuff by sticking it to popular stuff so it kind of passes by default without going through the full process, but the result is that the popular stuff doesn't get passed either, at least not quickly. But by separating things out into bills with an express purpose, the popular things would have a better chance of getting passed, not being stuck to something unpopular, and then the unpopular things could just die on their own, and the whole process would move much faster.

Is what I'm proposing correct, or am I missing some of the puzzle? If we were to limit the purpose of an individual bill, what would the positive and negative effects be? Who has the most to gain/lose from the way things are now?Recently there was a [poll](https://www.businessinsider.com/majority-of-trump-voters-believe-its-time-to-secede-survey-finds-2021-10?amp) that showed that 52% of Trump Voters wanted red states to secede from the US. 

Now, a survey and an actual referendum are two very different things. But it did launch a thought; should states legally be allowed to secede?

Many Americans of course believe that states shouldn’t be allowed to secede even if the majority wants to. The country supposedly settled this debate in 1865. 

However; many Americans probably also believe in a concept of self determination. Colonialism in Africa being stopped in favor of independence is now considered an obvious moral thing; if the people want independence why shouldn’t they have it?

In more modern terms we can look at Scotland and the UK. The UK has allowed independence referendums, there is a major Scottish Independence Party, and Scottish independence is considered a serious issue. It’s taken as a possibility. The same thing is in Canada with Quebec.

So if Scotland can vote to decide on independence, why shouldn’t Texas be able to?

Moreso, how is it moral? If 60% of a state votes for independence or desires it, why shouldn’t they receive it?This is a hypothetical and it requires placing oneself in someone else’s circumstance. I’m not asking if you agree or disagree with this or that position. I’m asking what you would do if you were a current Republican member of Congress. Would you be willing to compromise at all and cooperate with the Biden administration on any issue?

Before answering this please read these two recent Quinnipiac polls and pay close attention to the Republican responses when asked if they approve or disapprove of President Biden generally and specifically. 

10/6/2021: [https://poll.qu.edu/poll-release?releaseid=3824](https://poll.qu.edu/poll-release?releaseid=3824)  
10/19/2021: [https://poll.qu.edu/poll-release?releaseid=3825](https://poll.qu.edu/poll-release?releaseid=3825)I’m just curious on your stance on if you think Joe Biden is doing a good job or not in office and what your political status is(republican/democrat/conservative/liberal). If you reply, make sure to put what your political status is please, just for curiosity.The [Wall Street Journal is reporting](https://www.wsj.com/articles/biden-administration-in-talks-to-pay-hundreds-of-millions-to-immigrant-families-separated-at-border-11635447591) that the Biden administration is in settlement talks to resolve lawsuits brought by immigrant families that were separated at the border during the Trump administration.  

The lawsuits seek a range of payouts, with the average demand being roughly $3.4 million per family.  The Biden administration is said to be considering a settlement offer of around $450,000 a person in compensation, which could amount to close to $1 million per family and cost American taxpayers $1 billion or more.

It's complicated to try hundreds of different lawsuits at the same time, which is arguably why it makes sense to try to settle them together.

But many Americans will likely balk at the price tag of the settlement the Biden administration is currently considering; some government lawyers involved in the talks view the proposed settlement as excessive for people who violated the law by crossing the border, and another has pointed to the fact that the payouts could amount to more than some families of 9/11 victims received.  In 2019, moreover, the Trump administration was able to settle the claims of an adult and a minor for a combined $125,000, which is considerably less than the $450,000 per person figure currently under consideration by the Biden administration. 

(It should also be noted that settlement talks are also ongoing in a separate lawsuit, known as *Ms. L v. U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement*, in which the ACLU has asked the government to provide families with mental-health and other services, along with a permanent legal status.)

If the claims go to court, Biden will bear no political responsibility for the amount of any judgment and the cost to the taxpayer will lay squarely at the feet of the Trump administration.  Damages will, moreover, be based on each individual's unique circumstances and reflect the will of a jury.

But trying the cases will take a great deal of the time by DoJ attorneys and/or other attorneys if there is a need to outsource work to law firms with special expertise, and there is a risk that juries will award far more than a total of $450,000 to each person.  

The Biden administration has a legal obligation to make a good faith attempt at settlement.  How much should the administration offer to settle these claims, recognizing that if they don't offer enough the claims could ultimately go to court?I'm just curious about how you see the country being in better, same, or worse place if Trump had won his second term. Include your political status and explain your reasoning. For example what would be the state of the economy with Trump and/or what would be the state of Covid in the country.Retail store theft has been on the rise. "A 2020 survey from the National Retail Federation found that organized retail theft has seen a nearly 60% increase from 2015, now averaging $719,548 for every $1 billion in sales." - Business Insider. Several stores like Walgreens and CVS are reporting that more people are committing theft and many new cases are of people walking in during the day and walking out with bag full of products. Walgreens has closed several stores citing theft as their reason. (This claim has been questioned due to the low number of shoplifting incidents reported at some of the closed stores, and Walgreens long term plans to close approximately 200 stores nationwide.) Department stores like Neiman Marcus have also reported increased theft. 

Have specific state laws/national laws impact the retail theft? Have certain policies been more or less successful in reducing these types of crimes?There are reports that the democrats bill is to be completed this week.  Recently there have been reports of many cuts to the democrats bill.  These cuts have been broad and significant.  These cuts or proposal of cuts include penalizing companies who don’t meet renewable standards, free community college tuition, limiting child tax credit and Medicare expansion to only a year or two, potentially removing hearing, vision and dental from Medicare coverage, removing taxes on high income earning, removing Medicare’s ability to negotiate drug prices, removing increasing the IRS ability to go after existing taxes, among others.

These cuts have been made to appeal to moderate senators.  Democrats original strategy was to pass a bill that appealed to middle and lower class Americans.  Yet nearly all of what is being cut is broadly popular.  At what point do these cuts begin to undermine the full effectiveness both from a policy and political point of view?  The only way it will be viewed as a success is if the majority of America feels the impact of it.  Republicans have already prepared their attacks on democrats that these bills are just democrats wildly spending regardless if the bill is $1T or $6T.

There is also the risk that too many cuts will result in the loss of progressive support and then both the infrastructure bill and the BBB will both be dead.  What is the best path forward here?  Should democrats admit defeat and pass nothing?  Should progressives hold strong?  Should they accept a moderate compromised bill?So obviously, political violence is still a huge thing in this day and age, from the 1/6 insurrection to Summer 2020, to Charlottesville. Political violence, sadly seems to be here to stay. However, one thing I've noticed is that we (thankfully I might add) haven't had any major assassinations of any politicians in a long time, and even in regards to assassination attempts that got close to their targets, I can only think of Gabby Giffords and that one British guy who tried to attack Trump in 2016 (I might be missing a few.) 

So why, in this age when political violence is still commonplace, do we have less assassination attempts or assassinations that are successful? I can't think of any time the president has been close to danger since the Reagan attempt except for 9/11. Do we just have better security, or are we able to keep tabs on people who are dangerous and might commit such an act? It seems weird that it the 60's we had a lot of successful ones (JFK, RFK, MLK) and a lot of attempts in the 70's (I think Ford had a lot of assassination attempts IIRC) , however it seems as if since Reagan's assassination attempt there haven't been many that have been close. Could it be possible too that assassinations have gone out of style, or that they don't really achieve political goals all that well ? Obviously I think this is a good thing, but it is odd that we've seen other types of political violence increasing but assassinations have not.[It has been reported that Joe Manchin is currently blocking the Medicare expansion proposed by Bernie Sanders to cover dental, hearing and vision for seniors.](https://thehill.com/policy/healthcare/578319-manchin-shutting-down-sanders-on-medicare-expansion) Manchin's primary concern is the programs solvency, which is set to run out of funds at some point during 2026,  “You’ve got to stabilize that first before you look at basically expansion".

How valid are Machin's concerns. Is expanding Medicare appropriate right now given the program is running out of funding or should the program be cut? Should the Democrats pursue tax increases to make the program financially solvent?So Democrat are pushing for a Tax Reform Bill and  the main  argument is a lot of billions worth Corporation and Billionaires  are barely paying any taxes like Elon Musk , Michael Bloomberg . Jeff Bezos  was put as an example in a interview in CNN as he payee only 83,000 $ in income taxe 

So how accurate is the claim that large multi-billion corporations and Billionaires are not paying their fair share of taxes ?Obviously, there are far more representatives then senators, but when only 1 senator voted Ney, to 66 Representatives, the math doesn't seem to hold up. Nevertheless, both groups likely had the same emotional pressure (9/11 just happened so feeling the need to enact some sort of change to prevent a future tragedy makes sense) and political pressure (the U.S. Public wouldn't look fondly on a politician voting against a security bill in the immediate aftermath of 9/11). So why the stark contrast between the senate and the house?   
Is it to do with something systematic within either the senate or the house which led to the representatives feeling freer to express their opinion? Or the contrary for the senators?  
Is it do with just a different attitude between senators and 'congresspeople'.  
Did the house or senate have some additional motivation to act in the way they did, that the other lacked?   


Thank you all for your thoughts.Things are not looking good for the Democrats in the upcoming midterm and Presidential elections.  They are dealing with difficult math to begin with, holding small margins as it is, facing retirements in their own ranks, and facing Congressional district lines re-drawn to favor Republicans.

Nonetheless, just who is going to show up to oppose Democrats in 2022 and 2024?  Of course, individual Republican incumbents and challengers in hundreds of Congressional Districts.  But what organized opposition?  Who is their *leader*?  Mitch McConnell?  Republican National Committee Chairwoman Ronna McDaniel?  (Most voters haven't even heard of her.)  House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy?  (Likewise.)  

Now, I realize I haven't mentioned the Elephant in the Room.  But can he do it?  Is he even interested?  Will being banned from Facebook and Twitter affect his ability to contend?  And is he too damaged politically from recent events?

I reiterate, just *who* will show up to oppose Democrats in 2022 and 2024?   A disorganized rabble, every Congressional contender running on a different platform in a different district?   Or an organized Republican alliance with a clear agenda and central leadership?   

  
New York Times, Oct. 20, 2021, "[House Democratic Retirements Pile Up as Party Fears Losing Majority](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/10/20/us/politics/house-democrat-retirements.html?smid=url-share)."Earlier today, the Senate's Subcommittee on Consumer Protection, Product Safety, and Data Security held its [third hearing](https://www.commerce.senate.gov/2021/10/protecting-kids-online-snapchat-tiktok-and-youtube) in a series of hearings known as "Protecting Kids Online." While today's hearing saw SnapChat, TikTok, and YouTube provide witness testimony, previous hearings saw Facebook [Whistleblower](https://www.commerce.senate.gov/2021/10/protecting%20kids%20online:%20testimony%20from%20a%20facebook%20whistleblower) Francis Haugen and Facebook's [Global Head of Safety](https://www.commerce.senate.gov/2021/9/protecting-kids-online-facebook-instagram-and-mental-health-harms) testify. 

Throughout these hearings, senators have referenced several bills introduced in Congress. These include the Platform Accountability and Consumer Transparency (PACT) Act, the Kids Internet Design and Safety (KIDS) Act, the Algorithmic Justice and Online Platform Transparency Act, the Children and Media Research Advancement (CAMRA) Act, and the Social Media Privacy Protection and Consumer Rights Act. 

Do you think these hearings will motivate Congress to pass any of these bills or other technology legislation? What measures do you favor or oppose making the final cut of any of these bills?The turnout of Black and Latino voters on 11/02/21 and a consistent turn out of White Democrats are key to a Democratic win; according to some opinions apathy right now is at its highest amongst young Black and Latino voters.  Some of it may be the result of great expectations in the Biden administration which has struggled in accomplishing its agendas and by some accounts has not delivered as much as expected.

Strangely enough some Pundits think Trump is the one selling point that seems to resonate across the Democratic base and the more he gets involved the better it is for the Democrats.

With early voting available on Sundays, Terry McAuliffe has been in majority, Black churches for most Sundays encouraging people to vote. He was in seven churches this past Sunday, according to his campaign.

But, is this enough to compensate for the 20% loss in White vote that he sustained the last time Terry ran and won \[due to super turnout in the minority including Asian\] votes?

Will the demographic changes in recent decades help him win again despite the Republican enthusiasm?In today's world, "fair and free elections" are synonymous with the word democracy. However interestingly enough, this was not the case throughout much of history. In fact, some philosophers (such as the ancient Greeks) would claim that elections are a tool of "oligarchy". 

Some interesting thoughts to consider:

## Ancient Greek democracy & philosophy

* Aristotle [writes](http://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/politics.4.four.html), "The appointment of magistrates by lot is thought to be democratic, and the election of them oligarchic." Here, the word *lot* refers to the use of random selection to appoint officials.
* In the Republic, Plato [writes](https://www.gutenberg.org/files/1497/1497-h/1497-h.htm), "And then democracy comes into being after the poor have conquered their opponents, slaughtering some and banishing some, while to the remainder they give an equal share of freedom and power; and this is the form of government in which the magistrates are commonly elected by lot."

Ancient Athens is usually thought of as the birthplace of democracy. Yet they typically eschewed elections except for a small amount of government positions [1, 3]. The rest was chosen by "[sortition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sortition)", the lottery system as described by Aristotle. 

Although Athens is best remembered for their People's Assembly, other assemblies selected by lottery were used to administer the government, set the agenda, review the legality of legislation, and render judicial verdicts [1, 3]. 

## Rousseau

Rousseau claims elections to be a device of oligarchy in *The Social Contract*. Rousseau writes, "The
moment a people allows itself to be represented, it is no long free: it no longer exists. The
day you elect representatives is the day you lose your freedom” (Social Contract, III, 15). [1]

## The Iron Law of Oligarchy

[Robert Michels](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iron_law_of_oligarchy) suggests that as no sufficiently large and complex organization can function purely as a direct democracy, power eventually is delegated. For Michels, such organization inevitably leads to oligarchy. 

## The practice of sortition in the world today

Although the most famous example of democratic lottery is Ancient Athens, some forms of lottocracy are practiced in comtemporary times. [The practice of random selection for rotating leadership is practiced in some indigenous communities of eastern India](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/dech.12651). Here, anthropologist Alpa Shah observes egalitarian societies that use this practice. However as elections were introduced into village life, Shah noted the rise of hierarchies and even patriarchy once the practice of elections was introduced. 

## Democracy as defined by Woodrow Wilson

Woodrow Wilson writes [1], democracy is

> A form of government which secures absolute equality of *status* before the law, and under which the decisive, final control of public affairs rests with the whole body of adult males."

> More briefly, it is government by universal popular discussion

> Most briefly, [it is] government by popular opinion.

Yet finally

> The people can only accept the governing act of representatives. They do not and cannot originate measures of policy; they acquiesce in policy which a few have originated... They do not, in any adequate sense of the word, govern. 


## Democracy as defined by Robert Dahl

Political theorist [Robert Dahl](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Robert_Dahl) would suggest, democracy is the outcome of the "logic of equality" (Dahl would also define the regimes of today as "polyarchies" rather than "democracies"). 

However for Dahl, "democracy" is an ideal that can only be approached but not necessarily reached to perfection [2]. Liberal democracies approach this ideal through the typical institutions of free and fair elections, freedom of the press, and voting equality. 

## Competitive Democracy

Elections are justified by economist [Joseph Schumpeter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Schumpeter#Democratic_theory) as the mechanism for competition between leaders much like a market. For Schumpeter, democracy *is not* "rule by the people", nor was it about finding the "common good". Democracy is a means to ensure circulation among elites. 


## If not elections then what else could be democratic?

There are a variety of alternatives to substitute or supplement elections with varying degrees of practicality:

* Referendums, recalls, ballot initiatives
* Direct democracy, "soviets", federalism
* Random selection of representatives, jurors, "sortition"
* Solving democracy through technology such as "[liquid democracy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liquid_democracy)". 

# The Debate

Winston Churchill describes democracy as the worst of all governments aside from all others. Yet is the democracy he described really all that democratic? Are elections a facade oligarchs use to as a way to construct legitimacy rather than to achieve self governance? Or are elections the only practical approach towards scaling democracy? If representative democracy is not really democracy, is it synonymous with oligarchy/aristocracy? 


# References

1. James Miller, *[Can Democracy Work?](https://oneworld-publications.com/can-democracy-work.html)*
2. Robert Dahl, *[On Democracy](https://yalebooks.yale.edu/book/9780300254051/democracy)*.
3. Hansen, Mogens Herman. The Athenian Democracy in the Age of Demosthenes (J.A. Crook trans.). University of Oklahoma Press, 1991.Why is homelessness such a large problem in democratic states like New York and California? I have always heard that part of the reason that democrats raise taxes is to help people in the lower class, however, in both California and New York taxes are very high and they both have some of the highest homelessness populations. Is this something to do with legislation or does it have to do with how people are being raised? What is the source of the homelessness problem in these states. I know this is a bit hard to answer and there probably is not a definitive answer but I am curious to get some other thoughts on the issue.Historically, political parties in control of both Houses of Congress and the White House lose seats in midterm elections. Given the Democratic Party’s slim majorities in the House and Senate, conventional wisdom would state that the odds of the Democrats losing Congress are high.

Let’s say, however, that Democrats buck trends and maintain control of the House and the Senate. What would be the ramifications, both in terms of party politics and policy-making?Has a president running for reelection ever been successfully primaried by a politician of his own party and replaced on the ticket? 

There was talk of Republicans primarying Trump in 2020, but that didn't happen, because Trump was too popular with Republicans.Recently, the Grinnell-Selzer poll found that just 30 percent of Americans believe the justices' decisions are based on the Constitution and the law. 62 percent of respondents said the Court's decisions were based on the "political views of members" and eight percent said they weren't sure. The poll was conducted among 915 U.S. adults from October 13 to 17, and had a margin of error of 3.5 percent.

The U.S. Supreme Court's credibility or impartiality is at stake. In the past, the Supreme Court has been unable to enforce its rulings in some cases. For example, many public schools held classroom prayers long after the Court had banned government-sponsored religious activities.

Although the division between the left and the right leaning justices with respect to constitutional interpretation has long existed it has become more stark recently. Some of the disagreement centers around what the Constitution means in the current times rather than what meant as originally written.  

Do the justices need to exercise moderation in their interpretation of the Constitution to gain some credibility back?There has always been a long political debate on the long term prospects of any political system, from the widespread movement away from monarchies/aristocracies in the last couple centuries to the rise of democracies, or governments experimenting with forms of socialism and communism.

What kind of endurance will Western Democracy have in a world in which China and Russia are trying to expand their global influence?

How will democracies deal with homegrown undemocratic movements (especially in the internet age)?

Which western democracies are best positioned?The filibuster has been a widespread point of debate in the last few months due to its role in holding up President Biden's agenda. In frustration, activists have pointed to the filibuster as an arcane tool that simply serves to act as a mechanism to force gridlock, rather than a mechanism to create bipartisanship as its backers say. In response, they propose a total elimination of the filibuster, pointing to its historical use as a weapon against segregation. Backers deny that the filibuster should be removed, pointing either to its potential role in allowing the minority party to air grievances with legislation or to the risks of not having the filibuster when the Republicans return to power. 

That said, why has filibuster reform not received the same attention? Some possible examples of filibuster reform could be as follows: 

* Instead of those seeking to break the filibuster needing 60 votes on hand to break it, the party that wants to continue the filibuster needs 40 people present at all times. If the filibustering party ever only had 39 votes on hand, then the filibuster could be broken immediately. 
* Filibusters require the party in question to send a Senator up to the floor to talk at length. They would be unable to leave the floor for anything -- food, water, bathroom breaks, anything. After every Senator finishes, the Senate could hold a vote on whether or not to end the filibuster and proceed to voting. If it fails, the filibustering party could send up somebody else to take their leg of the filibuster, on and on until either the filibuster is broken or nobody else from the minority party wants to speak (effectively breaking the filibuster). 
* The use of the filibuster grinds the Senate to a halt, and nobody can do anything on any bills or judgeships. All the Senate will be able to do is vote on whether to end the filibuster or give speeches on the attendant legislation. 
* Carveouts for certain specific classes of legislation such as voting rights, much like already exist for judgeship nominations. 

Why do proposals like these to modify the filibuster not get as much attention?With the midterms quickly approaching, people are already looking towards 2024 and the next Presidential election.

Incumbent President Joe Biden will be eligible for re-election and has not indicated that he's against seeking a second term. 

Also possibly seeking a second term is former President Trump, who has made recent campaign stops in Iowa, a key primary state, and currently enjoys support from around [80%](https://poll.qu.edu/poll-release?releaseid=3825) of Republicans. 

If President Trump did as Grover Cleveland had over a century ago and secured the White House after losing the previous election, what effect would this have on the American political situation?During the run up to the 2020 election, Democrats main goals were a: get rid of Trump and b: get large scale infrastructure bill to pass to stimulate the economy during the pandemic. While the infrastructure bill isn’t exactly what it was as designed, and it hasn’t finished negotiations yet, it is still something Democrats can say they have gotten done. With that said, what’s next? What new legislative agenda Democrats should push for nationwide to make voters want to vote blue next November?Yes, I’m thinking of Sens. Manchin and Sinema now. But I’m actually asking the about the general case. How can the president and chamber leader influence a Senator’s vote? Especially, what are the less obvious and/or most forceful ways?

EDIT: To clarify: I'm asking in general, what hardball strategies are available to a US president or congressional chamber leader to win a member’s vote. I'm not asking about current politics surrounding Manchin or Sinema in particular. Also, oops, I made a mistake above, as per precedent, the U.S. Senate is led by the Majority Leader, not the Senate President. I'm talking about the chamber leaders, so the Senate Majority Leader or also the House Speaker.

Some examples: the President can scold or praise members publicly (like Trump did effectively on twitter), or maybe appoint their friends or enemies to official jobs. Or let them take credit for something. Or maybe the President could have the park service stop cleaning the toilets at campgrounds in a Senator’s state (am reaching on this one). A speaker could favor a member for good assignments. Or block a vote on any bills a target representative sponsors. Or allow a vote on their pet bills. It used to be that members were rewarded with pork in their districts. Since leaders generally raise the most money, they can fund opponents to run against disobedient members in the primary. In Statehouses, disobedient members are sometimes punished by assignments to the worst committees, or no committees, or assigning all of that members bills to a single kill committee. It doesn’t always work like this. But i assume it does sometimes, probably rarely, in some places, when the issue really matters to the leader. 

So I’m asking, at the federal level, what kinds of tactics like these can occasionally really get the job done and deliver votes? Also remember, elected officials care about more than getting re-elected. They have their ethics and ideals, as well their legacies, families, friends, and futures outside of politics or beyond their current job. Their self-interest could lie in any of these.Recently, the Education Department [announced](https://www.cnbc.com/amp/2021/10/18/9point8-million-student-loan-borrowers-will-have-servicer-switched-by-2022.html) that in addition to the student loan payment pause ending January 31, 2022, nearly 10 million borrowers will have to deal with transitioning to a new student loan servicer next year.

Meanwhile, progressive members of the Democratic Party have been [pushing](https://news.yahoo.com/progressive-democrats-push-biden-advance-210323407.html) President Biden to take executive action to cancel up to $50,000 in student loans, a move he has so far resisted.

Should Democrats run on college education policy? Should they run on education policy more broadly? How can Democrats effectively campaign on these issues?

Note: I really enjoyed the discussion generated by my original post. My apologies to everyone for crafting the last one in a manner that got taken down and making folks interested in voicing their opinion have to post again.In the United States, much has been written about how Republicans have a structural advantage in the Senate, the Electoral College, and to a lesser degree, the House of Representatives. Generally this is because conservatives tend to live in less populated areas and are thus spread apart more in the country.

There's a lot of discussion about how to account for this structural imbalance through vote reform such as gerrymandering reform. But aside from vote reform, what are some ways to address the structural imbalance itself? What would incentivize urban people to move to the country? What would incentivize people in North Carolina to move to South Carolina? What are some ways to actually decrease the level of geographic polarization that we see?16 American citizens and 1 Canadian affiliated with the Ohio-based Christian Aid Ministries were kidnapped by the "400 Mawozo" gang in Haiti on Saturday. The hostages are twelve adult men and women, as well as an 8-month-old baby and minors ages 3, 6, 14 and 15.


Currently, both Haitian police negotiators and the FBI/State Department are advising the missionary group on how to proceed and that negotiations are ongoing. FBI agents are on the ground in Haiti assisting with the investigation but are not leading the negotiations, nor have they spoken directly with the kidnappers, according to the Haitian Justice Minister. An FBI spokesperson stated, "The FBI is part of a coordinated US government effort to get the Americans involved to safety." A State Department spokesperson stated, "The welfare and safety of US citizens abroad is one of the highest priorities of the Department of State. We have been in regular contact with senior Haitian authorities and will continue to work with them and inter-agency partners."


Obviously this is a tragic situation, but who should be responsible for attempting to resolve it? Governments have a responsibility to keep their own countries safe and enforce justice, and they also have a responsibility to keep their citizens abroad safe. However the US State Department had already previously issued the highest threat level travel advisory on Haiti, "Do Not Travel", for numerous reasons, including the very high risks of kidnapping/related violence. According to the Christian Aid Ministry, the missionaries would have "been well aware of the dangers" of being there. 


Despite their current efforts to resolve the situation, did the US government reasonably do its duty beforehand to try to protect it's citizens? Should it use taxpayer money and resources to help the hostages after they chose to go to Haiti despite knowing the official advisories and risks? Is the ministry group actually the organization that should be most responsible for dealing with this crisis?


Additionally, what are the pros/cons of a government negotiating in any capacity with foreign hostage takers? Could this just encourage future hostage takers to continue similar actions in the future, endangering more lives overall? Or does the immediate threat to civilian lives takes precedence? If the US government use its resources and negotiates, how should they do so to try to discourage potential future hostage takers? Also, does the fact that the hostages include children and a baby, who could not have understood the risks/had a choice in going, affect the scenario?Some pros and cons that are often stated

Pros:
•limit one person having too much power
•encourages people to vote more often
•encourages fresh ideas

Cons:
•sorta un democratic (if people like a president why can’t they keep going)
•arbitrary amountConsidering all of the abuse and invective hurled towards him, it's probably not a shock that Joe Manchin is [considering leaving the Democrats](https://www.motherjones.com/politics/2021/10/senator-joe-manchin-democratic-party-exit-plan-biden-infrastructure-deal-exclusive/) if he does not get the cuts he wants to Progressives spending plan.    

What are the implications for Manchin?  Will he hold his seat next election (presuming he runs)?    

What does this mean for Biden's legislative goals?  Does he change his posture for dealing with Congress?     
  
Finally what does this mean for Democrats if they willing to cast aside moderates to achieve progressive goals?For context:

- All workers in Italy require new COVID health pass from Friday
- Protesters say Green Pass is discriminatory
- Government hopes move encourages more people to get shots
- More than 80% of Italians over 12 already vaccinatedIn early 2021, New York State created the Excluded Workers Fund to give money to undocumented immigrants or others who didn’t have access to the relief the government handed out in reaction to the pandemic. The $2.1 billion has since run out after paying out to over 128,000 people. Now activists are wanting $3 billion more for the fund to cover all the claims made. Is this something democrats should be doing with public money? Do you foresee any political impacts from republicans for this? 

News article: [here](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/10/19/nyregion/new-york-excluded-workers-fund.html?referringSource=articleShare)With ongoing drought issues plaguing western states, we continue to see lowering levels of reservoirs, lakes, and rivers, particularly the Colorado River. States have implemented plans to limit the amount of water allowed to be extracted from the river once certain water level benchmarks are reached. But is this enough?

Development, including residential and commercial development but also industrial and agricultural, continues unfettered in Arizona, Nevada, and southern California. Rather than continue to develop arid areas of the southwest, would America overall be better served by severely limiting development in arid areas and create incentives for relocation to Midwest states?

And if such measures were determined to be required, how would politicians approach this issue?

Obviously politicians from these Southwest states would never allow proactive measures that could hamper growth in their state, but it's interesting to consider whether this one day will be necessary.Atlanta dominates the economic and cultural life of Georgia, and its suburbs are rapidly turning blue, handing Democrats a crucial win in 2020.

Philadelphia is a similarly sized city that dominates the economic and cultural life in PA, and its surrounding suburbs went from deep red to blue in a few decades, keeping PA in the blue column.

Illinois has Chicago and its rapidly blue-shifting suburbs, which are so big that they make IL a deep blue state.

In contrast, states like North Carolina and Ohio do not have a single metro area that dominates the state. Instead, they have several medium sized cities, and their suburbs are quite conservative, compared to Philly or Atlanta. This kept NC and Ohio in the red column. 

Is there a correlation or causation that makes smaller cities have more conservative suburban voters than bigger cities?Since this questions relates to legislation of a fairly particular and less mainstream or nowadays debated area of policy making, this question might not resemble to the more conventional bipartisan political discourse. Please be patient regardless.

I seek, among other things, to understand if there is an apathy in the U.S. and whether it is the reason for the lawmakers own indifference of the issue which otherwise affect thousands of vehicles each year nationwide.

——————————-

Imagine the following scenario: You purchase — or yet worse: Undertake a loan — for a vehicle with a balance on its original manufacturer warranty on the premise the it had no issues other than anything minor. So far so good.

After the purchase, problems ensue, the vehicle needs substantial repairs, engine, airbag etc. and potentially some minor problems as well, and the vehicle ends being a regular at the shop for moths spending several weeks there while you keep jumping in and out of similar loaners. Then you learn the vehicle actually were returned for the same major problems only for the manufacturer to buy your car back and sell it without disclosing it knew.

Turns out you could have been spared by a big sticker on your car “lemon law buyback”, but absent federal regulations, manufacturers simply pass these cars between their subsidiaries across states and evade these duties and spare themselves from the loss associated with putting the scary decals on customers cars.

The implications may be dire. When selling the vehicle, you are required by law to disclose issues actually known to you and of material importance. Arguably, knowing your vehicle is an undisclosed lemon law buyback or a “laundered lemon” may substantially affect your selling propositions concealment may result in a finding of criminal fraud.

Absent federal laws banning these practices, one may only relay common law causes of action to sue back, for e.g. if an action or conduct of one is “outrageous”. The trier of fact is typically the people of this questions as it, by definition, is based not on statutory law, but the lack thereof and on our shared conscience and reasonable moral judgements.

Therefore, my questions are:

Would you consider such a sale to you outrageous? If not, why?

Do you consider the conduct in the above example intolerable in a civilized society? If not, why?

Do you think legislative action is desirable to require manufacturers to brand the title of these cars generally without regard to the state of repurchase or sale? If not, why?I'm not sure if this would be a political or an economic discussion, but since it involves definitions I figured it would be political. So my reasoning is this:

Are dispersals (subsidies, welfare, etc) and taxes very similar things but in reverse? Could our government be improved by thinking of welfare as a reverse tax, or a tax-break for the poor?After the fall of the Soviet Union, it seemed to most that market capitalism practiced in the US and elsewhere was the only way to make a
nation wealthy and powerful. However, the rise of China militarily and economically has seemed to push back on this. In many markers, China is the largest economy in the world with its military being the world's largest military force. They have built the worlds longest high speed rail system in a little over a decade, and have the worlds biggest state-owned corporations. Additionally, places like Vietnam have also grown while operating a state capitalism-like system. Should other nations support state capitalism or continue to only
encourage free-market capitalism like in the US and other nations?Since 1929 there has been no UK elections where the largest party got below 300 seats. Even though it's unlikely to happen for the next UK election, it is also not impossible, considering that at least around 35 (and likely much more) seats from Scotland is going to be won by neither Conservative Party or Labour Party.

Labour Party has ruled out working with SNP if they demand a referendum, while SNP and Conservatives have very little in common. I created a scenario in where no party were close to a majority, and what would happen then. Would the Labour Party be desperate enough to find a deal with SNP? Would the Lib Dems dare to accept a Conservatives coalition when they have an absolutely awful experience with that? 

&#x200B;

Using electoral calculus I made a scenario where

Conservatives got 299 seats

Labours got 253 seats

SNP got 54 seats

Lib Dems got 23 seats

18 seats go to Northern Ireland

PC got 2 seats

Greens got 1 seats

Reform UKs got 0 seats

SGP got 0 seatsI know this question gets asked a lot in the real world but never but here. The presidency of George W Bush is always in hot debate, especially amongst neo-conservatives.  Meanwhile, there is still a debate if either Gore or Bush even won Florida. Now, regardless of your political position, most agree that the 2000 election was seen as a "turning point" as the events of 9/11 and the resulting War on Terror and Iraq War were major points in American foreign policy. Bush also passed the Patriot Act. Al Gore opposed the Iraq War. Though some say that if Al Gore was president, not a lot would have changed. What are your thoughts?It looks like the Democratic candidates for Governor, Lieutenant Governor & Attorney General are not performing very well as of some of the polls that have been published.

It might very well be the case that I haven't researched enough, but save for a recent Fox poll which had McAuliffe up by a not too bad margin of 5 percentage points among likely voters things aren't looking great for Democrats according to pollsters such as YouGov, Emerson and Monmouth.

What are your thoughts? Could the GOP win any of the aforementioned offices in the state or not? Should Democrats be concerned about a reversal of Virginia's realignment process?

P.S: I got the information from [FiveThirtyEight](https://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/polls/governor/virginia/) and [Emerson College](https://emersonpolling.reportablenews.com/pr/virginia-2021-dead-heat-in-governor-and-attorney-general-race).Some historical events have shown that majorly disruptive events such as wars or severe inflation can tip the scales in favor of more governmental control. But events can also tip those scales towards giving the people more power.

What are your thoughts on where that point of no return is, and what sort of events or legislation bring about a style of government that will never return control to its citizens?I calculated this using real (not averge) historical market ROI and revenue collection figures since 1960.

Revenue grows on average 6.5% per year.

Market growth is, on average, 11.62% per year.

2021 FY revenue is estimated to be $3.86T.

With $73T, the government could cut all revenue collections by 6% indefinitely (without a 5% annual investment).

Should governments use revenue to generate revenue?  Or should simply remain reliant on traditional revenue generation?  

What concerns might you have about such strategies?  Edit: Otherwise known as sovereign wealth funds.I know how vague that sounds but considering how ideologies have progressed through out history, what fringe/experimental/theoretical ideologies are there that appear the most modern or advanced in that sense?Afghanistan is arguably the biggest attempt at nation building the US has made in decades and was inarguably a failure. Regardless of the factors the led to this result, does it indicate that neo-imperialism is not a winning strategy the way it was during the cold war?When looking at the last few decades of US politics, government & leadership can we say US Dominance is close to ending under the Biden Administration?

How does the world view the Biden Administration and what will we see out of this presidency?

I am looking for open minded answers and a logical driven approaches.

Please leave your political preference out of discussion and take in account to current and possible future event’s ie China / Russia partnership.


How do we compare to future adversaries?


Please debate but debate respectfully.With us approaching the end of the first year of the Biden-Harris administration, I think its starting to be apparent that democrats might have a problem fielding a strong candidate for the next election. Biden will be more than 80 years old by next election, and although he remains relatively healthy, the toll of the presidential role and the passing of time means that there's a real chance that he is not the next presidential candidate. His most obvious successor, Kamala Harris, is often considered a weak candidate and has relatively low approval ratings. With this in mind, who do you think could be the strongest democratic candidate in the 2024 election as of today?In 2014, the board of Market Basket fired the much beloved President and CEO, Arthur Demoulas. Despite not being unionized, the employees came together for a massive strike and protest. Managers let them clock in despite them doing no work, they discouraged customers from purchasing anything. Managers threatened to resign en mass and many delivery drivers refused to make deliveries. All this happened despite repeated threats to fire the striking workers. Many of the protests were organized over Facebook.

This unrest eventually led to the reinstatement of Arthur Demoulas.

None of the workers or managers were unionized. Yet, with the help of social media like Facebook, they were able to engage in organized labor activity.

Is this a viable approach to get around anti-union legislation? "Unofficially" organizing and communicating over social media? Such actions would risk termination, something against which a union could insulate, but if enough employees come together, a mass firing would be untenable for the company.

With the labor market shaken up and desperately short of workers due to the pandemic, such actions may pack even more of a punch than they did in 2014.

Is this a viable approach?More specifically, he has spoken out against [pleading the fifth](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hMyh7ko9L2g), however he used it many times previously in lawsuits against him.

Curious when the fifth amendment is allowed?

Also, do you think he will use the fifth in impending lawsuits? How do you think this will impact the way he is seen by his followers? Would they see it as acceptable court strategy?

In general, any thoughts on how the lawsuits will affect his possible run, if at all?While Trump as an ex-president has been more visible than past presidents, a theme among some in the commentariat is that it is unseemly for Republicans to be loyal to or fond of Trump even though the vast majority of conservatives voted for him over Biden.

How is the affection toward Trump different or similar to those of past presidents and their partisan bases? Did voters of Obama or Clinton at least through the first year of their ex-presidencies still admire them and wish they could be reelected? How about the Bushes or Reagan? Is Trump supposed to be an outlier among his fans or not?The [Congressional Apportionment Amendment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Congressional_Apportionment_Amendment) was one of the proposed amendments for the bill of rights, which would have set the HoR size to one rep per 50,000 constituents.  The amendment was sent to the states for ratification, but fell one state short, and no state has ratified it since 1792

As there was no sunset in the proposal, it can still be approved if ratified by the requisite number of states. [11 have ratified, 27 more would be required](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Congressional_Apportionment_Amendment#Ratification_history).  

With the current population, the size of the house would be over 6000 under the terms of the amendment, which is completely nonviable.  The current size of 435 was set by the [Apportionment Act of 1911](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apportionment_Act_of_1911) and hasn't been changed in over a century.

Since it can still technically be ratified, could some larger states with complaints over disproportionate representation use the pending amendment to push the issue into a more prominent discussion?  Could a few more states ratifying, or seriously considering it, be a catalyst to drive apportionment reform, even though the chance of hitting 38 states is slim to none, and implementation would be unrealistic anyway?Richard Nixon's approval rating hit 65% in polls immediately following the Apollo 11 landings as this historic moment rallied the country. 1969 was the first year of Nixon's presidency; 2024 is an election year.

Yes, there is unfortunately a good chance this deadline is not met, but if it does occur, how might that impact the 2024 election? Would the fact its not the FIRST lessen the impact? Would the other planned milestones (first woman, first POC) influence things? What other variables are there to consider?A chart showing how the female labor force participation rate has declined over the past two decades:

* https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SL.TLF.CACT.FE.ZS?end=2019&start=1999&view=chart

Report going into greater detail and breaking down the present day statistics. Exact figures are 43.2% of working-age women employed worldwide compared to 68.6% of working-age men, with there being 13 million fewer jobs held by women in 2021 compared to 2019:

* https://www.ilo.org/global/about-the-ilo/newsroom/news/WCMS_813449/lang--en/index.htm

It’d be easy to dismiss the recent figures as down to COVID, and there’s little doubt the pandemic has amplified these changes, but as the first chart shows, this is something that’s been steadily going on for a lot longer (perhaps previously undetected). Men have also almost recovered to their 2019 employment levels, and are fully set to do so later this year, while women have not and will continue to lag behind. 

If these trends continue to hold, what (if anything) do you see as being the cultural and political ramifications? Will society become much more traditional with more strictly adhered to gender norms again like for instance the 1950s and vote in more conservative candidates that will preach those ideals, or could we see a revolution of some sort away from present structures where we could see greater parity in employment between men and women? Could policies like UBI gain greater traction and come into the picture more, for example? And when do you think we could start seeing these changes? If/when overall female employment drops to around 30%? Or 25%? Curious to know your thoughts.Polarization in America is the largest it's been in the last century, possibly since the civil war (in congress at least). Economical issues are not being solved, and the ones that 'are' are happening at way too slow of a pace. 

See a good visual here: [https://www.google.com/search?q=congress+polarization+graph&sxsrf=AOaemvJUPmv\_fJtxgDt1J3Ueu2IuH6\_Z5A:1633813316081&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwie8NXynL7zAhVNVc0KHQx\_DZQQ\_AUoAXoECAIQAw&biw=1257&bih=690&dpr=1.8#imgrc=f9K-KZyr262H\_M](https://www.google.com/search?q=congress+polarization+graph&sxsrf=AOaemvJUPmv_fJtxgDt1J3Ueu2IuH6_Z5A:1633813316081&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwie8NXynL7zAhVNVc0KHQx_DZQQ_AUoAXoECAIQAw&biw=1257&bih=690&dpr=1.8#imgrc=f9K-KZyr262H_M)

&#x200B;

Trust in Government is only going down

[https://www.pewresearch.org/politics/2021/05/17/public-trust-in-government-1958-2021/](https://www.pewresearch.org/politics/2021/05/17/public-trust-in-government-1958-2021/)

&#x200B;

US Debt is going through the roof [https://www.statista.com/statistics/187867/public-debt-of-the-united-states-since-1990/](https://www.statista.com/statistics/187867/public-debt-of-the-united-states-since-1990/)

&#x200B;

My question is, will we see another party emerge, what should we expect in the next 10-20 yearsFollowing two contentious nominations and the inconsistent treatment of Garland vs Barret, the Supreme Court now has a substantial conservative majority in a country which does not. Historically, the court has erred in favor of apolitical behaviors in order to maintain legitimacy and authority despite lacking the power of the purse or sword to back up its rulings.

Do you think Democratic governors and/or the Biden administration will continue to respect the authority of the modern Supreme Court if the court makes a contentious decision - like overturning abortion rights or gay marriage? 

What do you think would happen if a state refused to adhere to a court ruling or rejected the court's legitimacy? For example, would the Biden administration deploy troops to California to shut down abortion clinics if the judiciary told him to? Do you think the newer justices will take legitimacy concerns into account when issuing rulings?Is age an important factor? 

US has quite old politicians from a European perspective. President Biden is 79. The house speaker Nancy Pelosi is 81, the Senate Majority Leader Schumer is 71, and the Senate Minority Leader McConnell is 79. And the US Congress itself is quite old compared to parliaments in European countries for instance. I think you don't can find many example of 85-year olds serving in Parliament with heavy parliamentary duties in other countries. 

I have three questions about this: 

**Why have politicians born in the 1940s dominated US politics so much? Is this because of a generational factor?** I notice that people born in the 1940s have dominated politics for a while. Four US presidents have been born in the 1940s, and house speaker Newt Gingrich (born 1943) already came to power in the 1990s. And almost 30 years later, the house Speaker is born in the same decade. I guess it is not only about about the age itself, but rather also that generation is quite big.  

**Do you the US Politics would be different if there was younger congressmen, Presidents and Governors? Is it good or bad with continutity? Does younger Americans feel represented?** 

**How long will it take before a US President born in the 1970s, 1980s, 1990s will came to power?** Do you think this trend of older politicians in congress, senate and presidency will cling on, or do you think this will eventually change? I guess the trend is that the newly elected senators and congresmen many times already are in their 50s and 60s.A state's certificate of vote can be rejected only if both Houses of Congress, debating separately, vote to accept an objection by a majority in each House. If the objection is approved by both Houses, the state's votes are not included in the count. On January 6th we saw objections but Republicans did not have a majority in the House or enough votes in the Senate. How much pressure will there be especially if Trump is running again in 2024?Since 1980, the inflation rate of college tuition and fees are up 1,200%, and the level of student loan debt is unsustainable. Many are calling for full or partial forgiveness and indefinite 0% APR, however the program is already projected to lose the US govt. $435 billion. These trends will undoubtedly lead to catastrophic fiscal problems unless reform is achieved.

The purpose of this thread is to hear other people's ideas on creative solutions and uncover courses of action that are palatable for both sides of the political aisle. Please share your thoughts and thanks for your time.Republican politicians have been publicly crusading against Twitter's ban on Trump and other controversial figures, on the idea of freedom of speech. The conventional wisdom is that twitter is useful for Trump/Republicans to motivate and activate voters to turn out for elections. But it also motivated Democrats to turn out as well by keeping Trump's name in the news. Is it a help or a foil for Republicans?For those who don't know, let me explain

Chakmas and Hajongs are ethnic groups that originated from the Chittagong Hill tracts of Bangladesh (East Pakistan once).

During the 60s a lot of them migrated and landed in the Indian Union territory- NEFA(Now the state- Arunachal Pradesh). More have come over the years and have been increasing. They first came to escape ethnic clash and dam problems in their Homeland.

Chakmas are predominantly Buddhists while Hajongs are predominantly Hindu

The trouble is, that the indigenous people of Arunachal Pradesh have been getting problems from them. A lot of the new generation Chakma-Hajongs think of themselves as Indian citizens and not refugees like their ancestors. Even the ones who have newly come, think the same way. Cases of encroachment by Chakma-Hajongs have sprung up, which agitates the local people. The agitation has resulted in extreme actions like violence. 

A number of the local Arunachalis want them sent away to another state or back their Homeland, as they fear they will be replaced by the Chakma-Hajongs. In their cultures, the Chakma-Hajongs and Arunachalis have basically little in common. However a lot of the Chakma-Hajongs refuse to leave as they are accustomed to this land and feel emotional with it. 

They are not legally citizens and they do not have the Scheduled Tribe status. In India some special privilege is given to certain groups by giving them statuses like Scheduled tribes or Scheduled castes. There are protests against giving them these statuses

Keep in mind that non-Arunachalis are not allowed to own land in Arunachal Pradesh.

A problem with sending them back to Bangladesh is that Hindus and Buddhists are hunted in the country. It would be problematic for them.

What serves as a worrying example for the unions in Arunachal Pradesh, is the state- "Tripura". In Tripura, the natives have become minorities in their own land, due to massive immigration, most of which is from Bangladesh. 

I am personally torn between preserving local identity and the well-being of the Chakma-Hajongs. One side refuses to go and one side refuses to let them stay.How does Marxism interplay with advanced automation? Once Boston Dynamics robots replace humans on factory lines, what does that mean for seizing the means of production? 

Let’s say that hypothetically we advance to the point that even the proletariat can afford to have an automated personal assistant (e.g. a Tesla bot), how does that effect the dialect between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie?

Will advance robotics move the world towards capitalism or communism? 

What does From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs look like in a society where physical labor is no longer a scarce resource?This Thursday, the Polish Constititional Tribunal ruled that certain sections of EU law are incompatible with the Polish constitution. Notably, the court has taken issue with the principle that European law and the rulings of the Court of Justice of the European Union take precedence over their national counterparts, holding that the Polish constitution must always be ranked higher than any international agreement. Although the ruling will only take effect once the government has published it in the Journal of Laws, the stage has now been set for a further excalation of a multiannual dispute between Brussels and Warsaw.

The dispute over who has final say in judicial and legal matters dates back to the 2015 Polish parliamentary elections, which saw the right-wing party Prawo i Sprawiedliwość (PiS, Law and Justice) come to power and can be seen in the light of a broader conflict over matters such as abortion or LGBTQ rights. Since the election, the party has initiated a number of reforms to Poland's judicial system, which critics, including EU representatives, have argued undermine the independence of the Polish courts. An earlier escalation surrounded the government's decision in 2017 to lower the age of retirement for judges, prosecutors and Supreme Court justices. The government holds that changes such as these are necessary to tackle corruption and to get rid of justices whose appointment dates back to communist rule in Poland, but the new age rules were withdrawn following domestic and international outcry and subsequently ruled illegal by the EU's Court of Justice. The year after, the government changed the rules for the appointment of members to the National Judicial Council, so that the body responsible for the appointment of judges is now elected largely by the PiS-dominated Sejm, a change deemed sufficiently worrying for the ENCJ to suspend the Polish body's membership.

The latest clash and ground for Thursday's legal ruling surrounds the creation of a new disciplinary body that would be given the power to challenge to punish members of the Supreme Court based on their rulings and was brought in response to an application by Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki in June. Critics argue that the ruling has been put out by a court packed with PiS-appointed government loyalists and may put Poland on course for a de facto legal Polexit. The European Commission has responded that it will not accept a challenge to the legal foundations of the EU, including the primacy of EU law. The possibility that EU funding for Poland's pandemic recovery plans will be suspended or withheld seems imminent, as the Commission has yet to approve Warsaw's application and has already linked the release of funds to compliance with EU standards of democracy and rule of law.

In light of all this, relations between Warsaw and Brussels seem to be at a crossroads. If neither side proves willing to back down, the court decision might lead to an indirect departure of Poland from the EU. At the same time, if the EU acquiesces in the face of Polish intransigence, fundamental questions arise about the legal framework the EU operates on. How do you think the situation, and the broader conflict between Brussels and Warsaw will proceed?Hey guys! As we all know the US has really been taking a beating these last 2 years through COVID-19 and the downturn that came with it. Some think that to fix this we need radical change across all areas of American life while other believe we need to slow down and work together. What do you think should happen?For months there has been a [growing divide in COVID vaccination rates](https://www.kff.org/policy-watch/the-red-blue-divide-in-covid-19-vaccination-rates/) between Democrats and Republicans.

[Data complied from the NYT shows that Republicans (/Republicans states) have had many many more deaths than Democrats (/the vast majority of Democratic states) since at least mid/late 2020.](http://dangoodspeed.com/covid/total-deaths-since-july).

I'm not a particularly politically savvy person, but I can't stop wondering specifically how the number of deaths we're seeing might influence elections moving forward. 

Has anyone seen any theories about whether there will be any impact - or even speculation about what potential impact might be? Could the number of deaths have a legitimate impact on how votes shake out in different districts?Idaho has mostly been in the news for overwhelmed hospitals, but today the news has turned bonkers.

Idaho's Governor, Brad Little (R), is currently visiting the Texas border. While the Governor is away, the Lt. Governor, Janice McGeachin (R), has named herself Acting Governor, and inquired of the state's Adjutant General about the steps it would take for her to send the Idaho National Guard to the US southern border.

That's wild enough, but in her own words, she also went on to edit the Governor's executive order on vaccine passports and mandatory testing. Eight minutes later, the Governor tweeted that she didn't have the authority, and that he would be rescinding all orders signed in his absence.

As far as I can tell, Idaho's Constitution does say she's Acting Governor whenever the Governor is away, but is there any precedent for actively going against the will of the Governor as soon as he crosses the state line?

>	Text of Section 12:

> Lieutenant Governor to Act as Governor

>In case of the failure to qualify, the impeachment, or conviction of treason, felony, or other infamous crime of the governor, or his death, removal from office, resignation, **absence from the state**, or inability to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the powers, duties and emoluments of the office for the residue of the term, or until the disability shall cease, shall devolve upon the lieutenant governor.

Edit to add the following from the Idaho Statesman:

> Was this instance of an executive order legal?

> Probably not. Following McGeachin's March attempt, Rep. Melissa Wintrow, D-Boise, requested that the Idaho Attorney General's Office clarify the legality of McGeachin's actions. Deputy Attorney General Brian Kane wrote a detailed letter in response.

> Under state law, school district trustees, cities, counties and public health districts have the power to determine policies to protect public health. State law also prohibits executive orders from changing state law.

> Kane wrote that her March order was not legal. He said "the statute makes clear that an executive order can only be issued to ensure 'that the laws are faithfully executed.'" He also pointed out that it encroached "upon the express statutory authority of local government entities," including school districts.

> Because McGeachin's order in March was not to ensure a current law was being executed, it was not legal. The same logic likely applies to Tuesday's executive order attempt.Parliaments tend to have speedier processes for legislation, but given how America is heavily enshrined with its constitution, it likely can never replace our current congressional system on a federal level.

In which case, if a state decided to adopt a parliament to replace the state-level congressional system, what political realities would need to be faced in order to succeed? It would require a new state constitution and a complete reshuffling of the legislative branch. 

Governorships could likely stay the same since it would be unpopular to replace governors for congress-elected councilors, but a state-parliament could gain the power of picking the Attorney General to offset more power to the legislature. 

The initial uphill battle for this would be extremely difficult since congressmen wouldn't want to immediately be upended from the existing system. But you could recommend "a transition" period, where existing members become the first members of the new parliament. 

[The German Bundestag](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gn45xqlK0uA&ab_channel=CNBCInternational) serves as a good model. I'd go so far as to even divide in bicamerally, with one chamber/house elected by individual ballot, and the other by party-based ballot. 

The hardest aspect for this would seem to be getting the local voters informed as to why this is better. Similar to how its difficult to describe ranked voting to many voters, the advantages of parliaments are difficult to visualize. And garnering support for a constitutional change through referendum seems improbable. 

What do you think about the political capital required for states implementing this sort of system, and would the payoffs to this be worth the energy to push for this?Many people say that we become liberal or "woke" as we get older. Others say we become tomorrow's conservatives. What are some things you have waffled on in later adulthood that are different from when you are a teen or young adult?I'm not from the US and I don't know the intricacies of their political system. From my understanding ( which is likely incorrect ) this a game of chicken between Republicans and Democrats. Republicans can raise the debt ceiling by simply agreeing to it or by not filibuster it. The Democrats can also raise it by just using reconciliation and bypassing the Republican vote.  How would this have played out with an Independent?I grew up learning about the virtues of our constitution and the separation of powers, with the Supreme court's judicial review being the arbiter of what is and is not constitutional. I thought of this system as completely natural until relatively recently, when I read about Marbury vs. Madison and the political fallout of that decision. Specifically, that Thomas Jefferson was opposed to the concept, writing in 1820:

>You seem ... to consider the judges as the ultimate arbiters of all  constitutional questions; a very dangerous doctrine indeed, and one  which would place us under the despotism of an oligarchy. Our judges are  as honest as other men, and not more so. They have, with others, the  same passions for party, for power, and the privilege of their corps.  ... Their power \[is\] the more dangerous as they are in office for life,  and not responsible, as the other functionaries are, to the elective  control. The Constitution has erected no such single tribunal, knowing  that to whatever hands confided, with the corruptions of time and party,  its members would become despots. It has more wisely made all the  departments co-equal and co-sovereign within themselves 

[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Judicial\_review\_in\_the\_United\_States#Marbury\_v.\_Madison](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Judicial_review_in_the_United_States#Marbury_v._Madison)

It seems like control over the constitution has become (or, perhaps, always has been) a game of king of the hill, where it's a mad dash to the top every once in a while when a justice dies and the ruling party gets to put a new guy in. We debate over the merits of packing the court to get favorable results for our party, under the threat of the other party doing the same in 4 years in a system of mutually assured destruction.

Mark Tushnet, a Harvard law professor, said in an interview that the specific members of the supreme court are also not particularly well qualified to be considered experts of constitutional law:

>**Sean Illing**: And what of the “legal quality” of the work \[the Supreme Court is\] doing?  
>  
>**Mark Tushnet:** I think the honest answer there is that, in the modern  era, the quality has ranged from minimally competent legal analysis to  extremely bad decisions that are announced without a clear or compelling  explanation. 

[https://www.vox.com/2018/10/12/17950896/supreme-court-amy-coney-barrett-mark-tushnet](https://www.vox.com/2018/10/12/17950896/supreme-court-amy-coney-barrett-mark-tushnet)

Do you believe we need to rethink the fundamentals of the supreme court, specifically that of judicial review or perhaps presidential appointment/senate confirmation?https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/us-politics/facebook-whistleblower-frances-haugen-b1932226.html

It came out that the Facebook concealed internal research that their platforms cause harm to young children and to society. There is a lot of discussion about regulations. What kind of regulations could we see to combat the negative side effects of social media?I mean people like  Susan Collins (Maine), Lisa Murkowski (Alaska), Mitt Romney (Utah) and Rob Portman (Ohio) pride themselves in not being super Pro-Trump. I'm sure Biden and Democrats might be able to find some common ground with these folks.How far do you all suppose a strong interpretation of the Unitary Executive Theory can be stretched, before it starts to receive resistance that obscures it's effectiveness almost entirely; whether that be from the agencies that constitute the executive branch, or the masses?Do you personally think that Hobbes’ realist model can be seen in our modern day international systems? Does the US actually behave like an individual? If everybody’s end goal is peace then how do we explain global super powers that have already achieved peace for themselves but continue to violate weaker countries?I’m looking for opinions on this. As the country grows and the country seems to become divided, it seems like this country is in for some kind of reckoning or revolution of some sort.

I’m trying to imagine 20-30 years in the future. Would there be any certain events happening like another insurrection, or would there be something that changes the political landscape of this country? Would there be some kind of shift in power for any of these two parties or might a new party created from some kind of ashes?In the current status quo, the House size is fixed at 438 seats, meaning that as the population of a state grows, its districts will end up representing more people even if a neighboring state LOSES population, which could mean less people represented per seat unless the state loses or gains so much people that they start losing or gaining districts, in which the problem keeps repeating. With all the mathematics behind the scenes, we end up with districts of unequal population.

Now granted, there really isn't any room for more physical, actual seats in the actual, physical House of Representatives down in the Capitol, but if the House size wasn't capped and the government had enough money to build a giant new house of representatives with plenty of room for more seats, then we can fix the first problem, allowing districts' populations to equalize since we can keep adding seats to the House.

Now, the second possible issue with the House is more debatable. Some would say that the current 600k limit is just fine, while others may argue to cut those in half (300k), and those who are fans of absolute balkanization, like me, might present an argument for 100k. In fact, I actually am working on a project on [DRA2020](https://davesredistricting.org/) that presents a what-if scenario of the House using districts of 100,000. This issue is trickier, but also more open to discussion, as multiple factors come into play, ranging from nice geographical borders, gerrymandering, minority representation (or segregation some might argue), imbalances, competitiveness, to unforeseen consequences such as smaller districts possibly having a harder time producing qualified representatives, violality to population shifts, logistics of vote counting in the districts, etc.If the pending spending bills pass with a 100% increase in the Federal excise tax on tobacco, would that constitute a violation of President Biden's pledge not to raise taxes on households making less than $ 400,000 / year?

See [https://www.courier-journal.com/story/news/politics/2021/09/28/beshear-opposes-tobacco-tax-hikes-in-reconciliation-bill/5887950001/](https://www.courier-journal.com/story/news/politics/2021/09/28/beshear-opposes-tobacco-tax-hikes-in-reconciliation-bill/5887950001/).

Copy of Pres. Biden tweet:

“I give you my word as a Biden: If you make under $400,000 a year, I’ll never raise your taxes one cent. But, I’m going to make those at the top start to pay their share in taxes.”The Weimar Republic was the government of Germany from the end of WWI and abolition of the monarchy to Hitler's appointment as Chancellor in 1933.

Although the government was democratic for it's era and had moments of stability, the system ultimately failed to preserve itself and the constitution was gradually nullified.

Looking back almost 90 years after its downfall, what could have been done to preserve the Republic? Different economic policy? Alternative decisions from figures like Paul von Hindenburg? A constitutional change? Or was the system doomed from the start?In the United States, anyone can run to be the presidential candidate of a party. Who is allowed to vote in party primaries varies from state to state. There are several kinds of primaries.

**Closed primaries**

In general, a voter seeking to vote in a closed primary must first be a registered party member. Typically, the voter affiliates with a party on his or her voter registration application. This system deters “cross-over” voting by members of other parties. Independent or unaffiliated voters, by definition, are excluded from participating in the party nomination contests. This system generally contributes to a strong party organization.

Closed primary states: Delaware

Maryland

New York

Florida

Nevada

Oregon

Kentucky

New Mexico

Pennsylvania

**Partially closed primaries**

In this system, state law permits political parties to choose whether to allow unaffiliated voters or voters not registered with the party to participate in their nominating contests before each election cycle. In this type of system, parties may let in unaffiliated voters, while still excluding members of opposing parties. This system gives the parties more flexibility from year-to-year about which voters to include. At the same time, it can create uncertainty about whether or not certain voters can participate in party primaries in a given year. 

Partially closed primary states:

Connecticut

Idaho

Oklahoma

North Carolina

South Dakots

 Utah

**Partially open primaries**

This system permits voters to cross party lines, but they must either publicly declare their ballot choice or their ballot selection may be regarded as a form of registration with the corresponding party. Iowa asks voters to choose a party on the state voter registration form, yet it allows a primary voter to publicly change party affiliation for purposes of voting on primary Election Day. Some state parties keep track of who votes in their primaries as a means to identify their backers.

Partially Open Primary States:

Illinois

Ohio

Indiana

Tennessee

Iowa

Wyoming

**Open to unaffiliated voters primaries**

A number of states allow only unaffiliated voters to participate in any party primary they choose, but do not allow voters who are registered with one party to vote in another party’s primary. This system differs from a true open primary because a Democrat cannot cross over and vote in a Republican party primary, or vice versa. New Hampshire requires that unaffiliated voters declare affiliation with a party at the polls in order to vote in that party’s primary. In Colorado, unaffiliated voters must return just one party’s mail ballot, or state which party ballot they want at the polls. The choice is public information, although it does not change the voter's unaffiliated status.

Open to Unaffiliated Voters Primary States:

Arizona

Maine

New Jersey

Colorado

Massachusetts

Rhode Island

Kansas

New Hampshire

West Virginia

**Open primaries**

In general, but not always, states that do not ask voters to choose parties on the voter registration form are “open primary” states. In an open primary, voters may choose privately in which primary to vote. In other words, voters may choose which party’s ballot to vote, but this decision is private and does not register the voter with that party. This permits a voter to cast a vote across party lines for the primary election. Critics argue that the open primary dilutes the parties’ ability to nominate. Supporters say this system gives voters maximal flexibility—allowing them to cross party lines—and maintains their privacy. 

Open Primary States:

Alabama

Michigan

Montana

Vermont

Arkansas

Minnesota

North Dakota

Virginia

Georgia

Mississippi

South Carolina

Wisconsin

Hawaii

Missouri

Texas

 The British party system is much simpler. In the United kingdom, parties hold leadership contests any time they want, not just prior to an election. There are no primaries. In a leadership contest, only party members may run for the job. In practice, only top party insiders, usually people with years if not decades of political experience, and deep networks, decide to run. On election day, party members vote for a new leader, and that is it. The Prime Minister is the leader of the party that wins the most seats in the House of Commons. Whereas Americans can vote directly for their president, British people vote for who will represent their riding, and do not have a say in the choice of their Prime Minister. This makes the American system more democratic on one hand, since anyone can run for president, but more vulnerable to extreme candidates. The superdelegate system can act as a buffer, but it's not always enough. The British system is less democratic, since only established party insiders stand a chance of becoming the Prime Minister, but is less vulnerable to extreme candidates.Despite the support of John Locke it is highly debated if the Declaration of Independence gives US citizens the right to revolt. 

https://www.aei.org/articles/is-there-an-american-right-of-revolution/

I have looked many places and while there's many revolutions in the name of having the right to revolt the articles are very vague or do not mention if there was a former establishment by the government on if that right was explicitly given and how such revolution would occur legally as to remain peaceful. 

This leads me to question, what would a right to revolt look like? What would be the requirements for a revolution? What are the pros and cons? How could a revolution be done *peacefully* and legally? And would this ultimately be a good or bad thing?

While it's believed the majority already have the most power and influence in whether or not a policy gets passed, a recent Princeton study counters this and shows evidence that the economic majority actually have the most sway in passing policies. Granted this is a single new study that may be disproven in the future, however, it is currently not hard for many Americans to believe and is presently concerning. 

https://scholar.princeton.edu/sites/default/files/mgilens/files/gilens_and_page_2014_-testing_theories_of_american_politics.doc.pdf


One way a right to revolution could be executed is if the majority of people agree major changes need to be made to our political structure there could be some kind of meeting in which the current government and leaders of the revolution discuss these issues and the people hear both sides and whatever they vote for would get passed with no elected officials interference. There would most likely need to be a quota of how much support an activist needs in order to take it to the government of course, and this may look like a certain percentage from each state and a large percentage of the overall US.

An example of when this right to revolt could be used is in the USA's fight for gay marriage. Majority supported legal gay unions, however the hang ups were religious and constitutional confliction. Instead of the decades of fighting and marches this issue could've been solved much sooner. With the right of revolution people would have the right to update a single outdated part of the constitution that could achieve true separation of church and government by specifying civil unions instead of marriage and also fundamentally allow gay union as a right. This would solve the religious and constitutional conflicts instead of spending decades trying to bend a new law around them. As it stands currently that law could be taken away by the elected officials by using the constitution as their ammo regardless of if majority Americans agree. And if a right can be taken away it is not a right.

The people, as a majority, may get a safe way to resolve any glaring political issues that pose an immediate threat to their rights. According to a 2021 survey 46% of Americans think we're heading towards a civil war, and once again, stats can lie but this is still concerning. 

https://www.brookings.edu/blog/fixgov/2021/09/16/is-the-us-headed-for-another-civil-war/

With a new concerning study by Princeton, an extremely politically charged climate among us, and many Americans believing a new civil war may come, it may be time to start taking precautions for American safety. The real question is do you think a right to revolt would be able to accomplish this or would is be a major risk to American country?

Edited for context: 

I guess I am using revolution incorrectly or very loosely. It's in the sense that the majority of people should be able to overthrow government decisions and or systems. 

I am a youngin and in *no way* an expert, but I was young enough to see an extremely charged political climate while being unable to vote. As I became old enough to vote I realized how little power I *may* actually have in the face of lobbying and so many money games that go into politics as a whole. With so many elected officials saying whatever gets them elected then doing nothing in office or worse (we all can think of a few) it sometimes feels like our votes betray us. 

With so much violence and controversy today my little optimistic dumbass just wants to know if there's a way to unite people for the better good and skip the voting and praying for years in hopes that maybe our elected official won't change their mind or get paid off. 

This way, also instead of activists or protests becoming big shows or voilent displays, they are instead encouraged to educate and discuss to gain majority support (which in the climate I am familiar with seems almost impossible) so more ideas can be challenged and solutions refined until the American people can have something they can all feel confident in. This could possibly benefit the issues that are not discussed enough/no longer "in season" to debate within politics such as the American mental health system (in my opinion, wrote a research essay on the flawed mental health system but that's not really the subject here). 

However, this idea may all very well just be the ramblings of an idealist that will lead to greater violence in the end. That is also a very real possibility or just the reality. 

But that's what I'm here for, discussion and criticism so I may change/refine my ideas for the better. It's a discussion and without discussion there is no growth.

PS. I tend to be far more easy going/less assertive when talking to individuals in comments. It's a personal flaw I'm trying to work on.The redistrcting process in the US, is under a lot of criticism. The problem is gerrymandering, which means the state's electoral districts are drawn to favor a certain party.

What the catch is though, is the fact that many state's electoral districts are drawn by a governing party of the state.

Examples of how this can bring controversial results:

**Connecticut's 2018 House Elections**

Democrats gets 61.64% of the votes and 100% (5/5) of the seats 

Republicans gets 37.78% of the votes and 0% (0/5) of the seats

**New Jeresey** **2020 House Elections**

Democrats gets 57.28% of the votes and 83.3% (10/12) of the seats 

Republicans gets 41.58% of the votes and 16.6% (2/12) of the seats

**North Carolina's 2020 House Elections**

Democrats gets 50.00% of the votes and 38.5% (5/13) of the seats 

Republicans gets 49.40% of the votes and 61.5% (8/13) of the seats

**South Carolina's 2020 House Elections**

Democrats gets 42.98% of the votes and 14.3% (1/7) of the seats 

Republicans gets 56.38% of the votes and 85.7% (6/7) of the seatsWith progressives demanding 3.5 trillion and Manchin refusing to go above 1.5 trillion, will either bill get passed anytime soon? Who will move their price tag? Manchin, progressives, both, or niether?During the late 18th and early 19th century, there were many who said that free market capitalism was the most efficient economic system. An economist by the name of Henry George shred this sentiment but with an asterisk for land. You see, of the three factors of production, land is the most inelastic as it cannot be moved and investing in land will not increase the amount of it. George thus considered those who made their wealth through land ownership to be rent seekers. George also believed that land ownership enabled natural monopolies to form, particularly in land-intensive sectors such as railways and utilities. He thus advocated that the government use a land value tax in place of every other tax. The LVT is similar to the property tax in that it taxes stationary assets. However, the LVT is only supposed to tax the land, not all of the improvements made to it.

Now let's look at the pros and cons:

**Pros**

* An income tax is a tax on labor. Capital gains tax is a tax on the profit made from selling an asset. Sales tax and VAT are taxes on consumption. It stands to reason that taxing investment and consumption will mean less of those things. Conservatives don't like high taxes because they believe that it will lead to less investment. Capital can be improved upon, so taxing capital gains or corporate income may lead to less economic growth. This would not be the case with the LVT because taxing land will not lead to less land. Instead of taxing Amazon or Jeff Bezos directly for capital gains, corporate income, or general income, you'd be taxing the land on which Bezos owns his mansions.
* An LVT would be progressive in nature because land ownership tends to correlate with more wealth overall (though not perfectly). The proletariat would be better off if the LVT replaced every single tax because their labor (income and payroll tax) and consumption (sales and VAT) are no longer taxed. And if they're renters, they wouldn't have to pay taxes at all.
* LVT incentivizes landowners to make their land useful. This is perhaps the greatest benefit for a few reasons.  

   * Land speculation drives up land prices, making land less affordable
   * Land speculation is a form of rent seeking. Investment used to speculate on land would instead be used on something which actually benefits society
   * Land speculation creates a perverse incentive to limit housing supply
   * Even if a landowner isn't holding onto land to speculate, empty plots of land don't contribute to society
* Land cannot be moved which means no capital flight.
* No tax avoidance can occur so long as land value is calculated properly.

**Cons**

* An LVT would require a land valuation separate from property.
* It is estimated that the total land value of the US is $23 trillion (excluding Alaska and Hawaii) or $26.55 trillion in 2021 dollars. In 2020, the federal government made a total of $3.4 trillion while spending and spent over $6 trillion. In order to equal federal revenue, the LVT would have to be 13%. If the federal government wanted to break even or run a surplus, the tax would have to be 25%. This is all assuming that land values don't drop in the wake of such a tax and Georgists claim that it will, making the tax even higher. And that's just for the federal government. The result could possibly be extremely punitive for farmers. [https://www.forbes.com/sites/timworstall/2015/04/23/fun-number-the-us-is-worth-23-trillion-or-why-a-land-value-tax-wont-work/?sh=31ccbf642bba](https://www.forbes.com/sites/timworstall/2015/04/23/fun-number-the-us-is-worth-23-trillion-or-why-a-land-value-tax-wont-work/?sh=31ccbf642bba) [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United\_States\_federal\_budget#/media/File:2020\_US\_Federal\_Budget\_Infographic.png](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_federal_budget#/media/File:2020_US_Federal_Budget_Infographic.png)  

   * The LVT was proposed back when the federal government's revenue was much smaller and when land made up a larger portion of total GDP. This may be why the LVT fell out of favor after the early 20th century.
* For how much lip service is paid towards the prevention of capital flight, land-intensive industries such as agriculture can move to other countries without an LVT. Furthermore, an LVT may decrease the demand for land, leaving at least some portion of land to public hands. This would decrease the amount of revenue from an LVT.
* Because the US constitution specifically requires the federal government to tax based on state population, an LVT would most likely not withstand a day in court. This means that the LVT would have to be authorized through a new constitutional amendment.

**Some acknowledgments:**

* An LVT requires a distinction between the land and the total property.
* There would have to be an exemption for state parks if this was implemented on a national level.
* As part of a climate change solution, a tax break for carbon sinks would be required.
* There could also be an exemption (or reduced rate) for reservations.
* An LVT would be best phased in gradually. Start at a small number and require people to pay both the original taxes and the LVT. Then do a tax rebate proportional to what they paid in LVT. People (and entities) who pay more in LVT than in any other federal tax combined would not have to pay federal income or capital gains tax.The United Kingdom’s bicameral legislature’s main power lies with the House of Commons and the House of Lords work to complement it (Way Jr.). When a legislation is passed in parliament, there is relatively no opposition. In contrast, the United States’ bicameral legislature’s main power lies in between the House of Representatives and the Senate. Both the houses hold equal powers to rival one another.Joe Manchin's 1.5T resolution bill proposal is the first specific bid from the conservative wing outlining what kind of resolution bill they (or at least Manchin personally) would be willing to pass. It's sure to upset progressives, who were pushing for something much larger and more comprehensive. However, with only 50 votes in the senate, any bill will have to be approved by Manchin in order to pass.

With that in mind, what are your thoughts? What do you like/dislike in his outline? Does this strike you as more of an opening bid, or a hard line? What is the likelihood that a bill following this outline could pass, and *should* it pass?

Below is the verbatim contents of his proposal.

\--- --- --- --- ---

**Agreement to start budget resolution**

# Topline: $1.5 Trillion

Begin debate on Reconciliation bill no earlier than October 1, 2021

Funds in the new legislation cannot be disbursed until all funding from COVID legislation and ARP has been spent.

Federal Reserve ends quantitative easing.

# Spending Conditions

***Families and Health***

Needs based with means testing guardrails/formulas on new spending

Targeted spending caps on existing programs

No additional handouts outs or transfer payments

Inclusion of S. 1783 Budgeting for Opioid Addiction Treatment Act (LifeBOAT Act)

&#x200B;

***Climate***

Sole ENR jurisdiction on any clean energy standard

Spending on innovation, not elimination. Fuel neutral

Energy and Vehicle Tax policies:

* That CCUs be included and ensure that CCUS on coal and natural gas can feasibly qualify
* If tax credits for solar and wind are included and extended, then fossil tax credits are not repealed (eg. intangible drilling costs and credits for enhanced oil recovery)
* Vehicle and fuel tax credits shall not be limited to electric vehicles -- they must include hydrogen.

&#x200B;

***Offsets Conditions***

Any revenue exceeding $1.5T shall be used for defect reduction

Corporate tax rate: 25%

Corporate domestic minimum tax: 15%

Raise the top rate on ordinary income: 39.6%

Raise cap gains rate: 28% All in

End carried interest

Tax Gap, Rebate Rule, Dynamic Growth

**Senator Manchin does not guarantee that he will vote for the final reconciliation legislation if it exceeds the conditions outlined in this agreement**

[Link to Original Document](https://static.politico.com/1e/ef/159cabd547868585f9b1a8f06388/july-28-2021.pdf)The post-Trump era of U.S. politics seems to have highlighted a lot of growing discontent with the design of the U.S. government, ranging from disillusionment towardsthe federal judiciary (particularly the U.S. Supreme Court) to longstanding frustrations with the inherent inequities within the Senate and Electoral College.

Some features of the U.S. government have been amended over the years:

* The 12th Amendment revised the Electoral College such that electors cast a single vote for president and a single vote for vice-president, to prevent a scenario where the president and vice-president came from opposing parties (prior to the ratification of the 12th Amend., the vice-president was simply the runner-up to the presidential election)
* The 17th Amendment changed the way U.S. senators were elected -- no longer directly elected/appointed by state governments, senators are now directly elected in statewide elections
* The Reapportionment Act of 1929 permanently capped the size of the U.S. House of Representatives to 435 seats, in an effort by Republicans to limit the impact of demographic shifts that threatened the party's electoral prospects
* The 22d Amendment codified term-limits for the presidency, after Franklin D. Roosevelt managed to be elected to four terms, breaking the longstanding tradition set by George Washington of voluntarily stepping down after two terms
* At various points in U.S. history, the size and design of the federal judiciary has changed, with early fluctuations in the size of the U.S. Supreme Court (though the Court has been set at 9 seats since 1869) and changes in the number of and size of the federal circuit courts and district courts

So if you had the power to unilaterally enact amendments to the U.S. Constitution focused on the design of the U.S. government, what would you change, and why?In some countries in the past, mostly with Parliamentary systems,  they have weathered various storms by forming unity governments where the biggest parties, who are usually rivals, unite to form a sitting government. The equivalent for the US would be a bipartisan unity ticket for POTUS with a predefined power sharing arrangement. Which politicians today could pull this off (one from each party, please) and what are the top 2 or 3 issues they should build their campaign around in order to win.Somebody like Dick Cheney, from what I've read about him, held an enourmous amount of power in Politics are the highest level, for a long time. It appears like he 'played the game' well, and he ended up being in and around Political power over about 40 years.

So, what other American politicians compare, and who did it better?So I reisde in Denmark, but have british roots on one side of my family, which makes me very interested in British politics, but also very not too knowledgable about British politics (yet). Therefore I wanna apologise if I appear unknowledgeable about some thing regarding UK politics

But I wanted to discuss why the Green Party are doing so bad on a UK scale.

So what I do understand is that the election system in UK more or less forces a two-party election (or at least few parties). This makes almost all voters who are left of center vote for Labour, and almost all voters who are right of center vote Conservative. This is why 98.4% of England seats are either Labour or Conservative. 

But something I fail to understand is why the Green Party is doing so badly. They only sit with one seat out of 573 possible. But what I fail to understand is why they are not at least close to winning some of those very safe Labour Party seats. Because there is around 30 seats in the UK where Labour has around 60% of the votes, and Conservaties have lower than 30%. So why would voters be afraid to vote Green Party in these seats if they knew that it wouldn't be vote wasting as the centre-left is guaranteed at least 60% of the vote. 

I mean in Canada, NDP and Green, more left than centre-left Liberal, is winning around 8.8% of the seats, while in England, parties left of centre-left Labour is winning 0.2% seats. 

I understand that Labour Party is very unpopular right now, so why has been it been so difficult for the  Green Party to challenge them, in very left-wing seats.

Could we see a revolutionary election soon where the Greens begin to get 10+ seats?So North Korea has wanted an official end of war declaration to the Korean War for a long time. Pres. Moon of South Korea has also indicated he wants this as well. My question is, would this actually change much on the peninsula? What would the geopolitical ramifications of an official end to the Korean War, for both Koreas and for the two other participants in the war, i.e. China and the US?

If there wouldn't be much change, then why do both Koreas want it?The New York Times published an article titled ["Red COVID."](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/09/27/briefing/covid-red-states-vaccinations.html) In it, they showed that [Red states](https://static01.nyt.com/images/2021/09/27/multimedia/27-MORNING-sub3-STATE-DEATH-VOTE-PLOT/27-MORNING-sub3-STATE-DEATH-VOTE-PLOT-jumbo.png?quality=90&auto=webp) and [counties](https://static01.nyt.com/images/2021/09/27/multimedia/27-MORNING-sub4-COUNTIES-VOTING-DEATH-CHART/27-MORNING-sub4-COUNTIES-VOTING-DEATH-CHART-jumbo.png?quality=90&auto=webp) have been hit much harder by COVID than Blue states and counties, especially since the Delta variant spread.

At this time, it seems that COVID might be killing Republican voters at a much higher rate than Democratic voters. Will this make it harder for Republicans to win any future elections? Will it effect the Midterms?

Additional source: [Market Watch](https://www.marketwatch.com/story/red-covid-coronavirus-deaths-are-highest-in-counties-with-the-largest-share-of-trump-voters-report-11632764116)

[Vox article on who is vaccinated](https://www.vox.com/22587443/covid-19-vaccine-refusal-hesitancy-variant-delta-cases-rate)As the title says, Republicans have recently threatened to let the US default on it's debt if they don't get their way on the infrastructure bill.

 Does this threat hold any weight? 
Would they really let the US default on it's debt?Mitch McConnell, known for his calculated approach to politics, voted in favor of the bipartisan infrastructure framework (BIF) along with 19 of his Senate Republican colleagues. His reasoning is as follows: while its passage would deliver a key legislative win to President Biden, if the BIF were passed first, it would likely sink the $3.5 trillion reconciliation bill, which contains tax increases and other provisions that are very unpopular with Republicans.

Progressives also realize this, which is why they’ve pressured congressional leadership to advance both the BIF and reconciliation bills in parallel. But after a revolt from centrist Democrats, Pelosi has agreed to unlink the two bills and hold a floor vote on the BIF this Thursday, September 30.

If House Republicans are willing to supply the missing votes that progressives currently refuse to provide for the BIF, they could greatly defang the reconciliation bill, if not sink it altogether. But they seem to be unwilling to do so, unlike their Senate counterparts, and it’s not clear to me why.

1) Do Republicans see a plausible path to sinking BOTH the bipartisan & reconciliation bills? I don’t see one, as Democrats know they have to pass something before the midterms.

2) Do Republicans believe Democrats could still pass a $3.5 trillion Families Plan if they supplied the votes for BIF? Media reports suggest Democrats have serious disagreements over the size & scope of the bill, along with its funding sources.

3) Is it just driven by Trump opposing the BIF? I think even Trump would understand a partial repeal of his signature tax law would be worse for his legacy than giving Democrats a minor win.https://www.washingtonpost.com/us-policy/2021/09/27/senate-debt-ceiling-government-shutdown/

Republicans voted to increase the debt ceiling 3 times under Trump's administration (https://www.factcheck.org/2021/09/debt-limit-qa/) and at least one of these votes was bipartisan:

"In 2017, there was an almost identical bill to fund the government in a bipartisan way, provide bipartisan disaster relief and avoid default. Republicans had total control and were using reconciliation first to try to repeal the Affordable Care Act and then pass the Trump tax cuts for the wealthy, adding $2 trillion to debt,” White House spokesman Jesse Lee said.

“Democrats joined to prevent default in good faith because economic catastrophe should not be a political football. Republicans in the Senate should just do the same now,” he said."

(From https://www.nbcnews.com/politics/congress/why-gop-threatening-block-debt-limit-extension-they-say-needed-n1280064)

Independents and moderates typically decide elections with their votes. McConnell has stated that the debt ceiling *should* be increased, but Democrats should do so unilaterally. This would require Democrats using a reconciliation bill, which they have limited opportunities to use. With McConnell's reasoning and the political implications, how will non democrat/republican voters react to the vote?- The Department of State has stated that “Americans and Israelis are united by our shared commitment to democracy, economic prosperity, and regional security.”

- Wikipedia states “Since 1985, the United States has provided nearly US$3 billion in annual grants to Israel, which has been the largest recipient of annual American aid from 1976 to 2004 and the largest cumulative recipient of aid”

- Israeli settlements in Palestine have seen an increase as of this year, despite Biden’s push for a two state solution

https://www.google.com/amp/s/www.dailysabah.com/world/mid-east/israels-expansion-of-illegal-settlements-in-palestine-has-just-began/amp

Considering the decades America and Israel have been allies, the amount of aid we give Israel, and recent Israeli settlement developments, what would be the results of the U.S. condemning their actions? How would that effect our relationship? How would that negatively and positively impact us?One of the most transparent partisan issues currently is the status of voting rights. Pretty much all democratic voters are against any of the voting restriction laws currently circulating Republican lead state legislatures. With that being said, Senators Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema have continued to drag their feet on the issue of abolishing the filibuster even with it being in the perspective of a civil rights struggle. What can the larger democratic leadership do to pressure them into changing their vote on the filibuster?Hey guys,

I’m interested in learning what are your thoughts on Andrew’s third party, his [platform](https://www.businessinsider.com/andrew-yang-new-3rd-party-name-forward-party-book-2021-9), and potential? 

1.	"Ranked-choice voting and open primaries."
2.	"Fact-based governance."
3.	"[Human-centered capitalism](https://youtu.be/4gFjvm5bu-g)."
4.	"Effective and modern-day government."
5.	"Universal Basic Income."
6.	"Grace and Tolerance."

It is possible he will begin campaigning starting this October giving him almost 3 years and 1 month before Election Day.Over the past few weeks, articles such as [this one from the Washington Examiner](https://www.washingtonexaminer.com/opinion/op-eds/unpacking-the-first-eight-months-of-the-countrys-most-self-destructive-presidency) have been [plastered across right-leaning media](https://www.foxnews.com/politics/white-house-chaos-biden-on-time). Some opinion pieces have claimed that [the US was better under Trump than under Biden](https://www.washingtonexaminer.com/opinion/us-was-better-with-president-trump-than-with-president-biden). Even traditionally left-wing media [are saying that the Biden administration is facing a competency test](https://www.cnn.com/2021/08/16/politics/joe-biden-afghanistan-border-masks-covid-19/index.html). Virtually all of these criticisms stem from 3 “crises” that the current administration is facing:

1. Afghanistan: Biden has been facing criticism for completing the withdrawal of US combat troops from the country, for how quickly the Taliban defeated Afghan forces, and for the chaotic exit that saw [13 service members killed](https://www.google.com/search?q=13%20service%20members%20killed&ie=utf-8&oe=utf-8#). Additionally, critics believe the Afghanistan withdrawal [damaged US relationships with its allies](https://www.cnn.com/2021/08/18/politics/america-is-back-joe-biden-afghanistan/index.html).

2. US-Mexico Border: Biden has been facing criticism as [migrant encounters at the US-Mexico border are the highest in 21 years](https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2021/08/13/migrant-encounters-at-u-s-mexico-border-are-at-a-21-year-high/). Recently, [thousands of Haitians have been arriving at the border](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-us-canada-58667669) seeking refuge.

3. Covid-19: Biden has been facing criticism for the continued spread of Covid-19 and the rising number of hospitalizations in recent months. Some critics have [linked Covid-19 to illegal immigration](https://www.cnbc.com/2021/03/04/texas-gov-abbott-blames-covid-spread-on-immigrants-criticizes-bidens-neanderthal-comment-.html), which ties two of these criticisms together. Biden has also been criticized for [the vaccine mandate on large businesses](https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/republicans-vaccines-mandate-covid/2021/09/13/751c7bde-14a3-11ec-9589-31ac3173c2e5_story.html).

Are these legitimate crises? If so, how much of the blame falls on the current administration? Additionally, are these crises worse than the ones faced by the previous administration during its first 8 months?Obviously, the argument to abolish filibuster is pretty clear. Without the nuclear option, HR1 is dead in the water and any other potential legislation have no chance of getting passed as well.

However, filibuster also prevents Republican's abortion ban after 20 weeks while the Republicans control all three branches of government. [Senate defeats Trump-backed 20-week abortion ban](https://www.politico.com/story/2018/01/29/senate-trump-20-week-abortion-ban-316002). As we can see, legislations can fundamentally change the social and legal structure of the society, like HR1 and a federal ban on abortion. 

So should legislative filibuster be abolished in US senate siAs people repeatedly talk about the price tag of the $3.5 T bill, I've seen very little actually discussed what is in it and far less what should be cut.  Currently Manchin and Sinema are out saying they will not support the bill but it's very unclear what they actually want to see cut.  So I'd like to discuss what should be cut and what should be kept?  If voters and politicians are to demand a reduction of the spending then naturally things must be removed.  What should these items be?

Edit: I don’t want this to strictly be about manchin/Sinema but also you, yourself, as a voter.  If you’re republicans or moderate, what would you remove?  If you’re progressive or far left, what would you be willing to compromise on?As it stands right now, exit polls are showing a tight race between the SPD Social Democrats and Merkel's party, the CDU Christian Democrats. For the first time in 16 years, Germany will have a new Chancellor, but it appears it will be with a very divided government and come down to whichever party is able to deal-make the best to form a government. Currently, both leading parties are at around 25%, meaning no matter what happens they will need at least 2 other parties to form a government.

What do you think the outcome will be and which party will come out on top? Where does each party taking control of the government leave the future of German politics and the future of European politics at large? Germany is seen as the de-facto leader of the EU and whoever takes over for Merkel will have a huge responsibility domestically and internationally.Yesterday, [Nancy Pelosi said she will bring the $1.2 trillion Bipartisan Infrastructure Bill to a vote](https://thehill.com/homenews/house/573840-pelosi-bipartisan-infrastructure-vote-will-happen-monday) in the House of Representatives on Monday, September 27th.

However, Rep Jayapal [has signaled very strongly that she and most of the progressives will not be supporting the bipartisan bill](https://www.newsweek.com/democrat-led-house-panel-advances-35-trillion-budget-bill-ahead-key-vote-1632749) unless the [$3.5 trillion Reconciliation bill](https://www.cnn.com/2021/09/12/politics/house-reconciliation-package-explainer/index.html) passes first, which seems impossible given the timeline.

In addition, it is unlikely that Republicans will make up for the more than 40 progressive votes lost, as [the GOP leadership is against it](https://www.cnn.com/2021/09/23/politics/infrastructure-bill-vote-house-republicans/index.html), and [only a handful of House Republicans have signaled support.](https://thehill.com/homenews/house/573679-house-republican-comes-out-in-support-of-bipartisan-infrastructure-bill)

For discussion:

1. This Bipartisan Infrastructure Bill is unique in that it passed the Senate with bipartisan votes but it is now coming under fire in the House by both the Left and the Right. Is this a good bill in-and-of itself?
2. What will likely happen on Monday? Will the vote succeed, or fail, or be further delayed? Will the progressives fall in line, strike it down, or will the bill be rescued by the Republicans?
3. If the bill succeeds or fails, what will be the likely consequences for the fate of the Reconciliation bill, and the midterms in 2022?

UPDATE:
[Pelosi announced Sunday night](https://www.nytimes.com/2021/09/26/us/politics/infrastructure-vote-pelosi.html) that she is [delaying the vote to Thursday.](https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2021/09/27/pelosi-punts-infrastructure-bill-progressives-claim-60-votes-against-it/)  

Has the increase in spending in American politics by corporations damaged congress's ability to accurately represent the American people? Interests groups have gained so influence on what is bills are being discussed based on how much they spend on lobbying. Campaign costs have risen so much that most candidates have to make deals with super pacts to win. Has all of this damaged the ability of these congressmen to represent who they are supposed to represent the everyday people of their districts or states?With the increased number of undocumented migrants entering America though our southern border from all over the world in the past 9 months — many coming from countries who’s citizens don’t normally immigrate to the US through our southern border — is it possible that we are experiencing a situation similar to what the Europeans began dealing with in 2012?  If so, what lessons should the US take from the European experience to mitigate this situation in a way that is both humane to the immigrants and fair to the citizens of America (particularly in the long term)?For example, a right wing argument for taking action to minimize the damage from climate change could be to frame it as an investment. An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. To put some random numbers on it, we could spend 5% of GDP over the next 10 years or be forced to spend 30% of GDP from 2050 onwards. Another conservative approach to climate change could also be one of national defense. Climate change is going to create increasing instability which will lead to more wars and refugees seeking asylum.When politicians and people talk about people having to pay their “fair share” in taxes what do they believe constitutes as “fair share”? A flat tax? A progressive style of taxation? What manner of progressive taxation? What income is taxable? What constitutes as income? Which people have to pay which tax rate? Should some people be exempt from paying any taxes?

The government now has a lot of obligations which costs a lot of money. People also want a lot of things. They also cost a lot of money. The government has to find money to fund those things.

How would you define “fair share”?I was having a discussion with a coworker and an answer he gave for majority of his taking points was this notion of personal responsibility and that life is “…full of choices that you make…”.  Which led me to this question in where does this strong notion of personal responsibility and personal choice permeate from in American politics?

For a little added context, I grew up in a fairly white, conservative county in the US. The county itself has one of the highest degrees of social mobility in the country. I made a comment how privileged we are to have, by chance, been born here and take advantage of the social mobility, landing good paying jobs abd being seemingly successful young people. His retort was more along the lines of “I made it here due to my own personal choices and owning my responsibilities”. 

Doing a little digging, Ronald Reagan in 1968 said, “It is time to restore the American precept that each individual is accountable for his actions”. And in a speech to the nation on April 9, 1983, Reagan touted “personal responsibility” as a bedrock value of Americans. 

Where does this idea of using personal responsibility to underscore ones success and to discredit others comes from? Was it a political talking point in the past to churn out a voting bloc? Had it always been a talking point for one political party in the US? I’m curious as to the meta behind the talking point, where did it come from and why?

This whole idea of thinking is foreign to me so any insight would be fantastic, thank youI remember in the 2000s when the war in Darfur was major news, especially around 2006 and 2007. And one major aspect that got a significant amount of coverage was the Darfur genocide which involved the Janjaweed militias and the Africans in the South who were either Christians or Animists. There was significant international pressure to do something and you had statements from the Bush Administration on the conflict as well as sanctions that they and the UN imposed. Barack Obama when he was a Senator held rallies on the issue in Washington. You had international campaigns all focused on Darfur. 

Then after 2009ish it just fell out of the news. And I say "fell out of the news" because there is still a conflict going on as of 2021. The Janjaweed and the groups they are fighting in the South are still going at it. Yet the conflict has pretty much died in the international news coverage. Why is that and is it fair to say that that genocide has pretty much been forgotten in international politics?After doing research on the New Deal and Reagan eras, I became increasingly infatuated in the idea of one party solely retaining the presidency and congress for a long period of time. Now that the Republicans have been facing a sort of decline in the coalitions that put Ronald Reagan, George H.W. Bush, and George W. Bush into the presidency, I’m wondering if we are on the cusp of a new era in American politics or are we doomed to repeat this same partisanship we’ve endured for over two decades now?I've been seeing a lot of talk about the end of the Republican Party as a viable national option. I don't necessarily share that view, since I remember about 10 years ago with Romney's defeat, news outlets were saying that there would never be another Republican president without major reforms in the GOP. 

Change, the GOP did 4 years later, but not in the way we predicted. Trump doubled down on a lot of issues the right had been rather shy about since the last election. The prediction in 2012 ended up being partially true, as Trump, in spite of winning in the electoral college, lost the popular vote twice. January 6th also saw a fracture point open up as pro- and anti-impeachment Republicans turned on one another.

This leads to my question: if the GOP does fail to be a viable national party, what takes its place? Are we left with a one-party state, or will there be a successor party that takes its place? It would seem to me that for a democratic republic to function, there must be (however inconvenient it may be) an opposition the the ruling party. What does that opposition look like? If you are on the left, what opponent do you prefer to face?

I will note for full disclosure that I am a member of the Libertarian Party. As such, I have no interest in the success of the GOP,  but I won't interject my opinion on the question here.For Canada the election system if first-past-the-post just as in UK. You can see all the parties has a corresponding party in the other country.

Conservative Party of Canada is equivalent to Conservative Party (UK)

Liberal Party of Canada is equivalent Labour Party (UK)

People's Party of Canada is equivalent to UKIP

Green Party of Canada is equvialent to Green Party of England and Wales

Bloc Québécois is somewhat equvialent to Scottish National Party

New Democratic Party is somewhat equivalent to no party

And this is what I am wondering. What would a party in UK have to do, to gain seats from Labour?

According to electoralcalculus.co.uk there was around 60 seats in which Labour got 60%+ of the vote. This means that the conservatives got something between 7% and 27%. So shouldn´t a new party, like a new left-wing party, attempt to win some of these seats. I mean people wouldnt be afraid to vote for them, if Labour already got more than double of the Conservative, as the new left-wing party or Labour would be guaranteed at least 30% of the vote.From the end of WWII to the fall of the Berlin Wall, the United States has been responsible for providing aid to regimes with questionable human rights records that violently suppressed leftist movements within their own countries. Examples of this include the Republic of Vietnam, the Pinochet regime in Chile, the South Korean military junta, the Somoza regime in Nicaragua and the Contras, the Shah in Iran, Suharto in Indonesia and Marcos in the Philippines, etc.

Was support of these regimes conducive to US interests and/or the long-term liberty and wellbeing of the world at large? If not for these interventions, would the whole world have fallen to Communist influence under the Chinese or the Soviets? Which specific "allies" were worth supporting and which weren't?Scrolling through /all I noticed a post of Marjorie Taylor Green using a Scooby-doo meme to compare the Green New Deal to the communism.  This reminded me of James Inhofe bringing the snowball to the senate floor and, more recently, AOC's 'Tax the Rich' dress.

The cynic in me views acts like this as little more than brand-building for reelection campaigns and not serious politics, but, if I am trying to be more fair-minded, I think one could argue that these people are adopting 21st communication (memes and theatrics) to make serious statements.  

Ignoring whether or not claims of communism and global warming are accurate, or if the rich should be taxed more, what does everyone think about this style of communication?  Should it be ignored and discredited in all contexts or is it a modern and effective way to grab media attention for issues you advocate for?  For the political historians out there, are the theatrics a modern thing or just an evolution of something always present throughout history?

To be clear, I am primarily talking about how politicians communicate with each other and their constituents, not how non-politicians communicate with their representatives or other non-politicians.  Also, I reference US politics, but I think this applies more broadly to all governments as well.At the end of last week, elections to the Russian Parliament (State Duma) were held in Russia.  
Putin's  United Russia party received almost 50% of the vote, which greatly  upset various opposition parties. This is undoubtedly a sad result for  them, because United Russia retained its constitutional majority in  parliament, which gives it the right to pass federal laws without the  support of other parties.

However,  this time not 4, but 5 parties passed to the State Duma. A fresh  democratic party "New People" has been added. The party positions itself  as young politicians for change. Their participation in the new  convocation of parliament can already be considered a good result, since  such a progressive party increases the representativeness of Russian  society in parliament. The party can bring new ideas and a different  approach to solving problems in the country.

And here the question arises, did Putin manage to keep the parliament under his control? Or will a larger number of oppositionists in the State Duma be able to influence the political situation in the country and limit his power?https://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/.premium.MAGAZINE-former-pm-s-son-israel-was-born-in-sin-i-m-collaborating-with-a-criminal-country-1.10220502

>“Suddenly people say, ‘We know what needs to be done,’ for everyone, and are prepared to force their ideas on the public. Who put you [in charge]? The moment Zionism called for the Jews to immigrate to Israel, in order to establish here one home for the Jewish people, which will be a sovereign state, a conflict was created. **The Zionist idea was to come to a place where there were people, members of another people, members of another religion, completely different.**

>**"Have you seen anywhere in the world where the majority would agree to give in to a foreign invader, who says, ‘our forefathers were here,’ and demands to enter the land and take control? The conflict was inherent and Zionism denied this, ignored it… as the proportion of Jews to Arabs changed in favor of the Jews, the Arabs realized that they were losing the majority. Who would agree to such a thing?**

>“So violent conflict began, the riots of 1920, 1921, 1929, 1936–1939, and war and another war and another war. Many say that we ‘deserve’ the land because the Arabs could have accepted us as we were and then everything would have been alright. But they started the war, so they shouldn’t complain. **I see in this whole transformation of the majority [Arab] to a minority and the minority [Jewish] into a majority as immoral.”**

Is he wrong here?  His father was one of the founders of Israel who then became Israel's first Foreign Minister, then it's second Prime Minister, and he was a member of Shin Bet, which is one of the main security forces in Israel, so he saw first hand what was going on during the creation of Israel who's founders were Zionist "invaders" (according to him) from Europe who violently colonized the native Arab population and subjugated them under what can be argued as apartheid rule that still continues today.

I've seen it argued that being against Zionism is antisemitism and Jews who claim Zionism is immoral are "self-hating Jews" yet Yaakov Sharett isn't exactly the first Jew to have an anti-Zionist view point.  I remember Isaac Asimov, a well known Jewish science fiction writer making a similar quote before:

https://www.goodreads.com/quotes/304343-i-am-frequently-asked-if-i-have-visited-israel-whereas

>“I am frequently asked if I have visited Israel, whereas yet, it is simply assumed that I have. Well, I don’t travel. I really don’t, and if I did, I probably wouldn’t visit Israel. I remember how it was in 1948 when Israel was being established and all my Jewish friends were ecstatic, I was not. I said: what are we doing? **We are establishing ourselves in a ghetto, in a small corner of a vast Muslim sea. The Muslims will never forget nor forgive, and Israel, as long as it exists, will be embattled. I was laughed at, but I was right. I can’t help but feel that the Jews didn’t really have the right to appropriate a territory only because 2000 years ago, people they consider their ancestors, were living there.** History moves on and you can’t really turn it back. 

Also Israel's first Prime Minister, David Ben Gurion, was quoted to saying this:

https://www.progressiveisrael.org/ben-gurions-notorious-quotes-their-polemical-uses-abuses/

>“If I were an Arab leader, I would never sign an agreement with Israel. **It is normal; we have taken their country.** It is true God promised it to us, but how could that interest them? Our God is not theirs. **There has been Anti-Semitism, the Nazis, Hitler, Auschwitz, but was that their fault? They see but one thing: we have come and we have stolen their country. Why would they accept that?”**

>David Ben-Gurion (the first Israeli Prime Minister): Quoted by Nahum Goldmann in Le Paraddoxe Juif (The Jewish Paradox), pp121.In light of recent responses regarding this maneuver, I’ve noticed that the discussion regarding the stopgap bill is rather dry or inflamed, but often lacking nuance. 

My initial question is the title; I understand that within the house, there are a variety of committees, with subcommittees under them. Appropriations does have its own set of subcommittees, including defense. According to DeLaura, funding for Israel’s iron dome was moved to defense spending in December. However, it appears that DeLaura has doubled down with a wholly new supplemental bill allowing for Iron Dome funding entirely separate from the stopgap. 

https://appropriations.house.gov/news/press-releases/delauro-introduces-iron-dome-supplemental

My initial question is: 

- is this stopgap bill an appropriate place to include Iron Dome funding?
- additionally, is there something else going on behind the scenes? Was iron dome funding a stealth maneuver by another group of representatives?
- or is this normal, and the response was a simple maneuver that the progressive wing was bound to do?

I also welcome any ELI5 information regarding the stopgap bill and its contents.Recently in the news, Lauren Boebert paid rent and utilities with campaign funds. To which she later reimbursed her campaign for $6,650 source: https://www.denverpost.com/2021/09/22/lauren-boebert-rent-utilities-campaign-finance/

In the report it stated:  “Personal expense of Lauren Boebert billed to campaign account in error. Expense has been reimbursed.”

However, here's a question should individuals who are unelected be able to use campaign donations/funds for personal expenses? Or in short should they be able to have their campaigns pay them a salary? 

If someone is unelected and has a regular job, it can be really challenging to run a campaign plus work a job to support your family. In some instances your employer may even force you to resign, or take an unpaid leave of absence in order to run. 

Some individuals may be forced with the decision

* Do I keep my job, be able to pay my bills and not run for office?

Or

* Do I quit my job, use up what savings I have and run for office?

Or they may not even have to quit their job, but simply work less, and therefore earn less. This hurdle very likely keeps many middle-class Americans running from public office. But isn't the idea of representative democracy to be one where we elect our peers? If the average American can't afford to take a pay cut, or even worse lose their income to run for office, then are we even getting a chance to vote the average American? Or are we just stuck with those with enough resources who don't need to work so therefore they can run for office.

On the other hand couldn't this be abused? Say someone runs for office SOLELY for the purpose of paying themselves a salary, and instead of properly using the campaign funds for a reasonable salary they end up taking a huge chunk for salary well not really investing in their campaign?Recent reports have both Manchin and Sinema willing to sink the infrastructure bill if key components of the reconciliation bill are not removed or the price lowered.  Progressives have also responded saying that the $3.5T amount is the floor and they are also willing to not pass the infrastructure bill if key legislation is removed.  This is all occurring during Bidens lowest point in his approval ratings.  The bill itself has been shown to be overwhelming popular across the board.  

What can Biden and democrats do to move ahead?  Are moderates or progressives more likely to back down?  Is there an actual path for compromise?  Is it worth it for either progressives/moderates to sink the bill?  Who would it hurt more?Following the California recall, the Virginia Governor election takes center stage in the political world. The polling is close - Democrat Governor Terry McAuliffe [**has just a 3.4% lead in the polling average**](https://www.racetothewh.com/virginia) over Republican political newcomer, Glenn Youngkin.

The case for McAuliffe's chances is strong. He has won Virginia before when it was a much more competitive state. [**RacetotheWH has him with a 72% chance of winning the election**](https://www.racetothewh.com/virginia), based on the strength of his polling, experience, and the state's blue tilt. Youngkin has never run for office - which means he's more likely to make rookie mistakes.

However, it's also clear that Glen Youngkin's candidacy is looking stronger today than it did a few months ago. The polling has gotten a bit closer. Earlier, Youngkin was failing to get a substantial level of grassroots support, but he almost caught up to McAuliffe on that front in the last quarter. A strong finish could push him ahead, as 9% of voters remain undecided even with about 40 days left until election day. 

Do you think that Democrats will once again win the Virginia Governorship?For those a bit unfamiliar with recent American politics, Bill Clinton was the President during the majority of the 90s. While he is mostly remembered by younger people for his infamous scandal in the Oval Office, he is less known for having achieved a balanced budget. At one point, there was a surplus even.

A lot of people today claim to be fiscally conservative, and socially liberal. However, he really hasn't seen a Presidental candidate in recent years run on such a platform. So was Clinton the last of this breed?Assuming the US President had the power to order "snap" elections, which is a common feature in Parliamentary systems, who would have been able to use it successfully, and when would they have cruised to an easy re-election for themselves and a politically lockstep legislature?In recent history failure to raising the debt ceiling timely in 2011 rattled the financial markets and Standard & Poor’s issued the first-ever downgrade of the U.S. government’s credit rating. Another debt ceiling faceoff between then-President Barack Obama and congressional Republicans occurred in 2013 as part of a doomed Republican effort to undo the Affordable Care Act. It eventually resulted in the cap being suspended for the first time. 

A prolonged fight can also shut down the federal government along with its contractors and sub-contractors \[except essential services employees such as Border Patrol.\] Even those who continue to perform services are not paid during the shut down, \[though the federal government in the past has paid them after shutdown is lifted.\] Nonetheless, the delay in salaries causes the employees/families and those businesses who cater to the federal employees/government considerable hardship.  

Lifting the debt limit gives the federal government the ability to pay expenses previously authorized by presidents and Congresses. Raising or suspending the debt limit has no direct impact on the size of the national debt, nor does it allow for or restrict any future federal spending.

Democrats say raising the ceiling is needed to accommodate spending under Trump. While Democrats have the power to raise the debt limit by simple majority votes on the budget reconciliation bill, so far they have chosen not to go that route. As a result, it would take a supermajority of 60 votes to overcome filibuster.

Treasury Secretary J. L. Yellen has warned lawmakers that the department next month may run out of ways to stave off a default.

Mark Warner, Moderate Democrat  (VA), of the Senate Budget Committee, noted that both parties agreed under Trump to not “mess with the full faith and credit of the United States of America.”

“To create a fake crisis at this moment with this much going on in the world and this much going on in this country, with us coming out of COVID and dealing with the variant, would be the epitome of irresponsibility,” Warner said. “I just point back to how we treated it under Trump.“ \[Parties had cooperated under Trump to increase the debt ceiling under Trump.\]

Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell recently said: “If our colleagues want to ram through yet another reckless tax and spending spree without our input \[in a reference to 3.5 Trillion bill\], if they want all this spending and debt to be their signature legacy, they should leap at the chance to own every bit of it.”

A CR \[continuing resolution \], for short term is very likely, but is only a band-aid type fix and does not prevent damage to economy. It is unclear what political benefits or deficits this fight will have and which party is more likely to share the lion share of the blame, but it is certain that a shut down or slow down during this pandemic is not going to be helpful to the country. So why is this fight really necessary; what are the likely solutions?EDIT: Social Security (edit: TRUST FUNDS, of which include the OASI, DI, Medicare Part A, etc.) is expected to run out of funds earlier than expected. The OASI in 2034, DI in 2057, Medicare Part A in 2026, etc. I do not know much about how the social security is composed and its respective components’ weights (%) though so the article title could be misleading omission-wise or through lack of clarification.

Edit: [source article](https://www.cnbc.com/2021/08/31/social-security-trust-funds-set-to-be-depleted-sooner-than-expected.html). Dont like CNBC? [Here is Barron’s](https://www.barrons.com/articles/social-security-depleted-by-2034-51630449399). Don’t believe it too? [Here is the summary of the report from the official government](https://www.ssa.gov/OACT/TRSUM/index.html) 

Data from the US gov., shown in this Brookings report (https://www.brookings.edu/research/what-the-2020-census-will-reveal-about-america-stagnating-growth-an-aging-population-and-youthful-diversity/) reveals the US pop. growth is stagnating and the pop. is getting significantly older. 

Edit: 

[If you don’t believe Brookings for whatever reason, here is the official Census gov. data with the same stats](https://www.census.gov/popclock/) This fundamentally ruins the idea of Social Security (having the economically active support the retirement of the non-economically active). 

So what is the future for the program? Funding through taxation? Reducing eligibility?

EDIT: God I hate people who think every information is biased. It is an official government report and objective numbers/stats. Come on