Many regular posters here at [r/truegaming](https://www.reddit.com/r/truegaming/) may often wonder how to improve their posts to better improve possible discussions, but have been unable to get the feedback they desire in any form besides a downvote. This monthly post is designed for frequent posters of [r/truegaming](https://www.reddit.com/r/truegaming/) to receive the feedback they'd like in an organized fashion.

If you are seeking feedback for your posts, we recommend linking to your threads and explaining your thought process in posting them. Explaining the reasoning behind how you posted may be key to finding out what you did wrong and what can be improved. We also recommend including what type of discussion you wanted to start within your threads, and what you believe your own strengths/weaknesses are as a discussion author. This way, people can gauge how you see yourself and can give feedback appropriately.

If you would like to give feedback, we emphasize to please be constructive and polite when doing so. This post is designed for posters to learn from their mistakes, and in order to do so, a decently-sized explanation of their mistakes may be needed. Please also consider replying to those who may not have any replies yet, for even the smallest amount of feedback can help discussion authors.I only recently found out that Bungie was one of the original first person shooter developers. In 1994, they released Marathon, an FPS game that was wildly ambitious for the time. A full narrative, vertical aiming, and alternate fire on weapons were all novel things to have in a 1994 first person shooter.

I find it fascinating how much of Halo's DNA can be seen in Marathon. There are multiple AI characters; there is an invading alien force, complete with alien weapons that you, the player, get to pick up and use; even Hunters make an appearance here. There are not one but two major turning points that totally change the feel of the game in a way that's reminiscent of the Flood.

In particular, a direct line can be drawn from Marathon's Leela and Durandal to Halo's Cortana and 343 Guilty Spark- your two AI companions, one of whom is a steadfast companion and quest-giver, the other a less-known factor with dubious motives who comes in partway through the game to guide the player to questionable actions.

It's interesting how much of what would become Halo can be seen in Bungie's earlier work. What other good examples are there of lesser known early work that foreshadows a studio's later success?

If you want to see what the game is like, I have a review with gameplay on YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NsCo0XnRPT4Last time I tried to play this game was at release. I dropped it half way because of the repetition. This time due to the announcement of the sequel I thought maybe I was wrong and pushed through and completed the game. While I had some fun initially, the clunkyness of getting stuck on geometry during combat, the annoyingly designed enemies and the frustrating parts in the later half with no sense of flow has left me with a bitter taste.

For a Space Marine the later parts of game had me feel like a mook. The enemies are generally spongy and you are fragile. Your shields can barely take any hits and health drains quickly, to recover you need to enter melee combat but the later stages are designed to be primarily shooter driven. Since you are fragile you can't charge from cover to cover, so you end up playing the game like a cover shooter but without the cover mechanics. There was a section where I was thrown into an open area ontop of a giant mech with enemies flying really far away, but I had no long range weapons to take em out with because I did not anticipate it. Hence I had the amazing experience of hiding at weird angles to try and get hit by enemies one by one because you can die in under 5 seconds out in the open when all attack together. In games like halo the designers tend to leave a weapon appropriate to the challenge somewhere, none of that shit here. Similarly in another section there were many rocket boyz along with a large number of rushing melee enemies blocking off the view. Since the rockets seem to have a large area of effect you can never really dodge them, so you end up having to bait out the melee guys out of the reach of rockets and then pick the rocket boyz later. This is so underwhelming, what even is this?

Along with this, I would like to mention the Sprint is practically useless, the speed gain is marginal. Chaos Demons when they die they turn into particles but you cannot move or dodge through them, so in a melee fight you are stuck in place if you are surrounded by chaos demons. Performing finishers for health recovery does not make you invincible so you can still die in the middle of it, this is fine I think DOOM also does this, but what's not fine is some of the executions are crazy long so doing them in a group is certain death. Since there are no iframes for dodge and you are likely to get in some geometry while dodging anyway the game becomes a rather frustrating experience.

I have more but I'm stopping here. Also final boss being just a straight up quick time event is the most underwhelming shit ever! The shooting feels good, sound design is good, melee is satisfying. Most of it is generally just let down by poor game design. Probably never gonna play this game again. I will look to see if Space Marine 2 improves things.

PS: The game's story is so un-involving it might as well not exist.KOF XV is about to release and I found myself very intrigued with SNK already announcing DLC for this game. I just watched the review IGN did for the game and it really seems like this entry isn't much different from XIV. As the reviewer himself pointed, the game just looks like a preetier version of XIV, with some minor adjustments and new mechanics, better online, less characters and pretty much nothing else. Some of the animations are straight up exactly the same as the ones seem in the previous game (which was also in 3D, so there's def a carry over of work) and given the fact that it looks visually similar to Street Figther 5 (a game from 2016), I imagine it will look dated quite fast.

As you might imagine, it's a US$ 60 game.

I understand that DLCs in fighting games are much less intrusive than in other games. Realistically, the average player doesn't even use more than two or three characters consistently and won't be missing on much of the "plot" by not buying the characters or costumes with the additional content. Regardless, SNK wants to release 12 additional characters via DLC throughout 2022 and already showed gameplay for 3 of them that are releasing in March (maybe in less than a from the original launch). That's a little ridiculous to me.

Although I'm highlighting this particular case, you can find plenty of other situations of fighting game franchises using character DLC to boost up the price of their games. I'm not going to go on specific details any other particular cases here, but I feel like everyone knows that gone are the days when unlockable characters in fighting games where part of the gameplay. If you're not an average player and really want to jump in and become hardcore or just want to try a taste of a newer character, the price of admission starts to become unbalanced compared to other games.

The funny thing is that the community has come to accept this. Even though we don't often get new fighting games from new franchises if a fighting game stops getting DLC or doesn't get a lot of DLC, it's hastly considered "dead". Even more funny is the fact that fighting games often "die" when they're in the best shape: with a full roster of characters, countless balance patches and revised finished mechanics. By the time Street Fighter 5 dies (which is pretty soon), it will have 46 characters, the best gameplay and best (still kinda bad) netcode since its launch and the next game is rumored to be launching no further than early to mid 2023.

This is the sort of thing in gaming that gets me really conflicted: other genres that seem more complex  to design and create can't get away with a lot of DLC (especially when announced pre-launch), but fighting games need them to be "alive". Any thoughts?I know this is a strong title, but I genuinely wanted to love dying light,

I never had time for the first one, and I was super hyped for the second game. I was also a big dishonored and mirror's edge fan, so the fact that the main selling point of the game was its parkour was super exciting for me.

I wanted to love this game. I put it in my top 10 before even playing it and I had my heartbroken after getting around to 10 hours in to the first game.

my major problem was:

# The game not having an identity.

It didn't know what it was and most of my problems came with absolutely baffling design choices that really showed Techlands inexperience as a developer. 

* Why are there guns in the game?
* Why is the game so easy on normal and so bullshit on hard?
* Why is the story so bad and
* Why is does it have one of the most  ubisofteque open worlds out there?

# Why are there guns / firearms in the game?

I genuinely don't understand this. I think they fixed it with the second game, but in my (controversial) opinion, there should have been none. Instead of seeing the brutes as a brilliant twist to an otherwise repetitive encounter, now I just dump a bunch of lead to its head until he dies from a safe distance. The game lost so much tension that I purposefully handicapped myself from using guns for as much as I  could. That leads to my second point:

# Why is the game's difficulty so unbalanced?

I think this game should have been harder on normal.  So I restarted after the intro and played it on survivor (not nightmare) and found it surprisingly punishing, in a  good way. It forced me to change up my tactics and study my positioning. That all was thrown out of the window when I unlocked the slide-kick ability that breaks the legs and the finishing ability that insta-kills downed enemies. Since I stopped myself from using guns, that meant after dying a whole lot and almost losing ALL my survivor points, I just defaulted to using this tactic that worked 90% of the time. Draw out, slide kick into a finisher, repeat.

That ruined the potential of the combat system and made it boring. It was my fault, and I chose to make it less fun for myself, but let us take Doom Eternal for an example. It forces you into the "fun zone" by punishing you if you don't engage with the fun mechanics. Dying light actively punishes experimentation by removing survivor points EVERY TIME YOU DIE. I lost it after earning 5000 points for every side quest or so, but I lost 1500 every time I died, meaning that all my work could be undone in just 3 deaths. 

# The game takes itself way, way too seriously.

I think Rais and GRE were the most, bland generic villains out there. They could not have been more badly written. It just hit me so hard that I just ignored the story and skipped the cutscenes. Rahim was childish. Brecken was stupid and Jade was the smart one in the group stereotype.

It could have been so, so different. I wish it were.

# The open world had so much potential, yet was butchered and turned into a generic ubisoft clone.

I loved exploration in this game. I didn't find its color palette bland, I loved the locations. Instead of finding cool items, interesting backstories or awesome places to explore, everywhere was generic, filled with copy paste containers and hand boring fetch quests littered all throughout the map.

I saw the potential, I see it. It was just ruined. Techland clearly expected their gameplay to carry the weight and it does, but even after a while that gets boring too. I got bored mainly because of the difficulty and my previous points.

# I wanted to love it too much. 

I genuinely wanted this game to be placed among the best. I wanted to talk about mirror's edge 2008, dishonored, dark souls and dying light. I wanted this to be one of the all time greats. The potential is there. There are glimpses of it throughout the whole thing, but it collapsed under its own pressure.

&#x200B;

Thank you for reading this. If the second game fixes these issues, I will be more than happy to buy it and try it out.

&#x200B;

Have a nice day.Like, whenever you play video games, it's for the exact same reason you'd experience power fantasies in almost any other medium like them.  You never really question your own violent actions against numerous enemies, or how allies and civilians would have perceived you if you killed enough enemies right in front of them, even if it was to save them.  You just perform the violent actions against your numerous enemies, and get a sick dopamine kick out of it, especially if it was challenging enough, like something out of an old NES game, or Dark Souls.

But in the wake of all of these Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance memes, the ones featuring Raiden launching a flurry of punches against a jacked-up Senator Armstrong, while "It Has to Be This Way" played in the background, it almost made me think about the final battle song and its lyrics.  Essentially, throughout Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance, Raiden never really questioned the myriad of reasons as to why he committed violent acts against his enemies, and just thought of it as a means to save human life.  That was, until he got deeper into his mission, and all of his numerous enemies, like his rival, Jetstream Sam, constantly reminded him that these soldiers that he was killing never wanted to participate in a war at all, and were forced against their will to.  And that by killing these enemy soldiers, Raiden was only going to live up to his "Jack the Ripper" namesake.  Which he did, as soon as he obtained it as a power-up transformation during the boss fight against Monsoon.

Which eventually takes us to the final battle between Raiden and Senator Armstrong.  During that final battle, Raiden was up against a jacked-up, overly muscular and hyper-masculine politician, powered up by nanomachines as well his years of experience in college ball, who promised to use violence as a means to end it once he was elected President of the United States.  And that by killing someone as ultraviolent and dangerous as Senator Armstrong, especially with what used to be Jetstream Sam's katana, Raiden was essentially becoming the very thing he swore to kill, and makes you wonder how he was going to transition back to civilian life after finishing off Armstrong.

I mean, Metal Gear Rising: Revengeance was no Undertale.  It was still a PlatinumGames game, so it was all about over-the-top hack-n-slash gameplay in the vein of Devil May Cry and Bayonetta, and most definitely wasn't going to give you the option to spare your enemies the same way you would the ones from Undertale.  But its story would have made you question the video games you've been playing since your childhood in either the 80's or the 90's.  And both the final battle against Senator Armstrong, and the lyrics from its accompanying battle theme, "It Has to Be This Way" would have reinforced all of it.It's very common among cinephiles (people that loves movies, in case somebody doesn't know the term) to discuss about the work of the different people that were part of a project. While the general population cares about the actors and sometimes directors, cinephiles go much deeper, they care about certain scripters, production designers, photography director, sound designer and more.

But among Gamers, and I mean the hardcore ones that come to this sub to deeply discuss mechanics and systems, it doesn't happen the same. We praise/hate companies, developer/publishing but we don't know the people that worked on it.

We do know a few directors if they have a strong enough personality or career like David Cage, Miyazaki, Kojima, Miyamoto and Shinji Mikami among others and a few voice actors like Adam Harrington (from The Wolf Among Us and Remothered) may be mildly known but what about everybody else?

Can any of you name a lead programmer you follow? UI designer? Animator, environment designer or 3D modeler, UI designer?

Why do you think this happen? My fiancee (who is a cinephile and also loves games) told me that it's probably the Game Awards fault, as they give prize to specific games while movies prizes have a lot of categories for the different people that were part of it. She does have a point, do you think that's the reason or something else entirely?For the past few months i've tried New World and Lost Ark - the 2 biggest MMORPG releases for the past few years with >500k peak players on Steam. 

While New World is broken from the core Lost Ark just feel like a gacha game with shit tons of currencies and power systems. The common thing are they both have very good combat but everything else from questing, story, worlds, social, life skills,...everything just feel so terrible and outdated. If they are single player RPG they would never see the light let alone reaching top Steam.

So my question is: why MMORPG  have not really evolved like most other genres have  ? 

I think the latest wave of success MMO was 10 years ago (ffxiv, gw2, eso) .  And let’s be honest, these very few MMOs that are considered good, are realistically…just okay. When  octopath traveler was announced in 2017, a lot of people got excited  about it because of it is new and original art stlyle called "2D-HD"

I  can't blame them the game looks beautiful with the  exception of some  wierd ligthing effects, however the game art style was credit to be  original from Square-Enix witch isn't true.

This  art style is a evolution of Half-3D-2D games technique, when the PS1  era arive JRPG devs found them-self in a dilema, that being how should  they make their game, they could do like Final Fantasy 7 and make 3D  charater with Pre-render models.

The  problem with making a game like this is that if devs wish to make like  this with big explorable worlds, it would be very colstly and time  consuming because they would had to render all of the games  scenario.

They could go full 3D like Guardian's crusade

The  problem with this use of 3D is that most devs weren't used to use 3D  yet, Guardian's crusade devs had made the Battle Arena Toshinden  trilogy, before making this game, so they were use to make games in 3D,  even so this  technique would require a lot of knowledge about the PS1  hardware.

The could go full 3D like the Suikoden PS1 games

If  you weren't there in the late 90's most gamer would refuse to play 2D  because they were consider it outdated and  obsolete, in the west no in  japan, so your game might not left japan, if you made a full 2D jrpg and  if did it might not sold that well, losing a potencial market.

The solution was making a game with 2D Charaters and 3D scenario, like in Grandia and Xenogears

A  lot of JRPG choose to make games like this because it wouldn't have the  same problem as the other  technique, which was not limited to  tradicinal  turn based JRPG, as matter of fact a lot of PS1 SRPG use  that technique like Final Fantasy tatics and Kartia.

On  the PS2 era the use of it wasn't so wield spread because of the more  powerfull hardware of the PS2 and the fact that devs were more   accustomed  to work with 3D, some games however use that like Disgaea 1  and 2, stella deus, most PS2 flight-plan games and all gust PS2(Atelier  Iris,Mana khemia and Ar tornelico) in 2005 made a game using this  technique to create a action JRPG called Summon night Ex-these

With  the PS3 era most JRPG devs moved own with 3D or started to make more  games for the PSP/DS however idea factory made games like that for the  PS3

This  game made by Idea factory(Agarest of war and Cross edge) could credit  as the first use of "2D-HD" as we know today even thought they aren't  good game, they at least are pretty to look at.

The  modern day implementation of "2D-HD"  emerged with the struggle of  making mid budget retro RPG, Retro RPG had a struggle, If they went 2D  they would be ignore as indie trash or low quality Kemco RPG.

If they went 3D with chiby charater to give retro feel, they would be ignored as children game.

The "2D-HD" is a way to make a game have a retro feel without the problem of other art stlyle.Yesterday I bought Dying Light 2. I liked the parkour and night time zombie horde shown in the trailers, so I looked forward to playing it. But after 1 hour it became clear that this is yet another Ubisoft-style open world game. You clear outposts, scale towers, go from green to orange gear, rinse and repeat. Its blatant filler content that adds little fun but extends the game for longer than it deserves. It completely conflicts with the main story and gameplay. You get so strong, and you build so many safehouses, that the danger disappears completely. The game tries to fix this by having leveling on enemies, so suddenly a zombies does 10x damage, just because it says its level 20 instead of level 2. They also make you give bases to one of 2 factions to make it seem as if that is how you progress in the main conflict, but all the important parts happen in the story. 


Who actually asks for this? Ubisoft, who pretty much created this gameplay, tried to divert from this themselves somewhat with Far Cry 5, but after that they went straight back to this formula again. Assassins Creed Valhalla perfected it by having long segments of copy and paste stuff, interrupted at just before you get tired with some fun raids. Then back to grinding again. It also has a story, but it takes over 50 hours to complete because of the grind.


And the worst part is that**it is GREAT in some games!**. In Just Cause I just want to blow up bigger and bigger bases while getter better and better gear, that is completely acceptable. The Division 2 succeeds by having great level design in its outposts and by making the story line up with gameplay. The games that are actually intentionally designed to be like this are actually pretty good. Because they embrace it and make it engaging and fun. While TD2 is proud of its many "dungeons" and have some pretty clever design in many of them, meanwhile Skyrim has over 100 copy and paste Draugur and bandit caves. Same with Diablo 3, where its expected they put in the effort to make the grind fun.

Why does The Witcher 3, or Halo, or any of the other games that aren't "loot and grind"-games need this crap? It is obvious that their designers don't know how to design such games. They see every other open world game do it and think that its just about copy and pasting some outposts, high value targets, villages to liberate, etc etc. They don't understand how this can be made fun.

Shadow of Mordor managed to make it fun by adding the nemesis system. Then in Shadow of War they made the grind 10x worse, but then added castles and sieges. Meanwhile, what does Halo Infinite give me for grinding its copy and paste outposts? Nothing. 

This is also why BOTW was fresh, because it was largely just a big free world, yes it had towers and shrines, but it made clearing them engaging. Its also why old open world RPGs like Stalker, Morrowind, and FNV still has fans. 

TLDR: open world games with copy paste outposts and towers aren't bad, its only when its put into games that never meant to have them thatI am an indie dev, and sometimes the negativity in the gaming community scares me a bit. Don't get me wrong, I'm not going to be all like "woe is me", I chose this path and accepted the risks associated with it, because I love games too much not to be a developer, it couldn't be any other way.   


I just see lots and lots of channels on youtube(many of them huge), who are entirely dedicated to shitting on games and developers. I think constructive criticism is healthy for developers, and I do not think that they should be shielded from the truth, but sometimes I also think "Man, if game developers only got like 1/1000th the appreciation that actors(rip directors, editors and writers), musicians, and other creative people do, we might be at a much better place. It seems like there is no assumption of good intention, even though a lot of developers are creative people, who decided to dedicate their life to something they are passionate about, despite the enormous economic risks involved in doing so.   


I don't want to defend AAA studios, but it especially doesn't help when a lot of gamers expect more and more realistic graphics from their big titles, despite the prices of games actually decreasing the past 20 years, where as the prices of movie tickets have doubled, and people still saying 60$ for a AAA game is a ripoff. I don't develop these kinds of games, but it is obvious to me that these games are incredible pieces of tech, and take insane amounts of work to create. I know certain AAA franchises are more or less secure no matter what, the real victim here are new IP AAA games, unless they have a big studio with a following behind them (Cyberpunk). It doesn't seem realistic that this will continue, without devs scaling back production, prices increasing, or just implementing more in-game transactions(Most probable). 

&#x200B;

As much as I find this sort of discourse irritating and tiring, I wonder more than anything when watching these channels, why do these people even play games in the first place, when it seems like they have absolutely no appreciation for the medium?Hello!

What made me think about this are RPGs, but it can be extrapolated to any other type of gaming that abuses custom languages.

When they are done right, I believe they can help world building a LOT. Tolkien's LotR is the shining example of this.

But when they are done wrong, they can ruin a perfectly good game. Even more when its use is rampant across the game.

The worst example of recent games I've played, to my mind, is Greedfall. I understand what they were going for but it felt forced, jarring even. Specially since it wasn't used sparsely. The game was plagued with their "native language", and it became the tipping point for me to quit (Greedfall has other issues, but until I reached the point where the created language was used I had been able to ignore them). I couldn't stop thinking about [https://xkcd.com/483/](https://xkcd.com/483/) each time they used the word "ol'menawi".

Pillars of Eternity suffers from this, as well, but they had the benefit of no voice acting so the impact wasn't as heavy. That said, it sure wasn't fun reaching for a glossary each time a conversation was ongoing (And there were LOTS of conversations).

Lately, I've seen games in Early Access (Mostly RPGs) using custom-created languages as a bonus feature of their game, but I can't help feeling that it's actually the opposite, because 1 out of 150 pull it off correctly. 

To me, there's very little benefit to a custom language, and too much risk.Now, obviously I mean this in a general "we" as the community. But with the review thread of SIFU on /r/games the other day, some of the conversations got me thinking about game difficulty and what death/failure in a game should mean for the player.

Personally, I love a challenging game. Soulsborne games, rogue-likes, etc. are my bread and butter. And I have never been too put off by particularly punishing games. But a lot of the flack I saw SIFU receive in reviews wasn't just that the game was difficult but that the game punishes the player "too much" for losing.

But what does that mean? I haven't played SIFU myself yet (emphasis on yet) but from what I can tell, the game seems very similar to a lot of roguelikes/lites I've played with one major difference: losing means harsh consequences for the player moving forward. And I can definitely see why that would be off putting for some.

When compared to games like Hades or Darksouls or Celeste in the comments I kept seeing the same belief that somehow those games don't punish or even reward player death (i.e. death allowing upgrades, ability to level up, etc.). And that made me question why anyone should expect a reward for losing a game? Shouldn't the very idea of playing a game imply that the reward specifically comes from beating it? From winning?

With limitless lives and checkpoints we know in modern gaming, I don't necessarily disagree with the opinion that punishing players for death can be bad, I just can't put a finger on why I think that. So let's discuss:

Should a game punish the players mechanically for "losing" the game? Does that inherently make it more rewarding? Does rewarding death take away from the final feat of beating the game?I know every broad term can only be an approximation when compared to our multi-faceted reality. I am also aware that there are many, maybe terminologically more fitting sub-genres of strategy games, like RTS, GSG etc.

Yet despite that, I can't help but think that "strategy games" as an umbrella term doesn't really fit what is usually understood as part the genre  - similar to the term "RPG". There's two main reasons for this:

One, "strategy" as a term doesn't really serve to differentiate this genre from others. A "strategy" is a long-term and/or overall plan. Now sure, many strategy games require some sort of planning or goals:  create an economy, recruit soldiers, attack enemy (RTS) or forge alliances, focus on weaker enemies (EU4/GSG) or plan your city layout (city builder). However, the same applies to many other games and genres. They e.g. require or incentivize working towards a certain build, towards gathering a certain set of gear ("RPGs", action games); or they ask you to devise a certain battle plan or approach (Soulslikes); or they even require a general approach to a certain level (sneaking games - is Hitman a strategy game? Dishonored?).

Now you can call some of these aspects "tactics" rather than "strategy", but this wouldn't make a huge difference because even "tactics games" are often put under the "strategy umbrella" - and nobody would call e.g. Soulslikes or Hitman a "tactics game", either.

Two, "strategy" is also not necessarily the defining trait of "strategy games". Some people will surely claim, *"while other games have strategical elements, strategy games are defined by the fact that strategy is the key aspect"*. But in most cases, it really isn't IMO. RTS games are a prime example. Is strategy really their defining trait? In singleplayer certainly not: most people use simple, basic, obvious "strategies" without any nuance. Build up your economy, train villagers, make army, attack enemy. Thinking or planning is not really the focus here. Even in multiplayer, IMO other traits are usually more prominent than strategy: understanding the game, tight macro, good micro, knowing build orders, adaptation, speed, game mechanics etc. Some of these aspects could be called "strategical", but the "real time" aspect is really more prominent.

But even if strategy does play an important role in "strategy games", it doesn't really cover the more prominent and important traits they actually have in common:

1. Firstly, most strategy games involve you controlling more than one person. On some level of abstraction or another, you tend to influence or control a larger group of people - or at least you have power like some sort of ruler or god. This can be a zoo, a city, a civilization, a nation. Sometimes you only control "one person"  directly (e.g. a ruler like in Crusader Kings), but still influence many people on purpose, yet indirectly.
2. Secondly, most strategy games require you to control many different things simultaneously, although not necessarily in real time. This directly follows from having control over several, often many people at once. I.e. strategy games are usually complex because of their many moving parts.

Maybe a more fitting umbrella term would thus be: "**Ruling games**". Or "**governing games**". Maybe you could also use the term "simulation", but this is more reserved for games that are supposed to be very close to the real world, whereas "ruling games" can be quite abstract and unrealistic, see RTS for example. "Ruling" or "governing" does not mean you have to be an actual king or lord, simply that you have control over several people. This can also be as a mere city planner, zoo director or military officer.

Finally, to me this also indicates that maybe some sub-genres that are sometimes associated with "strategy games" are really not part of this genre. MOBAs come to mind. I'm not denying that they are very strategic and difficult, yet at least to me they are much closer to MMORPGs (which are also strategic) or team-based FPS games. Personally, I think they are closer to that than to classic strategy games like RTS, GSG or city builders. This becomes especially apparent when using "ruling games" or "governing games" as a term.This may come across as a classist type of perspective which I do think that there is some sound logic behind this criticism as I might have some nostalgia for the older games. 

And by no means, I am not saying that the older games were better than later versions of the series. 

My argument is that as the series continued to progress and evolve, the series' identity had to change as well but this makes me wonder about exactly was the original identity of the series and whether it has shifted for the better

&#x200B;

**Long post ahead so please read at your own time!**

&#x200B;

**EVOLUTION OF THE SERIES**

Most AC games have improved in terms of gameplay, graphics, atmosphere and so on and it is clear why Ubisoft really went forward with the RPG approach.

The RPG elements of recent games provided different forms more depth because, in truth, the older AC games were as compelling from a gameplay perspective because they were either too basic as you could spam the attack button or the counter move and chain them all together, or they did not fit well on making them compelling within the gameplay aspect (like the story or atmosphere), or this led to a narrative dissonance with the theme of the series as you could technically kill plenty of guards in broad daylight where you are very exposed but this contrasts that the concept of being a silent assassin.

In some ways, the RPG elements give depth to the recent games and make it fit with the world around the player like looking for treasures in cities or empires of the past that have fallen or been forgotten, or using items from different cultures as though they carry their own stories and legends.

&#x200B;

But there is one thing in particular that I found to be more present in previous games that I think is mostly absent nowadays.

**I cannot really put it in simple terms but I think the closest word that I can think of is "atmosphere" and I will explain why.**

&#x200B;

From my perspective and how I understood what the earlier games were trying to convey, especially the very first game, focused more on the historical side while adding some science fiction elements. Though the AC series is a sci-fi game, not a history game, it had elements that were heavily inspired by historical accounts with a different twist added to make the events similar to alternative history timelines but were influenced by hidden factors like the Assassins and the Templars in the background, or because of the use or the influence by the Isu race and their artefacts.

&#x200B;

**In contrast, the atmosphere that I absorbed in later releases gave me the impression that the series has evolved to be more fantastical in its themes and more related to sci-fi with some historical elements added.**

&#x200B;

Examples are a few, some are from how the developers implemented historical elements or gameplay elements.

&#x200B;

In some areas, historical/atmosphere elements were not as related to or deeply referenced by well-researched historical elements.

For example, some loyal fans of the series or even historians **gave deep reviews on the historical aspects of the recent games** where the elements used were not close to actual history or were deeply referenced by well-documented historical accounts.

But rather, they criticised that recent games took more creative liberty that makes the historical elements less close to historical authenticity, and more related towards historical romanticism or historical speculation as though the elements used are taken from general knowledge of history culture rather than going deep into the historical elements and putting their own spin on it.

&#x200B;

*Keep in mind that the Assassin's Creed series was never meant to be historically accurate since it is a sci-fi series. But rather, one could say that the series was more historically authentic as though we are looking at the actual history that has happened in the past but from a different lens. As though in reality, all we thought about history was actually hidden from everyone's eyes for generations.*  

*So obviously, there will be historical inaccuracies or some creative liberties on narrating how the "actual" history has turned out.*

&#x200B;

Some examples that come to mind is that the atmosphere of most games is still very revered like the architecture of Ptolemaic Egypt or Greece during the Peloponnesian War.

But some elements were not added or changed or highly emphasised over others.

For example, I learned that the phalanx is not added in AC Odyssey. Or I learned that seeing a female warrior, even if she was a Spartan, in ancient Greece would have been seen as very awkward and odd since females were not regarded with equal respect as men in ancient Greece.

And to my surprise, I later learned that while LGBT romances were accepted in ancient Greece, they were not deeply common or as deeply romanticised as we thought. However, pederasty, the sexual relationship between an adult male and a young boy, was quite common and regarded as an experience towards manhood.

&#x200B;

And **when it comes to gameplay aspects,** some also combined with historical elements, also brought their own criticisms

&#x200B;

For example, fall damage is barely present anymore or that you can parkour on pretty much anything or even with as much ease that it feels unnatural, or that the character can do a lot of fantastic moves that do not feel human or natural.

This somewhat contrasts with the idea that parkour is heavily ingrained in the series that requires a certain level of skill or mastery involved where you have to know which parts to use to climb, and which ones do not. It may make sense that some characters are related to the Isu so they may have some physical feats, but they are still human and earlier releases showed emphasis on the level of delicacy that was required in parkour.

This also contrasts with the Assassins' philosophy about parkour as a method of tranversity which mimics their philosophies of liberty and obscurity which means that few should be made to master because otherwise, anyone can easily do this and this contrasts with the whole idea of being a secret organisation

&#x200B;

Some gameplay elements also involve things like combat where the RPG elements added numbers and stats to your arsenal. 

But sometimes, this does not fit the suspension of belief that is needed when the character can do certain feats that feel too superhuman even though this is meant to be a historically-inspired game, or are capable of using their weapons in ways that feel like a superhuman level of skill or cost towards fantasy like the design of some the weapons used or putting the weapons on fire or with poison.

This is also sometimes in contrast with how sturdy the enemies are meant to be like how durable the armour really is (which makes sense if they are not killed as easily), or needing to asssassinate a target with more than one hit with the hidden blade which contrasts with the idea of being deliberate in your assassination methods, and if you need more than one hit to kill a target, no matter their RPG level, then you are more likely to be found which makes being stealthy an ineffective method

&#x200B;

In some aspects, you can still fight against multiple enemies at once, depending on the players' playstyle, but this also contrasts with the whole theme of conspiracy and secrecy that the series and the Assassins are meant to be known for.

The most optimal examples were careful combat and themes of secrecy was used very well was in AC Unity were you were more motivated to approach missions like in a stealth game, and in recent games after the RPG overhaul was added, involved features like the Mercenaries that hunt you after you do certain feats and follow you all the time, or even the Cult mechanic where you hunt down members of the Cult, like in AC Origins, Odyssey and Valhalla, but have to find clues on their whereabouts and who they really are.

&#x200B;

**ATMOSPHERE OF THE GAMES - THEMES OF MYSTERY AND EERIE AWE**

In many cases, the series showed an amalgamation of different themes that gave off a very particular awesome and ominous atmosphere.

The idea is that throughout history and time, there have been groups that have been secretly pulling the strings in every single event of history. 

Or better yet, some events did not occur as we are taught and were possibly influenced by secret powerful Isu artefacts that were hidden and were kept hidden right in front of our very eyes and some people worked hard to keep them that way

The whole theme of conspiracy, secrecy, puzzles, darkness, and ghosts gave off a strange feeling that is almost eerie-like. In some way, it was a bit creepy that history may not have been as we have through or that some elements are still being continued in modern day

&#x200B;

It felt like a weird paradox that you go back through time and you somehow see something that is more potent or significant than the modern-day.

**And this was a metaphysical element that mimicked our modern-day aspect and branches that different forms of psychology, philosophy, anthropology and culture.**

&#x200B;

It is like that since it is something that has happened in the past, you have this natural impression that you are safe because what happened then, happened then and it is in the past and cannot happen again. 

But you experience these experiences yourself as you lived there, and for some reason, they have a ghastly impact on the present too which feels strange when you look at the past, you think of a time that is less advanced than now but the series showed that this is not always the case.

It is as though something that has happened in the past still bears a legacy and an impact to this day, even if some may consider it to be ancient or forgotten or common knowledge.

&#x200B;

However, at the same time, you understand the necessity. You feel like you are going through time in something happened yet the same time you technically present in the time and something that should be buried in the past is something that you need to discover for something that is happening that could be happening soon and fast like the world was literally about to end.

There was this level of urgency of going back through time (in theory) and look deeper into the past so that you will figure out how to solve the present.

&#x200B;

**META-THEMES**

And more than that, there is a metaphysical element involved, or at least that was what I gathered, that quite mimics our real world or force the player to reflect on how these elements help us reflect on how we see the real world

There are themes of sociology, mythology, psychology, philosophy and so on.

&#x200B;

For example, the whole freedom vs order thing has been debated countless times in the series but we are sometimes shown different versions of the same plot that there is no clear winner here.

&#x200B;

Some of the games gave a clear and simple dualistic point of view of the Assassin-Templar war such as in AC2, as much as it is a very good game and very fun, it is purely a "Chosen One" story and the Templars are obvious antagonists because the Borgias, similar to their real-life counterparts, are quite selfish and authoritarian.

But in other games like AC 3 or AC Rogue, we explore the complexities of this debate where we are given brief ideas that the Assassin's are not exactly the heroes against clearly evil antagonists.

&#x200B;

The whole idea of conspiracy and secrecy and symbols (not to mention that the series really likes adding puzzling elements with symbols), the idea behind this also gave a whole meta-like feel that mimics how cultures are formed in the real world.

For example, some Isu characters have names that are named from or were inspired by certain gods in some pantheons, or certain names of some items or key figures were actually characters that lived during the Isu era like Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden and the Apple.

Juno, Jupiter, Odin, Persephone, and so on.

&#x200B;

So imagine a what-if scenario that for some reason, these names persisted and were down through time but eventually lost their original meanings and took up new forms which created whole new mythologies and civilizations.

This may make us understand of how we, as human beings, also reflect on how we see certain aspects and turn them into concepts and let them transform and evolve as time goes along.

Like Eden was an actual haven for the Isu which turned into the garden of Old Testament, or the Apple of Eden, a forbidden item, was a literal forbidden tool that had powerful elements.

Or even how we reflect on gods and cultures or how previous individuals were influenced by other things and put their own spin on it like the concept of god, the concept of immortality, the concept of myths like Atlantis, the all-seeing Eye, the eagle the world tree and so on.

&#x200B;

Not to mention that plenty of symbols, myths and cultures, and civilizations have evolved through time which also gives you a certain eerie feeling when you think about what civilizations have developed and evolved in our world.

It is almost like a religious or a spiritual experience of some sort when you reach this level of depth, mystery and lore but at the same time, it is also a bit scary too because of the whole idea of conspiracy and secrecy and the mythology and the symbology of it all.

&#x200B;

It is both vividly awesome and creepy too because you are exploring the origins of man and human culture and sometimes even exploring the origins and the meanings behind other things like things are regarded as the supernatural

&#x200B;

In recent releases, we sometimes see this kind of portrayal and atmosphere. 

Sometimes we find treasures of old worlds, or we see how mysteries of the Isu that we never knew about or exploration of different themes that have multiple arguments like the latest game of Valhalla explores the theme of fate which is fitting with the era and the story of Ragnarok.

Yet this element of reflection and metaphysics is either not as emphasised, as we often see that the bridge between the present and the modern-day are not that deeply important now as though we are using the Animus because we can (only lately, we can to see why it is important because in actually to AC Valhalla, there is the possibility of another world-ending event).

Or perhaps, the elements used that reflect our real-world aspect is more fantastical in nature.

For example, you get to encounter actual mythological creatures as boss battles where they have abilities that seem more magical than sci-fi and explanations for their existence are because of the Isu.

This is different from the previous games where reality and myth clash and combine and how humans put their own spin towards certain aspects of reality and allow them to evolve over time.

One good example that was well-made in the recent releases with the World Tree in AC Valhalla whereas the Norse thought that Yggdrasil connected everything together and branched all worlds, it was, in reality, a giant computer of the Isu.

 

&#x200B;

**OBSERVATIONS OF THE CHANGES**

I am fine with some of the elements that they inputted lately and I am fine continuing with the franchise with other eras and mysteries and so on. 

**But my understanding tells me that this strange feeling that I felt in previous games that allured me and sometimes even kept me awake is not really there and I genuinely miss this.**

There have been many changes in the gameplay aspect which on one hand, it works because the RPG elements make the world more large and more powerful and the search of different artefacts and treasures and weapons also fit in with the theme of exploring the past and previous cultures like AC Origins, you explore the treasures of the Old Kingdom of Egypt and other cultures like the Assyrians.

However, at the same time, **there is little emphasis on the roles that the Assassins play in history** to act like ghosts but in most games, you can kill multiple enemies in many awesome ways which will clearly leave witnesses and possibly historical records.

The games that managed to achieve this theme of mystery and conspiracy where the Assassins are portrayed like a cult of sorts and the gameplay supports this because you have to plan your approach carefully is not as present.

There is not that much emphasis on finding out more secrets about what the Isu had before their downfall, or what can the Assassins or the Templars do to alter history because we know pretty much a lot about them already.

**The themes of mystery and conspiracy and awesome symbolism** are still somewhat there but not as emphasized.

&#x200B;

**Other elements that also emphasised or reinforced what I mentioned earlier** like the music of previous games gave off a spiritual-like feel.

 It was almost as though you were a person on a spiritual or religious mission of some kind where you were also exposed to questions and mysteries that made question your views of the world when you see mysteries that were hidden. Some of the recent games also have this feature so this is good.

&#x200B;

**Emphasizing the debates and complexities** of the war in a moral or philosophical point of view is sometimes present but not as emphasized and more often than not, the Assassins are simply the good guys and the Templars are big bad.

The closest that managed to explore this in recent games were AC Origins which fit with the theme of Alexander, Caesar and Cleopatra. Or in AC Origins where the chaos of the French Revolution explored who is fit to lead the nation and how and explore how themes and ideas can quickly lead to fanaticism. 

Or in AC Rogue, you question whether certain actions in the name of freedom can be very detrimental and useless or in AC 3, the protagonist had to question which freedom is more important, his people or the colonies?

&#x200B;

**CONCLUSION - TLDR**

**\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_**

**So I will try to end this as simple as possible to avoid beating around the bush.**

**The themes of mystery, conspiracy, and sometimes the scary nature behind the vagueness of the themes and how cultures evolved and were inspired by or influenced by actual cultures and history.**

**These things are there but they shifted to be more fantastical.** 

**The gameplay and plots that emphasize this has also shifted - Assassins are mostly the good guys who can so many insanely awesome things, sometimes in front of everyone, and the Templars were simply evil who want power or tragic people who are obsessed with power.**

**I think that all of this combined have slowly led to the AC series to have its identity change and evolve which makes me wonder what was its original identity and whether it has changed for the better**Just like the title said.
I dont understand why  these play to earn scheme got a lot of player lately. I never seen someone get income from play to earn. 
Like axie infinity, isnt money to keep your monster alive is bigger than the selling of the monster itself?When I find an Early Access title or one in Alpha or Beta stages, I consider the game and its subject matter second; I consider the game's vision from the developer's standpoint first.

I like to see a developer with a vision for the road ahead; it doesn't have to be complete, or even have an ETA date. I just want to know that you're committed, have ideas, and are willing to change them and listen to feedback.

And most importantly of all, I want transparency. If you're going through life shit and just don't have time to update as often, or if you've needed to step aside and put development on the shelf for a while, *that's totally okay, and I encourage it* as I know development is fucking HARD work. But I would really appreciate some communication if this does happen.

That's all. I absolutely loathe the entitlement of some gamers today, demanding releases without flexibility and updates regularly, adding to the pressures of a developer to not communicate at all. I understand that game development is extremely difficult and something I could likely never do; but if I know that it's what you care about most, I will care about your product.I remember when the Xbox 360/PS3 game out, the [graphics](https://youtu.be/fU8vsAlCsCg) looked like [a](https://youtu.be/Hv48CUSjC40) huge [leap](https://youtu.be/oxy92E2KCx4). But looking back, early 7th gen games still had that video game-like appearance to them. Fast forward sometime towards the end of the 7th gen, we began to see graphics hit almost CGI film levels. Notably [Skate 3](https://youtu.be/Bt9sUdba414) and [Rise of the Tomb Raider](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U3V_ImMth9U&ab_channel=GameZine). Edit: actually I think even [Mirror's Edge](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EpohaSNHBzw&ab_channel=JoyfulGamer) is a good early example too. 

By the time the PS4/Xbone set in, games began to look like Uncharted 4, God of War (2018), Final Fantasy 7 Remake and even Mario Kart 8 or Wind Waker HD on Wii U. Fully playable pre-rendered trailers. 

What effects did developers start adding late in the the 7th-8th gen to achieve the pre-rendered look?Watching SkillUp's review of Sifu, he kept repeating the idea that the way this game is designed for repetition and eventual mastery and that this repetition is probably going to put a lot of people off. This was a deliberate decision on the part of the developers and they definitely knew going in that this was going to be a controversial design decision that would likely put off a lot of people who were interested in buying the game. While Sifu was on my radar and looked pretty cool, now I'm much much more interested in the game since it's somewhat rare that a game decides to lower the number of potential buyers in pursuit of a unifying vision. Other games that did something like this were Red Dead Redemption 2 with how incredibly slow paced that game can be with tons of intricate animations for doing just about everything. Or the entire aesthetic of Cruelty Squad that had people raving about the game on one hand and people who absolutely could not get past the horrific look the game had. These decisions that put a lot of people off their games really made them stand out in the sea of games that are going for a mass market appeal and I'm suddenly absolutely looking forward to finding out if Sifu's off putting concept also makes the game more interesting to play as a result.I always had loved Call of Duty since Black Ops 2, and had own almost every game in the series. But I always hear that modern COD games are just bad in comparison to the older "Golden Age" CODs during the PS3/360 era. Problem about that is that I seem to enjoy every COD game after Black Ops 2 and didn't see any issues these games had other than some of them having a rough launch, but even with those, I still enjoy them from a gameplay perspective. I have so much nostalgia for Black Ops 2, but I really loved Infinite Warfare and Vanguard a lot more than it, but saying that would be considered a crime against the COD community who thinks that the "Golden Era" games had very little to no flaws at all. We are in this time where everyone feels like they HAVE to hate on a new COD every year because it's the cool thing to do. I feel that many fand who hates the new COD are...I dunno, COD-out? Outgrowing the franchise seems reasonable, but I don't think anyone wants to admit that, so they go back to ranting about the series not being the same anymore.

So are the modern games REALLY bad? The most argument I get from those who hate on them is that they're not fun for them and that the older ones are better because they're fun. But...that can literally be said to just about any other game. I assume it's all personal preference because after all of the hate Infinite Warfare had gotten and the demand for BOTG COD got us WWII, I was expecting everyone to like WWII...but I was wrong. I kept hearing that the game isn't as fun as older CODs or that it's WW2 themed and that theme was also overused, even though these guys asked for COD to got back to the roots of being a WW2 shooter. Then you have Modern Warfare 2019, which a lot of people hyped up the game so much just for having "Modern Warfare" in it's name, only also being hated for same thing that all COD games after BO2 had been hated for: not being fun.

I know everyone have some issues with how each game plays and I do say it's all subjective and those who think the older games are the "Golden Age" probably got into it during their youth with friends and everyone was jumping in the fray because COD4 was different? I am not really sure.Not content wise, but literally too dark in color gradience.

Maybe it's just me, my monitors, or I've gotten old (though I don't have this issue irl) but I found that games are often made too dark these days. Like I'm switching back and forth on high to mid brightness depending on the scene and what time of day it is in the scene.

But turning up the (software based) brightness in the settings ruins the visuals imo; it can wash them out or make the bright aspects too bright. It's like they use darker textures for a lot of things and less luminous (luminousity?) in their lighting to me.

Maybe it's a contrast issue? But I've tried various settings and it's still a problem to me at least. Just asking around to see what other people think.

EDIT: I'm really surprised this blew up, and there's a great range of answers. Guess there are so many factors that can effect the lighting strength and quality for each person a dev can't truly design for every scenarioIt's a shame that the industry just gave up on jetpack shooters entirely; Slipgate is the only exception I can think of.

Advanced movement ameliorates two of the most common FPS criticisms: camping and map design. From my anecdotal experience, Advanced Warfare and Black Ops 3' maps are usually praised, and in my opinion, Infinite Warfare had great map design; from an aesthetic standpoint, they were visually diverse and vivid, and from a gameplay standpoint, they did a great job facilitating diverse playstyles and match flow. Breakout, Frontier, Skydock, and Mayday were some of my favorite maps.. especially Mayday, with the visual of the bleeding black hole in the horizon. 

So when people complained about MW19's gray color palette and camp-incentive map design, I felt vindicated. I would love an Infinite Warfare II, but alas... 

The only trade-off with advanced movement is that the skill floor raises. I find it a little unfair that the "battle royale trend" is still ongoing despite the ever-infamous gaming backlash and jetpack shooters had to die violently, but I suppose that's because battle royales are more profitable... So jetpack battle royale when? (I don't think Apex really counts). At this point, I'd take Warzone adding the Advanced Warfare exoskeletons!As many of you probably know Metaverses started as a part of sci-fi books, not as a Facebook product. The idea was often that there was one large central Metaverse, one which no one company owned. It still had companies operating in it, as anyone could freely make new content and profit from it, which allowed for free market competition within it. The interfacing would be done through VR, with the common idea that you would put on your HMD, boot up the metaverse, and then go to different worlds and play games, socialize, or maybe even do business. 

What Facebook/Meta wants to make is a Metaverse that they 100% control and operate. It seems that they do want to allow users to make content (see their prototype Metaverse "Horizon Worlds"), but all payments and moderation will be through Facebook. This greatly limits what can be added, and what who wants to contribute. Why would other companies develop apps or worlds for Facebook's Metaverse and have to pay them fees, if they could just bet on making their own Metaverse? Facebook bets on them being able to get starters advantage and hopefully win over the competition before they start getting rivals. If they fail this then we will have dozens of Metaverses, which defeats the idea.

But what if there actually existed an open-source, free to use and play in Metaverse? The company running it would be non-profit and only exist to update the code running it and other adminstration. It would be like how Mozilla develops the internet browser Firefox but doesn't actually control the internet. They just make the browser and follow the standards. (Obviously it does take a lot more to develop the tech that would run a Metaverse than a browser) Everyone else would be free to make their own worlds, collaborate within worlds, or do whatever they want. Companies are free to make their own worlds if they want, and charge money for usage or some sort of free to play system. I imagine they would have to pay for server hosting for their own world's data. 

The benefit of a shared VR world as opposed to using different apps are many: a shared platform, so users and companies all develop using the same system and engines. Having a unified control setup across games, being able to easily find new "worlds" and quickly jumping in and out of them. Being able to use the same character across games/worlds if you want. 

What do you think?Played through the first few hours of God Of War on PS4 twice and decided to pick up God Of War on PC.  Looks absolutely beautiful on my display and runs like butter. That being said I cannot mesh with the combat in this game and some of the games that have used it as a template. Most of the time I play single player games with a controller, but being unable to pivot 180 to counter or attack doesn't feel good in my hands. Can quickturn with the Dpad, but it doesnt feel intuitive after playing so many similar games. Almost feels like the devs prefer you to use mouse and keyboard. Once I switched I found myself doing much better at managing enemies and reacting to attacks coming from behind. Just got to Bock so I will admit I don't have a full picture to work from, but the design feels at odds for its initial console audience. Will probably stick with it even though I have a few gripes.

Really the root of what I want to talk about is if the aiming style is a worthy addition to the genre. Is it necessary to lock the camera over the shoulder just for the sake of a projectile mechanic like the frost axe throw? I fully understand that for a very cinematic experience like God or War it benefits from that restricted camera control. Is that story telling benefit at the detriment of player control? I know Godfall and D&D: Dark Alliance use a similar fps style camera, but both of those games IMO are of an overall poor quality.

I grew up on 90's and 2000's japanese action titles so I know I am a little more biased towards things like Monster Hunter and Dark Souls that keep that traditional style of combat. Is this just a rant post of a 30 year old boomer who wants his old dante back? Maybe, but I hope I'm not the only one who feels the loss of control.I saw this line of thought in the comments a few weeks ago during the Activision sale news cycle. Lots of people seemed upset at this concept that Microsoft just pays for studios to make them exclusive games rather than do it the "right way". I'm curious as to what this "right way" is. Are first party studios only supposed to buy or get exclusive games from companies that are below a certain revenue? Sales figure? Employee count?

The argument can be furthered into absurdity. It seems to be based on the fact that you don't deserve to have a video game under your name until you "pay your dues" or something. But I don't understand how this works. Valve was founded by a couple of guys who were millionaires from working at Microsoft. They hired game designers and animators. Was that not ok because Gabe Newell had never shipped a game before? Would it be ok if Microsoft started a brand new studio and then tried to attract talent like that? I'd imagine that they'd be criticized for "poaching" talent, and there would be extreme skepticism behind that strategy as well.

I'm trying to give this argument an honest look, but I really don't see where it comes from. Again, following it to an extreme can make it absurd. Does Microsoft not deserve to use a chip in their console unless they designed it themself? Is just buying and contracting a company to make the chip set for you, and using previously existing instruction sets "cheating" like using a pot of money to found or buy a gaming studio?

Can anyone explain where this argument comes from?Hey guys,

I was having a discussion with some friend. I remember a few years back there was a lot of American gamers who disliked JRPG's mostly because of the story and art style. However, I wonder, if already some Japanese manga is popular in the West why not simply adapt and make games based on those stories which already captivate the audience. For instance, I know My Hero Academia is popular but I'm sure there's already games based on that.

1-I'm trying to undestand what is going on with JRPG's? 

2-Or is it that its only a niche group in America who likes manga and the art style and video games are much more mainstream hence it won't connect with a large audience.

3-Or is it that Japanese video games, specially, JRPG's don't have the budget to hire professionals who can write their games?Legacy of Kain: Soul Reaver was one of my favorite games growing up. The atmosphere of the game was incredibly dark and fantastical. The concepts were unique and still remain unique to this day. Being able to transition into the Spirit Realm at any time, and the changes to the landscape that came along with that, was a very artistic experience. It was also challenging in a satisfying way. It definitely fell into the category of games that don't hold your hand. The story and lore that came along with it was cryptic and very well executed. The voice acting was on point. Raziel is an awesome looking protagonist with a very dark and savage look.

The introduction cutscene was a masterpiece. It really set you up with motivation to journey on this quest with Raziel. The map designs were labrynth-like, majestic, and just all around great looking.

The only things I could point criticism towards would be 2 things:

  * The puzzles were at some points simplistic in nature. There were some puzzles that just felt like you were moving cubes to fit into their places.

 The game was at some points overly dark and poorly lit. At some points it is very difficult to see where the paths are and where you are supposed to go.

Both of these flaws could be fixed by a modern remake with better lighting and smoother puzzle design.

Anyone else share this sentiment or have a similar experience with this game?

(I don't think this post contains any spoilers but if it does please let me know and I will add a flair)For those who haven't played or need a refresher, in FEAR, when you search a laptop, instead of getting the usual readable textbox to pause the game and read, you instead upload it to a guy on your radio  who summarizes it for you.

Replaying it, I don't think FEAR has a particularly amazing story, but I think this was a good narrative choice because, 

1. FEAR has a silent protagonist, and even games with protagonists who talk a lot don't usually have them comment on the in-game lore you read. Having a guy on your radio comment stuff like "I don't understand why they would ..." "it says they X, that's fucked up" is like having an audience stand-in.

2. FEAR is a cinematic game. Having a character actually relay the *gist* of an important letter or email is more cinematic then pausing to read it word for word.

3. You could in theory use this to slip in some characterisation for your radio operator. Uh, FEAR doesn't *really* do this unless you count him occasionally commenting that something is fucked up, but theoretically you could.

4. I think it makes intel feel a bit more diagetic and realistic. In *real* life, a medical report or a military dossier is probably extremely long and full of a lot of irrelevant and boring information and formatting. No game could make you actually read this. But, when you find a medical report in a game and it's like two informally written paragraphs it *is* a little jarring (FEAR 2). When it's relayed to us by someone else, we can fill in the blanks that maybe it *was* a boring lengthy HR report, and our radioman checked through it and gave us the gist on the good parts.

That's the narrative positives of it, which is the stuff I care about, but the biggest reason I'm shocked FEAR's approach wasn't copied more is that, in action-focused shooters, it's *way* more suited for the genre then stopping to read. Like, even in FEAR 2 jeez, I could barely get into interrupting the action to read the lore documents I found. Why couldn't a guy just read them to me again? Even in games were I *love* reading the in game lore, like the Wolfenstein Reboots, I feel like this would actually be a decent change.I think at some point, I’ve heard this critique levied against every open prominent world game out there - Skyrim, Breath of the Wild, Assassin’s Creed, Dragon’s Dogma, and so on. It seems to be a universal problem with the genre, but I’ve seen little consensus on what content styles would properly fix this problem once and for all.

Believe it or not, open world games do a lot to try and fill the world with content. The solutions tend to vary, but generally fall into a few common types: Quest lines, random events, general exploration, and enemy combat.

Most of these tend to suffer from diminishing returns, where the world will feel full of content at first, but will feel emptier as the player exhausts the content. This is true for quest lines and exploration in particular. Quests can only be done once, and tend to be copy-and-pasted combat fetch quests. Exploration is good, but eventually one will encounter new locations less and less.

To combat this, game designers generally try to put in spontaneous events to keep things happening. Random events are the main example of these, with Skyrim having 95 possible random events that can occur. Ranging from attempting thievery to finding cannibals to finding drunk people who want more mead, there’s a lot of types of them. Perhaps they feel insufficient because of how brief they are, or because they generally just predictably end in combat? 

Enemy encounters are another way they try to keep things interesting, sprinkling enemy encounters along the map. Breath of the Wild and Dragon’s Dogma even having a big focus on occasionally fighting boss-like enemies within the wilderness. Skyrim’s focus on Dragon combat also echos this concept.

Assassin’s Creed and Ghosts of Tsushima sprinkle around enemy camps in the world, where exploration will lead to the chance to raid an enemy stronghold. Perhaps these can also feel repetitive.

Yet, with all of the above measures to fill these worlds with content, people still find these worlds to be empty. Is it because of the general repetition in the content, the diminishing returns, or something more?

When people say the worlds are barren, what content are they looking for? This seems like a hard solution to fix.

One potential fix I’ve contemplated is that interacting with the world itself could be made a larger focus, with environmental problem solving being a way to keep players engaged in the world even when there’s no new content. An example of this is in Breath of the Wild, where Link can cut a tree down to create a bridge to cross a cliff. This only happens once, but more instances of things like that might keep players interested. Even with that, however, the problem still exists that players want interesting destinations. Making the journey interesting is one half of the equation, but making the incentive to explore in the first place is just as important, and that requires a more robust solution.The Story of Seasons (formerly called "Harvest Moon") series is a game all about living as a farmer. A major part of it is settling down and having a family. It's rarely *required* but it's a huge draw to the series. Most fans I've seen online and met in person like the series specifically for the NPCs and the dating.

The Asian versions of a few of the newer games have a "best friend" systems. These are functionally the same as marriage except it only applies to same gender characters. They're your "best friend" who you have a "best friend ceremony", live with, and raise kids with. It's functionally same gender marriage with some minor text changes.

In the English localization, this was explicitly just changed into same gender marriage. You and the bachelor/ettes are effectively all bisexual.

I think Rune Factory 5 doesn't even have a BF system. The English version has same-gender marriage but there is no equivalent in Asia, AFAIK. The localizers went through hoops to get a full-fledged same-gender marriage option in Rune Factory 5.

Most farm life sims in the shape of SOS, such as Stardew Valley and My Time At Portia, have bisexual love interests as the default. The same gender marriage option was added into SV specifically because it was something fans asked for in SOS. Most of these are made by western developers.

Whenever this discussion pops up, there's always confusion and debate about whether this counts as censorship or whether it's a cultural issue. Are Marvelous just stuck in their ways and refusing to add same gender marriage into the original game, making the localizers add it in outside of Asia? Is there another reason for it? Even if there is, is that excuse enough or is it just due to societal queerphobia?

One thing I hear pop up a lot is that it's a *ratings* issue. Rumor goes that adding actual same gender marriage  would bump the rating from to CERO to CERO B. I'm not sure how accurate that is. I know Japan doesn't have same gender marriage yet but I'm not sure if just the act of adding it into a game will suddenly make it less kid friendly.I recently decided to play Wolf Among Us for the first time since it's release and it really disappointed me.

First thing is how it took the original material, being the Fables comic books, and absolutely butchered almost every character. Bigby, Snow White, Beauty are all shells of their former selves. Snow and Beauty have absolutely no agency and act like stupid damsel in distress caricatures even though both are supposed to be somewhat bitchy and no-nonsense. Bigby was nerfed big time, and you would never believe that the comic and game conterparts are the same person. Bigby in the comics solved Red Rose's murder within minutes and has an extensive network of spies, having figured out how to properly run the community, but in the game he's a bumbling idiot who's been on the job for like a week. Then there blatant lore inconsistencies like Bigby allowing Fly Catcher to be let go, and later offering him a janitor position even though in the comics Fly was continuesly busted for eating Flies to prevent him from going to the Homelands in search of his wife and kids.

Why is Bigby just letting Snow White join him on every step of the investigation, even though when she tried doing that during her own sisters murder, Bigby is very unhappy about it. Why do they establish a romance between the two even if it's not supposed to exist yet. Mr. Toad's inclusion is completely pointless when Collin exists, and especially since Todd is never once mentioned in the comics. The Crooked Man has been running rampant for centuries but Bigby is so blind that he just now realized it's a problem (again difference between comic and game Bigby). Bigby and Beast make up at the motel when Beast realizes Bugby is only there to investigate the murders, but later he's hostile again. The Crooked Man says that Snow White should be held accountable for Bigby's abuse of Tweedle Dum during the interrogation (something that didn't even happen in my playthrough). The counterargument that at the time Crane was still Deputy Mayor and Bluebeard was the one who beat Tweedle Dum, is completely ignored by him and everyone else in the room. Why is murder of criminals so frowned upon when in the comics capital punishment is used often.

You can say all of this is nitpicking, but the story is cannon and when you create a tie-in to an existing piece of media, you have to think about such things. However all of this can be forgiven since the majority of people who played the game haven't read the comics. But the lack of choice and complete confusion I've experienced after some of the choices is insane. I always knew that Telltale games only pretend to have choices and consequences, but it's like they didn't even try this time. 

You can go the entire game as an absolute saint not using force and following the law, but the second you hit a person the episode five, everyone goes off about how violent Bigby is and how he hasn't changed. In the interrogation scene with one of the Tweedle brothers, I let  him have the cigar and the alcohol, but in the next scene Snow White is berating me for using violence. Then in Ep. five, the Crooked Man brings up how violent I was at the interogation, even though i wasnt. Snow White asks you if you enjoy violence in episode three, even if you don't hurt a single person. Beauty and Beats ask you to kill the Crooked Man but when it comes to the trial at the end, suddenly they think its inhumane. 

There are probably a lot more instances that I have left out, but it really breaks immersion. The Little notification that "someone will remember this" is an absolute troll, since it appears seconds before the someone is killed, or the games ending. I know that it's usually considered Telltales best game, I believe that is only because of the amazing world Bill Willingham has created, but Telltale themselves have absolutely no idea what to do with it.So, this will sound very stupid for most people but bear with me.

Oftentimes when I am playing games I have this nagging feeling in the back of my mind that there is a "right" moment to continue the game or even do a certain mission.

Examples would be:

* Only playing horror-games at night
* Only starting new games on a weekend when I have enough time and can play longer
* Not continue with story-driven games or play a certain "important" mission during the work-week as I fear it wouldn't have the same impact


So, basically it boild down to the feeling that the games are something so special that I should save them for the weekend.

What that effectively does,though, is cause me to delay actually playing my games almost indefinitely and I end up playing an MMO or something else that is kind of "endless" (RTS games, racing games, etc.).

I just wanted to ask this community if someone has this problem or if you have ideas to get over this.

Again, I know this is stupid and totally irrational, but still...


*Edit: Wow, I wouldn't have thought that there are quite so many people that share this sentiment. You guys made some really good points about just playing and getting over the mental "hump" of waiting for the perfect time. Thanks, guys!*For a game that focuses so much on pushing the player to explore, gather materials, build and craft, most of it is either completely unnecessary or just devoid of function to the actual experience. Some of the rewards for exploring unique structures are also not special and some of them are items you can find pretty easily elsewhere without much hassle or with better odds. I understand that the game is mostly geared towards multiplayer and content creation, but it pains me that some aspects of the game basically don't encourage you to engage with them if you're playing alone and don't wish to showcase your playthrough.

First of them is building: it's almost completely unnecessary. Unless you're messing with redstone (which is somewhat complex and not always optimal), basic building is neither important or required at any point in the game. If you can carve yourself a 5x5 space anywhere and put a door on it, you're set for the entire game. The only thing you kinda have to worry about is to keep it lit and make sure it has a bed where you can respawn on. Enemies aren't going to invade it or try to attack and destroy specific important strutures like the Nether Portal, your bed, the enchanting table, etc (therefore there's little to no reason to think about protecting your builds). There's no way for NPCs to acknowledge different types of buildings or autonomously interact with the stuff you create. There is no specific event where you might need to be indoors to overcome. No gadget that needs to be on a specific setting to function properly. Basically, if you can avoid explosions from Creepers around your stuff, you don't need to worry about building and with building out of the way, there is a massive array of blocks that you don't ever need to worry about, try to find and collect. 

That leads to my second point: you don't ever need to worry about monsters in the overworld as long as you have a bed (which is on of the most basic blocks to craft in the entire game). Even if it was complex, as I said before, enemies are not going to try to seek and destroy it. You basically have a "reset 95% of the monsters in the overworld" button on your hands pretty much in the first minutes of the game. It could be argued that you can make the game more engaging by simply not crafting a bed early, but again, since building is sort of unnecessary, you can't even spend time focusing on that during the night. If I want to battle and gather experience, I'd rather do that on a cave where I can be surprised by an encounter with a monster on rough terrain and, most importantly, find other crucial crafting materials. 

While underground, you'll find a lot of interesting geography (especially with the newest update) and many oppotunities to engage with enemies while looking for materials. However, you're also bound to find some of the most boring "dungeons" in any game, ever. Seriously. These have almost not being touched since they were introduced to the game way back when and they suck massively. They probably shouldn't even be called dungeons, but they do add to my third point: unique structures in this game rarely deliver in terms of gameplay. To be fair, some of them have not been update since they got into the game, but even most recent ones don't add a lot if you're playing single player and might not even be interesting to visit if you're replaying the game.

"Dungeons" are sinfully bad and don't offer good challenge or rewards; Mineshafts and ocean ruins are pretty much just enviromental; Pyramids and Jungle Temples become a free reward structure once you know their trick (also the reward is not always great); Outposts are challenging, but lack meaningful rewards. Ocean Monuments and Woodland Mansions are interesting to explore, but can be hard to find and overcome and don't offer meaningful or unique rewards; Strongholds are fun to look for and explore (they actually feel like dungeons), but offer some of the worst rewards in the game; In one hand, rewards from Bastions in the Nether are never worth the risk, while in the other, rewards from finding a treasure map on a Sunken Ship can be amazing and are pretty easy to figure out. Point being that the balance between exploration/challenge/rewards in the game is all over the place and there's no focus in randomization and variety.

It took me a long time to get into Minecraft and I still love the game, but I always played it alone. Now that I have a good understanding of how the game works and how I can operate as a player, it's just baffling to me the ammount of gaps the game actually has to make itself interesting for single player. From my perspective, learning Minecraft can be more more fun than actually playing it.Enough time has passed since The Game Awards, so I figured I'd give my thoughts.

While I appreciate what Geoff Keighley has put together, I feel like the show has regressed in recent years. While not as bad as the cringe-fest that was the VGAs, I almost feel like it's heading in that direction with all the celebrity cameos, silliness, and constant advertising. The show started off rough but improved with each year. They went from giving away most awards off-screen to actually going through the nominees and announcing the winner on-screen. This year, they couldn't even be bothered to read the nominees.

I get that it's just a big marketing stunt. All award shows are. That's why the show happens right before Christmas. I would just like to see this be a legitimate award show for video games that focuses more on celebrating the art form than getting people hyped for upcoming releases. Maybe I'm in the minority on this. I've seen plenty of people admit that they only tune into TGA for the trailers. That's fine, to each their own. It just upsets me that the show seems to prioritize hype over anything else. I suppose that's indicative of the industry. Most "gamers" only care about the next big triple A title and not anything with any artistic value. That's why you almost never see indies nominated for GOTY. Occasionally, you get a "token indie" thrown in that you know won't win.

Reggie Fils-Aimé gave a good speech at TGA a couple years ago when he presented best debut indie. He talked about how video games have become the biggest form of entertainment in the world, even bigger than music or movies. How ironic that in that same show, music performances and movie celebs would have more focus than the actual awards. Honestly, this is what really kills me. It's an award show, and yet only a handful of the awards are actually presented on stage. So many big awards are done very quickly off to the side, and many are just mentioned off-hand as some other award is being given! That's my biggest gripe with TGA. This year was just ridiculous. In a 3-hour show, maybe 10 minutes was actually spent presenting awards on stage. I get that not all the awards can be put on stage (there's 5 categories JUST for esports). I still feel like most of them can be.

So, how can The Game Awards improve? Well, it's an award show, right? How about focusing on the actual awards? Crazy, I know. If you must cut out some trailers and celebrity nonsense, then do it. Bring back the industry icon award. That was my favorite part. It would highlight an industry veteran and give them the recognition they deserve. It was always very insightful and touching. But I guess cutting that out makes more room for another Elden Ring trailer, right? Also, let people from the video game industry present the awards. Letting some movie actor who has nothing to do with games present it is just awful. You're not going to see video game people present awards at the Grammys. You're not going to see game trailers at the Oscars. So why are we getting so much non-game stuff at TGA? I gotta say, seeing Vin Diesel show off some crappy Fast and Furious tie in game before presenting GOTY in 2019 (and mispronouncing the winner) really made me lose any hope I had in this show. And above all, just start taking this seriously. Treat this more like an actual award show. Less Muppets and cringey advertising and more thoughtful discussion. The whole bit with Simu Liu going up to present an award while watching Halo videos on his phone was not only unfunny but a good representation of this whole show.

Geoff Keighley: "I'm sorry."

Kratos: "Do not be sorry. Be better."I’m sure we’re all familiar with how gaming used to be, even if you were born in post-2000. While the internet was still around back then, games retained their secrets for months and years after release. Speculation was just as common as raw information.

In the modern day, data mining happens as soon as games break street date. The ultra-connected nature of the internet also ensures that those who beat the game early can spread information to many people, also usually on release day.

Is it truly just a thing of a past, or is it possible to create lasting hidden content? Perhaps through some kind of encryption that slows down the data mining process? Or a way to package assets that makes it unclear what they’re for?

The closest I’ve seen to this in the modern day is when Dark Souls came out a decade ago. It took people a while to figure things out, and even things related to stats remained mysteries for a while, IIRC. But I can’t even seeing that happening today either.There have been three games that have made me cry: *To the Moon*, *Mother 3*, and *Drawn to Life: The Next Chapter*. All three of these games use pixellated sprites for character designs and next to no voice-acting.

I think the reason why I get more emotional over these games even placed against the most masterfully performed and rendered games like The Last of Us, is because they force us to fill in the blanks for what a character looks and sounds like. A character that I’ve had a hand in constructing is going to wring more of a response out of me than all but the best actors’ performances. 

Drawn to Life understood this the most, because you have to literally make your own characters and plot pieces and watch as the rudimentary cutscene engine brings them to life. It has all the benefits of reading a book and imagining what the characters are like (and I suspect your brain assigns faces and voices of people you’ve seen in real life), while also making powerful use of music.I'm mostly talking about action games here, or ARPG:s 

It's super nice when the abilities that my characters have, actually persist outside combat. And, here is the crux of the thing I'm trying to say. I love it when those abilities can be freely used without getting a button prompt like "Press X to quench the fire". In many games the characters can do absolutely crazy supernatural things in combat. I love it when it's incorporated to the rest of the game without any button prompts or any other artificial aids. Just use ice on fire or vice versa when you think it might be wise to do so. Bonus points if there's a chance to fuck up somehow, just make the fuckups either funny or interesting. Kinda like trying to clear a forest with fire in Minecraft. 

I recently played through both Psychonauts games, they were a master class in this regard. The player can use all the "spells" they have when ever they want. Sometimes the spells do something, sometimes they don't. Fire to burn dry plants is a given, but it's all built into the world in a very natural way. There's no hard separation between combat or just exploration. Sure there are some contextual clues at times for a solution in a visual form, but that's just good game design. All in all, it's a great example on how a game can very naturally both portray the powers and abilities of the character while making the experience seamless and interesting. I seem to remember Kingdom Hearts series doing something similar.

No need for giving the massively muscular dude a button prompt to "Press X to ~~punch~~ push boulder". If a massively muscular player character meets a suspiciously round boulder, there's no need for a button prompt. Have the player try all the things that the player character can do, I'm sure one of them will stick. It'll probably be punching, unless you heavily invested in pushing things while spending your points in the skill tree.

On a completely opposite side of things, I'm now going through Final Fantasy VII Remake on PC. It's not a great port, but it's not as abysmal as some reviews might give you the impression. It's really bad but it's completely playable. That game really, really doesn't acknowledge the characters abilities outside of combat. I recently came across a series of events in the game, that made me make this post. 

The way I was impressed with Psychonauts 1 almost made me write this but now that I saw the opposite, I sat down to do this.

In the FF VII remake I had a NPC give a very dramatic speech while being badly wounded. My playable character was there, trying to be sympathetic. My character was also holding dozens of healing potions and magical powers to heal people. The same playable character had recently healed someone who got hit by a fucking house in combat. Surely a fall of few meters could be dealt with a potion. 

Same thing with another character who can magically deflect a missile and freeze tanks with magic. For some reason they got stuck because a burning helicopter blocked their way.  I get it, sometimes you just have to block a path to make the story go in a more interesting way. But just fucking write it to make some sense. "The helicopters use Mako energy to power their engines. Once the Mako containment system is broken, the Mako starts to burn and is impossible to put out, not with water nor with magic". There, that took me 30 seconds and now the scene makes sense. If the visual team got 30 hours of dev time on top of that, the fire could have been made to look more imposing, scary and supernatural. Not something I'd fry sausages over before just hopping over it. 

I hate using the term ludonarrative dissonance. I think it's its a great term, it's a real thing and it's worth discussing. Using it just makes me feel pretentious.  And the Final Fantasy series has never ever given a shit about it, they do their own thing. Sometimes it's fine, sometimes it's very annoying. And I'm a huge FF fanboy.We are Northeastern University researchers interested in games and philosophy.

Works of fiction often have a message they are trying to convey, successfully or unsuccessfully. Have you played a game that tried to be “philosophical”, in that it was built with a deeper message as part of its gameplay? If so, please help out our research by filling out the following brief survey! This survey will take a minimum of 2 minutes to complete, however if you choose to submit multiple responses, it may take longer (You must be 18 years or older.)

[https://neu.co1.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV\_dniLJb9dPS44DMW](https://neu.co1.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_dniLJb9dPS44DMW) (NU IRB #22-01-08)So we're seeing a (first?) reaction by Sony on the MS aquisition of AB. Sony will buy Bungie, however they remain free to publish multiplatform games. 

What do you think of this? I find it a little strange that both MS and Sony are buying studios without intending them to create exclusives. Although I think this will nog last and Sony is finally trying to make a AAA FPS franchise.What people mean by "underrated game" is a great game that didn't gain popularity and/or critical acclaim for various reasons other than its quality. Released too late, bad marketing, tried to reach the wrong audience, this kind of stuff. But after watching an unhealthy amount of "*top X underrated <insert retro console> games*" my conclusion is that the aforementioned underrated games almost don't exist. There are basically **two types of "underrated" games**: 

The first kind is a great game in a niche genre, something like a "stealth city builder with dating sim elements". The game may be great, sure, but it's just not an experience many people dream about. Pyre by Supergiant Games is a great example: a 3x3 street basketball game mixed with a fantasy visual novel. Yes, great, but... who the hell asked for *that*? So, in the end, it's understandable that it's not popular. 

The other kind is usually explained in words something like this: "Well the combat is quite tedious and the game doesn't really explain how it works and the random encounter rate is too high and you might need to grind for a bit at the beginning and the animations are just 2 frames and the game was never released outside of Japan, but THE STORY MAN, THE STORY IS AMAZING YOU SHOULD REALLY TRY IT!". So the game has 1 thing done really great, but it's great only if you ignore every other aspect being done very poorly. Therefore, it's actually rated properly. If your restaurant serves *amazing* key lime pie, but all the other 20 dishes in the menu taste like garbage water, you don't deserve 5 stars. 

The real underrated games, gems lost in time where everything is high quality but the game "didn't make it" , kind of don't exist. And if you think that *this one game you love* actually is one, then you most likely don't see (and/or are not bothered by) the flaws that other people do see.Some of the larger games are really ballooning in size! Easily getting past the 100GB Ultra HD Blu Ray size.nor they will be soon enough.

So I'm really curious what will happen. Obviously a lot of people just want the digital downloads. Just easier. But a lot of people don't have that ability. They can't download that music data in any fast capacity. If we all had fiber internet, then yeah. But some people are still rocking 20 Mbps or less. That's a whole lot of time for the big games.

I wonder if a time will come when something like dongle security USB sticks will be the way to go. Still own them, can plug and use. Can be a bigger size pretty easily. Or even custom to that specific title.

From what I understand, an Ultra HD Blu Ray has a 82 to 128 megabit per second transfer rate (correct me if I'm wrong). That's mega*bit* not byte too. Meanwhile USB 3.0 and up can do 300-400 Mega*byte* per second. Dramatically faster. How this works in read speed and real time use is hard to say for me though.

But I don't have a ton of knowledge with physical media anymore (For instance, when there's a game that's like 80 GB, do you just play it off the disc like a PS2 game, or "install" it to the system, then play without the disc?). If you have any thoughts on it, I'd love to hear! I know the Xbox One got torn apart for trying all digital, making the PS4 get a lot of good PR. But it seems like there will come a time when discs in particular are going to be not so useful.

It's hard to say. The internet speed issues across the country make it a difficult thing to gauge.This is purely hypothetical, but I'm curious to hear some informed answers about this question. I'm not particularly knowledgeable about the technical side of hardware specs, but I understand that the Dreamcast was substantially less powerful than the Playstation 2. If that generation had played out differently and Sega continued to support the console to the end, is it likely we would have seen versions of major multiplatform releases like Time Splitters, Lord of the Rings, Medal of Honor, Prince of Persia, and the like? Would significant downgrades have had to be made in the Dreamcast version, or would all major releases have been designed to run well on that console, effectively lowering the standards for graphics in that generation?I was listening to some podcasts and was struck by the discussion that starts at [35:37 in this Triple Click podcast](https://open.spotify.com/episode/1vm4QxWIrudbU3pn0NSHrN). It made me think about how on the 2 video game subs I visit most, this one and /r/patientgamers, there's an overwhelming push for "games to respect your time". People dismiss games that don't give generous enough checkpoints, that make you go to arbitrary places to upgrade certain things, that make you repeat through a certain section, say a 5 minute hub environment before you go to a different world rather than fast traveling. 

The overall gist seems to be be **I want to optimize my video game time to efficiently maximize "unique gameplay experience" per unit time**. This is often couched in discussion about how "I used to have so much time to play games but now that I have a spouse and house and kids, if a game doesn't respect my time, I have no desire for it". As someone who was gaming since the 90s, I remember when things like fast travel were implemented as "quality of life" conveniences, and while there may have been minor backlash to it, they soon became the norm in gaming.

However, as podcast says, there is a certain charm, joy or satisfaction in a world where there's "friction" and you can't just warp everywhere and you have to repeat certain things. The feeling of coming back to a town, making the familiar walk to the blacksmith for an upgrade, seeing the kids play as you then make your way to another store to sell your extra items. Or the familiar trek up the mountain to see the sage who lets you upgrade a skill, that you might have to repeat 10 or 20 times in a playthrough. There is something that is lost when that becomes an "Upgrade all to max" button in the menu, or even having it done automatically.

I don't mean to demean anyone's style of playing games. I myself used to lean towards the "minimize friction, I want to see every unique area/gameplay style this game has to offer and then if it sniffs as repetitive I'm moving onto a new game". For me personally, this was mixed up in a desire to "keep up with the gaming community" and be on top of all modern gameplay trends. However, I eventually came to conclude that **trying to optimize for maximum progression/uniqueness per unit game time ends up feeling like an empty way to play games.** I'm an adult like the rest of all of you, I have less and less time for games a year. But I've come to prefer playing 3-5 games a year that might have this friction or repetition, but use it to feel like a cohesive world, rather than play 10-15 games where the progression and dopamine hits of new experiences are more streamlined.

Ironically, I think the success of Stardew Valley validates this somewhat. The Harvest Moon "slow life" genre is literally designed around this familiar repetition. I also wonder why some games like that are praised, but when it's in an action RPG, it's "not respecting your time".

What do you think?I love playing video games, but often become bored with the repetition of singular games, and end up moving on to another. Regardless of the genre, about 60-70 percent of the way through a game I often start losing interest. Whether its cognitive dissonance or repetitive gameplay, I just start to see the game mechanics at work and lose interest. I recognize that this isn't a problem that everyone suffers from, but for me personally, this isn't and issue I can solve by simply playing a different type of game. I love character creation and role play, and often find myself playing (and enjoying!) the first half of a game multiple times. 

Cue GTA V. I still remember the first time that the camera zooms out and flies halfway across the map from Franklin to Michael. My mind was blown. I played the entire game constantly switching between the three characters. Switching is smooth, instant, and immersive. When you switch to a character they are often in the middle of an activity like watching tv, or looking at the beach at the pier. It really makes you feel like you are in a living, breathing world. 

Most importantly for me, the multiple protagonists is an opportunity to roleplay the game multiple ways. I understand this isn't an important thing for many people, but completely immersed me in the game. I no longer feel like the game is on rails from a roleplay perspective, because I can experience the game from every angle. In GTA V I would play Franklin as a up and coming gangster proving himself. I would seek out flashy cars and listened to the hip hop stations. With Michael I would find the  mid-life crisis cars and listen to the classic rock stations and talk radio. Finally, with Trevor I would use the ATVs and buggies and listened to the punk stations. I almost never committed senseless violence with any character other than Trevor. I enjoyed this all immensely and flew through the game.

After I played GTA V I assumed that this mechanic would be copied endlessly. The same way they now describe all open world games as being "like Breath of the Wild"(regardless how similar it is), I thought  the same thing would happen with GTA V and multiple protagonists. I cant help but think about how awesome it would be to play some single player games in this matter. Imagine playing Skyrim and switching between a mage, a warrior, and a rogue. I would be in heaven. Imagine playing Mass Effect and having two or three squads across the galaxy. You could be a paragon, renegade, and neutral. Obviously this would ruin these games for some people, so I'm not suggesting change these games. I'm just surprised this isn't a mechanic we aren't seeing more often.Personally I think this is one of my favorite games of all time. I remember when it came out not having a SNES yet  (I would however the next year.) and playing the game extensively at the Toys R Us kiosk. I raved to my SNES owning friend about it and he was very lukewarm on the game. Sadly over the years it seemed that my friends' opinion was pretty common. That while the graphics were impressive the gameplay couldn't compete with the Mario games at the time.

This seems ridiculous to me. I loved how each level of the game gave you a new experience. Even the swimming levels were fun. I also really appreciated the atmosphere, the game seemed to be totally something new to me. 

So what are your opinions on this game? Do you think it can compete with the Mario games or is it just all graphics and no substance?Particulary what I think about is inventory management and crafting.  
In all of the games you need to build a base and in that you place crafting stations and storage. Then it begins.  
Running from chest to chest to take items you need to craft. You placed these chests all in one room and signed them by category.  
Then you go to the crafting zone, which is every station in the same place, so you you can access them quickly and not look far when you need to use another.  
After you crafted items, you return to storage and go through chests to return leftover items.  
After you crafted the item, it turned out that it is an ingredient for another. So the process begins again.  


It creates a situation where you have only 1 or 2 rooms in your game where you go to and spend all time in inventory screen, rather than in-game gameplay. You have no incentive to build nice, complex looking base with separate rooms, because if you do that, it takes much much more time to craft later on. It makes building part of the game completly optional to progress and while I'm sure for some it's great as they hate building, the game should make the player use all the game mechanics and make them rewarding for him. I love to build in games and love the idea of having separate buildings for each type of crafting, therefore create a village or complex building. But I actually never done it fully, because later it's so much trouble to manage inventory and craft something.

I see two (three?) solutions to this and some games or mods experimented with them.  
One is making the crafting and inventory already in one place, so that the player doesn't have to build storage and crafting zones. Everything happens in one place, one two screens.   
Two is making storage and crafting an actual in-game mechanic. Vintage story is pretty good at this, because you can place some items in the world to store them or make storages for specific items like tools or molds. Then you need to build a pantry for food which have conditions you need to fill to work. Plus in-game crafting and no crafting stations.  
Of course the more obvious solution is to design crafting recipes well, in that you don't need everything for evetrything, but seprate it in categories, so making storages and thematic buildings is easier. Almost impossible given chaotic design of survival games, but could be done.  


So do you think the formula will change or stay how minecraft or terraria has started it? Or maybe there are some niche games that are trying to fix these issues and move gameplay from interfaces to the game world.It feels to me as though games companies have become so pigeonholed into automatically correlating RPG = medieval, post-apocalyptic, or sci-fi futuristic world, that none of them even consider making a game just set in our *current* world.

As in, on actual Earth, with our actual constraints of physics, and actual real-world drama.

We have countless TV shows and movies set in the real world; why not RPGs? There's still the same room for decision-making, stat points & levelling up, fighting bad guys, epic conversations without needing dragons, magic or aliens as a crutch to make them more "interesting".

You can even have "classes" in real life; I mean we have soldiers, medics, conversation specialists, craftsmen/tradesmen, engineers right here on Earth, right?

The closest thing would probably be Disco Elysium or Alpha Protocol, but even those use made-up worlds or geopolitical situations/fake countries instead. We have the "zombie" type games out there with real-world physics and weapons but... umm, yeah - zombies.

Can a guy just get some cool, realistic roleplaying adventures here on Earth, please?

Edit: because people have asked for examples in the comments -

Crime cases

Spec ops teams

Legal cases

Drug cartels

World Wars

Archeology digs

Business backstabbing

The United Nations tensions

Highschool or college life drama

etc etc.

Take some of the most popular TV shows ever, RPG equivalents of stuff like The Wire, Band of Brothers, Mad Men, the Sopranos, Succession, etc... those are all based in our 'real world' without needing magic or fantasy etc.

Something like Mass Effect 2 is basically "Band of Brothers: the Game, But in Space" and is one of the most popular RPGs of all time.

And I have no idea why people are thinking that "based in the real world" means = "gameplay where you spend your time going to the toilet or mowing the lawn", lol...Apologies if the title sounds a bit clickbaity, as 'hate' is a strong word but to be honest it really does feel like it sometimes.

Accessibility means something different to every individual, but I think most can agree it can mean to make something less of a hassle to do or use.

In gaming, it can be something as simple as difficulty - in the old days, gaming was a bit inaccessible because they were built to draw out the length of games, to the point that you needed insane reflexes and vast memorization to pass typical levels. It became less about having fun, and more about forcing kids to, well, spend a lot of money so they can fail over and over. Difficulty can be adjusted in many ways but the most obvious way is to simply make the game 'easier' by making failure harder (player takes less damage) or by making success easier (enemies take more damage).

Less thought of when it comes to accessibility is literal ease of use for human ailments. Things like colour blindness, hearing impairment, etc. It can be really complex because there's tons of levers you can pull. Adjustable pacing, customizable controls, adjustable options, etc.

And then there's my favourite kind of accessibility: Proper on-boarding, good user interface/experience, and logical game design.

All of these are pretty damn big topics on their own but I wanted to try to discuss accessibility in general and maybe learn some stuff as someone who doesn't make games.

**Please note** I'm not here to diss gamers or developers. However, I would like to learn from others why accessbility seems be always be low priority and/or ignored, and why there is so much resistance against even seemingly simple but useful changes. 

#Gamer Mentality

Alright this one confuses me the most. Gamers tend to be SO against accessibility it makes no sense. They love forming communities, they love being able to share and chat, etc. etc. Yet if people so much ask about ease of use or difficulty settings, MAN do you get some interesting responses.

Do gamers just hate accessbility? Is this a side effect of competitive sports/multiplayer games existing in such a highly regarded state? People often seem to jump on the hate bandwagon if someone says a game is too hard or there's something off with controls/accessbility. Yet the criticism seems to be limited to simply "git gud", along with insults. 

What's crazy is that this applies to SINGLE PLAYER games too. For some reason even people who play single player games can be victims in discussions around accessibility. I've never seen this level of hostile mentality, even in other media. It just makes no sense considering they're SINGLE PLAYER games, so nothing you do would affect someone else's experiences.

What's the explanation for this mentality? As the only thing I can think of is it's a side effect of competitive MP games becoming popular. Maybe newer generations are growing up accepting this 'hardcore' mentality? Otherwise I'm at a loss.

It could also be massive misinterpretation. People perhaps think difficulty is the only thing you can adjust to make games more friendly to beginners or less of a hassle in general. But there's plenty of levers to pull besides that.

#Accessibility for ease of use for everyone

This one doesn't get nearly as much hate - after all, how often do people go "wow don't make colour blind modes for this game, how could you devs!".

Sadly these do take resources, and thus I can understand why not tons of developers simply do not implement features that can help out. They'll often have to take a look at how many players would actually use the feature, and then worry about if players can abuse said feature (because gotta win, am I right?).

Some games legitimately cannot add such features as it would completely change the game outright. Games where hearing is extremely important such as Counter-Strike, Valorant, and Hunt Showdown, would see no end to abuse cases if accessbility features relating to hearing was ever added. You'd see no end to sweaties gaining whatever advantages they can by using features they don't necessarily need to use.

On the other hand, sometimes it seems developers are against accessibility features despite the fact that resources are not really a problem. Dead by Daylight is pretty guilty of this (Oh I rant more against that game later), as it took more than 5 years for them to implement colour blind accessibility features. It also got kick started (read: Pushed up priority) after a developer on a livestream said some [questionable things criticizing a viewer](https://twitter.com/paeshplays/status/1351721896564420608) who asked about colour blind modes. 

Now I'm no developer, but I'd say DbD is pretty popular and they weren't lacking in resources, so I'm not sure what the excuse would be to wait 5 years and then implement it as damage control after someone says some dumb things.

Then on another hand we have developers who do try to implement accessibility features, but completely overlook some basic stuff and you get [situations like this](https://www.reddit.com/r/modernwarfare/comments/eaiwt6/colour_blind_mode_is_losing_me_friends/) from only a couple of years ago where for some reason the TEXT on the screen didn't change, resulting in a player not being able to tell friend from foe.

That all said, these 'proper' features do take an investment and admittedly that are targeting smaller sections of your larger audience, so again I do understand why it may not be immediate priority, especially for indie devs. But for larger game companies who do have the resources, this is where I'm confused as that's several thousands of gamers not really being able to enjoy your game. Why waste that potential? That's money and loyalty you can make right there, is it not?

On the topic of accessibility in game options, I feel we can make better strides here. Unless a game is very purposely designed around a structured difficulty (see Dark Souls, Sekiro, etc.), I don't see why we have to make games inaccessible to people who, say, haven't owned a console for years or are relatively new to gaming. People seem to believe options are forced, when in reality they're *options*. Why not have difficulty settings? Why not have better checkpoint / save systems? Why not allow 'cheats' especially when it's all optional?

God of War did this well as I let my friend couple borrow my PS4 to experience said awesome game. They had to play on easy mode and still felt it was fair for them. What I noticed watching though is that the devs put the time to actually adjust various areas, rather than just 'make enemies take more damage, call it a day'. They actually made some boss battles less of a pain on easy difficulty by changing features, for example one boss that is known for using a blind attack had said blind effect severely reduced on easy difficulty. Boss fight patterns were changed to make them more bearable for people who simply don't console game much and needed more time to react to things. I praise them for not taking the lazy route.

Control did something awesome and patched in better, less frustrating checkpoints, and actually added in the equivalent of optional cheats. While there still is no difficulty setting, at least these features greatly reduce frustration while allowing accessibility as for example, my friends from above would actually be able to play this game and enjoy the story instead of getting stuck (remember, not everyone are expert gamers. Some people get married and still are not experts at gaming, I know crazy!)

And then there's Last of Us 2, the king of accessibility which is beyond insane and I doubt anyone else will reach Naughty Dogs level of push here. I've never seen so many amazing options in my life, and because of it I could actually recommend this game to people who don't play consoles or are newer to gaming or would normally have difficulties for X reasons. The fact that you can even change gameplay aspects to fit each person is incredible, so for example maybe changing stealth attributes to make it easier for people who are struggling with that aspect.

#Game design, UI/UX, and proper on-boarding experience

Game design is can be its own massive topic, but to touch on it, it influences A LOT about, well, everything. Accessibility included.

This will vary wildly so I won't stick around on it too long. But for a lot of games, the solutions can be simple yet skipped for unknown reasons. Most of the time I get annoyed with user interface/experiences and on-boarding experiences.

The big thing I want to point out here is that games should have a decent on-boarding experience (meaning how easy it is to learn and get into). This can mean tutorials and logical game design. The other big part is the UI and how it can factor into making games easier to play without necessarily destroying the game's design.

A big factor is reducing the need for players to go *outside* a game to learn basic things. You shouldn't need to refer to a wiki to learn important things a proper tooltip or tutorial would normally teach. You shouldn't need to use 3rd party tools to fix some basic issues a player could have.

Customizable controls and options. Okay seriously, motion sickness is a thing, why do games insist not allowing people to adjust motion blur or camera options? This is slowly going changing for the better though.

Customizable controls? Company of Heroes 2 came out in 2013 and as an RTS competing with big wigs like Starcraft 2, I am flabbergasted as to why even a decade later, you cannot customize your hotkeys. You literally have to use 3rd party tools so you can, for example, rebind an important map button to an easier key to press (numpad 0 is not practical in an RTS game!).

User interface is a big one. Often times these can make a huge difference, making life easier for all players involved but especially for beginners or those with difficulties in certain areas. A long time ago when SC2 was announced, we even saw resistance to actual good changes, like being able to select more than 12 units at a time. Why? I don't know.

Dead by Daylight is pretty terrible example despite being popular. In DbD, your characters can have a massive list of perks to select from. However, it still has a massively outdated UI design where instead of having a list you can filter through, you instead have a limited series of PICTURES to look at. Each page only has a small number of pictures.

The problem if you're not someone who plays the game all the time? Say you and your friends pick up DbD and want to play it together. You go into custom game lobby, very excited to play together. Ok, now how do you explain the perks to your friends? You say "okay don't worry too much it's a lot to explain, I'll tell you what perks to pick". Now you run into another problem - there's no filtering, no search bar. You literally have to describe PICTURES to people, and make them SIFT THROUGH multiple pages of perks to find what they're looking for. 

Then you realize even if you wanted to explain about the perks, you can't, because the tooltips are horrendous. They say big keywords like "mangled", but don't explain what that means. Players now have to refer to info OUTSIDE THE GAME via a wiki, to learn what the crap anything means. They cannot get this information in-game at all, making them completely reliant on listening perfectly to one person talk all day instead of playing (not ideal), or everyone goes looking for a wiki. And what if the wiki is lacking or the game is less popular? Well good luck finding info I guess.

Proper game and UI design would mean the tooltips explain what you need to know, and reduce the need to refer to outside sources. Proper game and UI design would mean an easier way to sort through a constantly expanding list of perks/whatever, which the devs surely knew was going to expand to a list of hundreds. Imagine a card game where they have important keywords, and when you hover over a card the tooltip fails to explain what the keyword means. That's just terrible design, right?

This is the kind of poor design that really bugs me, and in DbD in particular it's 6 years and counting of just questionable design that has me wondering, "How does no one see these problems? Do they just not care?". They're certainly not the only ones guilty of poor design and UI, but it's one game that stands out to me.

Another great example are simple changes that don't really upset the game balance/design/etc., would help newer players greatly, but for some reason still meets resistance from veteran players. In Hunt Showdown, the game replaces gun names with skin names if available. If you look at a gun dropped on the ground, normally it says something like "Winfield Rifle". However, if the gun has a skin on it, the base name of the gun is missing, and instead it'll say confusing things like "The Grim Reaper".

As one can imagine, a simple solution would be to change the UI text so it says both the gun name and the skin name. Something like "Winfield Rifle (The Grim Reaper)" is not only immediately useful to all players, it avoids any confusion especially in a game where dark settings can make things even more difficult to read or see. Instead, what happened to my friends and I when we were new is endless confusion and wasting time swapping weapons back and forth because we apparently were supposed to memorize hundreds of skin names before playing. 

The weird thing, aside from gamers being resistant to such a simple change that doesn't ruin the game for anyone, is that the devs have stayed quiet on this and seemingly refuse to ever change this. Why? I don't know.

On the topic of on-boarding...I will never understand why developers insist on creating terrible on-boarding experiences ever. Getting more people to play your game would be good, yes? But it seems to me that making decent tutorials (or even any tutorial at all) is a path less travelled.

I know some MP games can be complicated, but that's no really an excuse to sit idly on a terrible tutorial and call it a day for several years (cough League of Legends). If regular people can make guides, the company certainly has the resources.

Teamfight Tactics is a fantastic example of a supposedly fun casual game that anyone can play. Except it has NO tutorial, making this seemingly 'casual' and 'friendly' game have an incredibly high barrier.

In order to play it, you HAVE to play against players and you HAVE to match make, you can't just do a simply lobby with a small group of friends. This limits options for groups of friends who want to play with each other and teach each other. But most importantly, there is NO tutorial at all. I've already witnessed this being a problem when my group of friends tried to introduce another friend into the game - we hopped into a TFT match and the player simply had no idea what was going on. And you can't really teach when the game is live and things are constantly happening and you have to also play the game so you're not dead too.

In TFT, if we want to have a new friend join us, we LITERALLY CANNOT TEACH THEM. They have to be thrown to the wolves over and over again, or be forced to watch videos or something (yeah because friends love joining friends only to not play with them...).

I really do not understand why no tutorial was ever made - Riot just kind of released it and said 'the nerds will figure it out, we can just get to work on making cosmetic money'. Which is just weird because there's such a big market they can tap here (TFT is available on mobile, people like watching others play it, easily accessible, etc.) and they just decide that gatekeeping newcomers is a good idea? Again, just lost here.

Most other games we're all familiar with terrible tutorials - devs just assume everyone knows how games work and sometimes skip on important basics. Then they just shrug and say 'go check outside sources' if you need information on important mechanics. Why is it so acceptable to force people to go outside the game they're currently playing just to get some important info?

#TL;DR

Help explain to me, or discuss these topics such as

- Why gamers seem to hate accessibility so much
- Discuss why accessibility options seem so difficult to implement, and/or why devs either have no interest, or seem so keen on avoiding seemingly simple solutions. Some are understandable or can't be implemented, but others seem to have simple solutions that are avoided for unknown reasons
- The apparent lack of proper tutorials, or just not making any at all, as well as incredulous on-boarding experiences that are lacking.I was chatting the other day about how I used to play endless hours of rainbow6 siege but lately, every time I log on it seems something has been changed for the worse. New characters that don't fit the original vibe, familiar corridors suddenly going somewhere else, gadgets broken, etc.

This got me thinking. Games are pretty unique as an entertainment product that can be changed, after you purchased it, into something else, even into something you no longer enjoy.

Imagine buying a bluray of your favourite film. You love this film but one day you put it on and all the effects have been changed, or they recorded a new ending, re-shot scenes with new actors or cut bits.

Imagine buying a book you love to read every year. One day a favourite chapter has been removed or rewritten. It's no longer the book you bought.

Unthinkable. It would be shit.

You can buy a game. Really enjoy it. But the manufacturers can just change it, into something that isn't what you liked.isn't the thing you bought.

Anyway. Thoughts?

UPDATE: I probably shouldn't have made the title "the only product..." Because I mean it's a more extreme version of this concept than most media in that it can be unavoidable.

Second. I've thought about the idea that we are effectively forced into sequels. You might have loved sonic. Then they release sonic 2. Maybe you don't like the feel of the new one so you just keep happily playing the original.

Nowadays the updates can effectively be like a game being updated to the sequel. The developers improvements aren't restricted to a new release but can effectively be like forcing you to receive the sequel with no recourse to playing the original you liked ever again.

Of course there can be great upsides to this. Games improved or expanded in good ways but there's definitely a downside to meI save scum on almost all games, and never try ironman.

It's not because I don't like the challenge (I always play on hard) or that I don't accept mistakes (happily did in Don't Starve). It's just that I don't think game designers know how to make games where permadeath/ironman/non-savescum mechanics are practical.

Let's say for example I do an Ironman run in Pillars of Eternity. Right now I have a 45hr run on my non-ironman save. If I die, I have to invest about 45 hours to reach the same point. But how many adults have the time to double down their gaming hours to reach the same spot they were before they died? And mind you, it's 45 hours of **redoing**.

It's not like CIV 6 where every game is different, and the world is randomly generated based on seed. Which brings me to my next point - I don't want to lose out on whatever scarce storytelling value in my playthrough because of a save/ironman constraint. And I say scarce **because 95% of games run out of story before anything else like chests to loot or dragons to slay.**

This is why I always save scummed when pickpocketing in Skyrim. I don't mind getting punished for poorly thought out heists. But if the entire town aggros me, and a really interesting character dies, **I do mind that**. Which is why I never go evil in games - yes choosing to arm the nuke in Fallout 3 in the main city would have given me 1000 bottlecaps. But I lose access to merchants, characters etc and trade it in for a smiling ghoul?

I don't mind losing a companion. Or burning down a village for more gold. As long as like in real life, they could be replaced by something of equal value.

If my best friend dies, I can try to forge a new friendship with someone of novel "backstory" and personality, and "dialogue options". AI hasn't gotten far enough for games to procedurally generate interesting characters to replace the ones you lose. So every hero you lose to Death's Door, and every merchant that dies in Skyrim after I touch a chicken are a **net subtraction** from my gaming experience. From the **finite storytelling** world. I can slay as many wolves as I want in Skyrim, but the writing team could write only so many backstories and dialogues and scenarios. 

I really liked Darkest Dungeon because the entire game **revolved** around permadeath. It was designed with permadeath and non-save scumming in mind, so as a gamer I accept it. If I get wiped, I can recover without losing hundreds of hours of progress. And I don't redo anything - all dungeons are unique, each raid is different.

I am also willing to lose characters in Darkest Dungeons, because they have **equal replacements.** I know all cRPGs allow you to hire mute henchmen in taverns, but they are NOT equal to The Red Prince from DOS:2. Can you imagine using \*insert mute henchmen at your level\* to replace Morte from Planescape Torment? Ah!

**TL:DR** many games offer ironman/permadeath modes, yet adoption of those mechanisms is not  widespread - even by people who WOULD love the extra challenge. And that is not due to gamer laziness to "git gud" but because very few designers know how to build a game to accommodate loss mechanisms like ironman and permadeath in a way that sits well with what makes gaming rewarding, and the constraints of being an adult.The Wii is a uniquely iconic and beloved console. There's no denying that it has managed to do what little other consoles have. It made its way into millions of peoples homes back in it's heyday, and even now, over 15 years later, the Wii is *still* relevant. Its impact on culture and gaming, and it's charming and iconic traits, are fascinating, and virtually unique to the Wii. After thinking about it for a while,  I finally nailed down a couple aspects that account for why I think the Wii is such a uniquely legendary console. Rather than typing it out, I made a short video essay explaining my ideas, and I'd love to hear your opinions, experiences, and critiques on the matter. 

[Why the Wii is such a legendary console](https://youtu.be/UQVm1MtoT6A)This is not a post to provoke people who love Nintendo but just curious what did Nintendo do differently in term of making games. It just seems to me they are not as different to other gaming company making same yearly titles but those companies receiving a lot of hate. I understand at the time Nintendo was the pioneer of gaming but now they are just releasing Mario, Zelda, Mario kart, smash, Pokémon that are pretty much the same but people still see Nintendo has best creativity of making new games. #Preface

I know *Death's Door* has been receiving high praises (some might think undeserving), so instead of an overall review, I'd like to focus on a few things that I felt made the game much more attractive than it has the rights to.  I'll try to keep this as spoiler free as possible while censoring even minor spoilers.

---

#Music and Sound design

The first "backstage" thing I'd like to focus on, is how *Death's Door* has got the music score and sound nailed down.  Not just that the thematic composition of the music was beautiful and matches the cartoony but sombre art design perfectly, but that it matches the *gameplay* to make the experience much more cohesive.

In the first hour or so of *Death's Door*, players will very quickly be acquainted with the main theme of the game, simply by the different arrangements of the same tune being played in different parts of the game.  Now you might think, "isn't that bad because they lack creativity?" On the contrary, I argue the composer intended to keep a simple melody that resonates the struggle of life and death (the very theme of the game) throughout as a part of the core experience.  When your character dies, you're met with a "Inception-esque" (for the lack of a better word) booming of the first few notes of the same melody, and it conveys the impact of your blunder clearly along with the visual.   There was really no need for any fancy special sound effects or songs.  Think about how Ghibli Studio music scores are designed for each films - simple tunes, different arrangements.  Same thing here.

More so, as you transition between sub areas, you can still hear the underlying melody as you switch screen.  I'm not talking about just turning down the volume or applying a filter on the soundtrack, but that these soundtracks within the same area are written with the same tempo, same melody, played at the same interval, but different arrangement just so your experience isn't interrupted between screens.  It's a very minor detail but personally I found it very effective and help with the immersion a lot.  There were only a few notable moments that the music got cut to silence during the theme change, but besides that the music design was mostly cohesive within the main areas.

Also, a key bonus that I noticed in one area (>!the Furnace!<) is that the gameplay is purposefully synchronized to the backing soundtrack, and that the sound effect ended up like a part of the score which was really cool.  When you first enter the area it's really quiet with only background noises available, but once you switched on the Furnace the whole area becomes alive - and at that time I was secretly hoping, "please, *please* let the >!mechanical!< action to match the rhythmic decisive tune" - and sure enough, it did.  And it was massively satisfying to see the >!pistons!< move along with the song.

So by keeping the main themes simple, but with different arrangements, I believe the composer made the game that much more engaging and memorable because any time you inevitable start remembering or hearing those key themes, the entire game will start flooding back to you in parts because you've been basically hearing the same simple themes all through the game.

---

#Rewarding your attention to details

Another thing that this game did well, I feel, is that throughout your adventure you are consistently left with breadcrumbs of things you are locked out on but can revisit later.  The >!posts!< that allow you to >!hookshot!< are only between two designs between the worlds, so whenever you pass by one it becomes easy to make a mental note to come back.  Also, most of the things in the game that stands out visually eventually serves a purpose (besides the >!stone circles with glyphs on the ground!<, which I'm still not sure if it was supposed to mean or do something.)  Anything that seems out of place or significant is probably something you should tinker a little bit with.  Personally I find that rewarding and validates my gut feelings as an experienced gamer.

That's not to say the puzzles are *great*.  Because by most standard, they're probably a bit on the easy side.  Particularly the >!post-ending!< sequence where it's basically a giant scavenger hunt but with probably not a great payoff.  But all those did not come as a surprise if you have been paying attention throughout the game as you ventured through the various areas.  As a result, I didn't have to rely on guides/hints at all, specifically with the built-in passive/interactive hint system that is >!Jefferson!<.

Now - this game being a very Zelda-esque non-Zelda game, of course there are gonna bound to be >!bombable walls!<.  Specifically, the ones people hate where they are invisible - *except this time, it works*.  It works because the game *tells you* where to look for these, so there's no bullshit "whack-a-mole" random >!bombing!< everywhere (even though your >!bombs!< are never in short supply).  I appreciated that a lot because the game respected your time and didn't want ask you to brainlessly scour every inch of the game for some stupid secrets.  (That said, the >!owl-searching at the post-ending!< felt a little bit like that.  But then again, the sound design is there to provide you with the hint if you paid attention).

So when you finally found something of value, it's not because you lucked into it, but because you followed your gut and paid attention for the little things in the game.  The "Eureka" moment, while not a lot, definitely feels genuinely earned if you've been relatively attentive.

---

#Closing, for now

There are really a lot more other things I feel are deserving of the praise *Death's Door* has been receiving, like its simple but snappy combat system, or that the game's story/progression didn't outstay its welcome, or that the game is genuinely fun and gives you a smile (particularly, >!The Frog King!<'s introduction was a good chuckle)... it's charming and quirky and got a lot of things done right.  But again, that's not why I'm posting this.  While it's definitely *not perfect* by any means, I feel that the little things that many games have forgotten - like how music is a key part of the game, and player's attention to the game world being rewarded - *Death's Door* has got it right, and I wish more games did that.  Because it really made the game special.

It's also the *only* game that I've voluntarily 100% (not the achievements, just collection and progression) in the past decade, while enjoyed doing it.  I felt like that's worthwhile to mention, specifically because I don't spend a lot of time gaming these years.So I've recently gone on an indefinite hiatus from traditional multiplayer co-op games, with the exception of SWTOR (which I mostly play solo anyway, which is probably why I still keep it around) and the occasional Korean MMO (which are also generally highly solo friendly).

A problem I have consistently noticed is the difficulty of being able to jump in and enjoy things as someone who still works a full time job outside the home (and thus spends about 10 hours a day away from the house five days a week). The experience requirements become daunting for the groups that you might actually be able to get something done in, the ones that you can actually get into usually beating their head into a wall and leaving you more stressed rather than de-stressed, unless you stick to the most trivial of content.

It has occurred to me that this might be the effects of Work From Home? It used to be there were three main categories of gamer: the working gamer (who spends half or more of their waking hours to/from/at work), the student, and the "NEET" who has neither job nor school to worry about and can devote nearly every waking moment to their hobby. There was always a disconnect, however, with COVID, now we have very many people working from home. Combine the lack of commute time with the fact that office work was always notoriously inefficient (some accounts suggest as few as 3 hours out of an 8 hour shift are actually productive on average), and the WFH gamer seems to end up with nearly all the advantages of the NEET and the resources of the working gamer.

Instead of accounting for this, the working gamer seems to find themselves increasingly excluded; the fact that we're stuck at work so many hours a day is just brushed aside and we are simply looked down upon for not being able to throw our entire life into the hobby. We get regarded as unmotivated or not willing to put in the effort (with what time? We're supposed to go without sleep now too or what?), or "entitled" just for trying to keep a seat at the community table. Meanwhile this breeds sentiment among us that the WFH, student, and NEET crowd are nolifers and elitists. We get offered a set of canned non-solutions, and then when we explain why these are not solutions, instead of the actual hand we need being extended we get told we have been offered solutions but ignored them and continued to whine. In the long run we seem to be either forced to simply give up or we get mass blocked and banned from communities under charges of "trolling" for what seems to be the crime of having a job outside the home (especially if 2nd shift) and wanting to continue to game as we used to. Holy kami, that's a cold reception.

(The fact that "block and ban" has seemed to replace civil disagreement in so many communities is another problem altogether, but that is tangential)

What will the solution for the working gamer be going forward? Surely "get a new job so you can game" is entirely too much except for the very hardcore gamers (who probably already did that, anyway). Communities seem to get entirely too merged and homogenized for niche pockets (which used to nearly be all there was in gaming) to really thrive. Is single player the only real answer, after years and years of getting to chill with friends old and new and shoot the s\*\*\* (and your enemies)?A lot has been said on the merits and genius of FromSoftware's Souls games. But many games in the same subgenre go unnoticed since they don't share the spotlight with games like Dark Souls, Jedi Fallen Order, Bloodborne and Hollow Knight (is this even a soulslike? a lot people seem to believe so).

This is just a little stream of consciousness I wrote up during a boring meeting. Feel free to disagree and call me out for my hot takes and bad faith arguments. This could also be useful to someone interested in less mainstream games in the subgenre.

From best to worst:

Nioh - This one is the most well known one here but I think doesn't get spoken off in the same breath as the games I mentioned above for a couple of reason.

Amazing combat but everything else is tiring. Game is bloated with junk loot and incremental % boosts that barely make a difference. The game is just obsessed with numbers. I got burned out so hard on this. Would play it more if it was less grindy and bloated. The story also makes no sense by just jumping from climax to climax with no build up, throwing plot twists at you that should be engrossing but fail to register since they're suddenly dropped on you with the grace of a jackhammer. Souls does everything better except combat. It's not enough to describe this game as a soulslike. It's a soulslike diablo-lite with character action (Ninja Gaiden, Devil May Cry) combat

Ender Lillies - Beautiful and tragic story and setting. Amazing music. Great deal of customization. It wasn't amazing but it was damn good. Very little to criticize. only lower than Nioh since it has much less content and has lower highs and lower lows.

Blasphemous - Amazing aesthetic and tone. Religious supernatural horror is so cool and underutilized. Combat is good but very simple and gets repetitive quick. I had a lot of fun playing this but not enough for a second run. Gameplay just lacks variety.

The Surge - The first was a bit mediocre but I loved the interconnected level design, limb targeting and cutting limbs for materials to use for equipments and upgrades. Shame the levels looked very similar and it was easy to get lost. Bosses sucked too. Surge 2 was a much better game. Better in everyway but still has problems like reusing the levels by making you go back and forth from one end of the map to another twice while also taking away shortcuts and routes you memorized. It sucked, even if the levels did change for story reasons.

Death's Gambit afterlife - Easy game for the most part until you attempt the heroic bosses which are optional hardcore versions of story bosses. These range in difficulty from a minor challenge to kusoge masochistic bullet hell insanity. The last 3 heroic bosses broke me. Especially one (eldritch council), which took me over 6 hours into the deep night with no success. For the first time in my life, I was going to give up against a boss... then I saw someone on youtube do it without getting hit which motivated me to try again. I got gud and kicked their ass. I can respect the game for making me feel like a scrub again. Other than that, there's a surprisingly emotional and ambitious story here with one of the coolest bosses ever (you'll know which one)! A very flawed game and a hidden gem. Weapons unfortunately don't feel good to use and you could get locked out of the best ending if you die too much before the endgame (this was going to happen to me since I died too much to the 3 final heroic bosses).

Salt and Sanctuary - I played this in 2021 which I feel didn't do it any favors since it meant I played so many better games similar to it. Overall, its fine but nothing impressive. A very shallow imitation of dark souls in 2D. Easy to break with a good build. Level progression with a tree sucked since it's presenting the classic souls level up system in the guise of a tree which is very restricting without providing any benefits. Art style sucks ass too. It's subjective but damn is it ugly.

Code Vein - I should love this since it's anime souls but its SO trash from the characters to the level design to the combat design to the bosses to the story. Nothing works here. The definition of mediocrity

Lords of the fallen - TRASH I shouldn't have finished.

Remnant - Tried it for a few hours and lost interest. Not for me. Too grindy without fun combat while relying on adds for difficulty.

Mortal Shell - I was getting Lords of the fallen flashbacks so I quit. Hated my short time with it. Confusing level design. Levels that just don't end while looking the same the whole way through. Shit boss design (red four armed freak). One thought kept coming to mind as I played - somebody designed this shit and somebody else approved it. They both need a slap (jk /s).

Nothing is at the level of fromsoft's work yet sadly except for Nioh which has surpassed them in combat at the expense of everything else.

With all that said, I am hyped to play Stranger of Paradise Final Fantasy Origin and treating it like hot but lovable garbage. Black Myth: Wukong, Lies of P and Thymesia also look like a good time which gives me hope that other soulslike devs are catching up to the quality of FromSoft

 What do you guys think about the state of Soulslikes and are there any interesting ones I missed? I love strategy games (AoE, Grand Strategy, Total War) but I could never get into the Civ series. Strangely enough, partly because of the hexagon map design. I know this could be seen as shallow, but it just feels extremely game-y and is, naturally, ahistorical.

I've tried to research about the topic of hexagon maps in strategy games yet didn't really find anything. How did they come about? What are their benefits, what their detriments? Why do they still exist? To clarify: I'm ***not*** comparing hex maps to **square** maps, but to RTS-style maps (i.e. no grid at all) and paradox/grand strategy (i.e. historical provinces).

I'm not trying to put down the Civ series at all, but I'm just genuinely curious. I would assume hex maps exist mostly for historical and technical reasons, i.e.: they are inspired by board games like "Catan" and they are/were easier to make, animate, compute, especially back in the day. But if this is true, why are they still around? Nowadays, having large historical maps like in Paradox' grand strategy games is not really an issue. Other games, like RTS, don't even have any sort of grid or hexagons. Is it just a matter of tradition? Or are there gameplay benefits for strategy games that I am overlooking?

Just to reiterate: **I am not saying "why do other people like something I don't like".** Instead, I am genuinely curious about a central trait or gameplay mechanic and why it exists. **Especially since - if I am not wrong! - it is originally based on reasons which don't apply anymore to video games**: I.e. board games use hex tiles because it is easier/there's no real better alternative in a game like Catan. But video games don't have these limitations.

&#x200B;I don't exactly know where I am going with this post since I am sleepy and the ideas are vague as it is, but it seemed interesting, so here goes.

At this point it has become a meme in the Rimworld community to commit frequent atrocities - enslavement, torture, organ harvesting etc are common things to do when playing, and people playing it usually take it in a light way. 

Compare this to the something like the torture mission in GTAV, which makes you feel a monster after playing. Why is their this divide? Is it just because of the more advanced graphics in GTAV, where you actually see the crimes being committed? Is it because of the way that you are more actively involved in one of them? Is it to do with some game design choices, or the context of these actions? More broadly, and I know the topic of violence and games is a tired one at this point, is there anything "harmful" in any of these depictions e.g. desensitization, encouragement, normalisation etc? I suspect with the rise of more immersive, VR games, this question will come up a lot in the future.The way all the classes interract of each other and the way they depend on each other is honestly baffling sometimes to me. There's not a single class in this game, From the Gunner, The Scout, The Enginner and the Driller that is less useful than the other, every single one has it's own uses and every single one is an asset to a mission.

The Gunner's massive heavy weaponry and plentiful ammunition are great for crowd control and getting the team out of a bad spot quickly and his rope elevator allows for quick traversal in badly angled holes whether they'd be going up or down

The Scout's speed and their grappling hook allows for players who play as him to scout ahead of the team and warn them if there's a giant hole in the way or a large concentration of creatures, and their giant flare gun that lights up entire rooms, lighting the way better than any standard flashlight or glowstick in the game 

The Engineer's platform gun allows for players to reach off far away mineral stuck to unreachable ceilings

And the Driller has drills...and in a game all about mining minerals there's no bigger blessing than a competent engineer

All of these useful things that every single class excells at and complimented that with the near flawless level generation that suits the level design for the specific type of gameplay and you got yourself one of the most dynamic multiplayer games i've ever had the pleasure of playing. ROCK AND STONE!I have not been excited for a CoD game in 5 years. The last cod game I got excited for was infinite warfare and I was on the hate bandwagon at first but after giving it a chance I was really surprised with how good it actually was. I think it just had bad timing with release and fans wanting a boots on the ground title. 

Since 2016 there has not been a single cod that I've been excited about. Bo4 looked somewhat okay but didn't look worth getting into. 

CoD fans are working on a project lately known as SM2 mod. A mod with all guns and maps from previous call of duty games including maps from call of duty online it legitamately looks like the best game I've seen in a long time. It looks fun and captures the old cod feels still very well and works surprisingly well just from watching the few videos I've seen.

Gameplay here for the curious (not mine) : https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-e8OKl7BJnk&feature=youtu.be

but im curious as to what you guys think. I feel like fans will always know what fans want in a call of duty game. It seems like so many good games could have been fun but get ruined by executive decisions and bad boardroom meetings because corperate thinks they know what the fans want when they dont. This game actually has me hyped for call of duty again. I would love it if they hire this team to work on the next call of duty game instead of SHG being in the yearly release. I have such high hopes for this team.I remember back to my 10th birthday and asking my parents for a Sega Mega Drive (Genesis if you're in the US). I also remember looking in my parents wardrobe a few days before my birthday in the hope of finding my presents, but that's a story for another day!

&#x200B;

Fast forward 20 years later and I am the very proud owner of an Xbox Series X. However, I got to thinking, for my 10th birthday, I simply had to ask my parents for a Mega Drive and I got exactly what I wanted.

&#x200B;

If kids today asked their gaming naive parents for a PlayStation 5 or Xbox Series S or X, would it go as smoothly?

&#x200B;

Imagine you know nothing about gaming and make your way to the shop/go online to find the present of your child's dreams (well, good luck finding the console in the first place!). I think that, for an average consumer, the current console market is an absolute mine field.

&#x200B;

All digital console or disk version? 

&#x200B;

500GB or 1TB? "How much space does a game take up?" "Anywhere from 500MB to 120GB Sir".

&#x200B;

Subscription services - PS Plus, PS Now, Xbox Live, Xbox Game Pass, Xbox Game Pass Ultimate. Little Timmy only wants to play Fortnite, does he need any of the above? He also wants to play Fifa online, does he need the above?

&#x200B;

Expanding the storage - Which drive do I need? Can I run games off the drive? Some games yes, some games no. If I have the fancy Xbox expansion card, can I run games off there?

&#x200B;

Which version of the latest cross gen game do I buy? This one says Xbox One and Series (or PS4 and PS5) on the box, the box for the same game says Xbox Series (or PS5) only, but its £10 more. Can I just get them the cheaper version? Its the same game, isn't it?

&#x200B;

What is cloud gaming? Do I even need a console?

&#x200B;

What do you mean plug in the console, update it and install all the games before his birthday? Can't you just put the disk in the console and play it straight away? So I buy the disk but still have to download the game?!

&#x200B;

My son says he wants a PS5, his friend has an Xbox Series X. Can they play games against each other/together? You say only some games, well which ones? Is there a list anywhere? Does it say on the game box? 

&#x200B;

Can my son connect his Bluetooth headphones to the console? 

&#x200B;

Will his old controllers work with the new console? I've heard you can with Xbox so I assume it's the same on PlayStation? 

&#x200B;

Will his old games work? So, PS4 only, unless you stream through PS Now, and then it's only some games. Xbox One games are OK, but only some 360 and original Xbox Games? 

&#x200B;

He really likes Call of Duty, if I get him a PS5, is that going to be OK for the next 5 years? 

&#x200B;

As you can see, an absolute mine field! If you're reading this Reddit then I assume you're a gamer, but put yourself in the place of a non gamer, absolute nightmare! It's like when my wife asks me to pick her up some feminine hygiene products. With wings or not? Heavy flow? Day or night? I haven't got a clue! I would imagine it would be the same if I asked her to go and buy a next gen console! 

&#x200B;

And then to further add to the complications, what about the TV? 

&#x200B;

I work in a TV shop and even now, after the new consoles have been out over a year, I ask people if they're in to gaming and have/want to get a next gen console, and if they say yes, I'll always recommend them an HDMI 2.1 TV. You wouldn't believe the amount that look at me blankly. Again, if a non gamer is looking for the best next gen experience, do they need to also upgrade their TV and are they even aware that it makes a difference? 

&#x200B;

I fully understand that as technology progresses, it gets more complex. Same with phones, TVs, cars, computers and pretty much most things in life. But has gaming gone a step to far that, unless you fully absorb yourself in the industry, you may not be making the correct decision on your next console, or using it to its full potential?

&#x200B;

Is there something that the industry can do to encourage new gamers to enter the market without the barrier to entry being too high?
Hi,

My name is Natalia and I am an Undergraduate Psychology student at Unicersiry College Cork (Ireland) looking to interview players who enjoy challenging games. The interview will involve receiving a successful and challenging game, which the participants will play for a week. The players will then be interviewed about their experience of failing and persisting in the game. I am excited to hear the perspectives, thoughts and feelings of these players about this experience. If you enjoy playing difficult games and are interested, I would be grateful for your contribution! 

Here is a link to a recruitment survey which will briefly ask you about your experience of playing video games and will walk you through the study in detail: https://cacsss.eu.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_0ix1F28qL5qrdoG

Note: Your responses and all material collected during interviews will be entirely anonymous. Thank you for your time!Hey All,

Currently (slowly) making my way through MH Rise, and I've been thinking something about games in the "boss-killer" genre.

 I've played Hollow Knight, Bloodborne and MH Rise, and the primary approach to dealing with bosses in all these games revolves around learning all their moves, and then developing the reflexes to react to those moves accordingly (And I don't mean this dismissively, just that this is the mindset one has to go into these games with). Now, thinking about it, in real life there's no reason a Bishaten would continue sitting on its tail and hurl fruits to its front while I'm whacking it from the behind. More realistically, it would stop and turn around to take me out. The closest I've seen to this kind of "reactive" boss moves so far is in Hollow Knight, where some bosses (>!Troupemaster Grim!<) will interrupt their move to teleport away if the Knight gets too close. 

However, I expect this kind of reactive gameplay would make the game VERY frustrating. It might turn every encounter effectively into a PvP match, and that might be just waay to stressful for some players to get into.

So, I wonder if you folks have ideas/recommendations for games which can incorporate reactive boss moves while still making the game fun? Or is this trade-off between realistic, reactive enemies and fun just the nature of the *ahem* game?I believe there are few main factors that currently stop VR from taking off and getting really popular. I also believe that Valve not only has all the means to overcome them, but also should have incentive to do so. Main limiting factors are:

* price of headsets
* selection of games
* software issues
* tech limitations

Let's go through them one by one.

**Price of headsets**

VR headsets are expensive, there's no denying that. Valve Index - $999, HP Reverb G2 - $599, HTC Vive Cosmos - $699, HTC Vive Pro 2 - $1399, Pimax 5K Super - $1350. Then there's a single affordable VR - Oculus Quest 2 for $299. People claim that it's because it's sold at a loss and then FB is making money on our data. However it was NEVER suggested by any credible source that Quest 2 is sold at a loss and looking at how many corners Oculus decided to cut it's hard to believe that. I believe the main reason why Quest 2 is sold at this price point is that Meta (FB) has a long term strategy.

For most companies revenue from headset is all or most money they will make on this headset. HP and Pimax don't have extensive platforms that would allow them to serve content to users and make money out of it. Vive is trying with their Viveport, they are even organizing VR art exhibitions or shows (that you need to buy a ticket for), but their platform is not nearly as popular as the Oculus store. Oculus can sell VR cheap, because they will earn more money when people buy exclusive games, shows, videos from their shop. Then there's also the whole Metaverse idea.

Who also has means to adopt similar strategy? Valve. It's not enough that Valve released Index back in 2019 that was the best VR headset of its times. They need to not only iterate faster (Index is outdated in many areas when compared to much cheaper Reverb G2 and Quest 2) but also provide cheaper option too. They could sell cheap VR, because then own biggest and most popular game platform on PC market. Every VR game sold on Steam would generate revenue. Since Steam anyways is preferred and most popular store they wouldn't even need to pay developers for exclusivity or to use their store in the first place. Every VR headset sold would result in increased revenue from VR games sold on Steam.

**Selection of games**

Selection of VR games is not that great. Especially if we count games that will provide fun for a long time as opposed to one time experience types of games. Facebook is buying many studios to make sure they will have a steady stream of VR games coming to their platform so it can thrive. In the long run this will work out for them anyway. Valve also owns multiple studios, they don't need to buy anyone out now because they already have extensive resources available now. They even created the most polished VR game so far - Half Life Alyx. They could use their current resources to produce VR games, it doesn't have to be a big production like Half Life Alyx. Strength of VR games comes from the fact that you can make them very unique due to how you interact with the world. Focusing on that would allow them to create more but smaller games and wouldn't stop them from releasing something bigger once in a while. Valve can create great games, we know that and with studios like Campo Santo under their wings they can't go wrong.

**Software issues**

VR is a completely new type of hardware and as such it's software had a lot of limitations and issues. Platforms had to be created from scratch. Oculus is steadily improving their platform, adding hand tracking, Air Link for wireless play over WiFi, option to move through your virtual home etc. Microsoft is... I don't know what they are doing, because Windows Mixed Reality is really way behind everyone else. This is another chance that Microsoft will miss, but I digress. 

Valve yet again has means to excel here. They created a solid base platform (SteamVR) that is integrated with the most popular store. They can create very good software, they already proved that with Steam Controller, SteamVR and most likely will prove it again with Steam Deck. Virtual lobbies/homes where you can invite friends, using virtual screens in VR to consume content, virtual personal cinemas to watch movies from Netflix and other platforms, etc. they could do this. Because again they have experienced developers that already proved they can create polished platforms - they just need to focus more on extending functionalities they provide.

**Tech limitations**

When Valve Index released it was the best headset. High resolution, high refresh rate, great tracking, controllers that track every single finger, great off ear speakers. Controllers to this day are the best you can get, speakers still best offered in VR, lighthouses used by multiple other companies because they work great too. Soon they will ship out Steam Deck, another piece of hardware that will impact PC gaming. It not only gives people the option to play their favorite games while traveling or simply from a comfy sofa, but also pushes huge software changes in Linux gaming. They have competent hardware division and Index is a proof, Steam Deck will most likely be another proof. However their slow release schedule is making them lose lead. By now they should already be close to releasing Index 2 that would be a much needed improvement over the current Index (better lenses, better screen - not only resolution but also contrast and colors). They should also be working on a cheaper alternative.

**Summary**

Of course for most of the time I'm not presenting much hard data, I'm just saying they could because they did similar or exactly this thing in the past. They overcame limitations and exceeded expectations. They have incentive to do this again. However it seems like Valve is mostly fine with just getting cash from Steam and occasionally releasing some cool hardware.

There's one more limiting factor I didn't touch - the need for a powerful PC, but this is becoming less of a problem as PCs get faster. Ampere and RDNA2 already provided a solid performance jump and if not crypto-craze we would be in a much better place. However once crypto crashes and miners will flood the market with cheap used cards and then Ada Lovelace comes to give us another solid performance improvement it should no longer be a problem.

Do you agree Valve could popularize VR or you disagree and why? What's your opinion of Meta clearly being on a path to monopolize the VR market (all Oculus headsets are 65% of VR headsets on Steam, Quest 2 alone is 40%, they focus on exclusive content for their platform and buy out successful VR studios)? Or maybe you think we don't have overall tech to really make VR enjoyable (full body tracking, completely wireless setups, pixel density so high even with 20/20 vision you couldn't spot pixels)?I saw a post recently about folks' top 10 games of all time. I also saw IGN updated their Top 100 Video Games of All Time. It was interesting to see BotW finally dethrone the 3 SNES classics that I figured would just sit at the top forever.

I began thinking about my own list. At first it was easy; what games have meant the most to me, what have I played the most, what have I replayed the most, etc. So I made a draft list of my top 10 games and decided to replay them all.

I realized I listed some games I don't play anymore (World of Warcraft and Pokemon Red/Blue/Yellow). I actually decided to go back and play both, and you know what? I wasn't having fun.

Both games meant the world to me at a time: playing Pokemon as a kid, trading with friends. World of Warcraft later as a teen, staying up all night with friends, LAN parties.

You could argue the social aspect is it, but I recall really enjoying both solo too, which is where I spent most of my time with them. The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time was also on my list, and that was an entirely solo adventure. Unfortunately, replaying that was also disappointing. It feels very aged now.

I don't want to be all negative. Some others on my list (Bioshock, Halo, The Last of Us) are still favorites. I'm sure I'll replay them again sometime too.

So it begs the question, is a top 10 all time list your current favorites? Favorites from certain points in your life? Should A Bug's Life on PS1 be on my list since it was all I played for a couple months? Will any new game ever be able to crack my top 3?

What do you think? What goes into your thinking when asked to give your top 10?I played and enjoyed Skyrim like everyone else. One of my favorite things to do in Skyrim, is to just go somewhere randomly and see what happens, see what I find. The DLCs neatly arrived and I did the same thing after each was released. 

But after **Dragonborn** released, I had it in me to do one single run with a lot of mods, and after that I just couldn't touch it ever again. I explored every nook and crany, I did every quest line, and not only did I explore everything, I found doing that stuff again, really tedious and uninteresting. There was really no interesting stories or characters or choices to make, it all felt so flat. But again back to exploration, and why I am most confused about this. 

Skyrim started to feel *"small"*, I just could not get that feeling of not knowing what's behind the corner, cause I knew what's behind the corner and I knew it wasn't interesting in any way. Animals or bandits attacking me started be really annoying, and after killing them for **34905030423th** time, it wasn't interesting to me. Killing anything, anyhow wasn't interesting anymore. Its not like let's say Dark Souls where only the most elite players can lose the thrill of fighting top tier opponents. 
On top of that, just like Oblivion, I got sick of hearing the same *voice actors* over and over and over and over again. 

Keep in mind this is what a HUGE amount of mods, lots of mods that I think should easily be part of the Vanilla. If it was vanilla I would have lost my will to play much earlier.



And then **Witcher 3** came out.... and made Skyrim look like a 10 year old game(the loading screens, the fetch quests, the dead writing...). 

I did not touch any of the endless re-releases, and even seeing this super hyped and explanatory trailer for the Anniversary edition, made me feel "meh, more Skyrim junk". 

So I genuinely wonder, who are the people who keep buying Skyrim over and over again, and then play the same damn game again and again. I would just like to know what is so interesting to them, that they can come back to it? Do people have some kind of "game amnesia", and they get to relive the thrill of the same game every time? 
Or every time they play it, they just enter knee deep, lose interest, and then get hyped again and rinse repeat? 

To clarify, this isn't an issue to Skyrim specifically(I actually couldn't re-play Witcher 3 or RDR2, the magic is just lost to me), but it is getting a comical amount of re-releases that other games just don't.

**EDIT:** To add, I am fairly certain that vast majority of people who purchase Skyrim again, do not use mods, or don't even know about the concept of mods. Even though Skyrim probably has one of the most well known modding communities.

**EDIT1:** Another thing I forgot, we are talking about TEN YEARS here! I played as a mage, now I'm gonna play as a warrior, is not something that can explain 10 years to me.

**EDIT2**: Also, let's not forget, the mods have issues on their own, you could easily install Skyrim and spend an entire session of your gaming time, downloading mods and getting them to work, and then tweaking them, perhaps even several sessions! No thanks, I'd rather dive in into a new game.This is a genuine question here, because I haven’t played every game and my memory is imperfect and my perspective is only my own, but have there truly been any AAA games that carry the same weight as a film headed by Martin Scorsese or Andrei Tarkovsky or Akira Kurosawa or Jean-Luc Godard or Hayao Miyazaki or Alfred Hitchcock or Stanley Kubrick or The Wachowskis? Like those are filmmakers that make cinema exciting, entertaining, insightful, moving, and inspirational. They innovated and pushed the limits of their medium, and arguably came close to perfecting certain styles and techniques. This is not to imply games don’t have the same artistic potential as film (or literature or paintings or whatever), of course they do. But it truly seems to me games especially in the AAA scene haven’t generally done a good job tapping into that? Like sure there are definitely dumb fun popcorn flicks and tent pole releases and such, it’s not like all movies are these canonical classics of high art (and that’d suck if that’s all there was), but it seems like at least historically the film industry has poured more money into more experiential or emotional works. I mean take The Last of Us. I liked it, I thought it was good. I thought it’s story was way above average for a AAA game. But honestly most of the story beats were borrowed from post apocalyptic films and novels. It does use gameplay and mechanics to tell elements of its story, but it also relies a lot on cutscenes (I’m not anti cutscene at all mind you, just making an observation). It’s story, both on paper and in execution, is not exceptional in my opinion when compared to a lot of truly great artistic works. Not just it’s story, it doesn’t feel as willing to experiment, and it feels less rawly emotional. I feel like a large part of this comes down to the fact that a lot of people cry out that games should be considered art, but then they go and actually think of games as more like products. And I’m specifically talking about the AAA industry, like some older games before the AAA industry as we know it developed and indie games are a different story altogether. But that’s just my two cents for now

EDIT: I’d like to clarify this isn’t to diminish or question the talents or passion of people working in the AAA industry, not at all. This is just a look at the industry itself. Also, this is just my opinion as of now, if you totally disagree then power to you, I don’t claim to be the be-all-end-all on this topic

EDIT: One other point, while individual counter examples are genuinely appreciated, I am more concerned with general industry trends, the industry limiting creative expression and suchBesides a few titles (mainly beat sabre and half life alyx) no major vr titles seem to be regulary coming out and according to steam hardware stats  it's still below 2% of the userbase with 39% of those users on Oculus Quest 2

Is this part of the hardware supply issues? prices are Inflated so most people are running old cards hoping to god they don't break. Not sure if vr headsets also saw a price increase 

Or is it VR just struggling to grow in the gaming space especially on PC.. psvr seems to be doing better but still a low amount of headsets

Is this a problem of not enough good games coming out regularly that's its just not worth it for most people? Devs might not make vr games if they think they won't sell which in turn makes people not spend the hundreds of dollars to buy headsets because of a lack of games.

Just seems to me after all these years it would have a larger userbase then it does but it seems to just be hovering at the 2% of steam users markHey folks!
 
It's been a while. We've been preparing a rules update for quite some time now and since we already had a meta post about the rules a few days ago now is as good a time as ever.
 
First of all, we're trying out yet another complete rewording of the rules. As always this is with the intention of better representing what the sub is about, but also as always we'll see how this version stacks up. Without further ado the new wording:
 
 
# New Rules

## General 

1. All discussion must be related to gaming.

2. No racism, sexism, bigotry, shouting matches, or witch hunts.

  This sub is meant as a discussion ground where you'll find other opinions. It is unavoidable that you will disagree with some of them - and that is okay. However: We will not tolerate any aggression, nor any bigotry on this sub. As a special clause we do not tolerate talk about controversial individuals. Keep it to the job, company or role - do not witch hunt the person.

  Feel free to report if you think something crosses the line. Don't bother shouting them down. At best you'll be removed as well. At worst, you'll catch a ban too.

3. Moderators have final discretion.


## Posts:

1. Posts must point discussion in a specific direction.

  Don't lose the topic in the details. If you are asking a question, show your own work on it. Be specific, don’t overgeneralize. If you make a statement about all games, we will check whether it applies to Tetris. Don't say "Games should..." or "Why don’t games…" because the answer will be "It depends."

2. Posts must be written clearly and with enough detail and explanation that the topic can be easily understood.

  Grammar, spelling, and punctuation do not have to be perfect but neither should your post be completely lacking in these.

3. Posts must not provoke answers to list something ([called list posts](/r/truegaming/wiki/rules#wiki_list_posts)).

4. We don't do support or advice.
   - We don't do tech support.
   - We won't tell you whether a game is worth buying.
   - We won't tell you what hardware is good to get.
   - We won't recommend gaming chairs.
   - We won't tell you which streamer or youtuber to follow.
   - We won't tell you where to pirate games.

5. banned types of posts: rants, speculation, rumors, drama, and reviews, crossposting, and self-promotion.

  Rants, speculation, rumors and drama simply generate bad discussion. People can't really engage since all information is hearsay anyway. Keep it to verifiable information.

  Reviews are a special case and delicate balancing act. You can read more about reviews [here](/r/truegaming/wiki/rules#wiki_reviews).

  Self-promotion is banned as a default with an [exception](/r/truegaming/wiki/rules#wiki_list_posts) if you provide a fully comprehensible text version of your work under the same title. In this case, link to the original at the end of the post.

7. If a topic is better suited to one of the following subs it should be posted there:
  * r/tipofmyjoystick - for finding that one game you played long ago
  * r/DAE - All about finding like-minded people
  * r/showerthoughts - your crackpot idea about Mario being a communist or something
  * r/gamedev - we're not game devs. we play games. go here to discuss your project in the works
  * r/gamingsuggestions - find your next game to play here
  * r/AskReddit - if you need an answer, go here.
  * r/AskGames - ...or here. AskReddit for games.
  * r/shouldibuythisgame - find out what's worth getting.
  * /r/CoOpGaming - A community for co-op gaming.

8. Certain types of threads are [retired](/r/truegaming/wiki/retired) and should not be posted:
  - Anger management
  - I suck at gaming
  - How can I get better at gaming
  - Gaming fatigue
  - Competitive burnout
  - FOMO (Fear Of Missing Out)
  - Completionist OCD
  - Backlogs
  - the difficulty of DarkSouls

9. Surveys can be posted as long as they match specific criteria.
  * The survey is academic in nature
  * Only master's and higher thesis. Research is also allowed.
  * The survey must be visible to take for the mods.
  * Requests for interviews or closed surveys are not allowed.
  * The survey or post must clearly state:
      * the purpose of the survey
      * contact data of the survey author outside of reddit
      * the research institute, university or college responsible for the work
  * Personal information gathering must have an option for anonymity
  * If the survey offers compensation, this must not be used as clickbait in the post
  * The same survey must not be posted again for 2 months

10. Donations/giveaways/fundraisers are not allowed

## Comments:

1. Be civil and don’t downvote opinions.

2. Accounts must be 1 month or older to contribute.

  It was found that the vast majority of posts and comments by new accounts are simply bad. If you're _sure_ your submission is not one of these and you've read these rules - drop us a note in mod mail, we can whitelist you.

3. There is a 100 character minimum for top-level comments.

  This weeds out noise like "I Agree" and "gg". Do _NOT_ pad your comment with garbage. This rule is already 142 characters long. It's not hard.
 
 
# Intention and Reasons
 
As you can see, we're condensing "Quality and Effort" and "Civility" into one General rule. Since the vast majority of the mod action is for previous rule 3 (Constructive Discussion), we're expanding it into more fleshed out rules for Posts and Comments and incorporate the meta rules as sub points in there. These are the wiki rules with all the examples and additions inlined. The side bar rules will be a more condensed version of this for space reasons.
 
One thing we wanted to make more important is now rule 2.1: be specific. We get way too many hand-wavy posts about "all games", so this will surely bring the discussion about diagonal water texture alignment in the second level of Wave Race 64 JP we all need.
 
Our last iteration of rules lost mention of purchase advice and tech support somewhere in the process. These are now back in with some other stuff.
 
We also moved the "these subs may be interesting for you" into the rules with the explicit rule not to post this here.
 
And as hinted at before, we're making it official with this update: Talking about both Dark Souls and its difficulty in the same post is now permanently retired. I had written up an explanation in the last thread:
 
> For one, it's because these two topics are like sub-critical masses that attract each other and then blow up. Every post about Dark Souls will sooner or later be about difficulty. Every post about difficulty will sooner or later mention Dark Souls and then be about SoulsBorne and no other difficult game.
>
> And secondly (the "retired" part) - it's always the same two stances clashing. One side insists that Souls can only be Souls the way it is now and that any modification would destroy what the game is about while the other side insists that Dark Souls can be made accessible just like every other game. No common ground has been found so far, and the topic comes up at least once a week.
 
We hope that this will enable talk about FromSoft games apart from their perceived difficulty and at the same time enable discussions about difficulty without always arriving at this one game.
 
 
# Further Outlook
 
The rules will be put into the respective side bars in the next days. Matching for this rule update there will be another round of regular retired topics coming up soon(tm).
 
We've also been talking about how to handle one particularly nasty topic: NFTs.
 
Previously we'd only gotten a post every once in a while about adding crypto to games, and those posts mostly got shot down for being obvious techbro bullshit. But now that Ubisoft has gotten on board, it will only be a manner of time before this will hit the sub in force. As individual persons we mods hate anything crypto with a passion and see it as pure investment vehicles having nothing to do with an actual game - but opinion is not a good reason for actual rules.
 
Nothing is set in stone about it yet, feel free to weigh in on how to deal with it. TL/DR: Death's Door is a *zelda/souls/studio Ghibli-like* action adventure game with a lot going for it.

**Intro.**

I don't know where to draw that line that defines whether a game is underrated or not. Some people focus on ratings (duh!) but a lot of people also also look at the level of attention and publicity the game receives. If we look at the former, Death's door didn't do half bad, with average scores around the 85-90 mark on Metacritic, depending on the platform of reviews. Media-praising, too, there is quite some. But all in all, my impression about the public is that people don't know it, people don't discuss it, people don't really pay attention to it, and that's a goddamn shame. 

**What is the game about?**

I won't go the Wikipedia route to describe it, anyone can read summaries and main characteristics if they will. In my own words, Death's Door is an action-adventure game where you play as a crow, the main character, a reaper of souls, a collector, an anti-hero searching for extremely simple things in a funny, clever and grim world.

**Some Thoughts About Mechanics**

You have a handful of weapon slots and skill slots, to be unlocked slowly as you progress. It doesn't really fall into "light RPG" territory, as you work with a very small set of approaches regarding attacking the part, and you roll and traverse the environment as means of defense. It's one of those cases where the game is quite simple to get, but there are several layers from there to perfecting the playing. There usually is room for frustration, learning from mistakes. It seems like it drew the simplicity and straightforwardness of some of the early Zelda titles and combined with the precision and challenge of Souls-like combat. Apart from fighting, we do face several puzzles across the levels, mostly to unlock pathways or get quest items. They are mostly simple, and don’t really have the level of complexity of the Zelda titles I have been mentioning.

**Some Pros**

* The world building is amazing, varied, we get to see castles, rocky mountains, snowy mountains, flooded fortresses, swamps, snowy wastelands, underground labs and more. There are a lot of connecting parts within a map to be found, in a small scale of what the Souls games like to do. Certain powers or gadgets you get later on make a lot of previous areas accessible within old maps, which means coming back mid-late game to levels you're familiar with to discover interesting treasures. Are you into games with secrets, hidden passageways, concealed corners, mysterious shortcuts? This is it. 
* Boss fighting: if that’s your thing, you’re in for a treat. There are many, they are diversified, both creature-wise, arena-wise, lore-wise, it’s clear how much effort and love (and sometimes spite, right?) was put into the bosses' fights in this game.
* The magic, the awe and the strong nostalgia I get from playing Zelda: The Wind Waker hit me on some of the levels. The artstyle is beautiful, the atmosphere is immersive, quite otherworldly.
* Soundtrack seems like a mix of medieval/heartwarming tunes, with a strong touch of Trine's vibe (if you happen to know it!). Relaxing, soothing, engaging. They really nailed this. Check for yourself even if the full game experience doesn't seem to float your boat.
* This game is funny. The lore, the dialogues, the flow of reasoning from characters: the sarcasm and the irreverence are everywhere, and they don’t try too hard, trust me, it’s organic, it plays well. 

**Some Cons**

* Keep expectations realistic after my praises: the storyline is absolutely *simple*. It’s not a con per se, I know, but I’m just saying. Even though the game gets things right, it does *simple things* right. It doesn’t reinvent the wheel in any aspect, it doesn’t develop deep, n-dimensional characters and arches, and it doesn't invest too much on any of the small bets it makes. It strives to be a  magical, pleasant, memorable *simple journey,* and I’d say it achieves exactly that.
* I mentioned secrets and corners all over the place, but sometimes the game makes you go through certain ordeals that are just too much for what they reward you. Long or difficult mazes/challenges/fights just to get a worthless shiny collectible?
* Bossfighting: if that’s *not* your thing, chances are, like me, you’ll at some points think they overdid it. I like bosses to be a sort of "cherry on top of the cake", a final stretch to crown myself as a sucessful guy in your game. In Death's Door sometimes bosses are too much, for me personally. >!The last stretch of the game is the part I refer to. From Betty to the Grey Crow from the 84576 stages of the Lord of the Doors, Jesus, I really didn’t need this boss-chain thing. I’ll also add, inside the spoiler tag, that making the final boss fight have 8 or 9 stages but forcing you to replay most of them if you die later on the fight was just cheap, not fun at all, had me raging for a good while there.!<
* For those who don’t know, there is a secret ending to the game. I suspect this backtracked on the creators, as people seem to prefer finding details about it on Youtube and realize it’s just not worth the grind and the effort to unlock it. I didn’t even bother. Not really appealing to me, from what I read, but to each its own!

**Wrap-up**

Death’s Door is worth your time. Google will tell you it’s a 8 hour journey to beat, it took me twice as much. I’m a slow burning gamer, and whenever possible, I try to find my next destination or the location of a key item without looking it up online. I also tried to get a few upgrades before certain fights, and that play style resulted in a 16 hour campaign. It’s a compelling, unique, fantastic experience that doesn’t take itself too seriously and delivers some really enjoyable moments.

The game is available on PC, current and next-gen on the XB and the PS and also on Switch, and being an indie game, it’s certainly not too hard to get it discounted if you’re patient.**Intro**

I personally think this game has some good bones for a casual MOBA game. But it is the MOBA genre which means it's not only going to attract casuals. Mid level and hardcore gamers likely are playing as we speak.

My impression of this game is the same as when I first played it. It has a lot of good elements to it, but there is too many aspects that caters to casuals and/or antagonistic to non-casuals. And I think that is a bad  business model. Casual gamers don't often stick around on a game for a long time. Casuals just generally aren't as invested as that is the nature of being a casual gamer. They might spend some money, but their LTV is likely not going to be as high as a mid level or hardcore gamer. So they will peel off. I don't think catering to casuals would deter mid level and hardcore gamers. What I do think would deter them are aspects that are antagonistic to non-casuals.

I am a mid level gamer myself and while I probably will still play this a little, I am just really more interested to see what changes they make next season. If it's not satisfactory. I think I will just just quit. Currently 1500.

**Some Antagonistic Elements To Non-Casuals And Has Too Many Casual Elements**

I won't list everything, but just some things. As I feel like these elements have deterred mid level and hardcore games from being stickied to this game

1. **A lack of good communication features:** This makes it hard to coordinate with teammates. And yes I have heard the excuse that some people won't listen regardless, but there is a significant number that would. It sets a tone in the game. Also the fact that pings have a very long cooldown for each one makes it hard to make them sound alerting to your teammate
2. **Ranking:** As we know and complained about a lot on this subreddit, ranking up isn't hard unless you are severely incompetent. Even if you are mechanically bad at this game, as long as you know the basics, given enough games **YOU WILL** reach masters. And this is a problem because now that rank name is meaningless. Basically beginner to ultra gets relegated to just tutorial mode and masters is really where rank begins. And of course this means you will be paired with teammates that shouldn't be at that rank to begin with. All MOBAs, including League, has some element of people not belonging in a rank because they got hard carried to there. This exacerbates the issues and makes matchmaking pretty shit in masters rank.
3. **Zapdos:** As we all know, Zapdos is severely OP right now. It's not a guaranteed win. But it tilts the scale too far. It doesn't mean you can just dick around and do nothing until Zapdos, but it does mean that even if you completely curbstomp the enemy for most of the game, Zapdos can change that. Often times when I am in the lead and my team loses Zapdos, it's because they don't know how to actually play around objectives. Then end up dying by making bad mistakes. Mistakes that I can't control because I can't play for them. This also makes hard carrying bad players a lot harder
4. **No Role Locking:** League had this issue a long time ago. Their stance is that they don't want to enforce a meta or lock people into a role too much. They were wrong and they ended up relenting. Now they have lane soft locking for their draft and rank matches. Before starting a match you say which lanes you want and then the matchmaking algorithm figures out how to piece those players together. This way you don't have two people fighting over jungle. This is also extremely odd that it isn't implemented as Tencent owns both this game and League. You would think they wouldn't role back to old mistakes. I know they aren't the actual developers, but I'd figure they would enforce such an obviously better decision.

As I've said, there is a lot more about this game I don't like. Some are more my specific opinions. I think we should punish players who don't stick to their lanes and I do think we should make that reportable for example. But that is neither here nor there.

**Rough Analytics**

So yea it is my belief that this game is dying based on the long text I mentioned above. I am pretty dam sure they are churning casual players and non-casuals won't stick around for long. There are no player count numbers out yet as far as I know, but revenue can be a soft indicator of of how things are going. A free [statistica report](https://www.statista.com/statistics/1281489/pokemon-unite-global-iap-revenue/) shows a huge spike in revenue in October, but this is just likely due to the mobile app release on 9/22. November numbers look worse than September so definitely a decline from there. But it's the decline from October that's most worrying as you would think a mobile release would at least help with any trickling from the September numbers. And it's only been 1 month.

Sensor Tower has [a report](https://app.sensortower.com/android/publisher/the-pokemon-company/The%2BPokemon%2BCompany) that says it has 2m download last month which is pretty nice, but only $900k in revenue. Which is a huge dropoff from the November numbers form Statistica. If you compare it to Sensor Tower's report on [Wild Rift](https://app.sensortower.com/android/publisher/publisher/Riot%2BGames%2C%2BInc), it only has 1m (not sure why they typed it as 1000k), new downloads for that month. Which is only half. However, while they have 50% less downloads than PU, they were able to rake in $3m in revenue which is 300% of PUs.

Active player numbers for Wild Rift is also not readily available. Just stale data which is more than we can say for PU. [Here it is](https://activeplayer.io/league-of-legends-wild-rift/). 55k concurrent player as I load up this page and about 8m monthly active users. Doesn't seem like a lot, I know.

But what these numbers tell us are a few things:

1. PU monthly revenue is on a huge decline. If we assume player numbers and it's relationship with revenue is relatively consistent, then this decline in revenue would also reflect a decline in player base
2. PU also has more monthly downloads, but less monthly revenue than Wild Rift. This could be mean that they have less a less loyal player based and/or less sticky customers which is one of the points I was mentioning before. Even if you don't compare it to Wild Rift, it doesn't look good. MLBB has even [less monthly player downloads than Wild Rift](https://app.sensortower.com/ios/US/shanghai-moonton-technology-co-ltd/app/mobile-legends-bang-bang/1160056295/overview) (likely cause it's an older game). But it has $8m monthly revenue. Trumping both games.

**Conclusion**

I know they originally developed this game for casuals and kids. But the business model makes 0 sense. First of all most Pokemon fans are adults while most kids and teens are into Roblox and Fortnite. And honestly let's remove teens because that's typically when a lot of players transition out of being casuals anyways. There was [some good findings](https://www.reddit.com/r/pokemon/comments/dvs2kl/the_majority_of_pokemon_players_are_over_18_years/) by someone else I found on this subject.

Secondly, it's the MOBA genre. Even if you make it easy, kids aren't going to be as into this as much. MOBAs feel too top down and impersonal to the characters you use. MOBA genre just isn't kid friendly because it's not necessarily clear why you fail. Why did you die? Why did you lose? It's harder to understand for kids.

It seemed to me like this project had a goal, but didn't understand the gaming community or audience when making the goal. Their initial support is really only hard carried by their IP. If they want to stay afloat, they will have to change their focus. If they want more monthly revenue, they have to retain players. And the only type of players that you can retain are mid level to hardcore gamers. It doesn't mean you have to alienate casuals, but there needs to be more of a focused on non-casuals and the numbers show it.With Starfield releasing this year and with Bethesda's average development cycle being 4 years, a generous estimate for TES6's release is 2026-2027, at least 15 years after Skyrim. AAA games have made ridiculous strides since 2011 in terms of scope, ambition, depth, complexity, visuals, polish etc, and even Skyrim felt a bit outdated and too similar to 2006's Oblivion to me on release (they both targeted the same console after all). When TES6 releases, Red Dead Redemption 2 will be almost 10 years old, but I haven't seen anything out of Bethesda that would lead me to believe TES6 will be anything but another Oblivion/Skyrim tier game except with slightly better visuals and even simpler gameplay, let alone something polished that will be on par with the competition or even revolutionary for mid-late 2020s. I doubt they'll even bother to address the standard bugs that have been part of every Bethesda game on release since Morrowind, I won't be surprised by glitchy animations, or floaty combat, or no ladders, or that slight delay to every action all their games have, or stilted stiff movement etc.

To consider it a success, I wouldn't need a drastically bigger world or revolutionary new mechanics, I'd be satisfied with just the existing formula and size and depth but polished to a sheen with no jank, no loading screens between the world/towns and interiors/exteriors, more responsive controls and combat, and maybe slightly more roleplaying opportunities as opposed to further simplification of the mechanics. 

I'll still obviously check it out anyway because they're the only ones even trying to work with their TES/Fallout formula which I love, but I'm keeping my expectations in check. I'd love for Starfield to prove me wrong and give me hope, I just don't think it will.

I searched "subscription" and found [this!](https://www.reddit.com/r/truegaming/comments/1ji9w6/might_we_ever_see_steam_offer_a_subscriber_model/) very interesting 8 year old post discussing about something similar.

With Microsoft acquiring Activision Blizzard, Game Pass' value keeps on growing. Sony will have to respond by making their own subscription service more viable. Mobiles games have Apple Arcade and Google Play Pass, which is now coming to PC. We already have EA Play and Ubisoft+. Both the console's subscriptions are available on PC one way or the other as well.
How long before Epic, who is chums with Sony, gets their own service and forces Valve's hand?

Very recently, I had a friend who was curious about PC gaming, and when I told him that he will have to buy games individually, it seemed like a foreign concept to him. He automatically assumed a monthly subscription to get access to the whole Steam library. 

What do you think will be Valve's play here? Will they just be a vendor for these services, like they are for EA Play? Or will they make their whole library available for a subscription? A curated list which keeps changing seems more of a reality to me. Which type of subscription will you prefer. It is inevitable. With Valve getting their own console like device, I think the Steam subscription will be announced by next year.

And the most important question: What will Valve call it?
I predict: Steam Pipe, cuz, games will flow through it.Youtuber Arlo recently posted a video discussing whether Pokemon games should consider leaving a turn based style of play [https://youtu.be/TDkMYfeI3Vk](https://youtu.be/TDkMYfeI3Vk)

His main points in favour of the change were that current Pokemon games are quite stale and would benefit from a refresh, citing BOTW as an example of a series that successfully made that radical overhaul.

He also acknowledged the other side, citing that the advantages of the current system is that it's something players are familiar it. Major changes would upset many longtime fans. Even BOTW had many fans say it doesn't feel like Zelda anymore. In addition, it's also much more accessible. Someone who is younger, or doesn't play games or even lacks fine motor skills can still play Pokemon since the games rarely require lots of inputs at once. Going so far as to say "In theory you can probably play a Pokemon game with just a d-pad and a single button".

Personally, I believe Pokemon should remain a turn based game and that Arlo isn't looking at the wider picture.

For one, there is a lot of depth in Pokemon's current battle system. Look at its competitive scene and hardcore nuzelocks as examples of how deep it can go. I'd argue the problem isn't that the mechanics themselves are antiquated but rather than main singleplayer portion of these games rarely showcase their quality. Most mainline Pokemon games' battles are against rather basic trainers that can be beaten by using super effective moves with little thought. You don't usually have enemy trainers using "Supereffective attack reducing berries" to tank hits and then retaliate, or using stuff like weather to cover for their weaknesses like using rain to weaken fire attacks lodged against grass types. Hell, even full 6v6 teams are quite rare with the 6 Magikarp dude being one of the few rare exceptions. I believe that in order for Pokemon to become more engaging, it needs to challenge the player's planning skills

I believe that at the very least, Pokemon just needs some kind of alternate difficulty modes or modifiers that are upfront to give more casual but still somewhat experienced players some taste that the game has more to offer. For example, on a new playthrough, the game can ask the player how experienced they are with Pokemon and either recommends an easy mode that's how the games currently are, or a "custom mode" that's like easy but forces set mode and no items during battle. Or we can go one step further and have multiple difficulty modes that affect things from enemy team composition and AI.

If Pokemon needs a more significant change, a better idea would be a world like the Rom Hack Crystal Clear where the player can battle the Gym Leaders in any order but the world's difficulty scales with how many badges you have. Again testing the player's planning skills as deciding which order to fight Gym Leaders (like choosing if you want to deal with Gyms you're weak or strong against) as well as making the playthrough unique to the player.

In addition, I feel abandoning the turn based approach also makes Pokemon less unique and polished. Like, let's say Pokemon does opt for action gameplay closer to Xenoblade or BOTW, you've thrown away the 25 years of refinement on the turn based system for an action system other games already do better. And there aren't many Turn Based RPGs that function great in both singleplayer and PvP situations. So it's more of a lose/lose.At first I thought this enjoyable was just a reaction to all of the negative press and launch drama- I was unconsciously expecting something borderline unplayable (maybe it *was* before patches, I don't know) filled with Cronenberg body horror and slap-dash retexturing, but instead, I've found all three to be fairly lovingly remastered, just maybe by a team of people who weren't super interested in the aesthetic details. It's evident in the faces, which save for a few key exceptions are bland and approach uncanny valley territory, and in some of the early indoor cutscenes which feature laughably scaled wall and floor textures. But these design issues aren't as important to the overall experience as some of the more clickbait gaming sites made them out to be, and my overall impression was that it's a really lovely thing to play. 

But there was another bit of extra satisfaction on top of the fun I was having, and I only realized what that feeling was today. It's that, this is how I *remember* the game looking and feeling. I know the concept has been captured nicely in memes already, but I have personally never had it ring more true for me than now, while playing these remasters. This is partially because I played through the original series just a few years ago, both on PC and some of the mobile versions, and I couldn't believe how ugly everything was. I don't know if you've revisited them but everything is really sharp edged, harshly lit, and muddy, and honestly it was a dissonant experience. I couldn't believe I used to spend hours in this foggy, saw-edged world. I didn't finish them this last time around. 

It was today, while running down the streets of remastered San Fierro outside of my newly acquired garage, that I realized I was once again immersed in the game world, losing myself to the atmosphere and familiar sights and sounds. For the most part, I wasn't walking around gawking at the shiny textures and lightning, I was just existing in the world like I used to. And I felt the reality of the fact that remembering, the act of bringing up a memory, is an act of creation, and that when I have thought fondly about the time I spent in the 2000s in San Andreas it has been through the lens of increasingly powerful graphics cards capable of atmospheric lighting effects, realistic weather and HD textures. My brain upgraded the graphics for me in my memory, basically. As far as I was concerned, this was how GTA had always looked. But it is *not*: 

https://imgur.com/a/Yc0fPvi

Anyway, the games are hard not to recommend to anyone who played them as kids when they first came out. It's too great of a nostalgia trip, and the pros outweigh the cons in my book. Another lesson in not paying too much attention to gaming hype, negative or positive. they really will write about anything at all, for as long as people keep clicking on links about it. what an exhausting place the internet has turned out to be As they do every year, PlayStation has released a list of the year’s most downloaded games. The list can be found in full over on the [PlayStation Blog](https://www.blogger.com/blog/post/edit/2900839354541658221/1252507314491683853#) and outlines the most downloaded games on PS5, PS4, and PS VR, as well as the most downloaded free-to-play titles on PS5 and PS4. 

It should be noted that these lists aren't an accurate representation of a game's sales. However, it does give us a rough idea of how a game is performing on PS5 and PS4. 

That said, here are a few key takeaways from the PlayStation Store’s most downloaded games of 2021…

## Usual Suspects At The Top

Take a look at the top of each platform chart and you’ll find the usual suspects. 

On PS5, *NBA 2K22* was the most downloaded game in the US/Canada region in 2021, while *FIFA 22* was the top dog in Europe. Activision’s *Call of Duty: Vanguard* secured a clean sweep, with 2nd place in both the US/Canada and Europe. *Madden NFL 22* was 4th in US/Canada, while *FIFA 21* was 3rd in Europe. *Battlefield 2042* took 5th in both US/Canada and Europe. 

On PS4, *Grand Theft Auto V* took 1st place in the US/Canada, with *Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War* in 2nd. In Europe, *FIFA 22* took 1st place yet again, with *Grand Theft Auto V* having to settle for 2nd. *Minecraft* swept 3rd place on both sides of the Atlantic. The widely popular *NBA 2K 22* was only 4th in US/Canada, with *FIFA 21* securing that spot in Europe. It was an all Activision 5th row, with *Call of Duty: Vanguard* and *Call of Duty: Black Ops Cold War* securing 5th place in the US/Canada and Europe respectively. 

Even though the PS5 and PS4 charts don’t perfectly mirror each other, the same games still make up the top 5. EA and Take Two’s sporting goliaths are up there as usual, accompanied by Activision’s *Call of Duty* series. The two best-selling games of all time — *Minecraft* and *GTA V* — are also present, most likely spurred on by their thriving online communities. 

We, the core gaming community, like to criticize annualized sports games and shooters for their poor quality, buggy releases, microtransaction riddled stores, and copy-paste content, but the hard truth is that none of that matters because these games will continue to sell millions of copies each year. Take a moment to acknowledge the sheer size and scope of the audience that a company like EA and Activision have gathered due to their games. We may not like these publishers’ business practices very much, but their continued financial success every year is undeniable.

The story of the expected continues when we take a look at the PS VR and Free-to-play charts. 

On the PlayStation VR, *Beat Saber* war number 1 for the third year running, *Job Simulator* war number 2, and *SUPERHOT VR* was number 3 in both the US/Canada and Europe. 

*Fortnite* was the most downloaded game on the joint PS5 and PS4 free-to-play charts in the US/Canada and Europe. *Call of Duty: Warzone* was 2nd in the US/Canada and 3rd in Europe, while *Rocket League* was 3rd in the US/Canada and 2nd in Europe. Just like the main PS5 and PS4 charts, it is a story of shooters and sports games at the top — albeit with unique spins on the genres in the form of battle royale and football with cars. 

## Another Solid Year For PlayStation Studios

PlayStation’s team of first-party studios has been the industry leader in high-quality single-player games during the last generation. This was even more apparent due to the lack of output from Xbox Game Studios during the Xbox One’s life cycle. But with Microsoft’s recent acquisition spree in the form of ZeniMax Media and Activision Blizzard, they are showing clear intent this generation, and with *Halo Infinite* and *Forza Horizon 5*, Xbox released two of 2021’s biggest games. 

But if these charts are anything to go by, then Sony should walk out of 2021 content with its achievements. 

Insomniac’s PS5 exclusive *Ratchet & Clank: Rift Apart* charted 6th in US/Canada and 14th in Europe. Another first-party PS5 exclusive, Housemarque’s *Returnal*, was 19th in the US/Canada region. *Returnal* is a brutally difficult roguelike shooter, so even sneaking into the lower reaches of the list is a job well done from one of PlayStation’s more niche first-party games. 

From not even charting in 2020, to 8th in the PS5 and 9th in the PS4 charts for the US/Canada region — *MLB The Show 2021* rounds out the year with a bang. This is proof that despite releasing simultaneously on Xbox — not to mention a launch day Xbox Gamepass inclusion— the game’s PlayStation sales have not been majorly impacted. This is good news for Sony and means that one day we might see first-party PlayStation games launching day and date on PC. 

## The Spider-Man Machine

You might have noticed one particular PlayStation game missing from the section above — *Marvel’s Spider-Man: Miles Morales*. This is not because the game had a lacklustre year, quite the opposite. Insomniac’s late 2020 spin-off had a 2021 to remember.  

*Miles Morales* was the 3rd most downloaded game of 2021 on the PS5 in the US/Canada and the 4th most downloaded in Europe. In the US/Canada region, the game was downloaded more on PS5 than *Madden NFL 21 —* a game based on the country’s most popular sport. On the PS4 charts, *Miles Morales* was lower, only the 12th most downloaded game in the US/Canada region. But for a narratively driven single-player title, these numbers are impressive. 

Many fans criticized Sony’s cross-gen approach to new game releases at the onset of the PS5’s launch in November 2020, saying that people wouldn't buy the new console if new games were also released on the old one. And while the argument about old hardware holding back how far a game can go in its creativity and scope is valid, *Miles Morales* shows, that from a purely financial standpoint, cross-gen releases are working wonders for Sony. 

The fact that *Miles Morales* is performing better on PS5 than PS4 means people are investing in the new generation hardware even though its games are still coming out on last generation hardware. 

In hindsight, getting Insomniac to make a *Spider-Man* game in 2018 looks like one of the best decisions Sony has made in the past generation. Purchasing them in 2019 and getting a second, albeit smaller spinoff, *Spider-Man* game out of them in 2020 was a brilliant move. 

I wouldn't be surprised if *Miles Morales* is selling more PS5s than PS5-exclusive games like *Ratchet & Clank: Rift Apart*, *Demon’s Souls*, or *Returna*l. And I certainly won't be surprised if the upcoming *Marvel’s Spider-Man 2* breaks sales records for PlayStation’s biggest game launch ever. 

## Buggy Surprises

2021 had some really good AAA games. But 2021 also had some AAA games that were released in buggy, broken, and unfinished states. It’s disappointing to see such big publishers release games that are not up to the mark, especially when they are charging full price for them.

EA and DICE’s *Battlefield 2042* had a rocky launch, with issues such as poor optimization, buggy hit registration, and server issues, amongst other core gameplay concerns. *Grand Theft Auto: The Trilogy- The Definitive Edition* was a hot mess at launch, with Rockstar even having to remove the PC version from its storefront. Then there is Konami’s *eFootball 2022*, a title that was supposed to take the *Pro Evolution Soccer* experience and make it free to play, finally serving up an actual competitor to EA’s dominant *FIFA* series. But the game launched with broken ball physics, bugged-out character models, and almost no content.

All three titles found their way onto the PlayStation Store’s most download games of 2021 lists. *Battlefield 2042* was the 5th most downloaded PS5 game in both the US/Canada and Europe. *GTA: The Trilogy- The Definitive Edition* was the 17th most downloaded PS5 game in Europe. And to cap it all off, *eFootball 2022* was the 4th most downloaded free-to-play game across PS5 and PS4 in Europe.

I think these games charting shows that there is a real demand for such titles. Gamers out there want a new *Battlefield* experience, they want to be able to play old *GTA* classics on their latest machines with touched up visuals, and they want a solid football experience other than *FIFA*. If only these companies just delivered decent and playable games, everyone would be happy. Instead, they face frustrated communities who are losing faith in the people who make the games they love.

## Indie Successes 

2021 was a great year for indie games and they seemed to have good commercial performances as well.

Hit social deduction game *Among Us was* only released on PlayStation platforms in December but features prominently on the download charts. It was the 13th and 6th most downloaded PS5 game in the US/Canada and Europe respectively. It featured on Europe’s PS4 charts too, slotting in at 19th. *Among Us* was already a massive success on mobile and PC, but it's nice to see the small team that made this game get the popularity they deserve across PlayStation platforms too. 

Another indie success, but this time on the free-to-play side of things, was *Splitgate*. The *Halo* x *Portal* inspired shooter took the gaming world by storm upon its 1.0 release last year. The game was even initially delayed to give the developers time to increase server capacity to keep up with player demand. *Splitgate* was the 4th most downloaded free-to-play game in the US/Canada and the 10th most downloaded free-to-play game in Europe across PS5 and PS4. 

📷Source: PlayStation

The Game Awards’ 2021 game of the year winner *It Takes Two* also found its way into the charts. Hazelight’s coop adventure was the 16th most downloaded game on PS5 in the US/Canada. A ‘most downloaded’ list isn’t the most representative of game sales, and even more so in the case of *It Takes Two,* due to the game’s ‘friend’s pass’ — a system that allows someone who has bought the game to invite another person to play online coop with them. This may have skewed the number in *It Takes Two*’s favour, but it's still nice to see so many people get to experience such an acclaimed game. 

*Kena: Bridge of Spirits,* indie studio Ember Lab’s debut title, was the 20th most downloaded PS5 game in the US/Canada and the 7th most downloaded PS5 game in Europe. 

*It Takes Two* and *Kena: Bridge of Spirits* were funded and published by EA and Sony respectively, which does make it harder to call them true indies. But their success, for games made by relatively small teams, is commendable. 

. . .

2021 was a great year for games. And it looks like everything from annualized shooters like *Call of Duty* to creative gems like *It Takes Two* found some success of their own. Which game on these charts do you think did better than expected? And which game failed to meet expectations? 

Link to my article if you want to read it there: [https://www.platyview.com/2022/01/takeaways-from-playstation-stores-most-downloaded-games-of-2021.html](https://www.platyview.com/2022/01/takeaways-from-playstation-stores-most-downloaded-games-of-2021.html)From Gears of War to Call of Duty. Dead Rising to Dead Space. Resident Evil to The Last of Us. If a game had shooting mechanics and came out in the mid 00's to early 10's, there was a pretty good chance we were gonna have to sit through a scripted sequence of enemies coming straight at you while you shot at them with your infinite ammo mounted gun.

Did we find it really fun back in the day? Maybe I'm being unfair, but honestly it hurts the replay value of some levels in otherwise fun classics. (Looking at you almost every Gears of War game)

Eventually dev's stopped doing it as much, so clearly some kind of breakthrough happened. I'm just confounded as to why it began in the first place. *And lasted a whole generation*Recently I've noticed that my taste in games has slowly but surely changed. This topic is not supposed to imply that there is a hierarchy of games according to which some games are more "mature" or "intellectual" than others. It is simply meant to describe how my own taste in games has evolved over time in an attempt to better understand my own preferences and to compare them with other gamers. 

Way back in the day, I started out as a PC gamer. The first video game I can remember playing was actually Age of Empires 2. Later on I also delved into AoE1 and AoE3, when it came out. I love strategy games and history, so this was a perfect match for me. Recreating historical battles, controlling armies, feeling like a grand conquerer - I enjoyed it immensely. 

This is something that has not changed for me. To this day, I love strategy games. However, my focus has somewhat shifted over the years. RTS games have interested me less and less. When AoE4 came out recently, I could barely get myself to play it. Nowadays, RTS games feel somewhat shallow to me. I always liked the strategy side of things, planning, building a city, an economy, an army, expanding. I never cared much for the "real time" aspect. Thus, RTS games are now both too easy and too hard for my taste: Too easy, because I can easily build a huge economy without much thought and crush the campaign and AI. Too hard, because in order to succeed online I would have to focus on APM, unit control, build orders, micro - all things I personally don't really enjoy in games. 

Perhaps this also explains why my strategy game focus has changed. In the mid-late 2000s, I discovered Rome: Total War and was hooked. I moved over to the Total War series and enjoyed it a lot. However, in recent years, my interest waned again. Nowadays, I am most interested in the paradox grand strategy games. I love the level of complexity and control and can satisfy my urges of huge conquests and medieval simulation.

Aside from strategy games, my other love has always been open world RPGs, starting with Oblivion in 2006. I downloaded Skyrim when it came out, playing it for a long time. But I have to say my love for RPGs and open world games has decreased. Like many others, I feel fatigued by them. While I really liked RDR2, it was also a bit of a drag to me. Therefore, my preferences have shifted a bit in this regard as well. I still enjoy open world games occasionally, but I almost prefer shorter singleplayer games with a more or less linear story, everything from Jedi: Fallen order, Tomb Raider (2013 and later ones) to Hitman (2016 and later ones) and Dishonored.

**Tl;dr:** my personal taste in games has, broadly speaking, shifted with age as follows:

\- strategy games: AoE/RTS games -> Total War -> Paradox grand strategy

\- action games/RPGs etc.: massive open world RPGs (Bethesda) -> shorter, more linear singleplayer games (Jedi, Hitman, Tomb Raider, Dishonored)

Does the taste in games correlate with age? Or is it completely subjective and depends entirely on the individual? Are there trends according to which certain age groups prefer certain games? Did your taste in games change as you grew older?While playing the Matrix Unreal 5 demo, I realized two things: One: we need more tech demos on console. (and more demos period.) And two: That it's a shame that PT is still not available in almost any capacity unless you already have it on your console. If you downloaded it before, you can redownload it on PS4 using [some console trickery.](https://www.polygon.com/2015/12/16/10296546/pt-hideo-kojima-silent-hills-re-download-ps4). I really got to thinking: Is PT the greatest demo of our lifetimes? It certainly is the most important one. 

We all know the story of PT. It's been documented all over the world wide web. But for those of you don't know, here's the 5 minute version: Hideo Kojima was bringing in a dream team of creators to put together what would've been an incredible horror game. Creators like horror movie director Guillermo del Toro, art by Japanese horror comic staple [Junji Ito](https://junjiitomanga.fandom.com/wiki/Junji_Ito). Kojima had a falling out with Konami over Metal Gear Solid 5, rumored to be over budget and often delayed, and got subsequently fired from Konami. The Silent Hill game, known as Silent Hills with an "S",  remains unfinished and unreleased. No one is for sure how far along the game was although it's rumored to had started development in 2012, three years before it got canceled in 2015. Guillermo delToro [said in an interview](https://bloody-disgusting.com/news/3364524/interview-guillermo-del-toro-on-serenading-crews-silent-hills-and-crimson-peak/) that the game had "hundreds upon hundreds of designs." delToro even went as far as saying other games made similar designs, so he knew they were on the right track. Adding: "Some of the stuff that we were designing for Silent Hills, I’ve seen in games that came after, like The Last of Us, which makes me think we were not wrong, we were going in the right direction." 

Although the game was never actually made, the concept was interesting to say the least. The Playable Teaser, or PT for short, was a proof of concept, or a set of ideas, of what the game *could* have been not necessarily what the game actually *would* have been. If Kojima and company could put half of those into a game, it would've been a hellova ride. The Teaser itself has been dissected to hell and back with entire YouTube channels dedicated to solving the mysteries present. Not to mention the various let's plays, articles, YouTube commentaries, with some going through [it's entire games code](https://www.vg247.com/hacking-pt-silent-hills-secrets) to find things and had people combing through old interviews with the developers looking for hints of what the game could been. There were people who sold PS4 with PT on it on eBay for hundreds of dollars over what it's worth, and people are still asking for $400-600 those consoles right now. To say PT was a phenomenon is putting it lightly.

If you've never played it you should definitely check out a let's play or one if it's various remakes on either Dreams or on PC.  It truly is something special.That's very basic stuff, but after reading a lot of problematic reasoning and talking with a decent amount of people who missed it, maybe it's useful. For some. Maybe.

So, why a lot of games are scored at 7/10 or in the 70s/100? 

* From 1 to 10, the average is at 5.5. Basic math: 1,2,3,4,5 are the 5 lows, 6,7,8,9,10 are the 5 highs.
* Which doesn't work for some publications, so it's rounded. For whatever reason, maybe to be more palatable to partners, it's rounded up to 6. So 6 means "meh", means "adequate".
* If you had some fun or some engagement with the game while playing it, it's easy to argue (for some) that's it should be somewhere in the "good" range. 7 is the first number in that good range, it's the lowest score a game can get while being good-ish, or above average.
* What about the low scores then? Well we all have AAA or popular games we don't like. But, business and management issues aside, even those aren't asset flip, shovelware or bad Pong clone. If you look at the depth of Steam and [Itch.io](https://Itch.io) you'll find plenty of games that are clearly not in the same class, and absolutely should be scored from 1 to 5.  
But obviously reviewers spend time (and money if that's their job) to review, so they won't bother with shovelware level of games. So we'll almost never see those scores.

Hence, 7/10 games are quite common. Because the scoring range is so compacted.

Final consideration: % scores aren't grades. Like Rotten Tomatoes for movies, or Steam reviews, if a product is a 5.6/10 for everyone that product will get a 100% positive reviews. If it's a 5.4/10 for everyone, that product will get a 0% positive reviews. That % is not a grade, it's a percentage of positive and negative reviews, there's no finesse of grading.

Which doesn't mean it's bad. I find Steam reviews % personally useful (as *one* bit of information) before purchasing. Just remember, it's not the same thing. A highly unique and original game for example will be divisive, and could be a 0/10 or a 10/10 for you just depending on how your tastes and mood click with that game.

PS: I'm not defending anyone, or advocating for anything. I personally would do things differently, especially in the presentation. Just explaining very basic math stuff.I understand /truegaming is meant for meaningful discussion about gaming topics. I am always trying my best to contribute here, think before I post and attempt to add insightful topics and arguments. However, I am a bit lost when it comes to the rule that "DAE/does anyone else" type of threads are banned. 

I get that such topics can be lazy and not generate discussion, e.g. if I just posted "Does anyone else dislike open world games?".

The problem is: isn't almost any possible discussion on redit, especially in this subreddit, essentially a "Does anyone else"-topic? I mean, people mostly post about topics that they care about because they want to know what anyone else thinks about them, i.e. "does anyone else share this sentiment"?

I have several topics I would like to post about currently, but I'm now really unsure if they are allowed here and where the line is. What especially confused me was the closing of this topic:

[https://www.reddit.com/r/truegaming/comments/s2vvwj/only\_playing\_a\_game\_for\_a\_fairly\_short\_time/](https://www.reddit.com/r/truegaming/comments/s2vvwj/only_playing_a_game_for_a_fairly_short_time/)

I mean, I put effort into writing it, people posted long, insightful comments, so IMO it did generate constructive discussion. Yet it was closed due to supposedly being "DAE". But does it really differ from other, very popular topics on this subreddit? There are e.g. topics like "Do you think long loading screens could "ruin" a game?" (=does anyone else hate long loading screens) or "red dead redemption 2 is long, but a masterpiece" (=does anyone else like or dislike RDR2)?

I'm not trying to be annoying or subversive or anything, just trying to get by and discuss interesting topics here. Thank you!This is the third time I started Fallout 4 after 2 failed 25+ hours playthroughs  each and this issue reminds me of a very important reason why I leave the game each time, aside from the 4 arrows implementation of dialogue choices which is obviously inferior to fallout 3 or new vegas, the real problem is when you choose one of the 4 most of the time it doesn't matter what you have chosen, example: 

&#x200B;

me: "I don't care"

other person: "no no listen this is important"

&#x200B;

Why did they put the choice then? most of the early missions are like that which makes the player hate the characters (or atleast I did) like gravey or the paladin so I just wandered around the wasteland to find another way to level up myself which turned out to be so damn hard because most of the other places in the game just requires you to have leveled up enough to not die from 2 shots which escalates the problem and remove most of the enjoyment of playing the game in general.

&#x200B;

One of the most important aspects of why I loved new vegas for example was the freedom of choice that you can complete a mission by a lot of ways and one of those ways was by dialogue which in itself included many ways (barter,speech, or just insult and attack the other person) and that was striped out in Fallout 4, I really hope that if there will be a next fallout game that it fixes this issue.It's not surprising at all that games like Fallout 4, horizon zero dawn and assassins creed valhalla have poor looking dialog with little to no emotion shown I'm the face, these games have a stupid amount of conversations in them that could never realistically be mocapped or competently animated. What annoys me however is that none of these games put any effort into trying to hide their bad facial animations, the majority of dialog in these games is in an extremely basic shot reverse shot format that, aside from being painfully boring, lends itself the worst for the bad facial animations. There's no reason we have to resort to this format for cutscenes, with how much work is put into creating tbe worlds, some wide, circling shots could easily be used. 

Contested to the 3 Games I mentioned earlier in this post, persona 5 has 

1. A much smaller budget. 

2. A lot more dialog scenes. 

And yet I still prefer the game's cutscenes to the vast majority of the ones in HZD ACV or FO4. The game's character animations are much worse and yet every cutscene has the camera stationed wide out. There's even a large effort to give the places where dialog occurs a lot of intricate detail to give the entire scene added beauty. The game also fantastic audio design, If you can't get people attached to your scenes by visual, using audio can also get the Job done.in most open world games, there's a basic quest loop:

&#x200B;

First, you are given a quest to complete. Then you complete a task. Then, you are rewarded for completing that task, usually with money, experience, or an item

&#x200B;

but do you always need a reward for completing the quest?

&#x200B;

Of course, if you didn't receive a reward for a quest you spent hours on, you would probably be disappointed and/or mad about it. but what about smaller quests? could a lot of short fetch quests or dialog based quests be done just out of the good of your own heart?

&#x200B;

for example, what if the quest focuses on helping a sick man find his daughter? surely the happiness of the two is worth it on its own, without the additional reward for money/item/experience.

&#x200B;

I'm conflicted on this myself. I think I might be disappointed if I didn't get a reward after a quest.Take the word "ruin" with a grain of salt, but how does long loading screens impact a games enjoyment for you? 

I thought about this recently when I started playing Pillars of Eternity II for the ps4 because there is a very long loading screen whenever you enter a new area or even enter a house. I think it is a very good game but I've always waited to play it again because it takes so damn long to even start the game up. I had the same experience when playing Disco Elysium which is an awesome game but the damn loading screens take up so much time!

I really find it a shame... However, I don't mind it when there is only *one* long loading screen at the beginning like in Breath of the Wild. 

It can ruin the immersion sometimes when having to wait all the time. Idk let me know what you all think.Maybe it can be considered stupid by the most of the people, but any game where I control a character will be ruined for me... If I can't walk in there. I suppose, we all have our gaming fetishes, and this one is mine. Why do I have to run in a crowded place or when there's no danger around? Or what if I just want to perform a slow, epic walk to my target? It's beautiful, as I see it.

Sadly, most of the games doesn't allow you just to walk. A hardcore example for me is Tyranny - a great game, no question, was thrown away by me because of lack of this ability, sorry Obsidian. The most common examples are first person and third person games which are supposed to be played on a gamepad - and gamepad can give you an ability to walk... But what should a person do, if they doesn't have a gamepad right now?

And it's not only about not having something. When we're playing a shooter game (like Far Cry 5 or SAO: Fatal Bullet, from my personal list), it's obviously more convenient and fair to shoot using mouse. However, it's definitely not convenient to use both keyboard+mouse and gamepad for different sections - especially when game doesn't border them from each other.

To be honest, I came here with a question. I tried to ask it in some other subreddits, even keyboard-specific, but never found an answer - and this subreddit looks like a right place for that sort of specific questions. I'm looking for a software or other decision which will allow player to emulate left stick behavior with WASD and be able to change it by pressing some switch button (like "Caps Lock" in Bethesda games). Right now, I see two solutions:

* Realistic one - full emulation of gamepad. It will require all the gamepad buttons to be binded on keyboard or mouse. However, if some of them are not binded, it will lead to frequent, probably really irritating and system-overloading switch between keyboard+mouse and gamepad interface icons.
* Fantastic one - "silent" emulation of gamepad. The same thing like I've just explained, but without interface switch: while some of the keyboard's buttons work like a gamepad, the game itself doesn't understand it and shows only keyboard. Of course, it would've been the perfect option.

While the whole discussion about the impact of being able to walk in games and it's value is highly welcome (because, well, I see it as a problem of PC gaming PC gamers don't deserve to have!), I still would've love to see the suggestions on my request. Not every gamer can have a gamepad right now to enjoy their games with the full power of control over their character.I'm curious what people think! I don't play a ton of games, but the PS5 seems pretty impressive. I'd wait until more games were out, but does anyone else feel like it's a much bigger leap in ability than the PS3 to PS4 (and likewise for xbox systems and their jump)?

I think the 60 fps and raytracing of new games is a pretty huge difference. The other very big difference is probably SSD use. Instead of using the old school HDDs, games can load assets so much faster. And it's an NVMe style SSD to boot for both new consoles.

Do you guys think this is a bigger leap between generations than it was for PS3 to PS4, or is it just in my head? I think Unreal 5, and some other engines, are really pushing things ahead as well. But it seems like the inevitable diminishing returns has hit a little boost for the time being.

Looking at Last Of Us 1 vs 2 is a big jump, don't get me wrong. But the lighting, speed, and fluid motion of the new games coming out seem like a pretty big jump in ability. And it's still early on into the console gen.

What do you guys think?

Edit: one thing I'd like to point out is that the new consoles use NVMe SSDs. Using a computer as a parallel, the SATA SSDs are 500-600 MB per second. An NVMe is 2-3.5 **GB** per second. Attaching straight to the board bypasses a huge bottleneck!

I think when NVMe is just the norm, there's going to be some insane quality jumps. Especially with open world games. Fast travel is basically insant always, without a loading screen. Game can load assets for the world faster, all of thatSo I was wanting to see how people felt about cross gen new releases

Doesn't it hold back games from being more by making them to be compatible with older systems?
An exciting part of getting a new system is being able to play games with better graphics etc that only a new system can run. It seems there's a trend to make devs specifically make games that work on older consoles. 

It seems the only reason to have a new system is higher resolution and framerate. I don't know how to feel about it because I'm not too knowledgeable on these things. That's why I wanted to get all your input.

What do you think?We thought that the acquisition of Bethesda was like a nuke, but damn, MS went and armageddoned the industry,

The literally own Call of Duty, and Diablo and WoW, and previously they had The Elder Scrolls....

People are cheering over this (the Xbox/PC owners) and others dismiss it because "they never liked COD anyways"

Don't they see the bigger picture? Monopoly only hurts the consumer in the end, but yeah, I forgot that people are too much into the console war and fandom to protest against this.

It's all about money after all. MS has a mountain of money, they can buy all the studios in the world and become Disney #2. Such a great time for gaming

**Edit**: It seems I have to point out the obvious. Sony's exclusivity was through THEIR OWN IPs which they chose no to release. MS buys studios that have previously had their titles as multiplatform and will make them exclusive, taking it away from others (as they did with The Elder Scrolls and Starfield). Do you see the difference or not?! 

Sony and Nintendo made clear what their strengths were when choosing which platform to buy. MS came out of nowhere and bought studios that people had no clue would be kept away from them after a year or two.Bloodborne is one of my all-time favorite games that have come out during the ps4/xb1 era.

Including the dlc weapons, there are 26 trick weapons and 15 firearms (and a wooden shield, but we don't talk about that). And each weapon has transformation, all with different playstyles. This technically means there are 42 trick weapons.

In most of my playthroughs, depending on the boss or what kind of regular enemies I was facing, I felt comfortable enough to switch between several weapons. However, I never felt I was overwhelmed with the choices, because I didn't need to search through ocean of weapons I had at my disposal, and the few ones that were viable depending on the build were all the ones I needed.

For example, for skill builds I found myself switching between blade of mercy, burial blade, and threaded cane. Each of them looked and played badass, and arguably gave different playstyles under theme of "quick-hitting roguish" type of builds.

Compare this to FromSoftware's immediate previous work, Dark Souls 3, which has hundreds of weapons to use. While this might sound great on paper, some of the weapons are clearly in there as a joke or for some insane challenges while other weapons aren't that viable. This IMO makes it pointless to have so many gear choices in the first place.

I feel this is why I can never get into looter RPGs/shooters. I understand it's the game's design to have a huge number weapons and gears. It sounds great on paper, and I can some players enjoying collecting them all. But these types of games always take builds into consideration, and only those in high-tier/legendary grade are really worth using for the said builds.

Not to mention that for most of these looter games you have to go through the same content over and over again just for that chance of legendary dropping. Even when you do get legendary gears after grinding for hours, not all of them are applicable to your build. I can count many moments in Boderlands series where I grinded on a difficult boss, see the lengendary color scheme pop out, only to see it's not the gear I want. I can certainly put it in the storage and pass it on to other builds, but now I once again have to continue to grind for the one I actually want. And once you get all the stuff you need for your build, the game's feature of having an endless amount of loots loses its meaning.

Another genre that seems to give players an extensive amount of choices are fighting games. Yes, you can use whatever fighter you want to use, but in terms of competitive play or even casual play, we all know some fighters are better than others.

Interactive story games are great with their choices. Taking Detroit: Become Human for example, there are many different outcomes mid-game and at the end depending on my actions. Yes, some scenes do repeat but it's different enough for me to try taking different actions to see what would happen. While the gameplay is rather shallow (dialog choices, QTE, button mash, interacting with environment and objects, etc), it's how the world and the characters within change depending on your action. It makes your choices meaningful, while the number of outcomes possible is few, and with each section being short, you don't replay them for countless hours. It's probably the only genre where I like having multiple choices.So i’ve been watching a video about the Witcher villains since i’ve recently finished the games for the first time (they were ok/10 part 2 was the best fight me) and i’ve noticed that a lot of people who love those games seem to have a borderline fetishistic obsession with comparing every single game with even the slightest hint of RPG elements (or an Open World) with Fallout or Skyrim.

That’s weird, it does not do the game you love any favors, on the contrary i’d say it makes it seems like it can’t stand on it’s own without that useless comparison

Now this problem is hardly exclusive to the Witcher fandom, i’ve seen this attitude when people were discussing Dark Souls, Kingdom Come Deliverance and even Breath of the Wild of all things, none of these games are even remotely similar to what Bethesda makes besides being either open world and/or having some RPG elements.

Let me go back the the video that got me thinking about this topic, it was a moderately interesting short analysis on some of the villains in TW3, I was enjoying until the very end when he just brings up Skyrim’s Ancano out of nowhere and he’s like “A VILLAIN WITH 0 DEPTH AND NUANCE DID I MENTION HOW MUCH I HATE SKYRIM AND HOW BETTER WITHCER 3 IS?” and with that he just invalidated his entire argument in my eyes, it made him seem extremely insecure in his passion for the writing by bringing up a game only tangentially related to the one he was analyzing. (I would link the video but i’m not sure if the rules allow that)

And here lies the crux of this problem, if the games that are constantly compared to Bethesda games were in any way similar to them, besides the superficial stuff, these comparisons would have some merit. But as it stands, you’re comparing a Sandbox RPG to a narrative Action-Adventure, a Souls-game,and Zelda (???)

I’m not here to say Bethesda games are perfect because they are not, but bringing them up in random conversations about games just to tear them down for NOT being The Witcher 3 or Breath of the Wild or Dark Souls is just a terrible way to go about discussing art, and that’s not even getting into the fact that Bethesda’s design philosophy is extremely different compared to most other RPG/Open World game creators, even if it wasn’t, the inherent pettiness of the comparison cheapens the game you’re praising, at least in my eyes. 

Let art stand on it’s own merits.I speak for everyone when I say Crunch is not fun, Crunch is unethical, Crunch is abuse, and Crunch is bad. It sucks.

However, as someone who grew up in the early 3D days, the part of me that appreciates what the body of the games industry is thus far is resistant to the idea that crunch should ultimately become legally impossible.

I do not believe the elimination of crunch will just lead to better games with longer, fairer development cycles. Crunch always happens because *development is going way too slow* by people and managers who haven't realized how much it will *really* take to complete the set goals of the project. I spoke to my cousin over a christmas dinner about it. He works in game animation at a big-budget developer in the UK currently. He corroborated this idea.

My cousin claimed that in his experience it was always looking at that burndown chart, and comparing it to the deadline and the closer you got to the deadline the more apparent it became that the overall goal was going to be impossible to reach. That leads to managers coming in and saying "We have to work overtime to get this done." and then people obviously wanna work hard, because the harder you work, the sooner this death march can end.

Everyone needs a comfortable work place, but the issue is that when you're seeking comfort, you often tend to fall into a "We don't have to worry about it" mind-set. I remember one of my bosses just going "aaah, it'll take a year to do this." and estimation is often prone to underestimation. This isn't because all leaders are toxic, it's because people are being wishful and unrealistic, and don't want to face the idea that realistically this thing we're setting ourselves up for is going to be stupidly difficult.

At the end of the day, I don't think you're going to see big, emotional, intellectual or entertaining juggernaut titles if we de-legalize crunch or put fences up against it with unionization. It's going to keep developers in the mentality that they work at the pace they do, and not worry about the health of a project until the production cycle is reaching its halfway point. Then big publishers have to pay for that, and every delay is a few more million invested in that and expectation increasing in what it takes to return profit. You end up in a bind where the only choice left is to say "We can't make AAA games."

AAA gaming thrives on crunch. Ultimately creative vision needs experimentation and internal taste-critique, and professional critique that goes beyond just "are the features what the user needs". Writers, artists and directors need to make bodies of work that fit with coherence and are artful, along with professionally artistic staff members who can serve their vision. This leads to redoing things, iterating and cutting work that isn't proper despite how much professional effort it took.

Remove crunch, and we won't see games like Horizon Forbidden West, Spiderman, Suicide Squad, Mass Effect, or Elder Scrolls. Every big-budget game faces crunch.(First post on this sub I'm still don't 100% know what people say here) I know I am very late to the whole rdr2 fan base but I recently played it and oh my god. It's literally real life, it is very long making it almost like a true test to see how far you can go before reaching boredom. It's like when the credits roll its a kind of thank you note because you spent the last 50 hours on the campaign, and 30 hours hunting and looking at random things. But I just never got bored of it. It has brilliant story design and gameplay, making it like every mission has to do with one person in the gang to make you get attached to them. Almost every single choice you make effect you in the long run. Like helping a man who got bitten by a snake, then later walking into a town there could be a man that recognizes you as that guy who saved his life, he will then let you buy an item of your choice from a store and he'll pay for it. It's just so cool. Also you could just walk up to a dog and just pet it for no reason what so ever. It is just so good and so immerse. If anyone thinks otherwise about rdr2 leave a comment. I would like to see others points on the game. 

I've  been playing a few fps games recently, and in each of them I've had to  experiment with the mouse settings to get them to match each other in  terms of speed and precision. Standard practice for pc gamers of course,  but it's made me think...

For all  the importance that mouse settings have with fps games on pc, the  settings themselves can get awfully abstract and inconsistent across  titles. Some games have a very precise mouse customization that list the  varying mouse speeds to the 4th digit, while other games abstract the  mouse speed settings to a single slider, often without a numerical value  attached.

Given the importance  that many people hold in customization in the pc space, it's made me  think about how much people would appreciate a simple, robust, and  standardized system for mouse customization. Something that's easy to  understand, which allows for all pc fps games to be customized to allow  for a consistent experience around the board. (This would also be  perfect for people who play with inverted mouse, as coming across a game  that doesn't allow for mouse inversion can be really frustrating).

Additionally,  standardized mouse settings across the board would help promote a  better mouse experience with pc games overall. Some games tend to mess  with the mouse far too much in my personal opinion. They add translation  layers that make using the mouse feel unnatural and sluggish, much like  you're only influencing the mouse movement rather than directly  controlling it (a recent example is [God of War](https://www.reddit.com/r/pcgaming/comments/s4ki6h/god_of_war_pc_port_has_negative_mouse_acceleration/), which has negative acceleration on mouse movements).  If standardized mouse settings also promoted simultaneous M+K and  controller support, it could highly benefit people who use gyro and/or  trackpads on controllers to play pc games, as having the capacity of  mouse precision and analogue movement on a controller is really  beneficial to the controller experience on pc.

There's  lots of obstacles in the way of this potential standardization of  course, with different mouse DPIs being one, and lack of developer  incentive or motivation to establish this practice being another, but  hopefully a major developer sees this post and tries to make mouse  settings standardized or something, idk.Playing through Brilliant Diamond right now, and begruding the limited access to certain version exclusives like Larvitar and Aaron right now which are gated behind the Pokeradar, which is a post-game feature.



But this isn't exclusive to Pokemon the vast majority of JRPGs in the last probably 8-9 years have all gated their most fun mechanics behind some kind of post-story system and it's infuriating. 

Super bosses and stuff aren't all that entertaining. They typically wind up being a coin flip of how prepared you are to fight them with limited strategic input other than maxing out your power options.

I really miss the days of Ruby and Emerald weapon, where there was still story content ahead of you if you chose to beat those bosses, because if you don't like fighting post-game bosses etc. then all the coolest gear and game interactions start to become meaningless.

A great example of this happening *just last year* is Bravely Default 2, where the ultimate weapons were basically only available exclusively for the last boss. In order to even get them you would have had to beat essentially the entire game, in which case why even have them?Kenshi took me a long time to sit down and want to figure out, but when it clicked I couldn't put it down, and the main unique feature for me is that defeat isn't the end of the game.

In just about every other game, defeat is the end, but in Kenshi, defeat directly translates to growth and sometimes new tasks. Each time your character gets hurt, their toughness stat increases, making you want to let the defeat play out. You can also retreat, and if you succeed, athletics skill goes up. If you carry a wounded ally away from battle, your strength goes up. If you lose a limb, now you can go on a quest to get a new and better prosthetic. And of course a long fought battle that ends in defeat still gives you combat EXP. I've always been a fan of the saying "a master has failed more times than the apprentice has tried", and at some point when you finally win a difficult battle you can see the scale tip and all those defeats start amounting to something.

Secondly, defeat gets resolved a couple ways, with the most standard being you play dead until the enemy leaves and continue on your way, maybe get revenge later. However you may be imprisoned or enslaved, which is a whole ordeal. Your character can try to break out themselves, but if their lockpicking isn't high enough, you have to send a whole raid to fight them out, or a sneaky character to break them out at night. But you can also just let your character's slavery play out, gain laboring stats, grow your sneak and lock pick skill and so on until you are finally ready to escape, maybe letting other slaves free as a diversion.

Anyway, I mainly just want to say this is the game uniquely handles defeat in ways I wish more games would. There are other games where defeat isn't the end, but it's just a set back where you are better off save scumming (Mount & blade comes to mind). Kenshi is just about the only game I've played where save scumming is extremely easy, but I would often rather let the defeat play out because of the growth to be had and the new choices and opportunities that arise.Sequence breaking has long been a thing in gaming, from the first Metroid to the recent Cyberpunk. To understand this post, you have to understand what sequence breaking is in the first place and how I'm using it here. From Wikipedia:

"In computer and video games, **sequence breaking** is the act of performing actions or obtaining items out of the intended [l](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linearity_(computer_and_video_games))inear order or of skipping "required" actions or items entirely. Sequence breaking is often used to beat a game unusually quickly, to beat it while only completing a few objectives or obtaining a few items, to obtain useful items early in the game, to make the game more difficult, or to help push a game as far as possible in some other way."

So how does skipping intended goals and achievements make a game more immersive? In Prey (2017) by Arkane Studios, you are an engineer aboard Talos I in the year 2032 on your first day. And tomorrow, you will be ready for your first day. And the day after that, and the day after that... Your world is shattered when the simulation you've been in unravels when the alien species Transtar has been researching, the Typhon, breaks containment and kills most of the crew. Once you escape the linear room that has served as your cage, you are free to explore just about the entirety of the derelict station in whatever order you want. With the GLOO gun, a device that fires incapacitating and rapidly-hardening balls of a glue-like substance, you can create pathways on walls and floors to get you up to places that seemed impossible.

Sequence breaking in this game is one of the best I've ever seen, because practically every action you take to skip things ([barring that ridiculous 7 minute speedrun](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yB-lTwRENU8)) is accounted for in big and small ways. If you kill an NPC that was supposed to help you, there's dialog from other NPCs. If you glitch through the door into Psychotronics, January has dialog expressing surprise. If save the crew before you unlock the Cargo Bay door, they have unique dialog. If you kill January the moment you meet them, the game is quite different. The game has so many ways to skip things using available tools and glitches that every time you feel like you've outsmarted the game, you're congratulated with being told that what you did was accounted for.

When I skipped something, or used GLOO parkour, I felt a sense of pride at having found a strange and unconventional way of reaching an objective. I got up to Alex's office through the deactivated gravity shaft through GLOO and careful jumps, and he had things to say about that, and then gave me the code anyways, but you get it much later in the game if you don't do this. And if you hack his computer with a high enough hacking skill, he has even more to say about your sequence break. When games account for the weird and wonderful ways players engage with the world, it feels special, like what they did was valid and not just a bug or an oversight on the developers part. It's that validation that makes the game feel immersive.

Now the opposite can pull players right out of the game. Nothing like clearing a bandit camp in Assassin's Creed only to find a quest telling you the place you just cleared out suddenly has an extra item that wasn't there before so you have to backtrack for a while. Or killing an enemy and them suddenly respawning because you now have a quest to avenge that farmer's family in The Witcher 3. Or saving an NPC and they're all thankful and like you, and then you turn around and they hate your guts.

When games don't account for players doing things out of their carefully orchestrated paths, at best it ruins any immersion and at worse it breaks the game with a bug or unintended softlock. So accounting for sequence breaking can make the game feel that much better when the players unusual actions are not only expected, but encouraged. And it can feel that much worse when even simple things like looting an area and having an item spawn there can make the game feel more artificial.I got Fallout 4 when it launched and quite frankly was underwhelmed. The map was smaller than Skyrim's and less visually varied, the game was pretty easy, and the settlement system seemed completely unnecessary. Why should I go through all this effort to make some stupid rusty iron base when the game is easy enough as it is? I played the game for a while but it just seemed like a game I had played a million times before - see map marker, walk to area, clear area, fast travel to vendor, sell, repeat. I ended up quitting after 50ish hours and at the time I though Bethesda might be dropping the ball on innovation.

Now recently a buddy of mine convinced me to give the game another shot on Survival difficulty, and all I can say is wow. This is a completely different game, and definitely the definitive way to play Fallout 4. The difficulty is high but fair, and forces you to use power armor, cover, and all the tools in your inventory. No fast travel and highly reduced map marker distances mean that exploration becomes a very visual and thought provoking experience, and makes the map seem so much more like a real place. And because there is no fast travel, the settlement system becomes far more important.

I wanted to talk about the settlement system for a second because it's really genius. It seems that Bethesda has solved the "junk problem" - the tendency of open world games to feature tons of useless aesthetic items that just clutter up your inventory, like "ruined book" or "wooden mug" in Skyrim. In FO4, because every piece of junk has component materials, they all have uses in crafting - so you feel a lot more like a scavenger, grabbing random crap and stitching it together to make a base. It's very fun. Because there is no fast travel, you are constructing supply lines, really building out your bases, and slowly moving further and further into the city. It's very addictive and immersive, I have been having a blast with this.

In summary, survival mode forces you to interact with basically all the mechanics of the game, and it turns out they all work in tandem to create a really fun, memorable, and innovative experience. I hope future Bethesda games follow this example and provide good incentives for players to interact with all the game's systems, because in regular Fallout 4 it's just unnecessary to deal with most of the systems in the game.The ready or not game has two editions standard and supporters. The supporters edition I believe is over $100 not sure of exact prices due to regions In australia the standard is $55 supporters $110

It seems updates to the game are going to supporters first before being given to standard players

The game is early access but it's only real early access if you paid for the supporter edition. On steam it's not clear that standard editions need to wait even longer for content (there is barely enough in the game as is)

Imo it's stupid to do it this way you would get more data releasing updates to all players for feedback and supporter editions could be given other exclusive content to make the purchase worthwhile instead of giving them updates first before trickling them down to the standard players

This leads to dividing the playerbase in a game thats already losing players. I'm sure you can't play the new content with friends if you are on the standard mode and they are on the supporter edition as that would make the supporters edition worthlessAs someone who was completely captured by the magic of Kingdom Hearts and Final Fantasy in my childhood, I don't know how to feel about Square Enix in their modern state. They've made so many blunders and bizarre business decisions over the past few years that I feel like they aren't called out for enough, but at the same time I don't know if they should be.

-Releasing the Kingdom Hearts series across nearly every platform over the years. A series that started on PS2 had plot-relevant games locked away on GBA, DS, PSP, and even pre-smartphone mobile phones.

-Final Fantasy 13 getting 2 sequels despite being one of the most disliked in the series.

-Sold timed exclusivity for Rise of the Tomb Raider on Xbox One.

-Final Fantasy Versus 13/15 stuck in development hell for ten years and releasing with messy, inconsistent quality in story and gameplay (to the point that some were worried about the quality of Kingdom Hearts 3 pre-release) Final Fantasy 15 also had 4 DLCs with more expansions planned, perhaps overambitiously, but then it was cancelled unceremoniously. There was a Cup Noodles product placement sidequest added. They also added a mini game mode that ties into a Japanese mobile game.

-Barely advertised games by their American studios in the Deus Ex and Tomb Raider franchises, then canned these series in favor of...

-having their best Western studio make Marvels Avengers a Destiny clone with repetitive and poorly implemented multiplayer.

-Epic store exclusivity for Kingdom Hearts, sold at full price

-Final Fantasy 7 Remake is Epic exclusive, poorly optimized, and costs more than the original release.

-Final Fantasy 7 Battle Royale

EDIT: The Nier Automata PC port is still not fixed

EDIT: NFTs

EDIT: Failed to tell consumers that Final Fantasy 7 Remake was actually only part 1 and was the first 5 hours of the original game stretched into 40.

I probably missed a few points, but I feel like Square Enix would do anything for a quick buck at this point, even if it means alienating their fans. They'll make a game in a genre their fans typically don't play just because it's profitable at the time. They love signing exclusivity deals. 

Square is such a middling publisher for me now. Their decisions really don't sit well for me, and I find it odd that they're not regarded like EA or Activision at times, but I can't bring myself to feel too angry about them either. They're certainly no worse than any other publisher, but honestly wherever they do something gamers don't like, such a making a game Epic exclusive on PC, I'm honestly not even surprised any more. They're a company I used to be excited for their new releases. Even ignoring that I'll usually have to wait for releases as a PC gamer anyway, these days they're more of a "wait for a sale" kind of company, To  preface, I don't play any Counter Strike games. Rather, I'm just asking  this as someone interested in game history (hopefully that isn't too  odd of a thing).

I remember back  in 2012-ish that CSGO was not entirely well-received. I also remember  that there was an extended period after the game released where more  people were still playing Source rather than GO. Looking at Steamcharts,  it looks like GO's population didn't really start to blow up until  probably 18 months after the game first came out. Of course, today it's  now consistently a top 3 most played game on Steam.

What  caused this delay in adoption? Was there a large content drop a year  after release? A tremendous amount of bugfixes in that time? Did Counter Strike hardcores just give up fighting against the new release?  Googling tells me that it didn't become free to play until 2018, so that  can't be the cause.

I'm sure this is an obscure question but it's something that I always found odd, especially for such a popular game. I've also posted this in the Counter Strike subreddit in case anyone sees it there.I noticed that every time I see people talk about playing the ranked game mode they talk about it like an obligation and if I see someone play it they seem pissed off getting frustrated by their teammates, bad luck or the ranking system. Having a goal to strive towards and a way to track your self-improvement is a good thing but I feel like ranks make people less focus on improving but more on cheesing or straight up cheating which is why boosting services and cheats are a big industry. Cheaters always existed but I only remember old games having obvious cheaters who flew around the map to grief people rather than the subtle aimbots we got now. But this could definetly be me having rose tinted glasses for the past. I feel like ranking systems create toxicity as people scream at their teammates for making them lose rank but I also met toxic people in unranked game modes so I wanted to know what your thoughts are on this matter.In the 80s, artistic and creative values had almost no consideration in the production of animation and video games, which were typically very simplistic and unambitious. However that  led to a rejection of that idea as creatives got a hold of more power in the early 90s, causing the animation, anime, and games boom of the 90s to 2000s, a period of huge change where creatives were allowed to kind of just throw shit at the wall and see what stuck, and where some of the most acclaimed of those mediums were made.  However, 30 years later, I can't help but feel we have backslid a bit from that resurgence back into samey commercialization. In the western world, the influence of GTA, Far Cry and Assasins creed have seeped into almost every mid-to-high-budget triple A game, leading to bland open world sanboxes and samey combat, often leaving me feeling a bit bored (other then a few examples of course.) In the eastern world, while i like anime i feel like it too has influenced games too much, with waifubait becoming dime a dozen, with stories feeling more and more cliched. I won't paint with a broad bursh, and you can think up many examples to prove me wrong that will be valid, but regardless every era has its 'cliches' and i think those two are it for their respective areas. I feel like, due to its rivaling or even superiority over movies nowadays financially, games have gotten complacent, and everything is back to a level almost where it was in the 80s, where save for a few holdouts commercialization and mass appeal has overtaken a large amount of the power and ground its lost to creativity and experimentation. Another big reason for this is the ballooning cost to make a game, which of course discourages risks. People's demanding for top-of-the-line graphics (moreso in the western world i think) has hamstrung experimentation too, as more and more budget and manpower has to go to ensuring proper nose hair physics so people online don't get pissed off. Of course indie games exist, but I can't help but feel that off the wall, truly bizzare ideas like Abe's Oddysey, Psychonauts, Xenogears, Grim Fandango or the like would have trouble grabbing funding from today's studios, and would have to be stripped down to become indie games.

This leads me to my main point- obviously aesthetics and ideas come and go. Ideas die and are reborn or replaced. So i beg the question, when will audiences get bored? Or will they? With the increased access to the ability to play older games, and the ability to play more creatively unchecked indie games, do you think this will stoke a desire and frustration in a larger audience for more experimental or off the wall high-budget games? Death stranding's success (though it was tied to a mega-popular auteur) proves that these seemingly unsellable ideas, a full-length 'walking simulator', can sell. I think soon a larger amount of people will grow restless or frustrated, and we will see a rebirth of the mid-budget AAA oddball game, as studios try to get their own  Taro, Nomura, Kojima, Toby Fox, or Lucas Pope.I got a PS5 last year and that was mainly to play the new Demon's souls remake and Bloodborne as I'm an avid souls fan and I wanted to play these two games since I've never owned a playstation system.

After having so much fun with these two (and platinumming Sekiro on the new platform) I turned to other 'playstation hits'. The last of us, Ghost of Tsushima, HZD, Spiderman, God of War and nothing really stood out for me except God of War and I'm really excited for the second game (gameplay wise it wasn't my favorite but I'm hooked for the sake of the great story/cinematics, I also really like mythology).

Due to the praise Hades got I bought it back in August and I've been playing it since then with my gf, we had such a blast with this game and the amount of variety and ways you could play the game and increase the difficulty still blows my mind. It also introduced me to roguelites and I thought I have finally another genre to like since I was really disappointed by many well praised games up until that point.

Then I hesitated a lot before buying Returnal due to it being an expensive title (80 €), and due to the very high praise it got from people and to it being a roguelite supposedly I was convinced to get it but it was a very big disappointment and it taught me a lot of ways devs can mess up a beautiful formula like roguelites.

I spent a total of around 10-12 hours on the game, I died quite a lot in the first biome then the rest of the game felt like the same. I died twice for the third boss and then when I got passed it I went through the rest of the game fairly easily without dying. I was kind of bummed that the game has ended so soon and especially disappointed when I saw that the 4th biome didn't have any bosses, only 3 pathways that lead to keys with the same exact miniboss at the end of each one and then I got a new ability, I didn't learn how to use more than half of the items (for instance, the astronaut figurine I read about its use after I'd finished the game) because simply the game was so short and it didn't feel like the game was pushing me to explore the items. If you get good item RNG you can shoot your way to the final boss easily.

Another point is that I didn't have any incentive to replay the game, the story has maintained its cryptic feeling until the final cutscene and being a story focused game the choice of this very confusing story-telling style seemed odd for me and I ended up looking up the story since I thought the final cutscene was everything there's to see and I didn't understand anything actually. Also when I looked up the platinum it seemed so grindy and I never enjoy grinding to get the platinum in a game  (Looking at you covenant items in DS3). It seemed crazy that you can get through a whole cycle without getting any Xenoglyphs or whatever because of how stupidly random the game system runs.

Replay ability from a gameplay point of view was also discouraging. The fully fledged randomness of the items system in the game made for a much worse experience in my opinion. For instance, I guess Hades changes the probability of the player landing a certain item dynamically depending on what's happening in the game. While in Returnal everything is completely random, it literally feels like a lottery, and there's no way to nudge the game in a certain direction to customize your build. In the winning run I think I had tons of health items when I got to the final boss (this boss was extremely underwhelming tbh) with double my health bar, while in other playthroughs, I got to the second or third biomes with half my health bar. It seemed very weird that luck played such a big role in a game that prides itself on being skill based.

This brings me to another point which is the malfunctions system. I got around it pretty soon in the game and I simply decided not to pick malignant items whatsoever. The boosts and rewards were mostly not worth the trouble and some malfunctions were pretty punishing.  Also, for a game with such a system, where I expect the game to encourage you to take the risk of picking malignant items, it was extremely weird that after two malfunctions you get a critical unrepairable malfunction, why would they do that ? That made experimenting with malfunctions much more difficult. The combination of malfunctions also was not really thought out, I remember having two completely contradictory malfunctions once and while one did not allow me to do something (or caused damage when doing it), I needed to do the same exact thing to clear the other. Also, I hated the fact that malignant health items had the same icon on the map as the normal health items and it made me do so many back and forth trips.

Another point that didn't make sense was the orange rooms where you get many waves of enemies and get locked in the room until you finish it. These were absolutely not worth the trouble, you get 3 or 4 minibosses with hoards of enemies and at the end the rewards may well be some malignant health items and a couple of useless parasites and artifacts. So after going through them a couple of times I just stopped because they weren't worth it, they're extremely hard for the rewards they gave. The same goes for the dead bodies of previous players, where you actually pay Ether to fight it, and the fight can be extremely difficult for early biomes, and you can well get a very disappointing loot after it. It just felt that the game was unbalanced in a way for the player to avoid encounters as much as he can because the rewards were mostly disappointing and you could well get them without going out of your way.

The last critique before moving to the positives of the game is the skippable bosses. During my play through and after finding the first boss skip I was wondering why would they make the bosses skippable?!! It seemed so strange for a game of this type and this length. Can we even call this game a roguelite if we can just skip whole areas and bosses when we go back to the beginning? This made walking to the place you died at the next cycle feel like a chore and combined with the random items and weapons I was just very annoyed because I knew that there was no way whatsoever to get more or less the same things I had the previous cycle. PLUS, the lack of any rewards for defeating a boss made going back to them after beating them once something unthinkable, this was just a waste of potential imo and one of the biggest disappointments in the game.

Positives (Sort of):

The gunplay was really good, but as I said, if you love a weapon, brace yourself because there's a possibility that you will not get the choice to get this weapon at your proficiency level and you'll get stuck with a lousy weapon that you don't like because if not you can't kill any enemy. For instance I enjoyed the Carbine red shooting weapon, and when I unlocked a few other weapons it was so hard to get my hands on a well leveled Carbine in the cycle, I even went and fought the final boss with a Carbine that was 4 or 5 proficiency levels below mine just because I kept getting bad weapons that I tried and didn't like in the last 4 or 5 rooms before the final boss. Why didn't they implement a system to upgrade your own weapon? It would have been awesome if we had a machine in the shop that would upgrade your current weapon to your current proficiency level for a certain amount of game currency.

The story was pretty good but was vague and ambiguous in a very unnecessary way imo. Also I don't appreciate jump scares in general and I think they're a cheap way to scare people, and the game used them many times in unskippable cutscenes which made me uncomfortable.

The gunplay is the best aspect of the game by far. The cooldown system, the overload system, everything felt very well made and it's really a nice and refreshing experience. Also, each gun felt unique and with the PS5 controller it really was an A class experience.

The game has this feeling of you wanting to play it when you leave it and you're excited to see what's next, but this doesn't last long due to how short the game is.

A few suggestions that would make the game a better experience:

\- Don't make the bosses skippable, and add rewards for killing a biome's boss: 1. 25% integrity upgrade or a certain amount of obolites. 2. Moving the proficiency upgrade that you get when you first get into a biome to a reward of killing the previous biome's boss and leveling up your current weapon to your current updated proficiency level. They can also add more customization to the weapon abilities before each biome to get rid of this current 'rigidness' in weapons, you get a weapon with a certain level with a certain ability and you can't change that at ALL.

\- Add more rewards to the difficult orange rooms to make it worth the challenge, or at least tilt the RNG to give meaningful items.

\- Remove the critical malfunction system or make them repairable. This will make experimenting with malignant items much funnier and a much more rewarding experience, since you know that you can look for the item that repairs malfunctions before going into a boss.

\- Add a nice gameplay mechanic to reset the cooldown of the special ability of the weapon. Something like 3 consecutive melee kills, or a last second dodge (for it to work with bosses), or dealing consecutive damage to the enemies, or all of that together. This will incentivize a more aggressive gameplay style.

\- Make a dynamic RNG system, like I don't want ether or artifacts in a difficult room if I'm very low on health, I need health. 

I'm not suggesting in any way to make the game easier, I'm just saying that the game's difficulty as it is feels very punishing sometimes and very stupidly easy at other times.

All in all, the game gets a 4/10 in my opinion and is definitely not worth 80€, especially when games like Hades exist for 25€ and Hades is better in every single aspect at being a roguelite compared to Returnal. Also, games like Elden Ring which are coming and will be FULL to the brim with quality content are even cheaper than Returnal, so I think it's way overpriced. I'd recommend it if it was around 40€ and this's just in recognition of the cool art direction and the graphics of the game.

A final separate note is that I posted a much less critical post on the game's subreddit a while back and it was deleted without giving any reason, people should chill when it comes to criticizing their favorite games, it's sometimes getting to a point where critiques are so downvoted that people stop criticizing the game, and when you see a game getting so much praise and you get disappointed with it you feel really discouraged from trying out other well praised games. It happened to people in my circle for games like The Witcher and Ghost of Tsushima where the fanbase was so oppressive and aggressive that people stopped pointing out the faults in the games and we need this critical sense in the gaming community, and I appreciate this subreddit for giving us this space. I so wish somebody had told me an honest opinion about Returnal before buying it, now that I think that it was not worth it at all.Title is a little confusing. This question applies to the people who are serious about clearing their backlogs. Here's my example:  


**You have "Darksiders Warmastered Edition" both, on PC and PS4. You beat it and platinum it on PS4. Do you tag the game as "Finished" on PC? Or do you finish it again to get it out of the way.**   


Just curious as to what you guys do. I personally would like to do it but I feel like I'm wasting my time. Do I finish other games and come back to replay it later? What are your thoughts?There are various narrative-driven single player story games that I'd like to experience / learn the story of without actually playing them (examples include Red Dead Redemption 2, God of War, Witcher Series).

I simply don't have the time to play through multiple 20-50 hour games at this point in my life, but I'd still like to experience these games in some sort of condensed format. Undoubtedly, I'm aware that experiencing the game through playing it is better, but time constraints make that difficult.

What should I do to get the narrative experience of these games without playing them through?So yeah, I have some friends in the dev side of videogames. My Twitter has been going crazy about NFT:s lately. The crypto bros are painting insane visions of a future that will never be. NFT skins that would exist in every game you play, animations that are only for you and the few hundred other whales.. I mean sorry, people who have some liquidity to spend on them.

The whole angle to NFT:s in gaming as of now in January 2022 is just plain stupid. I have not seen a vision that I would see even remotely viable. Cryptobroes are doing what Cryptobroes do, basically scamming people, or at the least hyping them up for a future scam. At the grass root level, the field is a mess. As I'm looking at this whole debacle from a perspective of a gamer as it is right now, I'm not that worried. 

Gaming companies are dipping their toes into the NFT waters though. They have a lot more capital and leverage  than the one time scam cryptobroes to actually make things happen. Right now we're living a period of reconnaissance.

Should we as gamers do something? Can we do something? There's been a lot of backlash from the players and a lot of backing down from the companies. The stable ground is yet to be reached. Neither party has surrendered yet.  

**You can stop reading now if you have an opinion on the matter. That's the gist of what I wanted to ask. The rest is sources, filler and personal opinions.**

Here's my personal take. It is very much uniformed take that I'm making with limited information. I'm not telling anyone to take it as gospel, I'm just some dude and this is my take based on what little I know.

Can we do something? Should we do something? My guess after a few beers is 

**Can we?**  Umm, kinda yeah but not really.  We can raise a public outrage and make the gaming companies stink on the social media. Maybe some news outlets will pick stuff up. But I fear it's to no avail, people buy games from rapists as long as there are fancy orcs or many openworld collectibles in them. Gamers who actually follow the gaming news scene are a minority of the buyers. And the people in that minority who care about crunch and abuse by boycotting a company are a minority of a minority of a minority.

**Should We?** I still we should be active and voice our opinions. I was going to say something about denouncing NFT:s. Hell, I'm against them, but I'm not smarter than all of Reddit. Maybe someone who has an actually good way to use them can voice their opinion too.

Here's a direct quote from the president of Square Enix

 "I realize that some people who 'play to have fun' and who currently form the majority of players have voiced their reservations toward these new trends, and understandably so,"  

In the email that the president sent, he actually put 'play to have fun' in quotation marks. For him, it seemed to be a bad thing, when compared to the "Metaverse"

Read the whole letter here. It's cringy, yet worrisome at the same time.

[https://www.hd.square-enix.com/eng/news/2022/html/a\_new\_years\_letter\_from\_the\_president\_2.html](https://www.hd.square-enix.com/eng/news/2022/html/a_new_years_letter_from_the_president_2.html)

I'm a very indifferent person to say skins. I have enjoyed the Halo Infinite multiplayer a lot. I have played it for dozens of hours and I honestly have no idea what the whole Batllepass debacle is about. I have fun with the core gameplay, not with the skins. I may have put on some shoulder pads I got, I'm not entirely sure. I have played Titanfall 2 for over 1000 hours. I just pick whatever from all the skins I have.

That said, most of the money in F2P games comes from a very, very small minority of people. The so called Whales who spend thousands and thousands of monies in a game. This will surely scale in some way to an imaginary NFT market.(This is adapted from a script from a video I did on the topic, so I apologize if the writing's a little jank here and there.)

 

**The Last of Us Part 2- A Meditation on Purpose**

Since its launch in June of 2020, The Last of Us Part 2 has gone on to become one of gaming’s most divisive topics. General reactions from the title have ranged from total adoration, with many believing it to be the perfect Swan Song for the Playstation 4,  to more critical viewpoints that felt its darker, more depressing narrative took away from what made the original special, and that the themes centered around violence failed to tread new ground. It’s actually on the matter of the game’s themes which I found to be a particularly contentious point during my research into the discourse around Part 2, and is what this analysis will mostly focus on. 

From both major gaming journalist websites and general fans alike, a well-circulated critique I saw when looking into the game was that the revenge driven narrative never elevated past the point of “violence and the cycle of violence that it can cause is ‘bad’.” though these are recurring themes throughout Part 2, when you look at how the plot unfolds from solely this straightforward perspective,  I feel as if it is very reductive to those themes at play. And while yes, The Last of Us Part 2 is a game about both revenge and how it can perpetuate a cycle of violence, I also believe it to be a meditation, albeit an emotionally devastating one, on the necessity of purpose for our protagonists Ellie and Abby, how they come to understanding this necessity, and how this need pushes them to their lowest and highest points throughout our time with the narrative, while also intertwined with the former mentioned themes

**Ellie - A Savior No More** 

Being known as possibly the only person immune to the Cordyceps virus that collapsed civilization more than twenty years prior instilled a sense of hope in Ellie. It’s a blessing that could’ve meant saving others from suffering the same fate of those she knew and loved at the hands of the infected. She is so adamant about being the one to help end the Cordyceps that when Joel, her protector turned parental guardian, gave the option for the two to return to a safe haven ran by his brother and sister-in-law rather than to the hospital where they would study how to create the necessary vaccine, she insist on finishing their journey, stating “After All we’ve been through, everything I’ve done… It can’t be for nothing.”

But when the time comes and Ellie is prepped for the procedure, Joel learns that in order to create the cure they must kill the host so that they can extract the non-advancing  fungal growth. This isn’t something that he can just let happen, as he had already lost his own daughter twenty years ago when the virus first began. He did the best he could then, but in the end lost her, and wasn’t about to let that happen again. And so he doesn’t. What ensues is a rampage through the hospital that leaves both the surgeon and Marlene, leader of the savioristic rebels known as the Fireflies, dead, and takes an unconscious Ellie back to settlement in Jackson Wyoming . When she asks what happened, he lies to her, stating that the Fireflies had found other immune, but came to no avail with a vaccine. Doubtful of Joel’s Story, she asks him again if what he said was true, only for him to reassure her that it was. And thus we conclude The Last of Us with an Ellie, purposeless in a world she very well could have saved…. 

We now travel four years into the future. Ellie and her friend turned partner Dina have been tasked with finding Joel and his brother Tommy after the pair hadn’t come back from patrol. After navigating the infected and taking shelter from a blizzard, She continues on without Dina, tracking the two to a mansion outside of the Jackson Settlement. Suspicious of what’s happening, she sneaks into the home where she finds Joel brutalized by an unknown group. Before she can intervene she’s knocked and  pinned to the ground, forced to watch as this mysterious woman and cohorts kill  Joel and knock her unconscious. And thus Ellie has a new purpose in life: To seek out those responsible for the murder of her surrogate father…. Or so we are meant  to believe. 

As Ellie and Dina track the group to Washington, and the former begins her reign of terror, we start to get flashbacks to the time between both the games. And it’s in these flashbacks we see the deeper implications that Joel’s decision had on her life. We come to understand that even while attempting to live as much of a normal life after the events of the original game, she’s constantly haunted by what could’ve been had she sacrificed herself. From the beautifully heartfelt birthday trip to the science museum that runs reminiscent to the two’s adventures in the previous entry that ends with her coming across wall writings showing disdain toward the Fireflies as being “Liars'' about hope for the future, To their trip to find new guitar strings only to find a note left by two teenagers who fled the Jackson settlement, again to find the Fireflies in an effort to“Find Hope in the Dark”, while their infected corpses rest nearby. A scene that unsettles Ellie so much that she, after two years, gives Joel another chance to come clean about what really happened, only for him to double down on the story he told before until the faithful flashback one year prior, in which Ellie seeks the truth out for herself, learns what actually happened on that day all those years ago,  and the bond the two had is destroyed. 

And as we see her recall those moments, we’re also seeing her unravel at the task of avenging him. As the days go by, we see her grow more and more obsessive in finding Abby. We see her navigate treacherous terrains, leave a increasingly more morning sick Dina by herself, and after a particularly nerve wracking and violent day, see her wounded by a Seraphite arrow,  nearly killed in a WLF base, until arriving back at the theater battered, bruised , and covered in both her own and another’s blood- only  for her to go back out and continue searching for Abby.  What The Last of Us Part 2 does in the juxtaposition of these two points: Showing Ellie trying to live a normal life, but being followed by her past, and her now in Seattle waging this war against her surrogate father’s killers is that there has to be  some sort of deliverance from the pain caused by both of these experiences, but instead it leaves her spiraling through this cycle of violence until committing an act so horrible, the killing of Abby’s friend Mel, in which she learns only after the fact was pregnant, comes too late to the realization that her purpose  in Seattle was incredibly misguided. So then after coming to an understanding from Ellie, with some coaxing from the rest of the group, she decides that it may be best to return back home to Jackson… until Abby finds them.  In a fit of rage, Abby shoots and kills Jesse, the biological father of Dina’s child, shoots and maimes Tommy, and brutalizes Ellie and Dina, even stopping just short of slitting the latter’s throat, but hesitates before moving over to a bloodied Ellie and threatening her life if she were to ever see her again….

The story then shifts many months into the future, where Dina and Ellie live out on a farm together, tending livestock and raising their child. And here I know that I, along with many other players, found this gorgeous, pastoral scene a perfect ending for a character who has finally found peace and purpose… or so that’s how it seems until Ellie has a severe mental breakdown in the barn while herding sheep. It’s here we come to the realization that despite the time she’s been away from Seattle,  Ellie has been dealing with horrible episodes of PTSD that have robbed her of sleep, eating, and otherwise wholly enjoying her time with Dina and their son. 

So when a partially paralyzed, embittered, and disgruntled Tommy arrives with information of Abby being spotted in Santa Barbara, California, she believes that in order to put an end to the intrusive horrors that have plagued her mind,  she has to finish what was started, even if it’s at the expense of her enjoying a new life with the family she, Dina, and the baby had for themselves.. And though this may raise the question “Then what was the purpose of the earlier realization that revenge was leaving her worse off?” From my own interpretation I'd have to say it’s the fact that even after there has clearly been some time removed, she still finds herself haunted by it all; that there wasn’t ever any real closure for Ellie in spite of this quiet life she’s lived since.

And so she travels to California, where she runs into a group of slavers who captured Abby and Lev. After freeing the other slaves, they inform her that they took Abby  to “The Pillars” down on a nearby beach. And so she goes searching among the sun-battered, busted, and broken before stumbling across an emaciated version of the woman she set out to find… she let’s her down, in which Abby then mostly ignores Ellie to find Lev. And while Ellie almost leaves, as there are two motorboats for them to separately leave on,  she can’t bring herself to do so. So she tries to drag Abby into a fight. Abby refuses, but Ellie then moves to hold a knife against the young boy's throat to egg her on… so she accepts. And though during the fight Ellie loses her mother’s switchblade she’s had over the years, and has two fingers bitten off, she finds herself able to overpower Abby and pins her beneath the water, coming within inches of drowning the woman  and finally avenging Joel. Finally bringing an end to the cycle of violence, and finally absolving herself of the means she took to arrive at the end… but then we see a glimpse of a flashback: We see Joel sitting outside, guitar in hands, glancing in Ellie’s direction. It’s a brief moment, but because of it, Ellie releases Abby for her to return to the Motorboat, and we see Ellie sat in the shallow waters watching the two disappear one final time into the fog… and though the raw anger of not going through with seeking revenge for the person we came to love as a character,  all the time we spent killing dozens, and seeing those close to us killed and bested at the hands of this woman, again wonder what was the purpose of it all, if any? 

We flash forward yet again, with Ellie now back on the farm- only now it’s desolate, as Dina and the baby have left with the only remnants being her own art and Joel’s guitar. Grabbing the guitar, she sits down and attempts to play the first song Joel taught her to play years before, but finds herself unable to  properly do so from lacking the fingers to play like before. It is then that we get one last flashback for Ellie: we see her and Joel together on the last night he’s alive. Having been estranged for a while, they shakily discuss him intervening when a bigot throws a slur at Dina and her. 

And though she scolds him initially for jumping in and other ways Joel’s been intruding lately,  it leads into the conversation  that they were  always bound to have again. She calls him out for not allowing her to fulfill that purpose she had all those years ago.  Again, Ellie was willing to die for the sake of society. That was something she had made amends with, but because of Joel’s actions, had that taken away from her. But even in re-addressing the situation, he responded simply by saying (clip of him confessing he’s so it again….) in which Ellie replies(Ellie’s response)  it is here that we do finally get the answers for why she let Abby go and why it was important for her to do so. We come to understand she will never get the chance to forgive Joel-which , for me,was the real closure she needed in order to have prevented this cycle, and instead reflects the ending of the original in being robbed of choice yet again,  but also we see she has purpose yet again:  to move on and seek life for her own sake,  rather than that of others.  And Unfortunately for Ellie, it’s a conclusion that ironically comes too late. 

**Abby - Finding Light in the Dark**  

When we step into the shoes of Abby for the second half of the game and learn that she was a FireFly , I find it important in remembering the motto that’s synonymous group: “When There’s Darkness, Look for the Light.'' It's a motto we hear at various times throughout the original as many looked up to the group of revolutionaries that fought against various oppressive militaristic organizations  throughout the apocalyptic wasteland. So when we go back in time to when her dad is confronted by Marlene about the means of creating the cure to the cordyceps, is that she, like Ellie, would be willing to sacrifice herself for the greater good of humanity, to be that light in the darkness. But when that chance for Ellie to save the world is snatched, along with her father and the majority of the group in which she found belonging in, she finds herself replacing that purpose she had with  seeking revenge against the one who took it all from her.

So when we come back to just before Joel’s execution , we’re supposed to get a sense that Abby  is moments away from fulfilling her goal and finally achieving what she has set out to do after all these years. But when she does deliver the killing blow , there’s something off about her body language that speaks to the opposite of that conclusion. For me, at that moment it looked like she very  much wanted to find catharsis in exacting revenge on the one who killed her father and took away both her own and her friends’ livelihood, but instead realized that after all these years her motivations were ill placed . Further still, it’s a moment of dramatic irony as we know that the death of her friends is from Abby’s initial inability to break the cycle of violence. But I digress

What further reinforces this notion that Abby lacks the relief she pursued is the nightmare that comes after a long day of learning her Ex, Owen, has killed another member of the WLF, is herself then captured by the Seraphites, and helped out by two Apostates of the cult whom she helps find shelter from after finding safety in the dark of the night. The nightmare leads her down the hallway to the surgery room her father was murdered in, but instead of finding his dead body, there are now the bodies of Yara and Lev: the excommunicated members of her sworn enemy The Seraphites that had saved her hours before.   So when she wakes from the nightmare and sets off to save the children, we come to understand that Abby has reconnected with the purpose she had lost long ago: to seek the light in the dark.  And though some players may be weary of Abby’s real purpose for why she would save the children in the first place, maybe even rather similarly to the character Mel who I feel in the scene where she confronts Abby on whether or not she’s doing this because of her feelings for Owen sort of acts as a stand in for the skeptical, which due to prior scenes that I won’t show here for explicit reasons, are totally justified in their hesitation about her motivations.

However,  I think this is largely dispelled as we further go through Abby’s experience and see her interactions with Lev. It’s through their time together that we get a deeper look at that idea of her purpose of seeing the light in the dark  through their dynamic. Though initially their relationship is a little on edge, as Abby accepts Lev for who he is without question, specifically by not pushing him into talking about why the Seraphites referred to him by his deadname “Lilly”,  as well as continuing to act as this protective bruiser for him,  and Lev helping overcome her fear of heights, and uses the teachings of the Seraphite’s prophet for good intentions and insight that rings so opposite to what both Abby and the player has been exposed to from the cult, we see this deeper connection  flourish between two opposing ideologies that eventually solidifies itself as a definite partnership. What I viewed to be this exact moment of  assurance is the scene where She outright  protects Lev from Isaac, the leader of the WLF, and the two end up escaping the Seraphite Island, while the Seraphites and WLF go to war against one another. It’s a harrowing scene that shows they are officially severed from the worlds that would’ve seen them as sworn enemies.  

But then they return to the aquarium and find Owen and Mel dead by the hands of Ellie. It’s here we see Abby slip into a deadly rage, one that sees her track down Ellie back to the theater, resulting in the death of Jesse, the shooting of Tommy, and her placing a knife to Dina’s throat with full intention of following through… However, Lev’s interjection snaps her back to that realization that she came to at the beginning of her journey, and keeps herself in line with the purpose she has regained. She realizes that there is no seeking light in revenge, for the cycle would just continue like it had before, and only bring back that darkness one way or another. And though her reluctance means she does run into Ellie one final time, I think that her actions in that moment, in combination to Ellie’s own realizations, are why she and Lev in the end make it out alive. 

What I believe TLOU Part 2 is really trying to  get at is how purpose can or is an incredibly important aspect in all of our lives. While it doesn’t have to be some grandiose gesture toward all of humanity, it has to matter and drive us to partake in our daily lives, be that for friends, family, or even just ourselves. However, in our journey to understanding just what that means for one another, we can become misguided, or lost, which is what I believe The Last of Us Part 2 is trying to explore with the narrative trek it endeavors. Through Ellie we come to see how being misguided can create a spiral that leads to less than desirable points in our lives, but in understanding the greater reasoning as to why or how you arrive there in the first place allows for us to move on, while Abby’s story shows that we could seemingly lose everything and still be able to reunite with what we once stood for and persevere because of this newfound light. And though the revenge and cycle of violence concept may make that message come off particularly extreme, I think it does  well in both complementing the game’s world, while conveying this message of the weary importance of purpose through even the darkest of our days.Every now and again I just stop and consider how much of a tragedy it is that *Everybody’s Gone to the Rapture* has such a slow and relatively weak opening hour. It prevented audiences from experiencing what is undeniably one of the most impressive and beautiful digital games… since games existed.

*Rapture* is a wholly unique; and such a uniquely powerful story, whose heights reach so high, whose sadness is so *real* and whose unbelievably large cast of characters is so well realized, and their stories brought to such beautiful, sad, profound endings; how stupid, how awful it was of TheChineseRoom to make the first hour so slow, and to insist so strongly on the absence of a ‘run’ button, that they knew they would turn away any and all but the most patient gamers. Who are missing a story of universal proportions, told by one of the greatest cast of actors in a game, accompanied by a gut wrenching soundtrack that deserves its own seperate post.

Now, seven years later, everyone still talks about Edith Finch, and nobody talks about Rapture, a game that has so much more to say, and says it with so much more truth, but which demanded stupid sacrifices of whoever sat behind the screen, so too few people ever saw; it marked the end of Director-Composer (and what a combination) Jessica Curry’s work with the company, and with video games in general. Such a shame. 

*Rapture* came too early, it needed to come to VR, (a transition it would make without any gameplay changes whatsoever) where there is demand for games that ask you only to see and feel, and not to run around. There are few endings in video gaming that are as perfect as *Rapture*’s, a story that makes you understand that things don’t need to get better in order to be good. It came too early; I daresay audiences who went through the past four years are much more receptive to the places *Rapture* goes.

If you haven’t played it, or if you haven’t played it past the first hour or so, and if you like stories that *really* want to talk to you, consider revisiting Everybody’s Gone to the Rapture. And if you’ve played it, but do not at all agree with any of the above, I’d love to hear why.Dlcs are actually relatively newer in the market, and I wanna know what you expect from them. Some want dlcs to simply give them a reason to get back into the world of the original game, while other want dlcs to almost stand out as a game on their own. I'll be honest- I'm a relatively younger, newer gamer, so i don't have a lot of experience. Till now, the dlcs I have played were of horizon zero dawn, witcher 3, bloodborne, dark souls 3 and a few more.

I'm my opinion, a dlc be done exactly how bloodborne did Old Hunters- it retained most aspects whilst adding some more, have players a reason to re-immerse themselves into the Victorian world of BB, as well as had a story that could stand out on its own, but was still connected to the overall plotline of BB. Also, the bosses were mostly great.

However, what Witcher 3 did was truly phenomenal, something we can't expect out of most dlcs. Blood and Wine could seriously be sold a Witcher 4 and I'd buy it in an instant. It had such a beautiful world, and introduced so many new mechanics. Hearts of stone was great as well, but apart from the story, everything else was not a very big breakthrough.

Anyways, what's your hot take on i 

First of all, English isn't my main tongue so please excuse any errors.

I have been playing videogames for a long time, but when Covid started was when I started to play Japanese games, mostly JRPGs if I'm not mistaken. A friend of mine started recommending them to me and hyping me up with all the mechanics they had which were mostly new to me. I usually play western games and their mechanics are pretty simple compared to JRPs.

All of the Japanese games I have been playing are some of the most popular out there (P5R, FF7R, RE, Tales of Arise, Danganrompa, FFXV, don't remember the rest). When it came to the gameplay and mechanics I really enjoy most of them but I was disappointed when it came to the story and characters in all of them.

I know most people won't agree with me giving how most of these games are universally loved but the story and characters in these games, and I'm guessing that in others too, tend to be pretty childish. I get it, this games are like anime, to some degree they are suppose to be childish but there should be a limit especially when the game is rated Mature like Persona 5.

Persona 5 is a very good game, to be honest I never played a game like it and it had some serious themes in the story but I was constantly thrown off by the characters acting like toddlers, villains laughing for no reason, stupid drama between the cast for no reason. Some of the conflicts in the game, in their core are well written but executed badly. An example is >!when Morgana had a conflict with the group and decided to leave, later the group found him and all Sakamoto had to do was apologize but he somehow screw that up and so Morgana ran away again like a 5 yo mad at their parents.!< The concept was good but it was written for small kids.

I'm all for making characters goofy or childish but know when to make them that way. Good example of this is Attack on Titan, it has a matured story with matured characters (for the most part) with a few fun childish moments here and there, like the famous potato scene from one of the first episodes of the anime.

I'm currently beating Tales of Arise and I'm experiencing the same things I mention in this post. Earlier I saw a post  where someone was talking about the same things I did, and it felt nice. I didn't know people actually felt the same way I did, so I decided to make my own post with my experience. After this one I will play Tales of berseria (got it on a big discount) I read that the characters there are some of the best in the franchise so we'll see. Recomendations are welcome if there are any. I hope not to have pissed a lot of people off, it was not my intention.

I finally let it all out, thanks for reading

Edit 1: I'm not exactly looking for a mature story, I was referring mostly to mature\realistic characters\story (not that I mind a mature story)



Edit 2: It seems like  I'll have to try out the Yakuza games





Thanks :)Someone told me he'd rather be playing in a squad of 3 than a 4 or 5 squad. Seeing as how everyone is trashing Extraction for that reason too, (among other complaints) I feel like it'd be nice to know what everyone's thoughts on playing games with 3 people are. Is 3 player better than 4 or worse? Is it easier to keep track of 3 people? Is it the right balance? Or is all the hate justified?I'll just say I think Ready or Not looks like a very polished game, it's probably pretty fun, and I think the devs should give themselves a pat on the back.

And yeah there's been some controversy over the school, but honestly? That's feels like such a small and inconsequential thing to discuss compared to something else I've seen no one even mention yet.

Here's the thing, as much as they've stayed true to what looks like the look, feel, and gameplay of SWAT 4, the game it's obviously emulating, the trailed is in my mind quite unfortunate and represents a significant tonal shift from the original game.

A tonal shift echoed by the very real change in policing in America.

What is this shift?

Well, when I think of SWAT 4, a game released in 2003, I think of careful deliberation. Caution. Weapon Discipline. Planning your entry. Checking your corners. Checking for *weapons*. Preparing a variety of non-lethal approaches to a situation. Following a strict rule of engagement that emphasizes more restraint than would've even been expected of real cops in that time period. In some aspects it even presented an even more idealized vision of policing in America. The focus of the game is to make **arrests**, not kills. And I think that's part of what made it a timeless classic.

What do I see in the trailer for Ready or Not? Lots of automatic weapons. Going in guns blazing. Lenient rules of engagements. Not a single non-lethal weapon featured. *Killing lots of bad guys.* 

It seems this game is emphasizing a more militant and violent police force. Which, after I thought about if for a minute, I realized. "Oh yeah, that kind of tracks."

Now I haven't played the game yet. Maybe the game will still have that element of SWAT 4, of going for arrests. And yeah, it's not like there weren't machine guns in SWAT 4 with the potential of a shoot out. But, it kind of doesn't seem like the two games will be the same at first glance.

Ready or Not whether the devs seem to have intentionally made this connection or not, literally seems to be highlighting police militarization in America over the past 2 decades, distilled down into a spiritual successor game that itself is more militarized than its predecessor. And that's kind of sad to me.

Your thoughts?This is not an advertisement for our game or a call to action to buy expensive shit you don't need.

There is a lot of negative backlash from gamers all over the place, everyone is hating on NFTs, they're right like 90% of the time Lmao. Its scammy, unnecessary, just a bunch of marketing words and crazy visions of the future (totally not dystopian^TM). I'll try to explain why I still decided to go this route.

Pros:
1. There's a bunch of money in this space. Do not ignore this! I'm an indie developer and have been making games for years, demos here and there, trying to pitch to publishers, trying to get people interested enough for a kickstarter, etc. I'm not sure how much you as a reader know about these things, but publishers take like 1% of games showed to them and the terms are usually cutthroat. For kickstarters it's a similar story, sounds like it's super easy just upload the project and wait for the money, if it's cool people will flock. No! The marketing you have to do is half a year of preparation, as well as super time demanding or expensive. You'll need to get lucky on the algorithm machine or have half a marketing degree. I know so many friends of mine who went this route and got like 10k for half a years worth of work. And this is not game development work, this is supposed to pay for the development afterwards, it's supposed to enable you to work on the game fulltime. Well, for most cases it's not enough. Bigger projects with a whole team are sometimes more successful if they have a person dedicated to marketing. I know two friends who participated in games who got like 100k+ which is already a start, but still  a low amount for most development. These teams usually don't even get to that stage, they make a half finished prototype and fall apart after like a month or two because they are working for free because they're not getting paid until the kickstarter succeeds or you get funded by an investor...

Well. That's the current state of things. I'm an indie developer, I'm dedicated, I'm willing to spend so much time extra working on these games and everything around it. I'm even willing to sacrifice my social life and freetime. If I feel stressed out I do easy and fun work to "relax" haha. It's not like it's not fun you know?? Nonetheless. It's really not worth it in the long run and you won't be able to make it. Everyone tells you not to do it if you're not intrinsically motivated.
Well... I'm glad to say I've been working with a full team of 3d artists, Programmers, etc for half a year now, we instantly got funding, so many people contacting us all the time asking us if we're interested in a business partnership, offers left and right. Like some of them are scams, true everyone here is just as cutthroat as normally, but they're willing to throw money at us because we're using "NFTs". Like I don't give a shit what tech we're using, I'm making my dream game here, it's gonna be awesome! The NFT tech literally is about equally as much work to implement as a normal system, so there's no difference. The debate at this point is more like arguing about game engines. Like who cares? As long as it does it's job you can make your game. And there have been enough good games done with unity as well as Unreal to prove it. I guess there haven't been enough good NFT games yet, but I'm telling you the NFT tech is way less impactful on the actual gameplay than you'd think, there's gonna be good games. And developers are gonna notice that this is like kickstarter and there's going to be projects like Undertale coming out of it which couldn't have been made otherwise. Not even a controversial opinion or daydreaming or anything, just more indie developers should be aware of these opportunities and it's going to be awesome. I don't know why someone decided that if you're making crypto stuff you'll get money thrown at you, but it's enabled me to work on my passion project and im tell grateful for this. And I wish more developers will be able to afford to properly work on their games.

2. I honestly thought that this would be the main argument, but in the recent months something happened that really made me appreciate that we went this way. We recently became victims of the log4j vulnerability... You may have heard about it on the news, but basically the entire internet was going crazy for a while until everyone fixed it. Basically allowed almost anyone to remotely execute code on any server using java. Our entire database got encrypted and we were devastated. The hacker wanted quite a large sum of money (ofc also transferred through crypto lmao) and we couldn't do it. Well... for any other game like let's say WoW, players would have been devastated! Like 12 years of work just down the drain. You know what I'm talking about, people would be rioting and going on the streets. Well, what essentially happened for us was that we almost saved no data in the first place. We just fixed the vulnerability, set everything up again and asked players to make a new account and link their wallet, minor inconvenience and everyone had their items. This obviously hasn't happened a lot in gaming history, but I personally was quite impressed. And it's definitely cool.

3. Metaverse... so many articles, people almost get tired of it. But consider this: Articles-> Marketing. We basically get free marketing, because people think that NFTs means metaverse. Never underestimate the importance of marketing for your game! Are we the metaverse? Idk you tell me. Does anyone even know what it is? It's like people a decade talking about "The Cloud" ominously and now everyone just uses it as what it is. But if you were able to be something something cloud you'd get a free article for you. Thank you journalists! Seriously though, it's a good opportunity to get some eyes on your game.

Cons:
1. Everyone thinks you're trying to scam them, rolls your eyes at your game without even having given it half a chance and hate it for some technology it's using. Luckily there's enough people in the crypto space willing to buy the product, etc so it's not that much of a negative. At the end of the day we will do good in our niche, I'm pretty sure. But to be honest it saddens me that my game won't be played by those who I made it for. It's like a cute tamagotchi style game with some PvP elements, and I'm like 90% sure that the target audience is more like the age of my smallest siblings, 10-15. While most of our customers are definitely not that. Tbh most of them don't even seem to care about the game, we can look at the numbers how many of our NFTs got used in the game and some of them just get traded around, but don't even end up in the game like wtf. I guess it's like pokemon cards people that don't even play the game and just like the shiny cards I guess(?)
Anyways, I'm thinking of making a non NFT version of the game, because honestly it's just sad. I don't think we reached the audience that the game is made for and I'm not even sure how many people are actually enjoying it. But just be aware that in the end all the negative attitudes gamers had didn't really affect our sales at all, since it wasn't the people we were selling to. 

2. Literally the amount of scams in this space... like omg leave me alone. We lost 150$ once because someone in our team was uncareful. You do not want to see how many discord notifications I have, it's literally stopped counting but from the rate at which it goes I'm sure it must be in the 15 hundreds or so. I made a separate account just for important stuff. Same goes for every other social media. Sometimes it's easy to ignore, sometimes obnoxious. We need to be super careful that people asking for advice on our discord server regarding any crypto stuff, that they don't get scammed by people pretending to be us. We had to make a custom bot for it and I'm not sure if people are still getting scammed. Anyways... really annoying and makes it so much harder to just do your work. Everyone instantly thinks you're a scammer as well, which isn't nice and actually quite damaging for the reputation of the company.

3. People don't know how to use new technology... I won't start to like blame them or talk down on them. I personally have issues with using social media all the time because I'm not that familiar with it. And some are just native to it. But it just means we have  to do a lot of additional support work, helping users set up their wallets etc. We get multiple emails a week claiming we scammed them because they can't see their items. We can see them just fine, and can even send a link to a blockchain explorer proving to that everyone else can see that you own it as well. So you just repeat the same things over and over again. "Hey, you need to use this wallet, then export your key and import it, connect the wallet with your user account in the game and then you'll be just fine"

I'm sure it's going to be a non issue in the future and wallets will be like emails or whatever, but right now I'm getting flashbacks to teaching my grandma how to create an online account.When I was younger I used to be obsessed with Pokemon, and it was the only games I would play, but around the time I turned 14 I started to play other games and lost a lot of interest in the games I used to love so much. I've tried getting back into the franchise by replaying the old games I had hundreds of hours in but I find it very difficult to deal with without playing an enhancement hack that adds lots of quality of life improvements. Looking back, there are so many small things about Pokemon games that make no sense design-wise and just serve to make the game less enjoyable. Stuff like the "running shoes" being locked to 30 mins - 1 hour of gameplay, everything about HM moves, a lack of multiple save files, etc. made it feel so outdated compared to other games that were out at the time. Then I decided to try out Sword and Shield and I felt like this was somehow even more outdated. It felt like a GBA game put in HD. No voice acting, no proper cutscenes, basic animations and textures, very weird character design, and a lot of missing stuff that i remember being in old games like the global trade thing or safari zone.

Why is such a popular and successful franchise so behind other games in terms of quality? Other games in the same genre and console feel way more complete for their era. In 2019 on a home console why are they still not adding cutscenes or multiple save files? By now with their success why does it feel like they're doing less instead of more?Now, I do agree that UC4 was a good game. But it is extremely underwhelming towards the end. Precisely at Ch14, where Nathan and Sam crash on Libertalia, the game goes downhill- Gameplay-wise as well as Story-wise. The best part about this entire second half was Ch15, thieves of Libertalia (which was actually very nice). I think that Chapter was what the second half intended to be- had some good climbing and set pieces, and even had a very powerful cutscene to back it up. Unfortunately, the rest of the act was boring because of repetitive gameplay structure.

It doesn't even feel like I'm playing the same game. Only hours ago, I was climbing a giant clocktower, only to massacre dudes in a market and was being chased by an armoured truck to swing my way into a convoy, and now, I'm pushing crates to climb for what feels like forever, and there's some badly placed firefights in between. It's boring, even with the addition of the piton.

Story-wise, the twist with Sam lying about Alcazar was great, but that plotline should've been evolved some more. Elena's part was also done slightly underwhelming, though she's never been perfect in character.

I might get some hate, but this is just my opinion, and I think that game could've been ended betterYes. I understand the appeal of the difficulty of souls games and their many offshoots. But I've never felt that having long treks to get back to a boss I've been fighting every time adds anything interesting to the gameplay whatsoever. If anything it's just likely to make me want to quit. 

In the original Dark Souls I sometimes can understand where they were coming from. A big part of the  difficulty is managing estus flasks and avoiding damage so long trecks test your ability to do this. I'd still personally prefer bonfires to always right next to bosses but I can understand it to some degree. 

So do any of you feel that there's good reasons for this or is this another case of people copying the wrongs things from their inspiration? 

&#x200B;

I'm also not going against the checkpoint system at all. I love the feeling of reward when finding one and many of these games need them for the core gameplay loop.I've thought about this a lot but occasionally I'll play a game that stick with me, I'll remember it for years and I'll begin to take inspiration from it. This ends up helping me form a certain skill, helping me understand some of my values or philosophies. There's many games that have had a positive impact on my psyche and I wanted to see who else have had a similar experience and what your stories are.

I'll go first, and I'll mention 2:

* I played a lot of eve online after finishing university, I was unemployed and didn't know what career to go into, I hated my undergrad after I finished it so that was off the table. Anyway, while playing eve I got really engrossed in the technicalities of it and started playing with excel to find the best way of making money in it's player driven market. I made an excel table that detailed $/hour, average price, average units sold.. all this data is available through eve api as the devs know only nerds play this game. But this small learning helped me land my first real job and several years later I am making reports just like the ones I made for eve.

* Another one is dark souls. I played dark souls 3 in 2015 up to a certain boss (optional boss, one of the last ones before the final one) I rage quit though... And installed cheat engine to cheese my way through the game ( not my proudest moment). I remembered it for many years and in 2020 I decided I'd not just play, DS3 but challenge myself to play the entire soulsborn series. I have just 1.5 left (demon souls remake and Bloodborne) and it's one of the silliest accomplishments I hold very dear to my heart. Afterwards when challenges arose in life, I remembered all the intense emotions I went through with sinh the slumbering dragon or with midir and used the same mindset from then to keep chugging along. 

Maybe I'm too impressionable by games or maybe I'm taking it too seriously but it's a great hobby and I don't see why people can't get takeaways from it to positively impact their lives while also having fun.

Looking forward to hearing some stories from others.I would love to have your opinions and discuss an issue regarding challenges in games (mostly action rpg, skill based action games..) and how success is rewarded by elements that makes you stronger and thus make the game easier.

Let say in a constrained level, you will face a linear set of challenges that leads you to the end of the level. You face enemies,  gaps, jumps, puzzles etc.

Often there also are secondary/optional challenges (or quests) that can be more difficult and ask for better play from the player. And they often reward you with items (weapons, spells...) that frankly make you stronger.

That's what I don't understand. 

If you are a good player , a skilled player, you get the get the super sword which makes the game even easier....if you are already struggling and barely pass the main challenges, you can't even dream to kill the optional  "red demonic dragon " and thus will never obtain the super sword.

How isn't this upside down ?

I know some.games have mechanics that subverts that (MGS V proposes an easy mode , chicken head, if you lose too much). But the standard way seems to be that good players are rewarded items that bad players need....

I am not talking about easy mode / hard mode , because these are choices from the player side, I am talking about the design of building walls around game items that bad players need , but walls unbreakable by said bad players.

Can we imagine a game design that think a different way ?

I understand that a constraint is that good players NEED to be rewarded,  but can we reward them with something else than stuff that make the game easier ?

Would skilled player be happy enough with content ( cutscene, area to explore, lore...)?

Would they accept it if the strongest weapons were given to the bad players ? 


Thanks for the discussion,If this continues for the next two years or more, PC GPU power will fall behind the consoles for majority of the users unable or unwilling to pay these eye watering prices which is marked up 3 times or more. Even Nvidia realized this and started to set the msrp of their new GPUs much higher for just some minor tweaks and a little VRAM bump. PC Gaming entry cost was always higher than consoles, but I feel the situation is so dire in all directions from higher msrp to scalping and mining, that it will severely cripple the pc gaming market. Many won't be able to purchase the new GPUs required to run modern games, while others will simply stick to their older GPUs which may not have the relevant core features required to run the game in base specs.Summary:

Is Mario a symbol of Nintendo or gaming? Is he easily recognizable or actually important to people? Is he important because of what he is now or what he was to them 30 years ago?

Full Text:

The mascot of Nintendo is an Icon that almost everyone recognizes - Mario. I've heard people non-ironically call Master Chief 'Halo' before. I've heard people call Kratos the 'Playstation guy' before. But I don't think I've ever heard anyone call Mario 'that red and blue guy' or anything. He seems synonymous with gaming in a way that nothing else is.

Even amongst Nintendo's most die-hard critics who focus on the companies controversies and failings as a gaming company many tend to have a soft spot for Mario. People who think Nintendo was for kids, or for casuals, or a simple supplement to a gaming PC all tend to still recognize and appreciate Mario to a certain extent that is not hampered by their opinions, ranging from neutral to negative, on Nintendo.

When I see a Halo bumper sticker or hat I assume that the person wearing it is a fan of Halo. When I see someone wearing a Horizon Zero Dawn shirt I assume they like that game. When I see a Mario bumper sticker or shirt or hoodie or anything else - I never assume that the person has an actual strong opinion on Mario.

Mario is the catch all gaming icon. Lego sets come in a wide variety of flavors but their video game sets consist of Minecraft and Mario. If I walk into any brick and mortar store I can find Mario merchandise. Clothes, toys, stuffies, video games, and more. Sometimes you can find merch for other games but a lot of time that stuff is only available at relevant times - new Halo game means new toys on store shelves for a few months. Mario toys seem to just release constantly.

What I don't understand, however, is how he seems to be a figure that is important to many in a symbolic sense while only a small percentage of those really seems to care about him as a character or franchise. He shows up in tons of games - racing, sports, turn based strategy, platformers, RPGs, and more. He's family friendly so anyone can enjoy any of his games. Everyone knows this character but then, unless you're a die hard fan of Mario or interested in one of his specific games, you just ignore him most of the time. If a racing game came out starring Kratos you bet your ass it would catch my attention - but when Mario shows up in a new racing game it barely even registers for me. There's going to be a movie and everyone has sort of agreed that it's going to be terrible based on the casting decisions, but then they all moved on. Nobody moves on from anything in movies or video games and here we have arguably the biggest character in gaming announced in the most bizarre fever dream of a way possible and everyone just sort of shrugged their shoulders and moved on after a week of giggling about it.

Could Mario ever fall as an Icon? Is he suspended by nostalgia alone and simply destined to fade over time? Are games oversaturated by his presence or does his status of a sort of roving mascot for Nintendo make his presence more natural? Are any other characters / games poised to take a place alongside him? Sometimes I play a game from the mid late 90's. A 2D game with amazing graphics. You know? Where there are digitized humans fighting, ray casting, lots of special effects, prerendered sprites, fluid realistic animation? This all looks so very good to me and still does today. But it makes me think, is all this realism too much stimuli? Did this kill people's interest in 2D games or 3D was less bound?

Your typical game in 1992 was usually hand painted sprites and we liked it.  Your average 2002 game was a bunch of blocky awkward people that could emote and we liked it.  Your average 1996 game had these empty environments with stuff that vaguely looked like things. These games in their time had their limitations.  These games though despite their limitation they made us imagine things such as a painted on textured bolt that didn't exist or limited locals that caused loading scenes.

 I feel like it's happening again. Games look so perfect now we don't need to improve much anymore. Our imagination is the limit. We can afford HD textures, Billions of polygons, and vast draw distances as far as the eye can see. I don't mean this in the Xbox 360 era sort of way I mean 8th gen. 

With this regard for perfection game developers have been trying so hard to pour detail in every little thing yet care so little about everything else in the gameplay. Now it costs too much to make a game. Now every 3D AAA game must fit into this mold. Giant open worlds with nothing to do but squash bugs and pick daffodils. This in turn makes journalists see past that pretty venire. 

A games immersion is far more than just looking good. It's about how the game is designed. Not just believing. 

What are your thoughts?If you haven't seen [this video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C3q5nSqGXr4) by Core A Gaming on the concept of "honers vs. innovators", consider watching it.  

Something I noted is that it's a discussion about how we interact with what developers give us, not necessarily about how games are designed, even if some games appeal more to one style of play than another.  

The advantage of the "honer vs. innovator" concept is that it doesn't invite anyone to see their style of play as superior, which is something gamers seem to struggle with.  

What about games themselves? One of the most common metrics people use is "difficulty", often thought of as a sliding scale. But the concept of difficulty doesn't even apply to games with no win condition, and it's a dubious idea in multiplayer games where difficulty is set by the opponent as much as the game itself.  

To mirror the concept of honers and innovators, I'd much rather see games described as curated or complex.  **I want to see people criticize and refine this idea.** Perhaps it would be better to describe *systems* as curated or complex.  I recognize that it isn't perfect. But I think it's significantly more neutral language than just talking about difficulty "hardcore vs. casual".  

A curated game has been carefully prepared and packaged by it's developers. The rules and game states are well-known and are being presented to the player in a digestible way. Playing it is a bit like coming home to comfort food. You know what you're getting and you know you enjoy it. While these games are naturally attractive to honers ([The World's Hardest Game](https://youtu.be/bhqkxwJWR0w) is a good example), there are curated games geared towards innovators- think Animal Crossing, Stardew Valley and The Sims. You might find it odd that I see The Sims as a curated game, and it exposes a flaw in the words I'm using, because in a sense, The Sims *is* complex. There's a lot of stuff that can potentially happen. But I consider it curated because it has been *packaged* in a digestible way. There's very little to learn when playing The Sims, it's mostly self-explanatory. Also, [according to it's developers](https://youtu.be/YjuOSgPdtS0?t=650), the game has been tuned to make sure that most players will experience a sim dying in a cooking fire. They pretty much know what's going to happen despite the breadth of interactions.

Complex games are the opposite. The developers have created many rules, too many for any player to get comfortable with (at least not for a long time), or the rules are exceptionally open-ended and prone to crafty innovators and emergent gameplay.  They tend to be difficult to understand by comparison but are not synonymous with difficulty. The Sims has an obvious complex counterpart, Dwarf Fortress. It is anything but carefully prepared and packaged. While it may eventually become a "comfort food" game, most players need to make on-the-fly decisions with only a vague idea of what their actions will cause. The developers themselves are sometimes surprised by how the rules they've created butt heads with each other. While complex games are the bread and butter of innovators, some honers love the challenge of honing a great number of skills and learning to "solve" a game.

Like gamers being honers and innovators, these aren't mutually exclusive ideas. The fighting games discussed in Core A Gaming's video strive towards being curated, while many players criticize modern fighters for the attempt, because they enjoy the process of discovering things on their own rather than having everything presented to them. That being said, fighters are inherently complex.  Minecraft is a curated experience which has [surprisingly complex systems](https://youtu.be/btYXcmnFhDo?t=1672) lurking in the background, beckoning those who want something even more freeform. Or maybe it isn't curated at all? Core A Gaming's video describes FromSoft's past decade as built for honers, and while that's true, and they are mostly curated, they have their [more](https://youtu.be/8vUmxVnfjOc) [complex](https://youtu.be/Xqg6FeRe0I4) [moments](https://youtu.be/EMN4cNFHLxY).  Traditional arena shooters are often discussed in the same breath as fighting games, but are highly curated experiences by comparison. Toribash is simple to present but might be the most complex game ever created by my definition.  


To what extent do you think complexity = difficulty? Are IRL sports the ultimate complex games for honers? Are curated games for innovators always what we'd  call "casual games"? Do you think this is useless pretentious bullshit?I'm not sure if anyone's noticed them but honestly, there have been like 5-10 of them published over a period of time just north of a year. They all have the same aesthetics and almost the same gameplay elements yet there are like 3-4 separate developers pumping them out with one particular developer as the seeming pioneer of the genre.

 Who and what you may ask? Here is the list of games I noticed in like the last month tops,

* Stay out of the house - Puppet combo
* Murder House - Puppet combo
* Christmas Massacre - Puppet combo
* Nun Massacre - Puppet combo
* Bloodwash - Black eyed priest (?)
* Fears to Fathom (anthology series of 5 separate planned episodes) - Rayll
* The convenience store - Chilla's Art
* Lights Camera Slaughter - Disrate Studios

They all share this really cohesive aestethetics and narrative. 

[fears to fathom](https://i.rada.vn/data/image/2022/01/05/Fears-to-Fathom-Norwood-Hitchhike-2.jpg)

[bloodwash](https://cdn.cloudflare.steamstatic.com/steam/apps/1598160/ss_8f95cfbfdba6f81c8588f98446b8b1a220458844.1920x1080.jpg?t=1631806838)

[murder house](https://cdn.cloudflare.steamstatic.com/steam/apps/1064460/ss_5e7cd7130d66a3e2e2750844687a7c117ba7d7a5.1920x1080.jpg?t=1603845135)

[lights camera slaughter](https://cdn.cloudflare.steamstatic.com/steam/apps/1364090/ss_fb67077efd8eabeb958b47ed23c67bd2ea04e813.600x338.jpg?t=1635364795)

They all seem to be set in the 80's, they all have these dirty-distorted visuals. They all make available some version of crt or vhs screen effects to reinforce the dirtiness. They're all short experiences with anecdotal plots featuring creepy encounters with creepy people, with an overarching similar narrative you'd find in r/nosleep or r/LetsNotMeet stories. 

I don't even know what exactly i'm ranting on cause i've really gotten to like these games. They are cool, entertaining and sometimes real fn scary and they're a refreshing new kind of subgenre but they also feel so out of nowhere or sudden, like there hasn't been any successful mainstream releases in the genre so far to warrant this kinda interest from developers so what is motivating these games? There are a lot of new games these group of developers are looking to publish in 2022 and so on so it must be profitable enough or they must be doing it just for the personal satisfaction. i've never seen them get talked about much other than some niche horror game communities or gaming channels either so what is going on here?Considering how the first game came out while I was in high school, I have a lot of nostalgia for the first few games in the series. And I tend to go back to them whenever a new entry gets released.

Well, security breach made me realize, the series hasn’t been scary for years, and has abandoned its darker concepts in order to be as kid friendly as possible. It reminds me of how in FNAF 2 the animatronics got redesigned to be as kid friendly as possible in lore.

Now onto my point. The concept behind the first game is dark as FUCK. Eternal torment is one is the scariest horror concepts IMO, and imagining children being forced to be in animatronics for years is both sad and horrifying. This concept combined with some really good chuck-e-cheese uncanny valley and you’ve got a great horror recipe.

Now with security breach we have sentient robots with no haunting? Ok. Great. The aesthetics aren’t even scary, it’s just bright colors and awful “scares”. How the hell do you fuck up a jump scare so badly? Did they purposefully make it tame for the kids? And I’m not even going to touch on the lore now, because after the first 3 games that fell off a cliff as well.

I get it, they want to sell toys and plushies to kids now, but it makes me lament what the series used to be and could have been.

There are fan works which are showing what can be done with the existential horror the original story had. The fnaf vhs tapes did this really well, and also has a good, concise narrative and a good ending. There’s also FNAF+, which is a fan remake of the first game that looks a lot darker and looks like it’ll also touch on the concepts the franchise abandoned long ago.

I guess security breach woke me up to what the franchise is now, family friendly children’s horror that even Goosebumps is darker and scarier than

There, that’s the end of this grown ass man ranting about a stupid children’s franchiseHave you guys ever played a game like destiny or even story based games and you run into a bug, glitch, or even a feature that makes the game fun or easier. Even could make the whole game playable vs without?

Have you ever had a lot of people make posts and YouTube videos about it to the point where developers remove it? It's one of my biggest peeves.

It seems people like to post about it, which is fine, but then it gets to the point where so many people are talking about it that the devs take notice and act swiftly to remove said feature which ruins it for everyone.

I've run into this in most games I've played. Sometimes devs remove things on their own but usually it's a response to the players.

What are your thoughts on this? I'm curious what you all think.

I personally don't mind much but I got into a discussion with my friend who was telling me it bothered him. Does it bother others out there? Let me know*from a european (at least) standpoint.

In America cities were created with modern planing, someone was responsible for the street layouts and all.

I would like to experience a more organic city builder where you don't control everything. In real life not every roads and housing spot were decided by the state. At the beginning you could for example only decide of the where the market and the church are. And try to influence the rest with public policies (lower taxes, bans and all)

I feel not having full control over your city would be an incredible experience, yet it never seems to be the gameplay choice and I really can't figure why.

Is that the US influence over the industry? The genre codes? Would it be to hard to emulate convincly for a computer? Does it already exists and I've missed it? Should I create my own video games studio.It kind of seems like a loaded question, I know, so let me explain. 

I was thinking of my time with Super Mario Sunshine. Played it a bit as a kid before finally getting a hold of a copy a couple of years ago and beating, as well as recently replaying some of it on Switch. Sunshine was initially regarded as this black sheep of the series, especially during its first couple of years out. By the time Galaxy came out, many were calling that game the TRUE sequel to Mario 64 whereas Sunshine was viewed as some sort of gimmicky experiment that didn't pan out. 

Sometime around when Super Mario 3D World came out, I noticed a bit of a shift toward Sunshine's general perception. Many wanted a return to that style of having a bright hub world with a consistent vibe. I myself LOVE the ideas of Sunshine simply because I think there's something really appealing of having a 3D Mario game with such a focused theme to it and even a bit of a cinematic edge (even though the voice acting is hilariously bad). 

Compare this with Super Mario 3D World which doesn't really have a consistent theme and can seem visually bland at a cursory glance, you can see people were hungry for some of the flair that Sunshine introduced. Especially too because Mario Galaxy 2 almost seemed like a rebuttal to Galaxy 1's grandiose approach- the story elements were stripped to their simplest forms, the hub worlds are now back to the rigid overhead maps of 2D Mario games, etc. 

I'm not saying Sunshine is undeserving of its praises but there was a sense that perhaps people moreso liked the ideas Sunshine brought to the table rather than the game itself. Which if you play, you'll see isn't necessarily bad but there are plenty of really forgettable and average parts to the game that just don't match the quality we've seen in other Mario games.Hey,

i just saw the IGN top 100 games of all times list and as i saw Breath of the wild on number 1 i was again getting sad. Because everyone has such a great time playing this game and i just can't have fun with it.

Obviously everyone has a different taste and that is fine but i am actually a mainstream kinda guy. I mostly agree with the people on what is good and what is not. So i wonder why i just dislike it so much (i'm gonna try to explain what bothers me)

I really dont want to make the game bad for anyone who likes it, i just want to talk about it and maybe i am not seeing something or i dont have the right mindset for it and someone can explain to me how to enjoy it. If you don't want to hear bad things about the game you love, than you should not read further. 

For reference: i played like 30-40 hours i finished all divine beasts but stopped before going to hyrule castle (but saw some gameplay of it)

My critisisms (I guess small !spoilers!):

**The open world**

That is what confuses me the most. Everyone is gushing about how great it is and how you just want to explore and that you find so many interesting things. I often hear people say "you just see something in the distance and immediatly want to go there and find out what you will find." and i just couldn't agree less. In the first like 5-10 hours it was like that. But after i found out that the only things waiting for me in that "interesting spot in the distance" was another shrine or another korok seed that feeling just vanished completly for me. It was the opposite, i was like "ok that looks interesting but i just know it will be another korok seed or a shrine which i will find more of anyway when i just keep walking to the next divine beast". 

You will not find great weapons to use, or new gadgets or something. You also don't find any great NPCs or small storys or mini quests. Because there are none (maybe some exceptions). 

It was just not worth going to discover stuff. Yes there are some amazing things. The first time you find an Ogre or the first time you saw one of the dragons is amazing. But then you find another one and another one and it was just loosing my interest. The lack of map makers and the "find your own goal" is great and in some areas there is cool environmental story telling (rarely). Mostly it is emptyness, big open fields with nothing in it. It is really not a bad world. Waaay better than most standard ubisoft worlds but i dont think it is "the best open world ever in video games" like i heard a lot. 

**The Combat** 

One of the most heard critisms i read was something like "i dont like the weapons breaking that fast". And i actually do not agree with this. I think it is, in theory, an interesting concept, which forces you to change weapons a lot and not use any weapon for long. BUT it has a huge impact on the exploration part of the world i mentioned before. 

Because your weapons break so fast, you can't find really great weapons. Or if you do, it is just not so impactful because you know, it will break anyway in a few minutes. Also the weapons really did not feel so different. Sword or Club or even Spear, doesn't really matter. 

Combat is mostly button mashing. You can get creative with your abilitys and environment though, which is great and saved the combat mostly for me. 

**The writing**

Not much to say here, the story is not the focus of the game and that is fine. But there is literally not a single NPC that is interesting or that i will remember. 

**The progression**

There practically is no progression. You will get Weapons with a stronger damage number, get more hearts and the enemys change the color. Thats it. You get (except for the 4 divine beasts) no abilitys at all, no new gadgets, nothing. 

 **The freedom/The climbing**

I know, that is kind of a weird critisism. I think, that you can climb anything, is a bad thing. You see something in the distance, you place your marker. And now? Now you just go there. You dont have to plan a route, dont have to think about how you get there. With enough food, you can just go in a straight line. Climbing over everything. One reason i liked WoW Classic more than retail was, because if you want to go from A to B, you have to plan, how to go there. Because you have to walk around stronger enemys or just because the terrain is forcing you to plan ahead.   
 Another example, on the great plateau, where you do not have the glider yet. There was a moment, where you had to cut a tree to use as a bridge to get to the other side of a chasm. Wasn’t that amazing? You have to use the systems the game gives you to solve a problem. Did you ever use that again in the rest of the game? Probably not because you could just glide over it and climb the rest. 

If the game restricts you in some ways, it forces you to use specific systems or play smart or plan ahead. On the way to the zoras, there is a path which you have to follow (not really but ist the easiest way). And its just fun, because the game places enemys in an interesting way you have interesting encounters and it streamlines the game.

With too much freedom, the game looses creativity needed. 

**Food**

You can pause the game and eat something at any time. Unlimited climbing, unlimited health (if you dont die in one hit). 

I think they tried to counter it, with the just most annoying and slowest cooking ever. It takes hours to cook stuff, it is just not implemented really good.

**Music**

The Game won „Best Sound design“. I agree that it fits perfectly and creates a great atomsphere. But a big part of the zelda games where the music for me. A few songs are there but i think not enough. But i understand, that this cant be really critisism, because it is just so subjective. Its perfectly done the thing it wanted to do.

**The Shrines/Riddles**

I like the shrines. But there are too many, to similar ones. And some of them are just over in a minute or something. You have seen (nearly) every riddle in about 10h playtime. Same with the korok seeds. Its fun at the beginning, but it repeats itself really really fast. Some exceptions.   
 I count the divine beasts here aswell. They’re okay. But far from older Zelda dungeons. 

I understand that some of these points are subjective and some of these points just don’t matter for many of the players. And with all these critisisms, i still don’t think it is a „bad game“. It has an amazing atmosphere, I just think it is far from perfect and one of the weakest entrys in the Zelda franchise. If i had to rate it i would give it something like 6/10. 

Just to finish this up. I know that there are some really amazing parts of this game. When you find the master sword in the forest, when you first spot one of the dragons. Or some special events (like the legendary mount (which you cant capture forever)) or other great moments. But there a few. The gameplay just isn’t good enough to entertain me long enough and these amazing moments just dont make up for it. 

I just love to think and chat about games and i really really want to understand how it is, for so many, the best game ever. I just needed to tell that to someone. I would love to hear opinions about this.

If you think, i am wrong. Try to get me on your side!! Maybe i focus on the wrong things? But maybe it is just not for me. Would love some discussion, thank you for reading.Given the current consumer reception I see of various games along with a lot of what I see when people describe pros/cons of games, I was curious to dive a bit deeper and see how others feel on this topic.  I feel like a lot of merit is given to games that mix these two aspects well, however, I think I have a different taste when it comes to that.

I would rather have a game focus intensely on one or the other.  I don't prefer one over the other generally speaking, but I will say that I'll spend much more time on a game with a solid/enjoyable gameplay loop.  

If the developer attempts to mix the two, even if they do so very well, I find myself focusing hard on one or the other, and experiencing FOMO for the other aspect.  

Here are some examples of how I classify a few of the games I've played.

**Gameplay dominates:**

Minecraft

WoW

Path of Exile

Teamfight Tactics

All pvp/MOBA/arena games



**Story Dominates:**

The Last of Us

Telltale games

Resident Evil games

Life is Strange

FFXIV 

**Hybrid:**

The Witcher 3

God of War

Assassin's Creed games

Skyrim


I've enjoyed all of these games to some degree, but on the hybrid category, I always find myself retiring them.  I've not completed any of the games on that list.  I've probably spent less than 20 hours in each of them as well.  From the other two categories, I've either completed them or spent hundreds of hours.  For clarity, I always feel like the gameplay gets in the way of the story (or vice versa) when both aspects are employed.  If I like the story, I want to play it almost like a TV show, and get the content as soon as possible.  If I like the gameplay, I want to progress without having to worry about RP/Dialogue/Gating that gets in the way of just playing the game.  

How do you feel about this, and where do you find a good balance?With the reports indicating that Dying Light 2 will apparently take upwards of 500 hours to fully complete in it’s entirety, it made me think about how the average length of games has drastically increased over time and how it is impacting the gaming industry.

For starters, Dying Light 2 comes off as a single player experience that apparently has a 70-80 hour campaign with side missions. That is a very large game based on the context of the genre and game it is. It begs the question to how is this game built to make it that long of an experience. So many games out there struggle nowadays in keeping the gamer engaged throughout the experience, and I often times gravitate to smaller, but more impactful games rather than large games.

The quality over quantity argument is something that is in every media, but is heavily discussed in gaming nowadays, and rightfully so. There have been a vast number of games that I’ve played in the past few years that have been super long experiences, but are entirely forgettable. This makes me wish sometimes that I didn’t make the time/money investment in said game. 

For a comparison, I played Assassin’s Creed Valhalla when it came out. I enjoyed the game, but it was an absolute chore to finish. I’m a completionist, so by the time the credits rolled I logged 130 hours played. This is for a single player campaign in a game that belongs to one of my favorite franchises. Since then, I haven’t even removed the disc from it’s case. Compare that to both Portal and Portal 2. The campaign for both takes me roughly 10-12 hours combined, and I have logged a combined 150 hours between the two of them. Those two games are vastly shorter by comparison and are infinitely more engaging. I will willingly play both of them back to back in a single weekend without hesitation. AC Valhalla took me 3 months to beat, which should tell you how engaged it made me. I couldn’t even remember the beginning or middle of the story by the time I finished.

There are many other games that have shorter, much more impactful ways to engage with the gamer without needing to make the map the biggest ever filled with meaningless content. I understand devs want to push the boundaries of current technology and try to create the biggest game possible, but why push for building a game that gives the user ONE insanely long and meaningless experience versus giving the user a short and meaningful experience that has strong replay ability?

There are some large games that are meaningful, like RDR2, Witcher 3, and BOTW. But it just seems the art of quality over quantity is losing traction, and we are now just getting large games that take forever to complete, aren’t engaging, and are primarily focused on looking good and having a big map. 

It isn’t a coincidence that majority of the critically acclaimed games in recent years are games that can be beaten entirely within 20 hours. Games are meant to be fun, and lately I have seen so many AAA games lose sight on what’s important, and rather go for quantity over quality. Let me know your thoughts. Happy gaming!Have you ever encounter this situation, where you are very enthusiastic about the game that you've experienced, and when you tried to express your feeling and share it with someone you knew, but instead you receive a response often like "Its just a game, why are you so serious"?

But you don't actually felt you were serious, instead you are just excited about it, same as if you are excited about any other hobby.

Come to think of it this rarely happens to other hobby.

You rarely hear:

Its just Piano, why so serious?

Its just Mountain Climbing, why so serious?

Its just Skateboarding, why so serious?

Its just Chess, why so serious?

The list goes on.

Why do you think this type of stigma attached to gaming still exist even in 2022?

\----------------------------

Edit: some of you made a good point, that maybe game doesn't require much effort than other hobby.

So I started a thought experiment, lets say if amount of effort is THE determined factor here. There could be two scenario, 1. If a certain type of playstyle takes more effort than other hobby. 2. If any other hobby that also takes less effort. How would people react to.

Imaging Scenario #1, you reached Diamond or even higher rank in League of Legend, which is already more effort(but you are still not a pro, its still a hobby) put in than any entry level of other hobby, but more often than not, people would even be more inclined toward "Why do you even bother about rank? Its just a game" kind of attitude

Imaging Scenario #2, you start learning Skateboarding, only at beginners level which is way less effort than the amount of effort put in than scenario #1, I believe more often than not, people would more incline toward encourage you keep going instead of telling you you are too serious about it.

I think the reason these discrepancy happens, are likely due to most people does not understand the substance of video game, **thus by definition its a sort of stigma**. But these are just thought experiment, there is no proof or study behind it, just take it as a grain of salt.

&#x200B;Promise I did a search to make sure this wasn't a retired topic or overly discussed first :).

The last couple years have had some frustrating issues for sure, but there've been bright spots too. Game Pass is crushing it and seems to be leading the charge towards streaming games more successfully than something like Stadia did. (Or Onlive. Remember that one? Lol.)

There are plenty of AAA games that came out and really missed their mark, disappointing audiences overall. Far Cry 6 to a lesser extent and the new Battlefield more so. But we also got some fun surprises, like the Guardians of the Galaxy game. Its not the most revolutionary thing and definitely plays it safe in some ways... but it was also a hell of a lot of fun, with solid gameplay and some gorgeous level design, good storytelling.

I thought we could work together and try to build a more complete picture of where things stand going into 2022, and what we hope to see in the not-too-distant future.To preface this I do enjoy difficult games. Dark Souls is one of my favorite series. I have beaten 1,2,3 demon souls and bloodborne so I am no stranger to difficulty. The difference with Returnal is not even the difficulty. It is simply that the punishment of loss is way too high.

Many people think the punishment of dying in Dark Souls is too high. You lose all your souls and every enemy in the area respawns. You have to kill every enemy and the boss in one shot or you have to start all over.

Returnal you have to complete the entire first half of the game without dying. Then you get one checkpoint. Then you have to play through the entire second half of the game without dying. Not only do you lose all your "souls" (In this case it is some mineral I forget the name) but you also lose all your equipment and any exploration progress (Each level procedurally regenerates).

In dark souls I feel like I am inching forward with each run. In returnal I feel like I can play a 2 hour session, die, and have absolutely nothing to show for it.

Beating the first half of the game takes an average of 5 hours and it has to be done in one sitting. You cannot shutoff your ps5, you cannot put it into sleep mode, you can't even suspend the game to play another. People are actually fucking with the settings of their console to suspend all other games and updates just so they don't lose their progress in this entirely mediocre bullethell game.

I am an adult with a full time job. I simply do not have the time that the developers want me to dedicate to this game. It actually made me existential with how large of a colossal waste of time it is. 

I feel like this game might appeal to the "Hardcore Gamer" crowd who have more time on their hands. If you are an average gamer like me and you are looking for a game that does a similar concept much better, I would recommend playing Death Loop. 

The reason why I am returning Returnal is because I know I will never finish it.Dark Souls 2 is one of my favorite games of all time and one of my favorite souls - likes. I personally enjoy it more than the first one. But even i can admit that there are a fair few number of things in DS2 that are very much worth criticizing. The downgraded lighting, the awful hitboxes, the way you can just spam lifegems to regain your health, there's a fair amount of things that i think DS2 deserves to get criticized for.

However, one part of the game that i think is needlessly and unfairly brought up is that most of Dark Souls 2's bosses are "Just guys in armor" This is by far one of the most popular criticisms towards DS2 and i personally do not think it's warranted, for two reasons:

&#x200B;

1: It's just not true

This one's fairly simple really, the statement itself is not correct. Dark Souls 2 out of the entire trilogy has the biggest number of bosses and, naturally, with a game with so many bosses some of them are gonna be better than the others. However Dark Souls 2's bosses are not "Just guys in armor". The game, along with the DLC has 41 bosses out of which only 17 have any armor or look knight like whatsoever (And 17 is really stretching it since i'm counting the Flexile Sentry and the two instances of the Smelter Demon). In comparison, there are 26 non armored bosses that don't look like knights at all

You see this criticism is generally brought up about Dark Souls 2 as a way to say that the makers just weren't very creative with the boss designs which, in my opinion, couldn't be further from the truth

The Last Giant, The Executioner's chariot, The Lost Sinner, The Skeleton Lords, The Covetous Demon, The Darklurker, Nashandra, Elana The Squalid Queen and (one of my personal favorite designs in the entire series) The Demon Of Song all have distinctive and memorable visual designs that stick with you one way or another. And speaking of which...

&#x200B;

2. Armor can be unique

This is the main point that i wanted to get to. Just because a lot of the bosses are clad in armor and have knight - like appearance doesn't mean that they're not cool or unique looking. Armor can be distinctive, armor can be unique, armor can be interesting and armor can tell a story in and of itself and by God did these knights have some stories to them.

Like let's be honest for a moment, are most of you seriously going to tell me that the [Looking Glass Knight](http://i.imgur.com/A43v9aOh.jpg) , [The Burnt Ivory King](http://i.imgur.com/yA99qyf.png) and [The Fume Knight](https://i.ytimg.com/vi/GciI0Qjv0EU/maxresdefault.jpg) all look the same, let alone generic? Each of their armor looks distinctive and their design alone tells you their story and isn't that what Dark Souls is all about, environmental storytelling?Recently I played through Prey(2017) and bounced off it pretty hard. I think the game is great overall. Fantastic atmosphere, music, and premise. This combined with the history Arkane has with power design, level design, and stories with well fleshed out characters and lore meant I thought this was gonna be a masterpiece but I ended up mixed on it. And the big problem I have is that there's no sword (Or I should have used MKB).

To be more clear I hated all the constant stopping to use the quick wheel. In a game with easily 2 dozen options having to navigate a quick wheel every 1-5 seconds in combat is so tiresome, especially on nightmare with traumas. Obviously Dishonored had this "problem" but it was handled so much better, which brings me to the sword.

In Dishonored your loadout always has the sword ready to use. Meaning if you switch to a power and someone catches you unaware you can immediately parry or start blocking with NEEDING to menu first. Keeping the flow and allowing you to stay in the moment. Meanwhile in Prey if I'm carrying the wrench to fight mimics and I get caught by a stronger enemy type it's a good practice to immediately pause and menu to a gun or throwable. Which breaks the flow. Even worse is on nightmare/ survivor where you pause to heal damage constantly and then need to treat traumas as well. I understand that this could be to increase the survival horror feeling but even Leon in RE4 could pull an knife at any time.

Dishonored also has a stronger power priority because blink is essential at most times meaning a skilled player can go through a whole zone with blink alone preventing this pausing problem entirely. Where in Prey you'll constantly want to switch to wrench to save ammo on mimics but then need stronger firepower as soon as any greater Typhon appears.

Dishonored also benefits from the stealth focus. I know many players(myself included) think the game is funnest when you get violent but the focus on stealth means you can get into a rhythm of sword and blink until you want to do a cool stunt with powers or throwables. And then the menuing blends into the prep phase of your plan as you excecute the necessary switches with quickslots or memorizing their location. This is technically possible in Prey but it also only has 3 slots compared to 4 in the Dishonored. Plus the power priority means switching powers in Prey is almost mandatory with Typhon abilities compared to Dishonored so 3 slots is WAY too few to be properly useful.

Stealth is also technically a playstyle in Prey but because the game is about exploring and enemies respawn, you are often  walking into danger randomly so stealth seems less useful unless you want to crouch walk through every area and clear it out before doing objectives every time.

Even basic navigation becomes cumbersome as I have to pause to switch to a recycler charge and back to clear debris or to the GLOO canon to web a generator. Compared to Dishonored where at least planks, bloodfly nests, rats can be cleared with the sword. 

Now I know this seems like I just want Dishonored 3 and while I wouldn't oppose that, I think a simple solution is just having a hand system like Skyrim or Bioshock. Each hand pertains to a gun, throwable, or Typhon ability. This way you could choose to have melee or a gun ready with a Typhon ability or throwable. It would even rightfully nerf the shotgun as it needs 2 hands so you lose versatility.

Finally, I want to say I don't hate the game at all, nor do I think it should just be like dishonored outright. I'm sure the developers consciously changed these things for a more horror adjacent experience. However, I maintain the constant pausing even for simple combat or navigation events breaks the flow in an immersive sim with such great atmosphere.

I would love to see a mod or revision to maybe free up the bumper buttons to allow more quickslots or just a better way to manage the options you have without a explicit pause in the middle of the action so frequently. I think in the quieter sections the quick wheel is perfect. But I challenge you to play a Typhon only run on controller and not turn the game into a slideshow as you use one offensive ability or gun and need to switch to your other 3-6 guns and offensive abilities.

Also this could be solved entirely by MKB considering it has way more quickslots but it still sucks my first experience was so marred by this issue. Plus no button remapping is just insult to injury.**Two points I want to focus on:**


* "Leveling Phase" => "Endgame Phase"
* Making the Carrot be on a longer stick over time.



**"Leveling Phase" => "Endgame Phase"**

Why are MMOs still doing this thing where there is a level cap that people have to spend 100+ hours grinding towards before they are introduced to the system and the rest of the world? New World had a massive opportunity to be a player-driven world. It could allow low level players participate in Wars among high level players, but instead they decided to do the typical leveling to 60 and alienating players that aren't willing to do repetitive shit for hours upon hours before they are allowed to participate in the rest of the world. Aside from having access to bigger numbers (another contrived system of separation for no reason), a level 20 player doesn't have less knowledge about combat than a level 60 player. Logically there is nothing preventing them from being able to participate in Warfare, but instead the developers have chosen to arbitrarily make the level 60 player just be stronger, making a level 20 player is at a disadvantage and therefore should never participate in PvP on a mature server.

Despite the 100s of bugs currently in New World, I would imagine the active population right now would be 3x as big as it is now if people didn't get burned out by leveling at level 20 - 30 and instead were allowed to play the game at an early level. Right now most modern MMO's treat the leveling phase as an extremely LONG tutorial section where you as a player aren't even introduced to the final systems. All in all this flow causes many modern MMOs feel like completely two different games before Max Level and AFTER Max Level. World of Warcraft is still a really fun game to run around and explore the world UNTIL you hit "Endgame". Once the leveling phase (well leveling BEFORE you hit the newest expansion) is over, you are pushed on-rails to participate in systems that didn't exist prior to you entering the "Endgame" phase. The game becomes less fun, less free.

**The Endless Erection of the Stick the Carrot is On**

Aside from Guild Wars 2, this is a common trope in MMOs. Instead of introducing new content on its own, most developers chose to make the "Leveling Phase" of the game longer. Instead of having faith that their content is interesting on its own, they keep adding random power level contrivances which in-turn also invalidate previous content in a lot of these games since the previous content usually isn't updated to possibly increase to the same power level. As an anecdotal experience, World of Warcraft started to die for me as soon as the first expansion came out. Part of what made the 240 hours of grinding to level 60 bearable for me was the combination of it being the first time I immersed myself in a 3D massive world, while also feeling like we were reaching something tangible. Instead, WoW popularized the "every expansion invalidates previous achievements and increases the level cap". On one hand it introduces a steady inflation that makes it so that long-time players don't just amass all the material wealth in the game, but at the same time it simply makes you feel like any grind you do is temporary and therefore less meaningful. 

Again, Guild Wars 2 is the only game I keep coming back to because my gear from 8 years ago is still as valid as it was 8 years ago. The only thing stopping me from participating in certain end-game content is my own skill and knowledge. That's it.


**The Audience as a Problem**

Whenever these topics are questioned, someone comes in and screams "If you don't like grinding, don't play an mmo**RPG**" as if the definition of "role-playing-game" implies that there is a never ending grind, and increasing numbers. It feels like the audience creates this shitty attitude that keeps games feeling stale and old because they like their own sunk-cost-fallacy reinforced without being aware of it. It's fine that there are some games like this, but we really need a serious pivot in the genre.
When someone talks about feeling "burnt out" in a game or "guilty for not finishing it", the most common advice thrown around is *"games are supposed to be interesting or entertaining, so stop playing as soon as you are not enjoying it"*. 

But if you are like me, you'll often find yourself in an anxious loop:
*"Am I still enjoying this?"
"Am I enjoying it less than before?"
"Is there something better I could be doing with my time"
"What should that be?"
"Am I over-questioning it?" etc.*

Which, of course, leads to not enjoying anything and extends beyond games and to all sorts of activities and projects. 

I’m sure just based on that you can already diagnose me at some level, but to keep this about games, I assume you are familiar with the opposite experience: sometimes, not questioning and just pushing through something gets you in a relaxed state and helps you to know, appreciate, and enjoy the whole thing without regrets.

Last year, embracing achievements helped me immensely with just that: staying in a flow state, avoiding overthinking, and overall having a better time with the hobby.

In her book "Refuse to choose", Barbara Sher writes: 
> “You might find the perfect combination of all your interests and have a very enjoyable career. Or you might discover that what you really love is learning itself.”

She is talking about the types of people that she calls "Scanners", those who thrive by constantly hopping around interests, projects, jobs, and activities until they have satiated their learning, and then move on to the next. In games, this translates to me dipping into most genres, all sorts of experiences, and enjoying the vast variety of the medium enough to make a career out of it.

With achievements, I get an automatic log of this exploration and dilettantism, the same type of satisfaction I'd get from a travel journal, a trophy cupboard, and a game passport. A feeling that pushing through and challenging myself is worth it and contributes to something bigger, even if it is still an illusion.

Of course, at the very core of achievement systems, there is still the very simple, endorphin-inducing DING, the child-like gold star, the skinner box, and the endorphin rush of putting a tick on a checkbox. But the rest of this post describes what I love about them: the systems that build upon that base pleasure.

**Features**

**Automatic tracking.**
This is not only convenient, but also sometimes almost necessary in the case of achievements that depend on timers or multiple conditions. 
Examples:
"Finish the level without touching the walls"
"Defeat the boss without letting go of the B button"

**Social aggregation**
I am not big into leaderboards, but seeing an achievement's rarity, reading guides, and sharing milestones all add to the systems' feeling of camaraderie and community.
This social integration also helps me find people with similar tastes and discover new niche games. Knowing the rarity of an achievement, I can also tell whether it is something I can reasonably attempt.

**Graphical assets**
Achievements always come with badges, icons, and other art that simply looks pretty to collect.

**Management**
The ability to sort achievements by completion date, rarity, platform, or rating games based on percentage of completion, difficulty, etc., all adds fun dimensions to reviewing the log, like a dynamic photo album.

**RetroAchievements**

I've been playing games for 25 years, and since the Xbox 360, I’ve thought of achievements as frivolous side diversions. 

In April 2021, it all changed instantly. 

On a shopping whim, I got myself an RG351V (a neat little pocket device made for emulation). I thought it'd be fun to fulfill a childhood fantasy and carry hundreds of games from the 80s and 90s in a very playable form factor. However, I was sure I had no interest in replaying games that I already knew so well, like Super Mario World. 

Then, I found Retroachievements. True to its name, it's a website that hooks on to emulators and adds achievement support to most consoles until the PSP (with Dreamcast coming soon). A few months later, I found myself attempting no-death runs, finding new secret areas, or completing 5-2 without touching anything: [https://retroachievements.org/game/228](https://retroachievements.org/game/228). I felt like I was getting to know SMW on a whole new dimension and enjoying it the most since first playing it almost 20 years ago.

One of the best things about this site is that since the focus is completely on achievements, they are mostly well-designed and avoid crappy goals reliant on unreasonable grinding or luck; instead, the attention is on deeply learning a game's mechanics, approaching it in different ways, and finding challenges that make you feel an intimate connection with its details. On other platforms like Steam or Xbox, that quality is completely dependent on the developer's interest in achievements.

I've been enjoying this site and system so much since then that I’ve now learned how to dig for memory addresses and develop my own achievement sets for others to complete. On top of the core achievement systems, they also have competitions, themed events, and a monthly magazine.

**Trackers**

Enjoying Retroachievements got me to appreciate the Steam and Xbox systems again, a deal that was sealed when I found the multi-platform tracking websites, mainly:
[https://www.exophase.com/](https://www.exophase.com/)
[https://completionist.me/](https://completionist.me/)
[https://metagamerscore.com/](https://metagamerscore.com/)

As a Scanner, I feel both at home and at the most fantastical buffets on these sites. 
They represent a tapestry of colour, memories, and possibilities. Examples:
[https://i.imgur.com/caMSkco.png](https://i.imgur.com/caMSkco.png)
[https://i.imgur.com/7kfsh0Z.png](https://i.imgur.com/7kfsh0Z.png)

There is a unique type of joy I find in seeing Forza Horizon next to Donkey Kong next to Frog Fractions next to Monument Valley next to Half Life: Alyx.

**Closing Remarks**

Like everything else in gaming and the digital era, achievements are another tool of interaction. They can be cheap and dull padding, or they can be creative, fun, and add to something bigger, both ludically and socially.

It's important to also note that one can engage with achievements in contrasting ways, from trying to 100% as many games as possible, to going for the hardest trophies, to getting as many easy ones as possible to climb the leaderboards, to just being like me and trying a bit of everything, keeping a dazzling and automatic log, and occasionally going for some hard challenges.

And maybe it's still all a basic, primitive endorphin and novelty addiction at the core, but it has led me to enjoy a variety of games like never before, and furthermore to use sites like GoodReads to track and log a reading collection, giving me more motivation to finish more books too.  

Note that I still play games that don’t have achievements (specially on Switch and itch.io), but this whole approach leads me to record my progress at least manually (namely on Exophase or a text file, but I’ll be looking at Backloggery in more detail in the future).

Because, behind all this, how can I appreciate a good work of art if I never take in bad ones? Achievements, even if they are a skinner box at their core, have become my antidote against the metacritic/rotten tomatoes culture of obsessing over ratings and “value for time”, which always ironically makes me not enjoy things as much.Hear me out. Whether you are a MMO game or not. Whether you like them or not. Guild Wars 2 is extremely different from the majority of MMOs out there. And by different I mean in a *really good way.* So when I recommend you try this game, it's to all of you gamers out there - not just MMO gamers.

GW2 is not an MMO in the way you might have had experience with it. Rather, it's more of an open world adventure/exploration/RPG game in a living and dynamic world shared with a whole bunch of other real players.

Here's some backstory from me. I have been into MMOs for years, since I was younger. But I've come to really become disappointed with the genre, like so many other MMO gamers. It's just become so stagnant. generic. bland. There's been barely any noticeable progress and innovation in the genre. Almost every MMO that gets released is just the same low effort WoW clone or "insert other long standing MMO" clone. Half done, P2W projects, with no real love and thought put into the game as a whole.

I'm very disappointed with this genre...

Now, I recently tried Guild Wars 2 (after playing a bit a very long time ago) and I've really come to appreciate this gem in this stale genre. Despite an older MMO, it's innovation was far ahead of it's time. And honestly, I think **it still is the most innovative MMOs so far** (I guess that statement also tells you a lot about the stagnancy of this genre). It has fulfilled much of what I was looking for in this genre. And it honestly, MMO gamer or not - everyone should try it.

It really is **different in a good and REFRESHING way** than any other MMO. I've given it some thought and I think this is because it **does so many systems in a superb way**, and **each system almost perfectly compliments each other** to make this beautiful in-game immersive experience.

I really can't recommend this game enough if you have not tried it and given it a fair chance (no... watching gameplay videos don't count, and don't do it justice!)

**1**.**The game is FUN right from the start.** Ever heard the quote "It's the journey that matters and not the destination?". Well. *GW2 gives you both,* and I love this about the game. It really values the journey as well as the destination (thanks to all the systems in place. See points below). Most MMOs just seem to be about rushing to max level and then "having fun". Isn't a game supposed to be fun from the start? Before putting in dozens of hours? Well with GW2 the whole game experience is exactly that - fun. And isn't that why we play games in the first place?

**2.Great story and lore.** Nice fully voice acted story with multiple endings. Lots of well thought of and constructed lore details around the world. So much voice acting even outside of the main story. Even just regular NPCs have awesome and witty dialogue with each other and with you. I've had a good chuckle quite a few times. Most MMOs stories are...pretty bad. And there's barely any voice acting. And lore is often just an afterthought. Just slap in some generic story and lore.

**3.World literally feels alive.** No standard quests but rather optional tasks and optional events. All of a sudden enemies can be invading a town. Or there's a convoy that needs an escort. You can choose to help or not. Sometimes a world boss appears out of nowhere. And within minutes you'll see hundreds of players coming together to take it down. One event often triggers another event depending on the outcome of the previous one. There's so many different events and it really keeps you wondering what will happen next!

Also, you'll see lots of players in all level zones, even lower level ones (because of horizontal progression and level balancing). Compare this to the majority of MMOs, everyone is at endgame and all lower levels are like ghost towns. Then you got all the little details and the great scenery/landscapes and dialogue and lore which adds to it feeling even more alive (see point 2). The world map is all fog of war and details are only revealed as you explore them. Compare this to most MMOs, it feels like there is no love put into the world. Just generic paste and copy from another game.

**4. Adventuring/Exploring is encouraged and rewarded.** The whole world map is in a fog of war, and you only unlock the details as you explore it. This really just makes you just want to explore and see and find things. Add in the fact that there are vistas, points of interests, and other things that you unlock as you explore the map AND it gives you experience and adds to a completion bar (all completely optional by the way). The fact the world feels alive too makes you want to adventure, explore, and travel it too (see point 2 and 3)

**5**. **Co-op encouraged and rewarded.** Events bring people together. Everyone gets full share of exp and resources. No kill stealing, no resource stealing etc. Add in the fact of level balancing and a higher level will get *more* bonus exp from killing much lower stuff. You can easily play with friends right from the start, no matter the level or skill gap (see point 9). And everyone still gets benefits. Most MMOs do not do this. In fact, group play and CO-OP is almost discouraged because of systems in place.

**6**. **Great action combat and skill progression.** There's also tab target for the classic MMO combat lover. Combat feels good and responsive. And there is so much diversity in how you can choose to play. First 5 active skills are dependent on class and weapon (one class can use multiple different weapons). Other 5 are dependent on which skills you choose to level and use. Lots of specializations and traits as well, and on top of that - elite specializations. There are a lot of different ways to build the same class. A LOT of build diversity and options.

**7.** **Best transmog/cosmetic system and mount system in the genre and probably one of the best in gaming.** So many ways to customize your character. Great armor/costume designs. HUNDREDS of dye options available. You can dye not just any equipment, but even the little parts of it. You can do this right from the start of the game (with a limited dye palate of course). The mounts have some of the best design in gaming. They also level up and each have individual skills.

**8.** **Lot of content, for both Pvp and PvE players. All your choice what you want to do.** I'm still fairly new to the game and haven't experienced most of the content but from what I've researched there is a misconception that GW2 is lacking content. There just SO MUCH content in PvE and PvP. And it's not just quantity, but it's quality content as well!

**9. Level balancing and horizontal progression while still rewarding progression and giving you that sense of slowly getting stronger and stronger in RPGs.** Levels and stats are always balanced depending on zone or event. In PvP everyone is level maxed and all skills are available. A lot of content is available right from the getgo. Higher levels will still benefit from doing lower level content. Despite this, you still feel like you are getting stronger with each level, with each new skill you learn, with each new weapon/armor you put on. It still feels relevant, and like that zero to hero feeling from most RPGs.

**10**. **No P2W, no sub fee, no ridiculous amounts of grinding. Respects your time AND money.** Can this be said of most MMOs? Probably not. But honestly, it's unheard of. the base game is NOT EVEN BUY TO PLAY anymore. Base game is completely free and each full expansion is the same price as literally 1-2 months sub in some other MMOs. There is a cash shop but it's majority cosmetics. There is an option w*here you can even covert in game gold to real life currency.* So if you reaallly don't want to pay even for cash shop cosmetics, just use in game gold.

There are a lot of other great things about this game, but this is already getting way too long. I'm sure people that play it can mention it in the comments below.

For me personally, I initially didn't want to play it for three reasons:

1. because the graphics look outdated (but I learned with a bit of Nvidia geforce experience touch ups, it can look very good actually)
2. gameplay and trailer videos seemed very boring (but don't let this fool you. the actual game is much more fun)
3. I thought it was a dying game (but it's far from dying. There's roughly around 120-150k concurrent players at any give time. And with the new soon coming expansion, it's going to get higher no doubt)

But I'm so glad I gave it a chance.

All in all, ***GW2 is a like a perfectly oiled machine or like an intricate watch. There are so many innovative and well-thought out systems. These systems in place perfectly complement each other, to make this beautiful virtual experience.***

I'd highly recommend it if anyone here hasn't tried it, or tried a little and it didn't click yet. ***I would recommend DO NOT think of it like a typical MMO though, but rather go into it as you would an adventure RPG game, but this time with a living breathing world with other players.***EDIT (for clarity): the question relates to marketing/advertising and how it impacts the perception of older videogames by younger people.   My perception is simply presented as someone who's lived through the countless 8bit revolutions, followed by 16bit, neo geo's "24bit", this gen, last gen, next gen etc. and how graphics especially in AAA games have always been heavily marketed. 

___________\

To me cinematography follows some of the same marketing ploys videogames publishers do, albeit to some lesser extent.  For example "The Thing" with Kurt Russell was remade, but we were supposed to be over the moon at how this classic would be reimagined with a cool CGI monster that wouldn't have any of the same limitations the 80s one had.  The difference between genres is it wasn't hard to find younger people who agreed practical special effects were still enjoyable, if not better than CG, so (to my surprise) many people I talked to didn't mind watching older movies. 


Videogames are all CG...  There isn't even any debate older games can be downright painful to look at.  There's also this assumption that sequels will drop the bad/unnecessary, keep what's good, then add to it. I feel it's needless to say that's just not the case.  MANY older games have FAR better gameplay than their successors.  My question is, given how marketing emphasizes graphics and how much of a hurdle it can be going back to playing on potatoes, are younger people even interested in trying out "the classics?"  Do they need to be remade into "ultimate editions" for them to consider them, or is that just nostalgia bait for older people?What I mean is the kind of battle system where the player's team stands on one side of the map and enemies get placed on the other. Every character can perform certain turn-based actions, like attacking, casting spells or using items. It's entirely command-based and none of the characters can move.

Maybe that's an unpopular take - but to me, this system feels mostly like a product of technical limitations and I think it overstayed its welcome a long time ago.

It's severely restrictive.

It doesn't allow for any kind of positioning. All enemies have to engage the entire player team at once. You can't attack from behind/sides (so there can't be any bonuses based on this). There's no such concept as range and staying out of it, or using the terrain to your advantage (finding a tight passage to prevent the enemy from surrounding your team, etc.) You can't, for instance, place some items somewhere on the battle map, which could make for some nice risk/reward opportunities. You can't have a scenario where one (or more) of your characters is surrounded by the enemies and you have to help them. You can't have elements that are based on your position and time during the battle, like in Vandal Hearts, where your team has to quickly advance through train cars which disconnect one at a time every couple turns. Enemies only differ in size in terms of their look, but it doesn't really matter as far as mechanics are concerned.

Those are just a few examples off the top of my head...

While such titles often feature beautiful backgrounds and artworks, I can't help but feel like those mechanics belong in the late 80s (third console generation) at best. When it comes to battles, they kinda feel like text-based games where the newfound computing power was simply used to slap various bells and whistles on top of the obsolete framework.

I must admit, battle systems like these make me reluctant to try many classic jRPGs, which otherwise appeal to me. While their stories, worlds, characters and art might be interesting, I shudder at the thought of spending so many hours in such "claustrophobic" conditions, without them ever changing.

That's why I decided to give some less typical jRPGs a shot first. Namely, Live A Live and Arc the Lad series. Even though they do have many drawbacks which wouldn't be present in contemporary, top-of-the-line games, their battle systems make up for their shortcomings (the formula is rare enough that there's not much to choose from, anyway).

In short, those titles make use of many position-based mechanics which wouldn't be possible to pull off given the constraints of the Final Fantasy-like battle system.

It's a big shame because even though Final Fantasy games (and hundreds of other jRPGs) were successful and of high quality, I feel sad every time I think of the potential that could've been unleashed by building the core game mechanic around something a bit more complex than what we got.Disclaimer: I know that Cyberpunk is still a hot topic, and I also know that it's generally considered heresy to have anything positive to say about it on Reddit, so I'm not looking to get into that debate. There are various aspects of Cyberpunk that I consider to be high quality, so any comments coming in saying anything like "nah man, the game's 100% shit and you're wrong" aren't going to be helpful. We know that the game is not what was advertised, and I'm not arguing that at all, but that's not the point of this discussion.

Like many, I originally played Cyberpunk at launch. I put about 20 hours into it on PC, and thought it was "okay". I didn't have as many bugs as other people did, but I had enough issues that I decided to shelve it and come back later. I got the itch to replay about halfway through December, so I've been making my way through. Honestly? I've had a decent time with it so far. It's not a very good RPG, but as an action-adventure game it's been decent fun. I still think that the gunplay is pretty good for a first attempt, and the design of Night City is still phenomenal. The interactivity within the city leaves a lot to be desired, but the city itself is stunning and has a lot of really interesting sub-zones in the different districts. The overall aesthetic and design of the people and their cyberware is also incredibly cool. I love seeing all of the different cybernetic type designs, and seeing people who are more machine than person (the Maelstrom enemies are really neat in this regard). 

One of the other things that I really like is that there are pretty extensive unique areas only used for specific instances. I won't get into spoilers, but if you complete Judy's side quest line, during the final mission you go to this really cool underwater section to explore. It's pretty extensive, and its only purpose is for that mission - I found that to be really cool, and that was the type of thing that felt like what CDPR originally promised with the game. 

But man, does this game have _jank_. It's almost impossible to put into words, because it's not any one specific thing - it's just what you experience while you're playing. There are still various small glitches and bugs, but the entire game feels like high quality individual parts that got duct taped together for the final product. Sometimes different things just don't work (when I click the button to highlight items in my view, sometimes it just doesn't work. Or other times it will work, but it won't make the sound that it's supposed to when it scans. There's also multiple instances where I can't pick up an item from an enemy because it gets trapped beneath them or falls through the floor), stealth combat still feels sort of unrefined (enemies seem to randomly get put into "alert mode", but it doesn't change the music at all. So you're sneaking around and they're yelling things like "we know you're here, come out!" but because the music doesn't update it just feels completely out of place), and in general the UI just feels very "busy". I notice this specifically when holding the scan button so that you can view all of the hackable objects/enemies - depending on the scene, there's just _so much_ in that view that it feels annoying to have to sort through all of it and find the stuff that you need. 

Like I said at the beginning, I know it's an unpopular opinion on Reddit but I don't think this game is bad. It has bad _aspects_ absolutely, but on the whole I don't think the game is bad. It's just so bewildering to me to play a game that can simultaneously make me go "Wow, that's amazing!" and then go "This feels so unsatisfying" within a 2 minute window. We've all read up on the development issues that the game went through, and it just makes you sad to think about what the game could have been.Of the two games in the series Left 4 Dead is the low-fat option, and I think it's better for it. The lower variety in Special Infected (You'll be swimming in Boomers), deadlier Tanks, and no high damage melee option make the game much more tense. It feels like a real horror game in ways that L4D2 doesn't.

A few other things I've noticed replaying it:

-There are longer unique reloads when a weapon is empty. This has loads of implications, chief of which is sacrificing a bit of extra damage in the moment for higher average DPS.

-Upgrading to a Tier 2 weapon is more consistent, as the director is guaranteed to give you something useful (The L4D2 arsenal by comparison has a lot of duds).

-All night maps. The game feels darker overall.

-Moving accuracy with automatics is lower. Killing Smokers during the Tongue Grab's grace period is noticeably harder because of this.

-You can see your feet!

I'd like to see the alternate universe where L4D1 got a little more play before 2 came out. The bleeding edge gore of the sequel is missed, but the tighter gameplay of L4D1 still wins me over.

tl;dr
Left 4 Dead is a time capsule of a very exciting time for PC Gaming. Less features here equate to less bloat, providing a focused experience that wasn't quite beaten by its sequel. This is the last game Old Valve ever made, and it shows.Why are these genres so popular? What am I missing? What is the hook of games like Oxygen Not Included, Valheim, Cities: Skylines, Stardew Valley, Terraria, Project Zomboid, Don't Starve and many others? Someone help educate me! On a game-by-game basis, I can understand there may be something to appreciate. Things that are relatively ancillary to the primary experience of building, simulating, managing, and/or surviving (e.g., defeating hidden bosses, unleashing natural disasters, etc.). Keyword, again, being that those side things are "ancillary".

When I play games, I need reasons to want to do more than piddle about in them for 5 minutes before moving on. Something about the game has to hook or compel me beyond the moment-to-moment gameplay. When I think about these genres as a whole, I've come up with a short list of games that are Good and Serviceable in terms of offering compelling reason(s) to play them.

Good Examples

(1) Discovery/Story. Base-building is a significant part of Subnautica, for example, but the main hook for this game is the sense of discovering the depths and piecing together a mysterious narrative.

(2) Emergent Gameplay. Almost exclusively due to multiplayer, games like Rust, Minecradt, Ark: Survival Evolved, and Conan Exiles offer a unique experience each play session. However, the Sims and Rimworld also stand out as rare single-player experiences that fit here as well.

Serviceable Examples

(1) Primary Overarching Objective. Nearly every player action in games like Stellaris and Civilization is done to advance in the race to become the most dominant and/or influential empire in the world/galaxy. 

(2) Secondary Overarching Objective. Satisfactory, Factorio, and others have a tacked-on sort of end goal, clearly an afterthought but they exist nonetheless (e.g., reach outer space  etc.)I have often encountered that a game on its "normal" difficulty gives you a plethora of approaches, tools, strategies etc... But as you ramp up the difficulty it ends up being more and more narrow, it turns more and more into cheese territory and not fun territory. This feels like an emblematic problem in the games industry, were you end up being stuck in difficulties which are either too easy or too restrictive and thus not fun. 


I feel like a good game lets you be "narrow minded" on easier difficulties, but guides you to use all tools and strategies on higher ones, to consider several options and approaches, to repeat the situation even if you won, just to test scenarios. 

But too often when getting into a game, you will find advice from the more experienced players something in the vain of "just use x and y, and you're good" and the so called dreaded higher difficulties now end up looking like a sick joke, like a travesty, something that isn't fun but a boring repetitive task that once you do right once, its pretty much the same after. 

What would be some games you think shine at higher difficulties? Which get wider not narrower as the problems are harder to solve?I don't have the knowledge to really make an in-depth post so this might be kind of aimless, sorry. I'm no expert on game development and mostly looking to hear other people's thoughts.

Anyway, for a while before 3D gaming was possible or at least widespread, 2d games would sometimes try to incorporate a third axis into gameplay. A simple example of that would be some old-school beat'em alls, which allowed you to go left or right, towards the front or back of the screen (often with no variation in sprite size to indicate perspective though) but also gave you a jump, introducing an element of height.

A more elaborate form of "fake 3D" and maybe the most obvious is the SNES' Mode 7, which could create depth of field by rotating a background layer, used in games such as Super Mario Kart, F-Zero, Star Fox and more. This of course looked somewhat choppy due to technical limitations, but was an impressive feat for the time.

That being said, with the return of pixel art and retro artstyles, especially among indie games, I haven't seen too many attempts at Mode 7-like techniques. The simplest explanation would be that pixel art is sometimes used out of convenience to save on time or money and implementing such technology would run counter to that. But I wonder if it's also because pixel art games often rely on nostalgia, and faux 3D is not what people first think of when they think of the SNES era. Paradoxically, the fact that faux 3D used to look so futuristic in the 90's might give it less nostalgia appeal. That's just a random guess on my part, though.

There are also some obvious gameplay problems; without depth, you need a frame of reference for how close something is to your character. I almost dropped Ganbare Goemon 2 because of the 1st-person mech battles, which expect you to parry attacks but you have no way to know when they are close enough to you. In faux 3D, a big object and a close one look the same, so do a small one and a far away one. Now this is less of a problem if you and the enemies/obstacles are on the same flat plane as in Mario Kart, but in first-person it's hard to discern.

Even if you don't use realistic perspective and vanishing points, and instead opt for a top-down view with some vertical elements, similar problems arise. You can't tell if something is on the ground towards the back of the screen, or up in the air towards the front of the screen. That's a problem I had when dodging some attacks in the Binding of Isaac, and to its credit the game tries to help you by giving the attacks shadows on the ground. But when a lot of these attacks happen at once, there is no way to tell which shadow corresponds to what.

These aren't the only problems that can happen with fake 3D but these are the first I thought of, and may be part of why it's not used anymore when we have, well, real 3D.

That said, I would like to see if fake 3D could do things real 3D couldn't, precisely because it relies so much on optical illusions. You could have things that are bigger but further away than they appear (or the reverse), or *trompe l'œil* (not sure what the English word is) traps like that painted-on tunnel in that one Wile.E Coyote cartoon. That said I'm pretty sure the games that match what I'm talking about the best, Fez and Super Paper Mario, are programmed in 3D.

Do you know any interesting uses of fake 3D in the modern age, or are there any you would like to see? Is there even a point to it anymore now that real 3D is available?Backtracking is a controversial topic in gaming. Some love backtracking because it lets you become familiar with an area, giving it a sense of place. Some hate backtracking because it comes off as padding to lengthen a game for comparatively little resources.

Personally, I think both are true, but I am also a defender of filler content as a collection of tools that can be used well or badly. As such, some people (like some on [this thread](https://www.neogaf.com/threads/i-love-backtracking-especially-in-horror-games.756452/)) will agree that backtracking itself isn't inherently a bad thing, just something that suffers from a bad reputation of being done badly a lot of the time.

That said, the amount of general information on what distinguishes Super Metroid-tier backtracking and Zelda: Skyward Sword-tier backtracking is surprisingly low, at least when I do a Google search. Which is why I ask in this post as to what the criteria for "good backtracking" are.

I have three ideas on what the criteria for good backtracking are, though:

* **Recontextualize the area either with new terrain or player abilities:** I've seen many agree that this is the most important aspect of making backtracking acceptable. Something has to change either about the level or the player so that it can be experienced in a new way. The Metroid series is generally good about this, as those games are full of item gates that can only be progressively opened by returning to previous areas with new gear. I would argue that even EarthBound making regular enemies run from you upon an area boss's defeat, simple as it may be, goes a long way in making the player feel powerful.
* **Keep it short(er than the first traversal):** I believe that brevity is equally important as recontextualization in making backtracking tolerable, to the point that I think recontextualization is outright worthless if the backtracking is lengthy. In particular, the best uses of backtracking involve just "passing through" previous areas to get to a new one. The "Adult arc" of Zelda: Ocarina of Time is very good about this, as despite most of its dungeons being in the same areas explored in the "Child arc", the unlocking of each dungeon is never a lengthy process and any actual pre-dungeon questing is done in new areas if at all. Going back to EarthBound, the fleeing enemies not only make the player feel powerful, but also eliminate the time spent fighting weak enemies.
* **Trust the player to do it themselves:** By this I mean to only "lightly hint" that the player needs to go somewhere, not explain it outright with text or a cutscene monologue. This can apply to many things regarding "player guidance", but I consider this crucial to good backtracking in particular because since the player has already been to that area, they shouldn't feel like they're told outright to go backwards. One of my favorite moments regarding this is the [last standing Chozo Statue](https://youtu.be/WINinwf6_Yc?t=4515) in Metroid: Zero Mission, where after most of the game the standing Chozo Statues provide subtle hints where to go, the last of them is destroyed seemingly as reassurance that the player knows where to go: Tourian. Another clever moment is in Zelda: Twilight Princess where to progress with the Lanayru Province plotline you need to take a molten lava rock to the frozen Zora's Domain to thaw it out. Thankfully, [Midna never says outright](https://youtu.be/8NgDgaY58ds?t=199) that you need to go back to Death Mountain and pick that rock up, trusting the player to think about what they've seen earlier in the game.

These are just my own ideas on what good backtracking consists of, though. Are there any other criteria that I missed? Are any of my criteria wrong? I would like to know.Honestly he probably deserve to get a reboot and I think the only way a 90's character like him could survive in 2022 is he can be like Johnny Lawrence from Cobra Kai.

The problem with Forever is that Duke is a really awuful man but he wins everything. 
-He's rich
-He's get laid
-He become the fucking president of USA


If Duke Nukem has a chance to survive now they have to make him like 90's character who never moved on but no one take him seriously (even if he's a badass). I can see the jokes too, lol. Maybe like Johnny Bravo too: a misogynist dude that can be seen and perceived like a bad example instead of be succesful with women and life in general.

This are my toughts. Let me know what do you think!I’ve recently had a change in my thoughts around skill in videogames. Previously I had always been on the lookout for deep games that I could sink thousands of hours into without running out of challenging content. When I found one I would learn the mechanics, practice repetitively (within reason), research optimal strategies, theorycraft and generally have a great time getting better at the game over a long period of time.  

Usually this would end with me at least learning some of the speedrun tactics if not performing them and other mechanically demanding strategies ect. Basically I would find things to learn until I ran out. 

This was how I wanted to play games, and I loved it until recently. 

&#x200B;

Here comes the major shift in my thinking: doing this continually makes the game less challenging, until the certainty of you winning is basically 100%. The absolute difficulty of a game could be extremely high, but everyone who has spent enough time on a game knows that any level of difficulty can be crushed by practice and knowledge over time. Even in a PVP game this is true; you will eventually win more often until you start running out of opponents that can keep up with you. The pool of players that are skilled enough will shrink dramatically over time as you gain mastery. 

Clearly a game is not the same experience at 1000-10,000 hours as it was at 10-100, but I think that when I dug deep into why and what has changed I realized that I was fooling myself into thinking that I was an “X genre player” that loved that sort of gameplay so much that I couldn’t be bothered to play anything else, and that’s what my journey was about.  

In reality I was creating a comfort zone for myself where I no longer had to confront failure or real challenge. 

&#x200B;

My solution: 

Things you have little experience with are relatively more difficult, but also extremely rewarding to learn and accomplish small victories in. I’ve found that switching to different genres on a regular basis to be a much more enjoyable experience overall, despite not becoming quite as skilled in each game and sometimes struggling a great deal. With how easy it is to get retro games running these days I’ve even been going back in time to experience classics for the first time which is an awesome way to gain perspective in the medium. 

Maybe I’ll get hooked on something for a long time again, who knows. But for now variety is where the optimal fun is for me. 

&#x200B;

DOOM 

I didn’t want to get into specifics too much but one example I have is my relationship with Doom Eternal. I am pretty awful at FPS games in general but when I saw Doom 2016 come out I thought it looked really fun, so I got it and played through it despite struggling with the controls/aiming ect. When Eternal came out in 2020 of course I had to get it, but I found that the number of mechanics added and speed made it too difficult for me. I was unwilling to learn and eventually I got stuck and gave up, uninstalling the game. 

After that it became a legendary game in my mind, and thinking about playing it again stressed me out. I’m sure that sounds silly and it is, but that’s genuinely how I felt about it for almost a year of going back to games I was better at. Now after shifting my attitude I’ve played through all of the Doom games (except 64, maybe later) in a row and I’m currently playing through Eternal on nightmare and having a blast. 

&#x200B;

I’m sure to some people this sounds immature/alien but maybe someone can relate so I’ll post it anyways. I still think speedrunning and high level competition is cool, but if I ever go back in that direction I’ll create a somewhat reasonable goal for myself to achieve or fail so that I can eventually move on with my life and continue experiencing new things.My favorite games this past year have been:  Path of Exile, Escape from Tarkov, and Halo Infinite.  If you are a member of any of those subreddits you’ll know what I’m talking about.  I’ve had such a good year with all these games, so many hours played with less than $50 spent if you include the cost of game pass.  

But every time I visit one of the communities there is just so much toxicity.  So many attacks on the devs.  Honestly idk how Battlestate maintains their current model of only making money from new copies sold, Path of exile and Halo don’t cost a dime, but the community’s are always criticizing and echoing until the one thing they despise is changed.

I don’t understand where the passion comes from, when I’ve put 5000 hours plus into PoE and Tarkov at the cost of like $0.01/hr and just don’t see the frustration.  The games are great and hiccups happen, but I’m at the point now where the game is less fun when I interact with the community, which sucks. 

Maybe I’m just getting old.[The Riftbreaker](https://store.steampowered.com/app/780310/The_Riftbreaker/). That's when. I had wishlisted the game on Steam when it came out. I bought it later for CPU testing after an upgrade to my rig, since it has hundreds of enemies on screen at the same time. I booted it up for a test, 16 hours later I'm absolutely hooked.

I presented my answer right there. Maybe we could have some more implementations of ray tracing that would actually serve a purpose, instead of just looking good. Mirrors in FPS games to see around corners maybe?

That said, I'm a huge tech nerd. Born in the early 80's, I've seen and admired all the stuff modern computer graphics have done and achieved since almost the genesis. 

I skipped the Nvidia 2000 series, because based on the reviews, the RTX was not quite there yet and the prices were just stupid. I got a 3000 series card on launch day for MSRP and I've been messing around with Ray Tracing ever since then.

It's a very nice piece of tech. It just makes some games look so much nicer. 

But looking nice isn't all there is to it. I'm hoping to see more functional usage of Ray Tracing in games. Returnal has had its sound design praised to high heaven. I haven't played it, since I don't have a PS5, but I know that it has ray traced audio. The RT cores simulate the paths of the sound waves in that game and make the sounds more realistic. That is something I would like to hear in the future in games to come.

The Riftbreaker then. That game really knows what to do with RTX. It's a top down base building/twin stick hordeshooter. Exploring the map with your giant mech suit is more viable during the night, since you'll be down on power for your base without your solar panels and thus building new stuff is not advisable. You'll venture into the dark and dense jungle. It's dark and the only proper source of light is your flashlight. With RTX on, it casts realistic shadows of the foliage, trees and rocks. An entire horde of enemies can pass unseen if they are in the shadow and then ambush the player. The whole combat loop is a spectacle. Entire forests get moved down in an instant, hundreds of enemies get pulped to mush. 

Fighting in the dark is a desperate fight for survival. Until you switch to the flamethower that lights everything around you on fire, including the enemies and gorgeous forests on the alien planet. Then the setting is bright and oh so beautiful spectacle of light and shadow for a while. Then the foliage burns down and the player is left with their flashlight again. 

&#x200B;

Of course, if you are a minmaxer type of person, that sounds annoying, you want to maximize your field of view to see the enemies better. But I'm a fairly casual player, I want to feel genuine feelings, like fear when I'm playing a game. And the way The Riftbreaker does it, is perfect for me. 

Here's a short video to explain what I'm going on about.

&#x200B;

[https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HRDLDBo6sk0](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HRDLDBo6sk0)Many regular posters here at [r/truegaming](https://www.reddit.com/r/truegaming/) may often wonder how to improve their posts to better improve possible discussions, but have been unable to get the feedback they desire in any form besides a downvote. This monthly post is designed for frequent posters of [r/truegaming](https://www.reddit.com/r/truegaming/) to receive the feedback they'd like in an organized fashion.

If you are seeking feedback for your posts, we recommend linking to your threads and explaining your thought process in posting them. Explaining the reasoning behind how you posted may be key to finding out what you did wrong and what can be improved. We also recommend including what type of discussion you wanted to start within your threads, and what you believe your own strengths/weaknesses are as a discussion author. This way, people can gauge how you see yourself and can give feedback appropriately.

If you would like to give feedback, we emphasize to please be constructive and polite when doing so. This post is designed for posters to learn from their mistakes, and in order to do so, a decently-sized explanation of their mistakes may be needed. Please also consider replying to those who may not have any replies yet, for even the smallest amount of feedback can help discussion authors.This came to mind while playing through Immortals: Fenyx Rising (side note: an absolute blast of a game, very underrated in my opinion). You reach a point in the game where the story is pushing you to fight the Big Bad Evil Guy, but the map shows so many unexplored and unexperienced locations. This is by no means an uncommon occurrence. It happens everywhere, with open world games being the worst offender (looking at you, Skyrim and Fallout 4). So how do you as a player “make it make sense” to continue side-questing when the world needs urgent saving? Is it just a metagaming shift in focus to see the game for what it is (a game) or do you, like me, struggle whenever the plot and the mechanics are driving you in two different directions?If you've ever wanted to play a game with someone again but didn't feel close enough to them to add them on steam (or xbox live, playstation, whatever) then you'll know what I mean.  


I was playing risk of rain 2 the other day and found a good team, we played a few games and wanted to add each other to play again another time, but the game has no friend system so we rely on steam, there's a few problems with this:

- There are people who, like me, only add friends to their account if they're actual close friends
  
- Steam has a limit to how many friends you can have, based on level  

- I don't like my friend menu being cluttered with people I don't know

Admittedly it also has upsides as well:

- Saves devs time on making their own friend system 
 
- If you don't mind adding randos to your friend list it's a convenient way of staying in touch across multiple games instead of friending different accounts for each game  


Personally, I still wish it was an option in more games other than MMOsI recently finished the game Lake and saw a lot of people who praise the game call a great tranquil experience. My one line summary would be a Hallmark movie like game in every way. 

The main gameplay for this game is the postal delivery with a van. The van drives very rigid and arcady like a PS2 driving game. There is no time limit or any direct failure option that I have noticed. Yes, the game has some inteactable characters and story bits within gameplay loop but nothing more than basic. I think they are going for a mundune serene experience, but it doesn't feel good in a very limited area with very little variety. 

The problem stems from the driving and lack of depth to it. Besides the driving, there are no challenges, perks, upgrades, or anything else.  Therefore, the feel of repetition comes quite quick.

I don't want to trash the devs because I understand budget, time limitations, and keeping the scope small. However, the game overall feels barebones. At first, I was quite intrigued by the general concept. While I did somewhat enjoy the story elements and small choices, I dread every time I deliver mail.

There are many games that have gameplay that can naturally create tranquil experience. Think of many good open-world games with collectibles and side quests. Even many indie survival like games can be considered zen like when the impeding threat is low. Yes, it could have too much for devs, but I think they should have thought of a better game design within their means.I guess the multiplayer system in the Souls game is beloved by most, but for me its a completely inexplicable diversion in what is otherwise an incredible game. I've only ever played DS1 but my understanding is that it generally works the same in the other games.

I just don't understand why anyone would ever want to deal with it. The player has to work in order to activate multiplayer, gathering humanity and reverse hollowing at a bonfire, and for what? So your single-player game can be periodically interrupted by random PvP encounters? For which your only reward is a negligible amount of souls, that can be acquired much more easily by just fighting the AI? I guess this would be fine if it was baked in as part of the challenge (a la Deathloop) but it isn't; you actually have to put effort into getting into multiplayer mode when you could just say fuck it and not have to deal with the invasions. As for the co-op summons, I find them to be actively detrimental to the experience. Why the fuck would I want anyone's help in my *single player* game? Doesn't that negate the achievement of beating a boss? I want to beat the game *myself*, through my own skill, not by switching the game to co-op every time I get to a hard part. To me, it's exactly the same thing as pay-to-win games that let you pay to skip parts of the game that you're supposed to enjoy playing. It doesn't help that the game is so obtuse about how the multiplayer works and how to summon players, which left me wondering if I just missed the part where this all makes sense and isn't just a huge distraction.

I don't understand why any of the multiplayer needs to be in the game, and I think the game would be better without the humanity system. All it does is distract the player and give them an easy out. If I'm missing something, please let me know.I've been (re)playing Kingdoms of Amaulur:(Re-)Reckoning and overall it's a game that's held up over time. Nostalgia isn't the reason I'm enjoying it. But the one thing that brings me to a grinding halt every thirty minutes or so is the small inventory limit of 70 that can be upped by purchasing backpacks to increase it by 10.

I think this is the worst possible choice of an inventory limit. RPGs prioritize hoarding or collecting of items such as potions, weapons, and armor. Weight limits make much more sense, as you can choose to keep 1000 health potions if you want but understanding you can't keep carrying that full plate armor as well.

KoA itself has also implemented it in way that smacks right against its other systems. The game has a wider category of items to pick up such as reagents, misc items (books), and accessories. If you are only selling weapons/armor you don't need you will find yourself consistently up at around 35-40/70 for inventory just because of ingredients for the various crafting systems.

I understand why there needs to be some restriction for inventory. Otherwise you end the game with 4000 swords you've never batted an eye at. But I just feel frustrated ignoring items in the world because it's just not worth looking filling up my inventory and stopping my quest just to offload 40 crude daggers. 

If KoA had less weapon drops or more merchants to make sure I never had to double back just to offload inventory, the pacing of this already large game wouldn't feel like such a slog. Or, make crafting ingredients take up no space. Because I'm 6 hours in the game and I refuse to loot bodies because I'd rather finish storylines than feel like a pack mule.I've loved playing singleplayer RPGs ever since Oblivion came out. Many who share my passion know the feeling of wanting to play these types of RPGs with their friends or at least others online.

However, while I love classic RPGs, I really have no interest in MMORPGs. That's because they are their own genre which really has little in common with the original type of (singeplayer) RPGs. They are usually not so much about an immersive world, interesting characters, intriguing stories. Instead, as far as I can tell, they are more about: grinding, XP levelling, maxing out your character, battles are all about roles and numbers, combat is more about button mashing. Most quests are simple, menial fetch quests, the world is more of an action-RPG-backdrop for multiplayer activities. Much more similar to e.g. the modern Ubisoft AC games than something like Skyrim. 

So why do MMORPGs have to be their own genre that is so very different from other (singeplayer) RPGs? Why can there not be multiplayer RPGs that are only expanded on singleplayer games?Ok before I begin I apologize if this gets rambly and also I'm aware that taste and art is subjective. (I've had literally hundreds of discussions about the latter) This rubric is highly personal and I found that it works for me, it may not work for you. I'm just posting it here because well, I like to discuss gaming.

First off, heuristics. Psychologist Barry Schwartz makes a great point in his book The Paradox of Choice  about how when we have too many options, we have choice paralysis and end up being less happy. So we all employ heuristics on a daily basis to evaluate food choices, what to wear etc. Why not gaming?

I am a lifelong gamer (39, been playing since 4, plan to play beyond 100+) so that influences a lot of my decisions. I'm VERY hard to impress, having played 1000+ games in almost every genre. I've played semi--competitively in the FGC and digital CCG spaces. 

This post started out as a discussion with a friend in which he asserted that 5 minutes is too short a timeframe to assess a game's worth, let alone a movie or book. I disagreed and felt that within 5 minutes (knowing my own tastes well) I can figure out whether any artwork (comic etc) is worth my time. As this is a gaming subreddit I'll only talk about games.

First off I filter from the genres I never play - FPS, RTS, open world, 4X, city builder, survival, MOBA, battle royale. I've tried all of these and I know I don't like them so I don't touch them.

Next we go to art. (it's subjective I know) If I like the art (not graphical quality) I proceed.

Storyline. My fave genre is the JRPG, so I weigh stories very heavily. If the story fits the game well (like I am not expecting a puzzle game to have an SMT story) that's a good sign.

Voice acting. I am a part-time VA myself and this is an important aspect of gaming to me. If I see VAs I like and I like the VAing, that's another good sign.

Gameplay is once again, highly subjective, which is why I try to field test the game a little (5 minutes) No glaring flaws or bugs ofc. If I like how it "feels", that's a plus.

X-factors - These are things that factor into the game that are hard to quantify. 

a) For instance I am bisexual and I really like seeing good representation in games. It's not going to make me play the game in and of itself, but it's a factor (for instance Hades - I like it because it's a great game but the representation is kind of the cherry on top. Same for Witcher 3.)

b) Off-the-wallness - I typically enjoy creators like Suda51 and things that are slightly quirky (Mother series, Katamari) I usually don't enjoy AAA games because they are a bit too formulaic to me (once again subjective)

c) Stories with a strong psychological or philosophical bent. (Baten Kaitos, Xenosaga) Games that push the envelope in new and exciting ways like Paradise Killer.

In terms of reviews, I typically seek out reviewers whose taste is similar to mine. I do trust Kotaku and Eurogamer's reviews in general even if I don't agree with them. I will occasionally watch gameplay vids. I don't trust industry awards (Game of the Year, Famitsu etc) or Steam/Metacritic that much. 

If a game has passed through this entire selection process, I generally play it from start to finish and greatly enjoy it. If I don't have the time I will at least watch a playthrough for story-heavy games.

Why go through all this bother? Firstly although I love games there is no way I can play everything with the amount of games on the market. This ensures I have no backlog, don't suffer from FOMO and have no unplayed Steam games (my wishlist sits at about 20 titles I think) 

tldr; This is my highly subjective rubric for assessing games, I hope you at least got some edification out of it. I'm not claiming it's for anyone else, just wanted to spur discussion.So i’m the type of gamer who cares about a good narrative, it’s my primary reason for playing games 99% of the time.

A lot of people suggested Dark Souls when I said I want a game with a good story so I went ahead and played the trilogy over the past year to see what the fuss was about and to my great disappointment, none of the games HAD a story

There’s bits and pieces of LORE scattered about that you can find and piece together what happened before your character popped in the scene but as for an overall narrative? Essentially none whatsoever. Your character is even less than a blank slate if that’s even possible, the other characters just exist to be talking history books and have no agency or development, they are implied or outright stated to know things the PC does not but you can never ask them about it (or build any sort of relationship with them) because uhhhh…. the player character really likes staring at people like an idiot without saying anything?

Now you might be asking why I played all 3 games if I hated the lack of story that much and the answer is that I liked the way the levels looked and I did enjoy piecing the LORE together, though I wouldn’t call the best worldbuilding of all time as some do, it’s decent, with some huge issues that people seem to ignore. 

For example, a lot of lore videos and wikis boil down to “my theory is…” “I think this character is supposed to be…” “Miyazaki said in an interview once…”

When most of your lore hinges on fan theories and external sources such an interviews I’d personally say you didn’t do that good of a job at presenting, though I can see the appeal of it for some people.

In conclusion, I think a lot of gamers just latched onto this idea that Dark Souls’ story is good just because of the unorthodox way it’s lore was presented in, which requires effort on the player’s part to uncover it, this effort in turn incites a sort of knee-jerk reaction that it MUST be good (gotta reiterate that i’m not saying it’s bad lore) because they had to go through the effort of uncovering it, whereas I strongly believe no one would care as much if it was presented in a traditional way like a codex.Obviously there are objective measurements of a game's quality such as how well it runs, polygon counts, glitches etc. However, that's setting the bar too low and I really think reviewers are being critical enough.

This question came about when I was playing P5. I typically don't like JRPG's and playing P5, I thought it was quite a slog and I thought the combat and exploration was quite 1 dimensional. Searching up these critiques, I found people saying that this is just how the genre is like. So is the criticism aimed at P5 legitimate or is it a criticism to JRPG's in general?

Same thing with Nier Automata. I thought the visuals and open world was terrible, the gameplay was disappointing and the story took too long to start. Yet people brushed this away with 'it's just not your taste'.

Obviously there are some genres where I would hate every single games (like immersive sims).

Where do we draw the line?I was playing some King's Field IV recently (old series of games from Fromsoft, developers of Dark Souls), and in the first few areas of the game, there are a few bits of music, which, while fine in their own right, are fairly simple 30 second loops or so that repeat endlessly. While walking around, I was reminded at how Dark Souls used music sparingly, and restricted it to primarily just boss fights, and occasional safe havens. This gave me a thought, and I went ahead and disabled the BGM entirely.

Wow, what a difference this made. I often disable music in games after a first playthrough only, but my god, I started to notice things that felt almost completely unnoticeable the second I made this choice. 

Things became immediately less annoying, and the incredibly slow nature of the game felt much more bearable now that I didn't have to subject myself to the same 30 second loop repeated over and over for eternity. The entire experience felt so much more atmospheric within moments.

Walking down a tunnel gave my footsteps an echo, how very marvelous! This was very difficult to hear otherwise, and had a reasonably big impact on the overall atmosphere of the area. Things suddenly felt far more freaky, even in that small space, and really helped immerse me into the experience.

But what REALLY solidified it was a small section in the starting area where there's a knight sitting on a rock next to a broken wooden bridge that originally held connected 2 sides of a very large chasm, being depressed that his wife was on the other side, and there was no way to reach her any longer. What previously felt like just another possible side quest thanks to the endless repeating loop of music that surrounded that entire area, became an incredibly sad moment as the sound design of the game shined through, and you could hear the wailing of the wind filling the chasm, and the sorrow of the knight was punctuated by this feeling of "There is no way for this to be fixed, and god knows what's going to happen to both himself, and his family".

I generally refuse to play through any game the first time through without music, and will only disable music on second playthroughs and onward, which I find works quite well, as a lot of games feel like music was just slapped on at the end due to the general public expecting music as a normal part of a typical gameplay experience that, you know, is EXPECTED to exist, but in this specific instance, moreso than others, I actively felt like the music was reducing the overall quality of the title. It makes me think that, perhaps, KF4 was designed without any music in mind originally during most of the game, much like its successor, Dark Souls, but that someone decided that music should be included because otherwise people would view the game more negatively.

I'm going to continue with music on for the title, but also disable it in areas which I've explored thoroughly, so I can soak in the depressing atmosphere of the game and its environments, which I'm doing as a sort of compromise. I do want to experience the game as it is intended (which is quite important for me, I want to enjoy a developers vision as intended, inferior to what I prefer or not) and I don't have any genuine evidence to back up my assumption listed above, but man, am I glad it can be disabled.

Anyway, how do you choose to approach matters like this? Are there any titles that you yourself view as being better with music disabled?

Cheers.Anyone who's played Red Alert 2 will recognize [this majestic beast](http://static1.wikia.nocookie.net/__cb20120124172521/cnc/images/d/dc/CNCRA2_Kirovs_Attack.png) on sight. The kirov airship is easily the most iconic unit in not just Red Alert 2, but the franchise as a whole. However for how iconic it is the unit actually isn't all that good in game. First, it's expensive as hell, and painfully slow to boot. Sure basically anything under it instantly dies, but pretty much any unit is fast enough to get away from it and it's basically impossible to rush it. On top of it all, **It's one of the few units that announces itself to your opponent**. This is especially terrible bc it's so slow, since any decent opponent will have days to prepare enough AA to blow it out of the sky. On top of that, Kirovs are incredibly predictable. Since it's the only air unit the soviet has apart from the siege chopper (which has to setup on the ground to do a ton of damage), everyone knows to build AA to stop a potential kirov attack. The only thing it's sort of good at in that game is acting as a sort of damage sponge to V3 and dreadnaught rockets, but even that isn't that good since V3s are also pretty mediocre units.

That said, despite everything bad I've said about this unit, I still think it's one of my favorite units in that game, bc **Kirovs are incredibly fun**. Sure it's slower than molasses, but once you actually get in to their base with a kirov, it can pretty much demolish it on its own. There's very little in this game that can beat the dopamine rush you get from somehow sneaking a kirov into the enemy base. Even as the opponent, Kirovs are still fun, bc it announces itself and gives you time to setup a defense. When you're a new player, there's very few things in this game that commands as much fear and respect as the phrase "Kirov reporting", mainly bc everyone who's played this game has had their base deleted by kirovs at some point. Kirovs are unquestionably low tier, but they still enhance the game just by being really fun to use and play against.

With that in mind, I also want to talk about another low tier that's actively bad but barely anyone remembers: **The flak trooper**. Flak troopers are a tier 2 soviet AA infantry that's basically bad at everything it's trying to do. They're too squishy against infantry, so they don't trade well with T1 infantry, They do too little damage against air units, so they're basically useless in their main role, and they do literally nothing against armor, so a tank can easily crush it. And they're completely outclassed by the infinitely superior flak track to boot. It's kind of the opposite of the Kirov in a lot of ways while still being low tier. Cheap, unexciting, but still shit at its job.

With that in mind, What I really wanted to talk about is **unit design in RTS games**. I've been thinking about the Kirov again recently and I really wonder if it's just a product of its time. Sure it's awesome to use and utterly iconic, but I feel like with how much RTS games gear to towards multiplayer now, I'm not sure if something like the Kirov will be accepted bc it's kinda useless. That said, I'm definitely for somewhat impractical but downright cool units in my RTS games. The [Alkaid orbital defense system](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vr5QusoXAoU) in the Corona mod for example basically nails that. It's probably not all that good but it's cool as shit.I’ve been following this game called Ready Or Not which is a spiritual successor to the SWAT games. It’s been in development for a few years and it’s finally coming out. This developer is going for a extremely authentic and realistic experience to accurately portray what it’s like to be in a SWAT team. One of the biggest differences from this to other games is what situations players will be put in. The game is getting negative publicity for a mission called “School” which puts the player in a situation where they must handle an active shooter. And from what’s been shown in the game so far. It will not hold back on the violence and the obvious brutality of situation like that. The developers are keeping it in. What is you’re opinion on video games displaying such content?Before I start I want to clarify that I am aware this would be really difficult, expensive and time consuming to achieve. Many might just want the game to come out sooner and be smaller. It is still nice to dream about this possibility.

Now the idea is that GTA VI and its story will have different chapters. Each chapter will be a few hours long and it will consist of one decade. Starting in the 80s and ending in modern day.

Chapter 1: 80s

Chapter 2: 90s

Chapter 3: 2000s

Chapter 4: 10s

Chapter 5: 20s

Each chapter will have a different tone and satire level depending on how Rockstar sees fit for the decade and its history. If Rockstar thinks a decade should have a more satire chapter, the chapter would be made more satire (well balanced out of course) both in gameplay and story. If they feel a decade should be more dark, the chapter would have a darker tone.

Guns would change throughout the decades both for NPCs and the player. Same with vehicles, several buildings and radio stations. You would also get new safehouse options and new safehouse finishes, many store finishes would change. It would be nice if you would have the option to keep your old equipment and NPCs would comment about you being an 'old timer'. The value for older equipment could also increase over time. It would be really cool if the cops gradually improved throughout the decades and it would get harder and harder to fight them. New buildings would be built and it would cool if they eventually opened museums based on the past decades. The game would also offer more subtable differences like having characters age and having some shopkeepers change. It would be amazing if the shopkeepers who would stay would grow more and more confidence in you eventually offering you more and more discounts. Something similar to this happened in Mafia 2 >!where after getting out of prison many cars, guns and vehicles changed. The radio stations also changed. !<In the great Red Dead Redemption 2 >!after a skip from 1899 to 1914 buildings changed and some characters aged (their models changed for them to look less young).!<

Now I imagine a Vice City type story where you slowly conquer the city and its surrounding area. The character grows up in the city and we explore his depth as he grows. It could also be about showing how the old crime days are fading or the story could be completely different, I have faith in Rockstar.

Any city could work really but I like the idea of it being set in Vice City. Perhaps it is due to the hype it has been getting but I think it could make for an amazing location.

In regards to online they could either go with the seasonal route, where throughout the year they change the decades in the form of events or they could let us choose the decade server we want to be in.

I know this will most probably never happen, I think it would be amazing though. They could take the game in many other directions of course which could also be really good directions.Okay, I guess I need some explanation here. I prefer games that are "stationary" even you either simply stay put in a safe area, or are just fooling around and enjoying the scenery. I dislike games that are constantly pushing you forward, or never give you any moment of respite. This can be interpreted in many ways:

1. I prefer games that don't constantly put you on a timer, like "20 minutes to finish this level" or "five days to resolve this quest". I don't reject all instances of timed objectives, but it needs to be rare and sparse. I'd be stressed beyond being able to enjoy the game if the entire games is on a timer. I had some fun in XCOM, but I don't think I'm gonna play another game like that, where it's just deadline after deadline... I prefer the game to not punish you for taking too long all the time.

2. I prefer games where there are plenty of safe areas, and if you afk in those safe areas, you are actually safe without any consequences. I dislike games where if you are not moving forward, then you are by default slowly losing (e.g. if the game has limited resources but infinitely respawning enemies)

3. I prefer online games to not have any scheduled progression systems that punish you for not playing on time. Stuff like weekly quotas, daily quests, etc. where you fall behind if you don't play on a specific schedule, even if you are able to dedicate the same amount of time off the schedule. This has basically turned me off most MMOs and season-based games, with only "fixed wage rate" games remaining.

Overall, I think I just can't handle time pressure as a form of entertainment. I'd rather take on a complex challenge with unlimited time than getting pressure-cooked by an ever-present timer.I've reached the point where playing games for the in-game aspects alone has gotten a bit stale. Most people play video games for fun, escapism, story, etc, but there are many people who use video games as a driver to create content for others.

These are some examples I can think of to explain what I am talking about:

- YouTube gaming channels
- Twitch streaming
- Strategy guides
- Supplemental services (https://theunderminejournal.com, https://op.gg)
- Fan Art

I think that pursuing something like one of the items the above, where gaming is driving some other hobby but isn't the primary focus, could be a very natural evolution for someone like me who enjoys games but wants to try something new as well. Not trying to make money, just looking to add a little more excitement back into my gaming life.

Do you play games to create content, or some other reason outside of enjoyment of the game itself?This game is kinda spoiling me and I'm pretty sure I can't go back to traditional 2D Mario after I'm over with this game. I got this free from the Epic Store a while ago, but only recently got to play it (I got a new laptop). When this game came out I saw a lot of people talking about how good it was because it was similar to DKCR: Tropical Freeze. I never played Tropical Freeze, but I had a small experience with the previous game on the Wii. Tropical Freeze is often regarded as the best Nintendo 2D platformer ever made and if it's any better than the original DKCR I can totally agree.

That being said, Yooka Laylee and the Impossible Lair being similar to Tropical Freeze is probably just the beginning of the description for this game. The developers bombarded this game with ideas from many different games and somehow they work beautifully.

First of all, the game opens up with two stages. The very first one and the final one. The Impossible Lair is a stage that can be tackled at any time and the final boss is there waiting for you. As you go from level to level, you free "battalion bees" that can help you overcome the stage by basically giving you one HP so that you can progress further. Or, if you're skillful, you can try to learn the entirety of the final stage and just beat it in one go without freeing any of the bees (the game also gives you that option if you rescue all the bees or some of them).

The world map, similar to Super Mario 3D World, allows you to control the characters and go from place to place selecting the stages. However, instead of being a glorified menu, the world map is an actual place that you need to explore in other to find secrets and, most importantly, unlock alternative versions of all stages. This is a big highlight in this game for me, because it sometimes feels like a Zelda map. There are puzzles everywhere, a lot of things to discover and everything feels very engaging and intuitive. It's basically a game within the game.

In the topic of alternative version of the stages I still haven't come across a single time where the alternative theme repeats. There is a stage that gets covered in sticky honey, another one that becomes an autoscroller, one where winds blow and move platforms, one that gets flooded and much more. Every single one feels unique and well thought out. I have seem Nintendo do this in the 3D series, but not to this extent. And they absolutely never incorporated that to the overall world map.

During gameplay, you always start with Yooka and Layle and they have a particular moveset when they're together.  If you get hit, Laylee starts to fly around aimlessly around the stage (similar to baby Mario in a bubble on the original Yoshi's Island) and you can catch her back by touching her. Different from Yoshi's Island, however, if Laylee flies away, you don't fail the stage, the only thing that happens is that the moveset for Laylee changes.

I was quite impressed that the very first collectable in the very first stage, requires you to perform a particular move, only available with both characters, where you perform a roll out of a platform, jump in midair, press the roll button again to twirl in the air to get slightly higher and glide further. You're taught this in the tutorial stage and the game always wants to make sure you learned it.

There is no concept of lives or time during gameplay and the quills (equivalent to coins) that you collect are used to unlock certain things in the world map. One of these things are the Tonics, which are gameplay modifiers that range from visual effects to actual difficulty options (which basically let you customize how you want to play a particular stage). Whenever you enter a stage, you can select 3 Tonics and they might influence how many quills you'll be able to collect by applying a multiplier to the ammount you collected by the end of the stage. If you select Tonics that make the run harder, you'll be collecting more quills overall and if you select Tonics that make the run easier, you'll get less. This is a terrific idea IMO and opens up a lot of possibilities.

The issues I have with this game are pretty minor. The music is kinda bland. It sometimes try to emulate David Wise's music too much and just feels derivative. The visuals in the levels are interesting, but nothing is particularly striking or unique. I'm not particularly a fan of how big most stages are and I also don't like that some of the collectables in the stages are kind of obtuse to collect. Fail to get one in the first try and you might need to die to go back to the last checkpoint and try again.

Overall, this game is just showing me how little effort Nintendo puts into 2D Mario. I don't want 2D Mario to become similar do DKCR, but the next game seriously needs to introduce cool ideas like the ones in this game otherwise no artstyle will save it from beign just some boring experience.Disclaimer: This is about single player games. There is also a personal rant at the end of this post.

In short: Games having different difficulty levels would make them more accessible so more people can enjoy them on their terms, but implementing diffuclty is not easy so we shouldn't take that for granted or expect it from every developer.

And now for a more detailed approach:

There is often an uproar about difficulty setting-especially the disscussion of adding easier difficulty for  intentionally diffcult game. The main claims stem from the idea of "intentional difficulty" which often just feels like gatekeeping for an "intentional player". 

Diffculty levels are great because difficulty is reletive. What you find as the optimum gaming exprience is not a monolith-there are many reason why people will want a game to be "easy" or even "harder".  This is a form of media, not the bar exam. The achivement of beating a challenge in gaming is entirely personal-as well as the messege/challenge delievered by a difficult game. In, say, Bloodborne, the game being difficult and uncaring (And overcoming the situation) is part of the overall narrative, but it wouldn't have been damaged by the option for easier difficulties-because, in theory, it still could have been challenging in the right way for the right person.

The ability of gaming to better tailor itself to an indevidual player is one of the strenghs of the medium-utlizing this advatage should be celebrated, not condemeded. 

WITH THAT BEING SAID.

From a developer's stand point, making EFFECTIVE, ENGAGING and most of all FITTING difficulty levels is... well... difficult. It takes time to "tune" a game to one difficulty level, let alone a number of them for different skilled players. This is twice as true for games that are meant to be challenging as part of the exprience. Briging us back to Bloodborne, there are so many moving parts and interlocking gears of the design, easier difficulties are more akin to a complete overhaul than just adding an invincibility option. I just can't blame From Software for not bothering with it and just sticking ot one artistic vision of difficulty level.

Cuphead, a game I'm currently playing (and enjoying) has difficulty options, and while none of them is ever EASY (and you cannot complete the game only fighting on regular, either) you can see how each of them is TUNED to be a differnt exprience. It took care-and time-and resources, and this should also be acknowledged.

I say all of this as a person who in the last year+ or so discovered their love for difficult games-and I also say this as a person who is able to see that not everyone is expriencing games the same way they are. I will always commend developers who undertakes the VERY REAL CHALLENGE of curating difficulty levels. It's not obvious, it's not easy, but it always makes a game better. 

PERSONAL RANT INCOMING

Whenever the idea of diffuclty options is brought up, or, god forbid, is implemented, the disscussion becomes baffeling in the WORST way. Gamers LOVE options and versitility, until the game becomes more accessible. It just so gatekeep-like and narrowminded, with a lot of people trying to police how others play their single player games. Like, dude; Not all of us have the time to spend hours on a game without beating that one boss. Not all of us want to.  Not everyone approach games with the same skill or abilities. 

Sometimes I hear people talk about how From Software games are  about pointlessly grinding till you defeat the boss and it makes me sad, because for me they are about so much more (from those I've played).

The phrase "not all games for everyone" gets thrown about a lot-this phrase is about tastes and preferences, not about gatekeeping your favorite grinding stone.Imagine two players, Alice and Bob.

Alice is very good at video games, but she doesn't know it. She watches a lot of gaming YouTube where she sees world-class players, and she thinks that is the level that you need to be at to call yourself good at games. She plays a lot of videogames and is really good, but if you asked her, she'd say she's mediocre.

Bob is not very good at video games. He doesn't play a lot, but he enjoys the occasional one, especially if it has a good story. He likes exploring virtual worlds, but he is clumsy with a controller and besides, he has a full time job and a family, he wouldn't have time to develop a lot of skill even if he wanted to.

The difference in skill between them is so great that anything that Alice would consider a fun, fair challenge would be impossible for Bob. And anything Bob considered a fun, fair challenge would be utterly trivial for Alice.

You know where I'm going with this. Sit both of them down in front of Dark Souls.

Alice has a _great_ time. She initially struggles, as everyone does their first time through that game, but she is skilled enough that she is able to rise to the challenge. She realizes, for the first time in her gaming life, that she can beat these super-hard games everyone keeps going on about. She feels that trademark Dark Souls Sense of Accomplishment. She falls in love with Dark Souls, the first game that taught her what she's actually capable of.

Bob gives it an honest try, can't get past the Asylum Demon, and refunds the game.

Now add an easy mode to Dark Souls.

Bob has a good time now. He sets it to easy, because he knows he's not very good at games, and he R1 spams through everything. He has a great time exploring Lordran, seeing the beautiful architechture and reading the item descriptions. He never learns builds or stamina management or good positioning, but he doesn't need to. He likes the game.

And Alice? She has a good time too. She also sets it to easy, because she knows this game has a reputation and she doesn't think she'd be able to ever beat it. She thinks the level design is great and appreciates the lore and art. However, she doesn't see the fuss about the gameplay; she finds every combat encounter absolutely trivial. She barely has to use the Estus Flask and occasionally she even forgets to level. She enjoys the game well enough, but she doesn't fall in love with it. She consumes it and moves on.

This example illustrates how an easy mode in a game can make it worse, even for those who don't need it. There is a type of player who consistently chooses a challenge level that is too low for them, and the only way they'll realize this about themselves, is if a game comes along and forces them to do something really hard, with no easy ways out. Only by breaking the brick wall with their forehead will they realize that they can break brick walls with their forehead, and futhermore that breaking brick walls with your forehead is _fun_, but they will never try to break one if there is any other alternative.

Because there is a fundamental problem of game design here. You _cannot_ make a game that appeals to both Alice and Bob on a mechanical level. If you offer a single difficulty that is right for Bob, it will be trivial for Alice. A single difficulty that is right for Alice will be impossible for Bob. And a choice of difficulties, one right for Alice, one for Bob? Alice will pick the wrong one for her.

A world in which every game is accessible to players of every skill level is a world where Alices never realize what they're capable of, and there are a lot of Alices in the world, I know because I am one. Wings of Vi was the first really hard game I beat, a kaizo platformer in the vein of Celeste. That game does technically offer difficulty options, and in fact it recommends starting with Easy, because Easy is already masochistically hard. My death counter was in the quadruple digits by the end of that game (again, on Easy). Had I played Celeste at that age instead, with its richly-developed assist mode that offers everything from minor adjustments all the way to trivializing the game entirely, I would have used them, but Wings of Vi didn't give me that easy way out, it forced me to engage with it at its level, with no compromises. And thanks to that lack of options, I realized that I could beat hard games, and that I loved them.

There are many varieties of Alice. It doesn't have to be a lack of confidence in her own skill. Maybe Alice doesn't understand why anyone would do a masochistically-hard challenge for fun. She figures there must be something wrong with those people who beat games with extreme handicaps, until she actually experiences that feeling of beating a really hard challenge and realizes why it appeals so much. She'd never seek out such a challenge if there were alternatives, but when forced to do it, she realizes she loves it. Or maybe she doesn't have a lot of time to play so she'll pick easy modes for expediency when available (even if she'd have more fun playing fewer games for longer). Or maybe she is legitimately not very skilled, but is a fast learner and has the potential to be better if she pushes herself.

An uncompromising challenge has its value. It is valuable to the Alices of the world, in all their variaties. It has the tradeoff of alienating the Bobs, but should every game ever made appeal to Bob? That isn't to say Bob doesn't matter. It's also valuable to have games that Bob can enjoy, with carefully-designed difficulty options, but shouldn't there be games for Alice too?

You ever wonder why people who love Dark Souls are often resistant to the idea of an easy mode? In large part, it's because of this. It's because many of them recognize that they are Alices, that if an easy mode had been provided, they would have used it, and robbed themselves of an incredible, unique experience. That is why Dark Souls doesn't need an easy mode. That is why it would be a worse game if it did. And it's why it's a good thing that there are games with the same philosophy in regards to difficulty.Now, for the uninitiated, S.T.A.L.K.E.R - Anomaly used to be a mod for S.T.A.L.K.E.R - Call of Prypiat but it has since gone standalone meaning you don't need any of the S.T.A.L.K.E.R games to play it, making Anomaly practically it's own game that combines all the maps from all three S.T.A.L.K.E.R games into one, updates the outdated engine and adds many quality of life addons. However i am not here to talk about Anomaly's history. I am here to talk about how the way Anomaly functions and works makes it not only the best post apocalypse/semi-post apocalypse open world survival game but also the best survival game of all time in my opinion. And there are 4 very specific reasons in my mind for this:

&#x200B;

1: The way it tackles the survival needs of your character is brilliant a.k.a "You mean i don't have to babysit the hardcore survivor like they're a baby?"

This is i think one of the best features that Anomaly has over many many MANY survival games. So first thing's first, you thirst, hunger and sleep don't fill up every five seconds. Instead, in Anomaly, your hunger, thirst and sleep fill up realistically. So for example you could go through 2 whole in game days before your character needs to drink, about 3-4 days before they need to eat and about 15-16 in game hours before they need to sleep. This helps so much since you don't feel like you're babysitting the supposed to be hardcore survivor like they're a baby.

In addition to these generous meters is something that i just find brilliant: The more you deprive your character of food and drink, the more they will need to consume to get their needs down. This is such a great risk/reward scenario for you as a player. So you CAN wait for 2 whole days to pass before you feed your character but at that point you may have to actually cook them a decent meal to feed them fully instead of 3 sausages if you had fed them in the early stages of hunger. Like that is such a brilliant mechanic that both give you time to explore the world without worrying too much but also being careful to have your character properly nourished and rested if you go on long treks across the Zone

&#x200B;

2: There are remedies for everything, so much to the point it can be overwhelming a.k.a "What..wait..who..what?"

Anomaly has an insane amount of items for you take advantage of in any and all situations. There are 3 different types of small medkits, 3 different types of healing stimpacks, 3 different types of large medkits, 13 different types of pills and drugs, 3 different types of enhancement syringes, 4 different types of alcohol, 5 different types of cigarettes, 4 different types of sleeping bags, 7 different ammunition types all of which have their subcategory of ammunition, 17 different field repair items ranging from a standard gun oil to a full blown repair kit and so on and so on. And each of these items serves it's own purpose.

Heading out to a radiated zone? Well buy some anti rad pills, radiation resistance vaccine and off you go. Heading into a known big firefight? Stock up on ammo and repair items and get going. Heading on a long trek across the Zone that could take in game weeks? Grab a sleeping bag, some anti - sleep depravation cigs, well stocked guns and a filed cooking kit and good luck. All of this at first can seem downright overwhelming but once you get into the groove you will be able to see which items will be useful to you and which won't be

&#x200B;

3: Combat is brutal, hard but fair a.k.a "Huh, being shot is actually a big deal"

If you expect this to be a game where you can deal with most threats with ease you will be sorely disappointed. Anomaly is brutal...brutal and realistic.

First off, there's no convenient tag or way to distinguish friend from foe so what do you do? Well you better get those binoculars and look at their uniform buddy, or just see if they start shooting at you, though i wouldn't recommend that because, pretty much, if the enemy spots you first and starts shooting, you are pretty much dead already. 5-10 shots to your torso from even the shittiest pistol and you're history my friend, let's not even get into headshots, that's instant death. You can remedy this by buying tougher armor but that is expensive and even then, about 15-20 torso shots from a basic assault rifle and you're dead. Helping this is also Anomaly's fantastic AI who can pin you down, flank you, throw grenades to force you out of cover etc.

But, and here's where the fair part comes in, if you can die in 5-10 hits, they can die in just as many as well. If you plan a successful ambush you can pretty much take out 5 people with a single rifle cartridge. In Anomaly you are an average joe, but the enemies are also. And finally

&#x200B;

4: The choices you have at the start are ridiculous a.k.a " Freeeeeedoooooom!"

This one point is kind of cheating since the reason why there's so much choice is precisely because this is a game based on the S.T.A.L.K.E.R series but i think this counts none the less. At the start, before you even get into the game you can choose between 9 whole unique factions, each of whom have their own specific starting locations in the Zone and their own starting loadout unique to that faction. Like it's to the point where even though this game is "technically" not an RPG, it might as well be, it's got more choices in it than some actual RPG's i've played recently. And each faction has their own story narrative and sidequests. Which brings me to my final point...

&#x200B;

5: There's an actual story a.k.a "You mean i have something to drive me forwards?"

This is probably the main reason why i enjoy Anomaly so much over so many other survival games. There's a story. A damn fine and competent one as well which continues after the events of Call of Prypiat and depending on which faction you choose, this same questline will go different ways. But no worries, if you don't wanna do the main story there's plenty of fetch quests and favors to be done for your faction and the people in them

&#x200B;

I can ramble on and on about how great Anomaly is but these are the 5 main points. The fact that a team of people made this for free, expecting no compensation but out of pure labor of love is astounding to me, truly isPlayStation’s appeal, especially during the PS4 generation, came from its exclusive games. Even though some second-party titles found a new home on other platforms, games from Sony’s in-house PlayStation Studios family remained tied down to the console. But towards the end of the PS4's life-cycle, Sony moved ground when it started porting some of the console’s first-party exclusives over to PC. 

**The Beginning**

Guerrilla Games’ 2017 open-world adventure *Horizon Zero Dawn*, ported over to PC in 2020, was the first first-party game to make the big switch. This was a watershed moment for a publisher that historically kept its games --its best assets --close to its chest and exclusively available on PlayStation machinery. 

In early 2021, it was announced that Bend Studio’s 2019 open-world biker *Days Gone* would be making its way to PC. On the 17th of April 2021, the game launched on Steam and the Epic Games Store. With almost 30,000 concurrent players over its launch weekend and the top spot in that week’s Steam sales charts, Sony had a successful formula on its hand: release a game on console, squeeze as much out of it as possible in terms of sales, and then drop it on PC a few years later. 

If Sony’s intent of bringing its in-house developed games to PC going forward wasn't clear enough, then one shrewd move in the summer of 2021 made it crystal. Just a few months ago (July 2021), Sony acquired PC port and tech specialist Nixxes Software. The Dutch studio has previously worked on several PC ports for publisher SquareEnix, including the recent *Tomb Raider* reboots, 2017’s *Deus Ex: Mankind Divided*, and 2020’s *Marvel’s Avengers*. This couldn't be a clearer signal of intent from the mega-corporation, who have now outright acquired a studio known for its work on PC titles, and one that is expected to continue with this field of work moving forward.

This push forward with PC releases looks to continue into 2021. Ever since PlayStation announced its intentions to bring *Horizon Zero Dawn* to PC, fans have been clamouring for 2018’s *God of War* to receive the same treatment. It makes sense considering that this was the next first-party game to release after *Horizon*. And just like Aloy, the next chapter in Kratos and Atreus’ adventure is scheduled to come out in 2022, allowing Sony to use this game to draw a PC audience into purchasing a console in preparation for *Ragnarok*’s release. *God of War* *(2018)* was announced for PC back in October and is set to release on the 14th of January 2022. 

Following closely behind *God of War* is *Uncharted*. Consisting of 2016’s *Uncharted 4* and 2017’s standalone entry *Uncharted: The Lost Legacy*, *Uncharted: Legacy of Thieves Collection* is slated for a PC release sometime in 2022. It is tipped for a second-half of the year release though, with PlayStation already featuring a front-heavy lineup for the year. 

The collection’s release later next year will signify the milestone of five first-party and previously exclusive PlayStation games being available on PC. This is a step forward in what I feel is the right direction for Sony and PlayStation, as releasing first-party games on PC has no real downsides, only benefits.

After more than 3 years on store shelves, the title would’ve likely already sold close to its final sales numbers, and so long after launch, the game has already sold all the consoles it could. 3 years after *God of War*’s release, people aren’t going to be buying a PS4 just to play *God of War*. Sure such people do exist, but the number is minuscule and the money made is inconsequential to a multi-billion dollar company like Sony. People are instead going to be buying a PlayStation console to play recent releases. It makes sense to keep new games console exclusive, but led older titles ship over to PC. It will help drive numbers in terms of raw sales on the new platform and boost interest in upcoming sequels that are only available on PlayStation. 

For the die-hard fan out there, who worries that putting PlayStation games on PC is a losing cause for the company, it's not. A game on a new storefront means more sales for Sony. More revenue from sales for Sony means more money can be poured into PlayStation Studios. More cash on the table just means more time and money can be provided to the first-party family to make the great games that we all love and cherish. 

The future of PlayStation on PC looks bright, but what can we expect to see going forward?

**More First-Party Games On PC**

Well, one thing is for sure. We are certainly going to see more first-party exclusives jump on over to PC a few years after their launch. The massive Nvidia GeForce Now leak earlier this year mentioned a few first-party PlayStation titles, including the now confirmed *God of War (2018)* and *Uncharted: The Legacy of Thieves Collection* PC ports. In addition, the confirmation of other third-party games mentioned in the leak shows us that this leaked list of games is mostly true. 

The PlayStation games brought up in the leak were *Horizon Forbidden West*, *Gran Turismo 7*, *Returnal*, *Demon’s Souls*, *Ratchet & Clank*, *Sackboy: A Big Adventure*, and *Ghost of Tsushima*. And yeah, these titles mostly check out. 

With *Horizon Zero Dawn* already on PC, it's only a matter of time before *Forbidden West* joins its predecessor. *Gran Turismo 7* is also an obvious port. 2017’s *GT Sport* had lacklustre sales, failing to out-sell five out of the six previous mainline games in the series. By eventually porting *Gran Turismo 7* to PC, Sony will not only see an increase in sales but also a boost to the game’s online community and e-sports initiative that would have hopefully stood strong in the years after its launch in March of next year.

*Returnal* and *Demon’s Souls Remake* are two PS5 exclusives known for their difficulty and niche appeal. While this certainly doesn't make for a bad game, it does tend to hurt sales figures. *Returna*l sold around 500,000 copies within 3 months of launch, while *Demon’s Souls Remake* sold ‘more than 1.4 million copies’ in little under a year since its release. While these numbers are by no means bad, they pale in comparison to other recent first-party offerings like *Spider-Man: Miles Morales*, *The Last of Us Part II*, and *Ghost of Tsushima*. In addition, the recently released PS5 exclusive *Ratchet & Clank: Rift Apart*, sold over 1 million copies in only a month after launch. 

A direct comparison must not be taken too seriously since these games are either from established franchises or more accessible through their difficulty and launch platforms. However, with the money Sony pours into its first-party, it wants to see and expects big results. *Returnal* and *Demon’s Souls Remake* are sure to find dedicated audiences on PC, increasing sales figures and in *Returnal*’s case, giving Sony more reason to invest in the future of this new IP. 

*Sackboy: A Big Adventure* and *Ratchet & Clank* (no game was specified although it's probably referring to the 2016 remake of the original or 2021's *Rift Apart*) are more interesting propositions since these games are directed at a younger audience who prefer consoles over PCs. Sackboy: A Big Adventure is not going to rock the world in terms of sales so giving it second life over on PC is in the best interest of Sony and developer Sumo Digital. But the biggest benefit of porting these games to PC is that it will diversify PlayStation's footprint on this new platform. With a slew of more mature titles and some family-friendly fun, Sony can appeal to the entirety of this new platform's player base. 

*Ghost of Tsushima* is another expected release on PC. SuckerPunch's 2020 title was a blowout success, and with Sony making a habit of putting its marquee open-world action-adventure titles (*Horizon Zero Dawn* and *Days Gone*) on PC, *Ghost of Tsushima* looks to be next. Job listings from SuckerPunch already have given away the fact that a sequel is in the works, so Sony using this port in the future to build hype for the follow-up title seems like a good bet. 

Apart from the titles mentioned in the GeForce Now leak, we can make some predictions about what could be on the move next. With the *Uncharted* Collection on PC, NaughtyDog already has one foot in the water, so it makes sense that we could see *The Last of Us* follow suit. Sony may likely be holding it back for now though, instead choosing to release Parts I and II as a collection in the lead up to the launch of a possible Part III. 

*Bloodborne* is another game that fans are pleading gets a PC port. The landmark PS4 release is beloved by fans, praised by critics, and has been a commercial success for Sony. However, the game hasn't aged well from a technical standpoint, with it still being capped at 30 frames-per-second. Due to how developer FromSoftware have tied the character and enemy animated to this frame-rate, simply flipping a switch to open higher frame rates is not a viable solution as it will mess with the overall gameplay experience. I think this has been a limiting factor in PlayStation still not releasing a 60 FPS patch for this game. 

But if Sony does plan to continue the series with a sequel of sorts, either with original developer FromSoftware or in-house team Bluepoint Games, then porting the game to PC will be a great way to please fans and build excitement for a sequel that has been a long time coming. 

Media Molecule's *Dreams* is a game that I feel must come to PC. The creation platform has failed to take off in the way many, including Sony, expected it to. *Dreams* was meant to be something similar to Roblox but for the PlayStation ecosystem. However, it clearly didn't hit the ground running. Even simply looking in from the outside, it's obvious that *Dreams* is a technical marvel, one that has the tools and systems to foster creation and innovation. *Dreams* on PC seems like a match made in heaven, and one that Sony must bring together to ensure the long-term success of a game that has so far failed to bear the fruit of its labours. 

**Day 1 On PC?**

With Microsoft's merger of its Xbox and PC gaming initiatives into one cohesive ecosystem, it means that all Xbox Game Studios titles launch day and date on both platforms. But is this something we can expect from Sony?

I think the last stop on the train is day 1 launches across PlayStation and PC, but this is still a long time away. The PlayStation brand is growing rapidly, and soon enough it'll be big enough that sizable chunks of the brand's fanbase who prefer console gaming will continue to buy PlayStation systems to play such first-party games, even if they are available on a secondary system. And fans who prefer PC gaming can play and enjoy their games over there. Sony doesn't make its money from console sales, it does so from software sales. And more systems to sell software on means more rolling revenue for the company, and better quality products for the consumer. 

But for the time being, I think PlayStation's PC initiative will continue to bring first-party titles to PC two, three, or four years after their PlayStation release. 

**Cross-buy?**

Another key aspect of Microsoft's common ecosystem is cross-buy. Purchase a game on the Microsoft Store, and you get access to its Xbox and PC versions. This pro-consumer practice is a far cry from what Sony is currently doing. Even though its PC ports are sold at lower prices, players still have to pay twice to get access to the same product -- albeit with some graphical upgrades on the PC. 

I think if Sony makes a habit of consistently releasing its games on both platforms, then it is ludicrous to suggest that consumers should buy the game twice. But with the equally embarrassing $10 PS4 to PS5 upgrade fee Sony is charging for its cross-gen releases, I think cross-buy is the last thing we'll see them do. And that's a real shame. 

**Conclusion**

PlayStation's drive forward into the PC gaming scene was perhaps as unexpected as its success. The move has paid off big time, with boosted sales, growing fanbases, and spiralling excitement for upcoming sequels. With the acquisition of PC-port specialist Nixxes Software, Sony is showing that it is committed to expanding the PlayStation brand into uncharted territory. 

There's no doubt that more first-party games are going to make their way over to PC. With this, more people than ever before will be able to experience and cherish these wonderful games. And I think both PlayStation and the consumer will only stand to benefit from this.So this is a question that comes to my mind that delves into the ethics of the product.

Should a game, regardless of how grand it is, what is promised, how doable it is to have it delivered as promised, no matter what franchise it is based on, no matter who is behind the development process,  ...

**should the development process and the work ethic, whether good or bad or everything in between, actually justify how the game is delivered?**

**Should the consumers actually care about this or should they not care and simply think about the game that is promised is actually given to them?**

&#x200B;

This is something that would be a good idea for further discussion about **the concept of  "fairness"** (or perhaps we can use another word) in this process where the consumer will be using this said product for their entertainment, to make memories, to build bonds, to learn new skills and so on.

Would it be considered unfair to have this product where the people behind it that helped deliver the said product as promised went through a lot of pressure, stress and possibly a lot of other struggles?

**Do the ends justify the means?**

&#x200B;

When it comes to a company that has a history of poor work ethic, such as the recent frat-boy culture in Blizzard or the reports of sexual misconduct in Ubisoft,  **should these be considered when discussing the games?**

**Should these be considered when a fan decides whether they should buy and support the company in question?**

&#x200B;

Would this be considered an ambivalence that the consumer would support and consume a product for their entertainment when the means to actually acquire the wanted factors and features to obtain that said entertainment, is done through questionable work ethic or questionable means that will impact the actual entertainment value during the development process of the developers or even their own health?

**Should the impact that the development has on those involved in the development process be considered by the consumer when it comes to the purchasing and the inclination to support the company that delivered the said product for further updates and further releases?**

&#x200B;

If the consumer actually considers this, then what will/may happen in the gaming workplace?

If consumers refuse to support said companies unless the latter decides to change its philosophy and/or risk losing its employees because of the re-occurring stresses, will this affect the companies' philosophies, their development cycle and later on, the respect that they will get from the consumer?

Should this be a question of ethics or a question of practicality?**Full disclosure about me and Halo**. I never owned an Xbox, I had no feelings towards Halo franchise whatsoever from before, Bungie is not "my childhood", they are not sacred and cherished to me nor is their Halo era. Halo MCC on PC is my first dance with Halo, but obviously I was somewhat aware of Halo franchise, I could recognize MC, Cortana, The Covenant, Martin O'Donnell's music and some other elements.

**I have not played H5, Halo Wars 2 and H6, please do try not to spoil them for me** though it seems like I will have to bite the bullet and watch H5 cutscenes and then play H6, cause H5 doesn't seem like its coming to PC any time soon. 



So my point being, I was open as much as a human can be towards 343 shift, in addition to that, while I did enjoy Bungie era, I was not blown away by their games, especially the story. I liked it, sometimes loved it, but I was never blown away. Yet I have never seen a studio handle a trilogy so well, where the first entry is arguably the weakest and the 3d could be the strongest. Usually trilogies are much more uneven.

In addition to that, **I liked quite a few things about H4.** The soundtrack was mostly amazing, and I think its better than any of the previous games except H1 and Reach, I am aware this is controversial, but I felt that the old composers after making the amazing H1, were reusing its highlights to liberally, they even kind admit it in their talk about Halo: ODST. 

MC and Cortana, finally... finally have some character. In Bungie era, MC was an action movie one liner NPC, I never felt anything towards him or really cared about him, except "hey that was pretty cool". There is being the stoic silent type, and there is just not having a character beyond "badass/tough". Not that Bungie couldn't write compelling conflicting characters, we had Arbiter and Spark. While on the other hand, Cortana is the exposition machine, that cracks jokes occasionally, carried like MC by the amazing VA. But at least I felt somewhat of a character by H3.  So seeing MC and Cortana face so many obstacles and issues was refreshing. For the first time I felt like MC was done amazing, basically his character struggle is what carried me the most. 

I felt 343 gave a good showing of Forerunner tech and structures in the visual department, and that they finally showed some fucking Spartans other than MC. In fact there was some "talk" about Spartans as a thing(in Bungie era I think they only talk about them in Reach). I liked the scientist in the base that holds the Composer, her writing and performance were amazing. 

I liked the intro with Halsey, Halsey must be my fav or second fav character I have seen in Halo, although she is barely in the games.

H4 following FPS trends is a problem in itself, but I cannot put the blame only on 343 when Bungie started it with Reach, and continued with Destiny. It is a whole problem for itself and I don't want to make it about this here. 

But now we have to get to the ugly part.  


So very early in H4 I noticed problems:

- **The Pseudo Science Fiction**

Look Halo is obviously a SF Opera, but still, there is a distinct lack of care or "sense" to science, to military doings to lore. An AI runs its course in 7 years? Wait whaaat? An AI was designed from a real person, and can be healed with that person. C'mon. That just sounds so contrived, such a forced problem to the plot. Then the "Rampancy", I mean what? I really see no reason why that should be the case, maybe on a lesser degree, but an AI "getting worn out" to me sounds like it would start losing data, it would just be less functional, less responsive, less reliable. I guess we could argue about the semantics of this forever, but it just did not sit right with me cause it felt so forced and out of the blue. It is clear case of "*we have to have a sequel*, so we have to force something".  There is the another issue of Bungie games never explaining what the AIs are and what Cortana is. I still have no idea. I have seen only two more AIs in the games so far, Serina in Halo Wars and Dot in Reach, none of it helped me more. 

At one point the Librarian says [this](https://i.imgur.com/4q5c91P.jpg). Basically she says that a race's genetics have been "reduced" from a space faring race to some ere of stone age. Wait what? How? That doesn't make any sense, how is a race's tech level the same as a her genetic level? Wtf? The humans shown in this Terminal, could easily fly the space, and the humans shown flying in the space could easily adjust to stone age. That's not how it works 343, or you did not properly explain what the hell is going on there. And how, how could the Didact beat the humans so bad they forget about all the tech and are in a stone age level? This entire thing could have been solved by fixing this sentence, and replacing *genetic* with *technological*. 

Didact's defenses make no sense. There is a section in which you have to shoot some generator thing, and it has only a shield from one side. That is just, insulting. Bungie rarely made such blunders, often it made sense why and where the protagonists are going to achieve what from a rough military stand point, but for this super ultra advanced race to not shield its generator. Just what? Then why doesn't the Didact just close the passages MC is using with his ship? Just close them dude, why use weird space race obstacles? I don't know man, in this I felt the sharpest turn with Bungie and 343, it seemed like military actions and sciencey stuff always made more sense with Bungie, by all sides, there was always some kind of logic to it. 

Which leads me to the whole Humans vs Prometheans conflict that makes no sense.

- **The Flood/Prometheans thing**

Look, I think Bungie never did a good job in explaining why would the Flood be such a problem to advanced races, but 343 sure as hell made it worse more contrivances.

Wait so, the Forerunners, somehow do not noticed these incredible infestations of their planets? They are completely oblivious, they seriously just think Humans attacked them randomly. They somehow also do not notice that humans are attacking the worlds with most infestations?

Humans, somehow, cannot get across why do they do this? Are you serious? There is a terminal in which the human Lord Admiral when told a planet has only its isolated outskirts infested, says "there is no time" to *tell* the Forerunners. Just... Well I don't know, you can start by destroying only that part, that immediately will slow down the spread, meanwhile you can communicate that issue to the Forerunners, and hell even if you destroy the planet in the end, you still made progress with the explanation. 

The whole Forerunner vs Human conflict reeks of forced contrived conflict, we often see in pop culture, where writers lazily throw some excuse that we know can easily be solved with one conversation, its like the damn flood, it permeates from 20min Sitcoms to high budget Superhero movies. But video games have the luxury of more time and more text to flesh out the lore, and that's why stuff like this is less tolerable to me.

So the only thing dumber than the Librarian's solution(which is Bungie's fault), is the Didact's solution (343's fault). Since this is about H4, I have to focus on the Didact, and 343 had the benefit of hindsight, to maybe fix or flesh out problems with the Flood. So his brilliant solution is to turn Humans and Forerunners(Prometheans) into  synthetic Prometheans? Wait what??? I could see this used for specific individuals or creating specific squads, its sounds very good. But to do that on a mass scale? 

Why not just construct more drones? And by drones I mean any kind of weapon that is guided by an AI or remote controlled. You already have it in LORE, just make more Monitors to guide the armies of drones, and those drones can be anything, not just sentinels. We also clearly see that the Flood uses as a sloppy way to traverse the Galaxy(In both Bungie and 343 games), again, it just seems very unnecessary and inefficient to turn people into machines.

- **Didact**

A annoying trope that Bungie managed to avoid was the "monologuing villain". Well 343, put that sucker right in. They had, they absolutely had to have the big bad have the hero in his grip, only to talk bunch of nonsense, and the first time for reasons unclear not kill him, and the second time jeopardize his own plans for again no reason. It also doesn't help that the Didact almost speaks only in pure Macguffin. "The Composer", "The Mantle", "The flood" ugh... Btw the game never explains what the Mantle is. 

- **Conflict with the Captain**

Again a character that acts irrationally hostile only so they can be another contrived issue. The Cap of Infinity just acts completely nuts and has an irrational distrust to MC and the AI, even with the rampant AI nonsense. He seems to believe and take everything seriously except when they talk about the Didact. Not to mention, in Halo CE, we see that a common marine has cameras which record what he sees, I see no reason why MC doesn't have that, since Cortana obviously sees what he sees through the visor. Just ridiculous nonsensical conflict that ultimately leads to nowhere. The Captain is replaced by one of the blandest most forgettable people in Halo I have ever seen in Halo franchise. And it really sours it for me that this bland guy is the last person to talk with MC in the end(despite one awesome line). 

- **Covenant...**

Its never explained, anything about them, why do they suddenly want to worship the Didact. Covenant again reeks of "*must have a sequelitis*". 343 just wanted you to fight the Covenant, and just forced some conflict. Nothing is really explained to give meet. Is this a new sub faction, is this main Covenant, what is going on? I gotten say, as someone who really was invested in the Covenant's story and lore, as their characters(After H3, I was more intrigued about the where the story leads the Arbiter and Covenant than anything else), this one hurt, they felt so brushed away.


- **The ending with the nuke**

This is probably me, but from the moment the nuke explodes, until MC is saved, I had no idea what the hell happened. But at least it gave us strong character moments. 

- **"I always wanted to do that" fanfic nonsense**

As much as I enjoyed the character development for these two, they to do it, they had to go to the cheapest lowest common denominator fanfic. It ruined everything, just fucking everything, Cortana yanked by Chief was all they could think off. To what fucking low level they stopped. 

I can only go by from what the games give me, with the story and the Terminals. I should not be expected to buy some guide, or dig through written lore in side media. I feel that is cheating when you can't explain to me the major points of the plot. To me the side lore is something like how the Battle Rifle is made, stuff like that is not necessary in the game.  

There is an obvious pattern with the issues of H4, and that is that its a forced sequel, coming too fast with the same characters who's stories have ended(or are on pause). I think they had to scrap together just anything Bungie left and find some new threat, new forced conflicts. In my humble opinion, a much more sensible but riskier approach would have been to do prequels, midquels and when doing sequels focus on different characters. They could have tried throwing stuff at the wall and see what sticks, maybe play with a marine on Harvest, maybe more ODST games, different Spartans at different places. Buy more time to figure out what to do with MC and Cortana, and build a solid foundation for them when they come back. But I guess the suits at Microsoft wouldn't have liked it. 

Yet even still I am a little curious on where the story goes further and what happens, if anything Halo's gameplay loop can always carry me, its really fun.

EDIT: More stuff: Sexed up Cortana, revealing MC's face, The Librarian saving only the Didact of the entire race, her bizarre love and apologia for Humans. So she puts only one Forerunner in sleep but the one that wants to destroy her precious Humans, just what even... \[ Cross-posting from r/Xbox , I suspect maybe this topic is broader than limiting to that subreddit - or that community isn't as open to discussion on it? \]

I've started to notice what *appears*  to be a strange trend with Xbox, Game Publishers, and engagement with  Sales Promos (or in extreme cases even publishing to the platform).   It's more than a little interesting to me, I'm hoping someone has  insight in what in the factors contributing here.

I  own multiple platforms and actively track the same games for sales  across all of them via XBDeals, PS Prices, and Deku Deals.  One of the  neat things those websites provide is insight into historical sale  engagement by the publishers (check out the graphs mid-page and isolate  digital deals from each platform's respective storefront).  I'm also one  of those weirdos that double or triple-dips on games (it's some weird  hang-up on "collecting" the game on each platform, I wait for  significant sales to round out my digital game libraries over time) - so  I just happen to be informally monitoring sale activity across  platforms for that reason.

There's  also a general sentiment in Xbox subreddits that games included in  their periodic sales are either lacking in breadth and/or percent  discount.  I'm not sure on the latter piece, but know anecdotally that  there is merit to the former.  This resonates particularly well when  compared against publisher engagement in Playstation sales events.

So, a few examples for the sake of discussion.  Check out activity on a few titles across platforms:

**The Messenger (Developed by Sabotage Studio, Co-Published by Sabotage Studio & Devolver Digital)**

* [https://www.dekudeals.com/items/the-messenger](https://www.dekudeals.com/items/the-messenger)
* [https://psprices.com/region-us/game/2777916/the-messenger](https://psprices.com/region-us/game/2777916/the-messenger)
* [https://xbdeals.net/us-store/game/601923/the-messenger](https://xbdeals.net/us-store/game/601923/the-messenger)

**Levelhead (Developed by Butterscotch Shenanigans, Published by Butterscotch Shenanigans)**

* [https://www.dekudeals.com/items/levelhead](https://www.dekudeals.com/items/levelhead)
* [https://xbdeals.net/us-store/game/581577/levelhead](https://xbdeals.net/us-store/game/581577/levelhead)

There also seems to be a trend where publishers elect ***not*** to publish to Xbox entirely.  Examples here are like the phenomenal **Transistor by Supergiant Games** and amazing **Spelunky 2 by Mossmouth**.  It can't be that the Xbox customer base is too small to make publishing viable, right?

The takeaway here being there has to be something driving the lack of consistency between platforms.  Some thoughts here:

* Is  it that Xbox is not as engaging / supportive of Indie Studios? Or  conversely, that Playstation and Nintendo are more engaging and  supportive, which incentives developers / publishers to engage more on  those platforms?
* Do Playstation and Nintendo offer better terms during sales that  incentivize engagement by the publisher (presumably in the form of  reduced cut to the platform)?  Is that even a thing that happens?
* Some  of these games did participate in Xbox Game Pass;  Is there something  related to that which prevents participation in sales (e.g., an attempt  to secure purchases at full / near-full price from customers that played  the game during Xbox Game Pass after Game Pass ended)?

I'm  really interested in the market factors that might be driving this, it  would be great if anyone familiar with the business / economics behind  publishing could share their insight!Everyone knows about Cyberpunk 2077 and it is still being updated.

Another thing to consider is that Cyberpunk 2077 is such a big deal that its updates also get reviews regularly.

However, fans are still dissatisfied with its bugs and glitches and most of them have not been properly fixed or removed as of yet.

&#x200B;

Now, this is an interesting case to consider discussing because there are a few factors here.

The game was announced and was under development for a long time and it was developed by a respectable company that brought a high-quality franchise in the Witcher series.

The quality that they delivered in the Witcher series cultivated the game's hype.

This could have also been the case  that there are many possibilities on the stories and themes that can be written a dystopian world of a near-future where technology is king, similar to other games and stories that already used this era as a way to indicate discourse of some kind like in the famous game Deus Ex.

However, the results were different and many criticised CD Projekt for the things that they marketed but were not delivered and for the poor state that the game was in.

However, some criticised that the reason a partial reason of why it was heavily criticised upon release, regardless of the state upon launch and that CD Projekt did not delay the game again before launch since it was delayed a few times, was because of the extra amount of hype that the fans had before the game's release. 

One speculation can be that this potentially encouraged the developers to add extra crunch time to deliver the game as planned. Or at least, this could be speculation considering that there has been a lot of recent insight about crunch time in the gaming industry and the toxic culture in the workplace.

Something that was also briefly mentioned are the poor work ethic in CD Projekt, including crunch culture - [https://www.thegamer.com/cd-projekt-red-overrated/](https://www.thegamer.com/cd-projekt-red-overrated/)

&#x200B;

There have been a few games that were also hyped and eagerly awaited by beloved fans and were developed by companies that already delivered many respectable franchises.

&#x200B;

These include games like Battlefield 2042, Assassin's Creed Unity and so on. 

But the results were different and the fans were angered by this, whether it is because of technical issues, missing features that were promised to be added later on, and so on.

So the question that needs to be asked is what are the re-occurring factors?

And also, whose fault is it?

Is the fault coming from the developers, perhaps a lack of time or ambitions that were too high, or perhaps the work ethic affected the quality of the development of the game?

Or is it because of the fans that demanded too many things or were overly critical or overly eager before release that affected the development of the game and/or the overall verdicts when they were released?**Intro**

For a bit of context: I recently read some comments in a comment section somewhere, where some people were expressing their frustration/disappointment that the meaning of "roguelike" had changed from the classic "top-down, turn-based, grid-based, procedurally generated dungeon crawler" description of the genre, and now in popular culture meant what it means today (short, difficult games with heavily procedural and random number-generated encounters, rewards, bosses, etc). I felt confused, because [I swear we all collectively got past this at some point in the past 8 years](https://www.reddit.com/r/truegaming/comments/1so41r/what_does_roguelike_mean_now/). But since it seems we haven't, I figured it might be worth spewing some words over this.

Alright, so if you've ever watched Game Maker's Tookit, in his video ["Do We Need a Soulslike Genre"](https://youtu.be/Lx7BWayWu08?t=189) he brings up one group's personal definition of the word "roguelike", which they call ["The Berlin Interpretation"](http://www.roguebasin.com/index.php/Berlin_Interpretation). Essentially a group of roguelike fans came together at a convention in 2008, and had a big discussion about what they think of when they think "roguelike", and then they wrote it down and gave it a fancy name.

**The Simple Point About Languages**

Now let's get the obvious response out of the way: all language changes over time, and new meaning, connotations, metaphorical extention, etc, get added to words. There's an [apocryphal story](https://quoteinvestigator.com/2012/10/31/st-pauls-cathedral/) that illustrates this well:

>Some words change in meaning for no apparent reason. Such changes explain the fact that the architect of St. Paul’s Cathedral was pleased when King James called it “**amusing, awful, and artificial.**” In those days amusing meant amazing, awful meant awe-inspiring, and artificial meant artistic.

*(The story's probably not true, but the point about King Charles calling the St. Paul's Cathedral design "artificial", and in that time meaning what we now mean when we say "artistic" is well-supported.)*

So we're done here, right? Well, no. I've got one more point: and that the genre names aren't equations or formulas, they're loose categories we come up with to try to convey something about something.


**The Complicated Thing About Genre Names**

For example, take the genre of "fantasy". What if there's no magic in the story? No elves or goblins? What if there's modern technology? What if the culture takes cues not from the Lord of the Rings-style European "knights and breastplates" but Medieval Japan, or China, or anywhere else in the world?

Maybe we can look to [Prototype theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prototype_theory) to explain why some things feel distinctively more or less "Fantasy" than others, but ultimately, it's not a discrete thing, it's a fuzzy thing. And where you draw that line is never going to be a definitive thing that everyone is going to agree with.

**Genre Names Aren't Just Definitions, and They Don't Follow Simple Logical Rules**

The second is that game genre names are names. There seems to be a lot of people who think that a genre name should be a literal definition (e.g. First Person Shooter = A game presented from a first-person camera perspective where you shoot), and in that sense, "Roguelike" should define as "Like Rogue", but that's not the case. "Role-playing game" in literal terms is so vague as to be meaningless, but people understand what you mean when you say you like classic computer RPGs, or modern Western RPGs, or JRPGs. You can talk about "RPG elements", and people will have an idea of what you're talking about (numerical stats, leveling up by gaining experience points).

But that's just the tip of the iceberg.

Take "Puzzle game", Tetris is a completely different experience from something like [Cogs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cogs_(video_game\)), which is very different from [Professor Layton](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Professor_Layton) and a world apart from [Spacechem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SpaceChem).  Some puzzle games go infinitely until you lose and your aim is to get a highscore, others literally have a set number of, pre-designed challenges. Some challenge spatial reasoning, other logical, some are about constructing relatively simple patterns under time pressure, and still others are about open-ended design challenges that give you enough tools to [create a working brainfuck intepreter](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EzzLzUCRmBw).

Then there's the nature of literal different category groupings, where the Japanese idea of an "ADV Game" is somewhat different than an English speaker's idea of "Adventure Game". Or the idea of a genre where the seemingly shared element is [that the game features pretty girls](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bish%C5%8Djo_game).

**A Brief Digression on the origin of "Rogue-lite"**

The term "Rogue-lite" in 2013 was coined by the developers of "Rogue Legacy" to market their game, as instead of true permadeath, in-between runs you would be able to spend resources to get persistent upgrades, like health, damage increases, and unlock new classes (what people nowadays tend to call "meta-progression"). I know [because I was there 8 years ago in the thread](https://www.reddit.com/r/gaming/comments/1ch4jh/been_working_on_this_game_for_over_a_year_and_a/c9gf50w/) and the marketing page still has the word listed as [*Rogue-"lite"*](https://cellardoorgames.com/roguelegacy/) (also in other [reddit posts about it](https://www.reddit.com/r/Games/comments/1h6xx2/roguelite_generational_rpg_rogue_legacy_now/)), because it was considered novel wordplay. You can look for yourself at [wiktionary](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/rogue-lite) and it's google groups/usenet archive, and there's [only one instance before Rogue Legacy came out that's even close to the meaning](https://groups.google.com/g/rec.games.roguelike.development/c/QhatHlPqTZk/m/DIe5JfO22eEJ).

Before that, I was more familiar with people calling them "rogue-like-like(s)". This entire point isn't important, but I just want to put it on the record since I've never seen anyone mention or record it. If you know of an earlier instance where people were using the term, feel free to correct me and prove I'm being overly presumptuous and dumb.

**So How Are People Talking About Games with These Kinds of Elements Nowadays?**

Here's how, in the year 2021, I find that people are describing Roguelikes.

1. "Roguelike" - Broad generalization of games that are procedural and feature some element of permadeath (may include meta-progression).

2. "Classic/Traditional/Other Term Roguelike" - or something along those lines to describe the Nethack/Dungeon Crawl Soup/Brogue

3. "Roguelike [Blank]" - As a modifier to a genre, like "2D", "First-person", "Action", "Puzzle" *(e.g. "Hades is a roguelike action dungeon crawler video game developed and published by Supergiant Games.")*

4. "Roguelite" - Roguelikes that don't have the traditional elements top-down Nethack elements.

5. "Roguelike Elements" - Basically synonymous with "Roguelite" (e.g. "Downwell is a combination of a vertically scrolling shooter and platform game with elements of a roguelike.")

**Conclusion**

In short, the meaning of roguelike has grown and shifted over the years. That's a normal thing, and all language changes over time. Genre names are fuzzy things, and I could go on and on trying to find the different patterns and strategies English speakers have in coming up with genre names (compare definitional mechanical ones like "Third Person Shooter" against tonal ones "Horror"), but I have no idea how deep that rabbit hole goes. Finally, while I hope that we had all moved on and stopped being bothered by "roguelike" no longer meaning "The Berlin Interpretation", I'm not upset if you still only ever refer to "Roguelike" to mean "Games like Rogue, Nethack, and the like". Just understand that other people have mostly settled on a new understanding of the term.One of my favorite old school games that I've gone back and played again and again is Majesty: The Fantasy Kingdom Sim [wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Majesty:_The_Fantasy_Kingdom_Sim), [steam](https://store.steampowered.com/app/25990/Majesty_Gold_HD/). I don't have any kind of strong preference for old games, its just that there really hasn't been a good spiritual successor to the first game. There was a Majesty II released, and a Majesty mobile game. Majesty II doesn't have the same feel as the original (I'll get into why I think that is), and I admit I haven't even tried the mobile game because the reviews for it are awful.

## What is Majesty, and why is it good?

Majesty is a real time strategy game, and many of the elements will be familiar to anyone who has played an RTS. There are recruiting buildings, defense buildings, money making buildings, and some specialty buildings that might have multiple functions. You manage your economy and recruit units to win against the enemy. Some of these buildings unlock spells for the player. Those spells include, single unit attacks, AoE attacks, healing, resurrection, map reveals, etc.That is the standard RTS part. Where it diverges from most other RTS games is that you do not directly control the units you have recruited.

Instead these units have personalities and goals. They go about fighting, exploring, leveling up, and upgrading their gear all on their own. You can influence where they go by placing bounty flags (only an explore and attack flag in the first game).

What makes the game interesting and fun is that in order to win most maps you have to shepherd a group of heroes from weaklings into powerhouses. You can use spells to take out some enemies, but spells require gold. So a spell ends up being a short term one-off fix, but heroes only require the initial recruitment cost of gold. And any gold they earn from looting monster dens/corpses can be fed back into your economy. In fact spells are even worse because they are a gold *drain*. Investing in bounties, or heroes can feed gold back into your economy, but spell gold is gone forever.

Whats happening in Majesty is actually *two* games being played simultaneously. A traditional role playing game, where a hero levels up, gears up, and fights monsters. And the RTS game that I have been describing. You are playing the RTS game, and the computer is playing the RPG for you as all of the heroes that you have recruited. The computer's role in playing the RPG is the "sim[ulator]" part of the title.

## The difficulty in making a successor

Majesty 1 has an RTS that the player plays, and an RPG that the computer is simulating for them. The main reason that I think Majesty 2 doesn't have quite the same feel as the first one is that it more heavily leans into the RTS aspects, and leaves behind the simulation aspects. By doing so it ruined the one thing that made it special, and became just a slightly more frustrating than normal RTS game where you don't control your units directly.

I believe anyone else that tries to make a game like Majesty 1 could easily fall into the same exact trap. If you set out to make an RTS you *will not recreate* Majesty 1. The focus would need to be on the sim part, and expanding the scope of the RPG that the computer is playing for the player.

I almost want to cry when I read about the sequel that died in development, because it sounds like they had exactly these thoughts. There is an old interview about the game [here](https://web.archive.org/web/20060314224055/http://www.gamespot.com/pc/strategy/majesty2/news_6026166.html):

> Jay Adan: Early on we decided that we didn't want Majesty 2 to be a small step forward. We wanted to completely reevaluate all of Majesty's strengths and weaknesses to see what we could learn from them, then design the sequel from that perspective.

>One thing that has been very clear to us is that while we had been building a "Fantasy Kingdom Sim," what we ended up creating was really a hybrid RTS where your units could rise in strength like an RPG, and they didn't have to do as they were told as with a sim. Majesty Legends is placing a lot more emphasis on the sim side of things. This will change a number of things but most importantly the relationship you have with your heroes and the pace of the game.

>In Majesty there was, at least early in the game, a sense that you had to protect your kingdom quickly or else the forces of evil were going to overwhelm you and destroy the kingdom. While it was sometimes exhilarating, it was also frustrating. Just when your kingdom had a feeling of stability and you had a chance to really play with it, the scenario would end. You could continue on from there if you chose to, but there wasn't much for you to do. It became a little like watching an ant farm (of course ants don't periodically launch a meteor storm at an offending rat man). In Majesty Legends we want to give players a chance to really get to know their kingdom and play it at their own pace. The addition of walls in your kingdom means that you can feel relatively secure from external threats while you build your kingdom, recruit heroes, and prepare them for forays into the wilds.For me, it's so convenient, specially for the players since now, where they practice is the place where they will also compete with the other team. At the comfort of their own team facilities, they don't have to travel and all. But there's also problems like potential cheating of players since they're not monitored that much compared to the traditional venue events. What are your opinions?I know this seems like i'm overdramatic and all of that, but I don't know who to ask about this. I have tried playing online video games for quite some time now but I cannot get through a single match without being kicked/made fun of. I'm female, and I rarely speak on matches. When I do, someone flirts. Even without doing voicechat, everyone's so rude and it's embarassing me when my friends try to get me to play with them. Maybe there isn't an easy way to this. Should I just practice a lot with bots? I quit Valorant for this reason.

Edit: Hey guys. Appreciate all the nice words and techniques you've given. Yeah, "growing a thick skin" is a sad thing but I guess it's the most viable option. I have always wanted to play competitive games, only if it wasn't for this. But I figured the mindset is what matters. I'll make sure to have fun and not let things get to me. Made me quite emotional seeing the nice comments of encouragement and emphasis on mental health. I'm hoping someday we would have to stop using voice changers and change our nicknames. And I hope everybody is making the effort to make their own communities safer for new players.
Feel free to comment more because I'm sure there's going to be people looking this up on google and I hope this is one of the first things they see. You guys are amazing. ❤️My favorite game mechanics in gaming are always related to traversal and mobility. But you can see the limitations last gen hardware has had on the scope of these mechanics, primarily speed.

For instance, while I've loved the mobility in Spider-Man, Infamous Second Son, and Sunset Overdrive, but have been disappointed in how slow the max speed is in these games. Obviously this is because the hardware cannot load the highly detailed maps very quickly, so even the physics-driven swings of Spider-Man is capped, limiting the realism of Spidey's physics. Of course, this isn't an issue if you strip the world of assets, such a in the Sonics. Super fast running tracks in an empty world.

I have high hopes that the next Spider-Man game will allow you to convert Spidey's terminal velocity into a forward swing.

There's also teleportation. In last gen, teleportation had to limited to only a few yards, such as blink in Dishonored. Shadow of War does a valiant job of hiding a brief loading moment when you do a teleport-attack, but I can't help but look forward to being able to instantly teleport to any point one can see on the map. 

What other mobility opportunities can the new hardware offer us in the next decade?Now for the unanitiated a hub/hubworld is a place of rest in a game that you often return to to resupply, talk to people, get sidequests or, in particular cases, help the hub grow and advance yourself. A lot of times this hub is your only place of safety in the entire game, a place where you don't have to worry about enemies or getting attacked. A hub can be anything from a small clearing, a building to an entire town/city or even an entire small world in and of itself. A good and well designed hub can not only make you feel homey and safe, it can also actively bolster your enjoyment of the game, which is why good hubs are always well remembered

My personal favorite hub probably of all time is Majula from Dark Souls 2. That's right, not Firelink Shrine, Majula. Firelink Shrine in both DS1 and DS3 are okay but in my mind nothing has or will top Majula because it encompasses all the things that i talked about perfectly:

1: The entire area is a huge contrast to the rest of the game 

While most of Dark Souls 2 is dark, punishing, downright depressing at times, Majula is bright, serene, peaceful. You could sit there and almost feel like nothing is wrong, like everything's gonna be all right as the constant sound of the waves and the peaceful serene music wash over you

2: It is the only place in the entire game that you can level up in

A lot of people saw this, and still do as a negative thing for DS2 since in both DS1 and DS3 you can pretty much level up at any bonfire you want but i respectfully disagree. Being able to level up only at Majula, by talking to a specific NPC made the entire place feel 10 times more important to me as a player. By having this one very important connection to Majula it made me connect more with the place, it made it truly feel like a home/port in the storm. Firelink Shrine by comparison just doesn't have that. And finally

3: You feel like you are helping Majula grow

This is probably the main factor as to why i like Majula so much. At the start of the game it is nothing but rubble and stone, with a few depressed characters walking about. But, as you progress throughout the game more and as you rescue or recruit more characters Majula livens up. Little by little as you progress the game, as you move on and keep working towards your end goal Majula turns from a ramshackle to a little small village filled with NPC's. It makes you feel like you're actually doing something, like you're helping this world heal, which is also in line with Dark Souls 2's more hopeful feel than the other two games

A good hub can not only feel nice to be in, it can actively reflect upon the way you play the game, thus making you want to return to it more, thus making you care about it more, thus making your enjoyment of the game itself increaseRecently I've been introducing people to the series, trying to explain why the games are so beloved and what is so enticing about them. 

If you ever have a friend who is clueless about the series and wants to know why we love the series so much, I hope you can show them this thread. (Bookmark it!) 

For me, it's the pure charm of the whole thing. I've played though the 1st game at least 3 times now, but I rarely get tired of it despite it showing it's age. 

If I had to define Kingdom Hearts in 1 word, it would be that, 

#CHARM. 

Even though the worlds lack a literal skybox (yes, they do.) The games ooze charm, it's the light humor paired with the serious moments that I enjoy most. It's the feeling of being in Aladdin or Lion King (not little mermaid) that is magical. 

The game(s) ooze(s) with charm despite being very dated. It really would benefit from a modern remake but its still very playable, you just notice more corners cut then before or obvious development flaws with the limited technology. 

The original game and its sequels (except bbs, 3 and ddd really) are the perfect cultivation of FFxDisney. 

You have the incredible backdrop of final fantasy paired with cartoon Disney, and it all comes together beautifully, 

It's just a beauty to behold and play though, even if It comes off as archaic or theme parkish.

Let's break down the game and it's sequels into multiple sections and discuss WHY the game is so good and the series is so beloved. 

#The gameplay 

it's fun and satisfying, the original game is clunky and repetitive, but the other games tweaked the gameplay and allow more combos and more fluid gameplay. 

The boss battles are probably some of the best I've ever played in an JRPG to this day, they're challenging but not too challenging (except Sepiorth, he can go **** himself). 

Every game in the series added a new mechanic to innovate. After the original, Chain Of Memories added the card system, 2 added drive forms (best mechanic), bbs added the D-links system, and so on and so forth. 

Each game doesn't get stale because it innovates. It isn't content to just give you a sequel with an expanded narrative, each game redefines the gameplay. 

The game IS an JRPG. It asks you to manage parties and abilities, you want Donald to heal you more often? Well..he won't but you can set it so he will try. You want Tarzan instead of goofy? Go for it. 

The game's enemies never feel too easy. The heartless always pose a threat in numbers. I've lost to Red Nocturnes repeatably in groups despite them being one of the games weakest enemies. The games always makes you feel like you're never too strong. And thats a good thing. No matter how much you level up, you never feel overpowered. 

The magic system isn't anything to really write home about. Its good for when you're in a pinch. But otherwise, I never really relied on it. 

#STORY AND CHARACTERS. 

The plot isn't as bad as people say, I tend to think beyond what the game gives me and think of it on a personal or deeper level and how it ties into the other games. 

The whole darkness and friendship thing is silly but persona 5 basically does the same thing on an adult level, right? So why do we admonish KH for doing it years earlier? 

The overall arching plot is very long and we all tend to make fun of how complex it is, and who the main villain is and what is Nomura smoking this week, but there is just something about the story that is interesting. The heartless invading, the worlds coming together, there is a reason to keep playing. And it isn't to just get Ultima, 

Of course you have to play almost every game (or read the wiki or watch cutscenes for games like Union X or Re:coded) to really grasp the full scope of things and understand every game's intro cutscene. 

But once you do, you realize the plot is a lot deeper then people say. And you start to see scenes differently, like Roxas in front of the mansion. 

You start to question stuff after playing KH3 and the DLC, 

As far as characters, Sora as a character isn't cut and dry, I feel bad for him having to go though everything, he is a very likable character. Roxas is even more of a tragic figure, but the game's characters all seem realistic and they carry their burdens with them. They experience trauma and regret. They reference previous moments in the games and games like COM show fear and worries. Sora develops exponentially as a character. All the main characters do. They face their fears. 

#Design 

When talking about artistic design, the game doesn't shy away from the absurd or crazy. The game(s) use a myriad of color palettes, areas like Traverse Town feel cozy and nightly, whereas areas like Tarzan's jungle feel green and alive, the original games cut corners due to technical limitations as mentioned, and areas like Wonderland paint images on walls to give the appearance of realism. The Disney worlds all feel true to their movie counterparts. Sometimes coming off as a theme park but still, they all feel unique and are fun to explore.

They are all crafted very well, but the enemy design is one of the more interesting points to touch across, now while I am not a fan of the FM's color swaps, opting for more colorful enemies rather then the blue and black variety, but the enemy designs cannot be undervalued, I love the soldiers and shadows, i love all the boss designs, they all look..odd. and that is the point of the heartless. They are supposed to look odd and wacky. Every world has a unique take on the heartless, and its always interesting to see how they designed heartless specifically for that world. Nobodies in the 2nd game look more alien and that is the point, they are supposed to be terrifying and alien compared to the wacky and odd heartless. They're an antithesis. 

#Sound and music. 

The game's orchestral sound is a huge part for me, every single world has a soundtrack that sticks with you. I KNOW traverse town when I hear it, I KNOW deep jungle when I hear it. They are all unique and identifiable. All the worlds themes fit the world. They're all wonderful. And I never get tired of them. No matter the game. I especially love the castle oblivion theme from COM, it has stuck with me all these years. You know a game has good music when the music is easily identifiable. Im not sure if the music is worth jt to listen to in a car ride, but it certainly is perfect for the game's settings and enjoyable while in the world it is meant for. 


The game's sound design is another interesting thing to note as every enemy has a different sound when you attack them, soldiers clank, shadows whisp, Nocturnes make a chirp, no enemy sound is the same (im pretty sure). The keyblade also clanks when you hit a wall or surface, Sora, Donald and Goofy's footsteps are all heard when running or walking. The keyblade chain can also be heard when walking if it is out. The game's menus use a traditionally pseudo Jrpg sound, but its charming and identifiable. The sound the heartless make when they spawn is recognizable. Every sound in the game is memorable and fans can tell you what each sound is, did you know Sora's fire spell and the spell that Nocturnes use are different sounds? They are. 

#Animation, graphics and nerd stuff 

The originally game ran at around 25fps, it was slow but fun, as of now, on the PS4/PS5 versions, the game runs at a stable 60fps, and around 30 on the ps3, Kingdom hearts 1 and 2 used an engine called the Luminous engine, it was an in-house engine from Square Enix, when 3 came out they switched it to the commonly used unreal 4, the original game used a simple concept, enter a room, NPCs would either spawn or enemies would. Pre-determined chests might spawn if enemies were determined, giving the players the incentive to explore the area more, animation wise, the game would sometimes slow down if too many enemies spawned or cutscenes were too heavy for the system it was running on, (this was remedied as of the ps4 versions). A lot of us original ps2 players fondly remember these scenes as such and find it weird to see them running smoothly and assumed they were part of the design. We still loved it regardless. The original games never dipped below 20fps that I can remember. There was slowdown with the drive forms in the ps3 versions but otherwise the games ran very well. Albeit slow. 

Graphically, the original games have not aged well, even with the HD versions, the character's faces seemingly "painted on", lip syncing isn't accurate, and there are clearly non HD textures strewn all about. Some as low as 144p. (Wonderland is a good example). Areas seem very hallwayish, with enclosed spaces evident by the painted on walls. The worlds never truly feel open because of this. The 2nd game feels slightly more open with larger spaces but still suffers from the hallway syndrome. 

#Closing thoughts

So what makes Kingdom hearts so special? Is it nostalgia? I grew up with the series like many of you. I had friends who would cosplay as Sora or Kairi, or used the Heartless emblem as profile pictures on MySpace. 

But, given I've played multiple iterations and still find joy in them like many of the people here, it can't be nostalgia.  I've pointed out the game's flaws. We know the original is SEVERELY dated. 

Maybe it's just the fact that everything i mentioned comes together beautifully to create a masterpiece that very few games can top in it's genre. The fun gameplay, the sense of mystery and wonder in the story, ive played so so so many games all throughout my life. 

But Kingdom Hearts? There is just something special about it. Something unique. Something that puts a smile on my face as I boot up the game and that iconic menu piano theme plays, 

And then I hear it again..

"I've been having these weird thoughts lately..is any of this for real? Or not?"There will be spoilers below so be warned 

Sometimes in a game we are faced with a battle that we are not meant to win. no matter how hard we try our defeat is scripted?

Sekiro has a good (or bad) example >!at the start of the game you will face an unwinnable fight against that samurai dude. New players will get steamrolled fairly quickly but if you have played before you can actually "beat" him. However your " reward" for beating him is the exact same cutscene but with a 2 second extra part where someone throws a shuriken at you and you lose anyway<

Another example that I actually like is Halo >!reach. at the end of the game you are the last Spartan left on reach as the covenant move in and begin to glass the planet. You fight waves of enemies until you eventually are defeated. This is the only example of an unwinnable fight that I actually like for 2 reasons. The first one is that it is actually unbeatable because the enemies get stronger and stronger even the best player will fall. And 2. It fits the narrative of loss and fighting a losing battle. The player is motivated to fight until their dying breath and take as many enemies with them as possible!<

What do you think about these fights ? What are some good and bad examples and how can developers  ensure they are effective and not just cheap and lazy feelingI liked Halo Infinite but I really disliked that ending, not only did it felt rushed but also it made me feel as if the entire game was incomplete.

In that last room with the boss, I even went through the floor once, had to kill myself to restart the checkpoint.

The story was the real thing that bothered me though; it seemed like there was a huge chonk of content missing from the middle of the game and its conclusion.

Seemingly they show Fernando getting tortured out of nowhere, I frankly don’t even know how he got captured, then you get into a fight with an elite and almost immediately right after, you fight another Escharum, the brute asshole who’s been terrorizing you for the entirety of the game, he comes out from nowhere, taunts you a bit, then he’s dead.

And after that segment you just go to the place Cortana died to kill the Khan Maykr, then the game wraps up with a fairly predictable ending that only serves to pave the way to its sequel.
The epilogue showing the classic sequence of the “bad guy survived” and done…


I don’t know, I guess I just expected for some more twists and character development, I disliked the pilot (Fernando) all the way through, he behaves like a complete pessimistic asshole through the entirety of the experience, I guess he was supposed to embody the frustration and anger of the annihilation of the human race, but he ended up coming off as an annoyance, more than someone I should feel empathy for.

I also felt as if the whole arc of the Weapon realizing she was Cortana and measuring the weight of her actions wasn’t nearly developed enough, you get one cutscene, a couple of conversations of her feeling bad, in disbelief that she did terrible things, and by the end, whatever individuality she had, had all of the sudden been replaced by a bit of Cortana’s personality, I just felt as if this detracted from the character more than add to it, and the fact that the game ended with the classic, almost cliche, “the adventure is just beginning” ending, just left me with a sour flavour in my mouth.


In retrospect the game does have its moments though, but I felt as if what truly elevated this game was its gameplay, as it should be perhaps, but I cannot help but to fault the game for its storyline.
Clearly the game must have had some form of troubled development, this is a game that’s been in development for more than four years, with a huge delay last year after the terrible response the game’s original showcase caused.

https://www.polygon.com/interviews/22791272/halo-infinite-development-crunch-interviews-craig#:~:text=In%20Polygon's%20recent%20interview%2C%20Ross,have%20the%20puzzle%20put%20together.%E2%80%9D

My guess is that, they went and reworked a multitude of different things but I also feel as if a lot got cut beyond the game’s open world.

https://www.ign.com/articles/halo-infinite-open-world-cut-down-zelda-size


I don’t know, I feel as if this game needed to commit to certain risks and it needed a bit more time to develop certain aspects of its story, still, it’s an excellent gameplay experience though.This is something I'm questioning since ive always thought that there is a difference. This text is also poorly written and leans in favor of Japanese game design. Warning: Broad generalization ahead, since some people get angry and they also have rights! 

I'm playing Mario + Rabbids for the first time, and there is simply something about the design choices when it comes to art style, menues, music and pacing in gameplay that is almost characteristic of either one of these styles. So much so, that I immediately knew that the game actually wasn't made in Japan, and I was right! It just didn't feel like the other Mario games do. 

Anybody that feels the same? 

I guess there are exceptions to this. Like Metroid Prime couldve been from both. The Twin Snakes to GC don't really feel western but it was also directed by a Japanese movie director. Also WWE games are all Japanese but I'm assuming they don't "feel" Japanese?
Even when trying Blinx for the Xbox Original, not knowing who made it, there is something with the cutscenes that just feel uniquely like a lot of Japanese games. Kind of an Ape Escape vibe. 

If you blindly played Lost Planet, Vanquish or Bayonetta from the ps3 generation, would you guess if it's western or eastern despite two of them being very Gears of War-like? 
Would you think Metal Gear Solid is made in the USA because of its setting, but Splinter Cell is Japanese because one level was in Japan? Can you tell when a Japanese producer is interpreting western stuff like the medieval attributes of Dark Souls, versus western developers making everything Japanese/other cultures into some fortune cookie type of kitsch? 
Even better, would an average gamer have ever guessed correctly if Ghost of Tsushima was a Japanese or an American game? 

So is it something more complicated at play here, or is this as obvious to me that there is clearly a style difference here? What is the style difference then? Some attention to detail, or some different perspective? Something with the narration? 
Or is it just that they're using different programs and 3D engines, giving it a Japanese and respectively Western feel? 

I'm gonna broadly generalize here. My first thought is that Japanese developers aren't afraid to combine many more elements from other genres in their games, no matter what the actual game is suppose to become in the end. 
Either Japanese games are more genre-defying even if it is "an action game", or a Japanese action game doesn't care what their audience thinks and creates solely for something to be its own thing. They also take advantage of its limitations to be creative. Like using a door as an eerie loading screen, like in Resident Evil. 
While western developers in my perspective seem to keep themselves in the same "style category" when creating an idea for a game, and barely putting in layers that would give it more nuance. For example if it's a war-game, then it must be war-like music, just like in Hollywood. The character arcs are also built almost as if they are meant to win in the end, or am I wrong here? 
Japanese developers surely blend styles more. Parasite Eve is a horror game that has techno-music it its fighting, but most western games would probably choose something resembling more of a halloween-themed spookyness. Japanese games doesn't need an Arkham Asylum to have a crazy Joker character to "match it" with the Gotham society and the very similar baddies in the game, but instead they have a medieval/magical/mecha society with varied world building, and have Kefka instead. 


Is this a dumb perspective to have, or am I right here somewhere? Is this the same bullcrap people have been writing for ages? I wouldn't know. Feel free to teach me something regarding video games then!I'm a fan and I'm very excited for Elden Ring. And before any fanboys get mad, I don't have a problem with the difficulty, it's a signature of these games and it's what makes them so satisfying. HOWEVER, I'm really hoping they update their game design a bit for Elden ring.    


1. **Story-telling:** I think environmental story telling is great and there are some awesome NPCs across these games but there is also a point where I think it just becomes lazy. If it was all cool NPCs with cryptic (but engaging) dialogue that'd be fine, but excessive item descriptions and nonsensical (and boring) NPC dialogue needs to be toned down in my opinion.  Even just a simple starting cut scene can go a long way in giving the game a sense of purpose without ruining the mystique. 
2. **Direction:** I don't want hand holding by any means but a tiny bit of direction here and there can go a long way and make the game more fun and engaging, instead of just ending up wandering around fighting the same enemies over and over without a purpose. 
3. **Explanations of game mechanics:** This is my biggest issue with souls-like games in general. The very loose and vague story telling is manageable but why do they apply that same logic to explaining how the game works? In my opinion that is just super lazy, especially when you include somewhat complex stats, weapon/armour mods etc. I'm a busy person, I sometimes can't game for a couple weeks, a month even and when I come back there's very little info in game to explain how the fuck everything works. I hate always having to watch a youtube video of someone explaining something which could have easily been explained in game. Many times I've felt like the devs just couldn't be bothered to take the time to figure out how to explain their own systems in text form. And if that's the case, they should include tutorial videos in game.  

Anyway, I'm gonna buy and play the game either way ahah i just hope they modernize their game design a bit and stop being so lazy when it comes to explaining game mechanics.I've been thinking about this today and was wondering what your thoughts on it might be.

If, like me, you browse game specific subreddits, you know that the community has many ideas of what should and shouldn't be in a game and how it should be balanced. There are many crazy ideas, but often times, I would say that the consensus is pretty decent.

I was trying to imagine, not only how implementing community consensus into a game could be done, but also what the resulting game would be like. What do you think?

I've thought about a voting system to modify game variables that could be run once a week/month for an online multiplayer game. I like the idea of a constantly shifting game as I tend to dislikes settled metas and prefer games that keep you on your feet. I'm not sure the community would be great at changing a game, though, it tends to be pretty conservative as a whole. Or maybe some users would campaign for change and rally other players to vote in their direction? Maybe something like this would break balance and players would be stuck full weeks with a game that isn't fun at all? Is it really community driven if there's still a designer deciding what can and cannot be changed?

It started off more as a thought experiment, but I realized this may have been done indirectly? Maybe some early access game that has taken community feedback very seriously? Does all the forking of 2048 count?

Sorry if this is a bit vague, I just would like some thought on the general idea of community driven design.I've been playing the Halo Infinite campaign lately. As you play through, you periodically rescue marines who have been captured by the enemy. Naturally, these marines are very grateful to have been saved by Master Chief. They thank you profusely, compliment Chief's skills, and pledge loyalty to your cause.

But it doesn't stop there. Even if you simply pass a group of liberated marines later, you're likely to hear a string of upbeat, Chief-adoring soundbites. "I'd given up all hope, but then Chief showed up, and now I believe!" "With that spartan on our side, we can't lose!"

Naturally, I felt good the first few times the marines thanked me. But the praise is so constant, so absolute, it starts to feel inauthentic and forced, at least to me.

During my last play session, I remember botching a marine rescue mission. I died several times, missed most of my shots, and let half the marine squad die, even on my successful attempt. I wasn't feeling particularly capable, but on some level, I was still immersed in the experience. War can be hell, after all. And then, breaking through my brief moment of a reflection, a chipper marine said, "We're free! It's all thanks to Chief!" He then ran happily toward a Warthog past two of his fallen comrades, each of whom were riddled with bullets from a Brute's Mangler pistol.

It's not just Halo of course. Many Zeldas, including BotW, include NPCs who shower Link with praise. He's the hero that was promised, after all!

Or consider Metal Gear Solid V. Like Master Chief, Snake commands unmitigated adoration from his soldiers. They don't simply follow orders or salute with military respect. They marvel at Snake's legend. They tell him it's an honor simply to be in his presence.

For me, the constant praise feels unearned. Unless I have literally played through the game with a speedrunner's efficiency or major league gaming skill, I just don't think I deserve that level of admiration. 

I realize that I might be over-associating myself, personally, with Chief or Snake. Perhaps it would be better for me to divorce my own abilities from the narrative identify of the protagonist. Those marines/soldiers are enamored with the character, not me, the player. I also have to acknowledge that Halo Infinite and MGSV are late entires in long-standing series, so you could argue all the effusive praise represents a culmination of that character's legend over 4+ games.

Still, sometimes it's just too much. Maybe the developers want the player to feel empowered, special, capable. But for me, it feels calculated and (just a tiny bit) manipulative.

What's the alternative? Some games allow your character's legend/reputation to grow over the course of the game. Horizon Zero Dawn comes to mind. The Witcher 3 too, to some extent. I think this works a bit better, because as a player, you'll naturally improve at the game as your character's status improves with NPCs, so the trajectory aligns more appropriately. 

Meanwhile, other game NPCs basically never approve of your character, or at least regard him or her with suspicion. The Souls games in particular withhold almost all praise. This can make the game feel daunting, like it's not rooting for you, but it also makes the brief moments of NPC-appreciation feel all the more special, and earned.

What do you think? Do you like having NPCs that adore your character? For you, which games provide the best NPC-protagonist interaction?I've played quite a few roguelites over the years, and the constant is that they're all pretty difficult. Binding of Isaac, Gungeon, Hades, and most recently, Dead Cells. These games are all, barring Hades for the most part, very hard. I by no means suck eggs at videogames. Watch me walk all over Dark Souls, but these games really do test one's skills.  

On BSC1 in Dead Cells, I have yet to even get to the second boss. With 16 hours of total playtime, I have not even killed any second boss since enabling BSC1. That's 13 hours of dying before or after the very first boss. 

So thus my question. Is it necessary for these games to be so difficult? There are of course going to be many people, maybe even in this thread, who don't find these games hard. That Dead Cells isn't even difficult until BSC5 or Binding of Isaac only has any difficulty in a Lost run. 

There is of course merit to difficulty. Rewarding skill, incentivising build exploration and diversity. But it often feels that the difficulty solely comes from high damage and the steep, *steep* penalty for death. Obviously a roguelite wouldn't be hard if you just respawned on the previous screen, but would it be worse? 

The most fun part of a roguelite to me *is* the build diversity. But, again, does that build diversity have any merit if there is no difficulty to utilise your build against? 

This may not be articulated particularly well, but I suppose suppose the gist is in the title. Is it necessary for these games to be so hard, for you to take so much damage, for the penalty of death to be so steep? If you *did* just respawn on the precious screen, is that game worse?Recently,  I was playing the Mobile Game Sdorica which is a story-based turn-based  RPG with Match 3 elements. You can bring up to 3 characters with you  into battles and each character has their own moves and abilities.  However, to use these abilities in the field, you need to match a  certain order of tiles in a scaled down version of Bejewelled. For  example, simply matching 2 horizontal tiles for your tank will make them  target 1 enemy with a basic attack. But if you match your tank's  specific tiles in a 4x4 configuration, they will do a stronger attack  that targets multiple enemies. and since the play field is so limited,  you have to plan ahead so you can play matches for all your different  characters so you get the best moves.

But  what I found rather interesting was in the Character select page,  there's a "comments" tab. In said tab, you can see what other users  wrote about the character and how upvoted they are. They ranged from  everything to helpful advice on how to play the character, to memes.  This got me wondering if such a thing could work in other such games and  what would be the pros and cons? Here's a screenshot demonstrating  this. [https://www.reddit.com/user/coolwali/comments/ri400h/sdorica\_screenshots/?utm\_source=share&utm\_medium=web2x&context=3](https://www.reddit.com/user/coolwali/comments/ri400h/sdorica_screenshots/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web2x&context=3)

&#x200B;

The  first major pro I feel is that it gives all kinds of players 1  convenient spot to discuss a particular character and gain insight on  them.  This can be valuable especially for more casual players that  don't spend their time looking at forums, discords and subreddits of the  games they play. In many games like this, there are often loads and  loads of characters and it can be difficult at a glance to tell who is  worth it especially when you're new. You can't tell if this low star  character is actually better than higher levelled characters or vice  versa? Or if this stat is important later.  


As  a personal example, I was recently playing Arknights, a similar game  but with Tower Defence as its gameplay of choice and I had to bench a  few of my starting archers since I found they were outclassed by Magic  dealers. I also have like 5 healers and am not sure which of them will  be more valuable later. It would be cool if I could just select a  character, open a comments tab and see what other players are saying  about them. Another benefit is you can use it to get specific insight on  the characters you have rather than what's popular or meta defining.  Like back to Arknights, looking at Youtube and other such sites has the  issue that better players may be using different arrangements of  characters that you may not have. You may not know if their 5 star  healer uses a different skill to your 3 star one. But with this, you can  see what people are saying about your 3 star healer and any tips to  play them better. Add in filters and you can sort by usefulness, humour  etc and you have a very useful teaching tool in the game itself.  


Another  pro is that it may help foster the community. If there's some XP or  rewards for getting upvotes, it may encourage players to occasionally  drop a funny comment or offer any tips they found.

The  biggest con I feel is more in story related games. If a character has  an arc or major event happen, it's possible they may be spoiled here.  Even if there's a spoiler tag, I imagine many will not use it and unless  there is active moderation of said comments, it may not help much.  Also, as with any comment section, the chance of trolls appearing is  also possible. In addition, I feel PC and Mobile users would be more  active with comments since it's much easier to type on a keyboard,  virtual or physical than type using a controller. So there would need to  be a fair amount of resources spent on making either an app or browser  version of the game for console users which somewhat undermines the  point of having a convenient discussion spot in the game. Even in game,  it's likely going to require a fair amount of development and  infrastructure which could also be used for other aspects of an ongoing  game.  


I  personally feel it is worth exploring even in other games. Like,  Imagine in Call of Duty, each weapon has its own thread where users can  discuss and share their builds and attachments. COD Mobile already has a  basic version of this where when you select a gun, you can see what the  most popular builds are from other users and vote if they're good or  not. Imagine if you could also write a short comment on why this  particular build works. Or drop a meme line.

So yeah, what are your thoughts?Let me start by saying I love Zombie games. To this day, if I see a zombie game I will at least take a look at it. That said, I genuinely don't get how zombies managed to overtake not only the gaming industry, but also the movie industry when Dinosaurs can be just as fun and/or scary, if not more.

However I know you can't compare the two of them. And I'm not here to do this. What I'm here to say is that its weird how Dinosaur games just.. never took off for some reason. I mean, we had Dino Crisis that was a blast (until the cursed one we shall not talk about), some old Jurassic park games (remember those? I actualy enjoyed them) and that was it. Nowadays all we have however is either: A Dinosaur Park building game or highly immersive Dinosaur Simulators (The Isle and such). 

While those games can be great if you are into these sort of thing, I believe the theme doesnt need to strict itself on these genres, specialy with the technology we have today. Just imagine, a game like REmake 2 but with Dinosaurs roaming an abandoned facility, a dark corridor where all you can see is some eyes at the end, statring at you, or an open, grassy field where you need to rely on sounds to know where the dinos are. (I once saw an indie game where you had to avoid some Raptors on a war trench, and it was scary af). 

Or maybe even an multiplayer game (TDM or even an Asymetrical game). One team hunting the other, one relying on stealth and the other on firepower. 
Ooh imagine The Forest but: Dinosaurs! (ok we have that weird survival game. Its actualy cool but its different than what I meant)

One can argue we "already have dinosaur! Look at MonsterHunter/Horizon/those mobile dinosaur hunting games" but those are not exactly what I'm talking about. I just think Dinosaurs  deserve a chance to really shine nowadays with the technology we have, and the genres of gaming.. honestly I can't think of a reason why this isn't a thing yet! 

I mean, everybody loves dinosaurs, right?It has just been [announced](https://www.theverge.com/2021/12/15/22834567/stalker-2-nfts-metahuman-dmarket) that S.T.A.L.K.E.R. 2 will auction NFTs to facilitate who gets to become an in-game NPC, **but no announcement has been made of in-game NFTs**:

>“S.T.A.L.K.E.R. Metaverse,” which will “use blockchain technology to let the community own a piece of *S.T.A.L.K.E.R. 2.*” That includes the opportunity to become the “first-ever metahuman,” which GSC Game World appears to define as a non-player character rendered in very high detail.  
>  
>To become a “metahuman,” players will be able to bid for an NFT offering that prize as part of an auction taking place in January 2022. **Whoever “owns” the NFT to become an NPC in the game will be able to buy and sell it up until a specific claim date after the auction.**

Let's review & discuss the implications of this type of NFT use, putting aside buzzwords and general gaming uses & stigmas of NFTs (I know I have some) for just for a moment.

**"What is the difference between this and some pre-release kickstarter perk for a game?"** is the first thought that came into my mind when I read through the article.

Before we get there, let me define a few terms in this context:

* NFT: A type of digital asset designed to represent ownership of a unique item, virtual or not, which can be tracked using blockchain technology
* Ledger: One or more systems of record that can validate the ownership of an NFT, commonly used in blockchain technology
* Auction house: A place that facilitates buying, selling, or auction of a good/service/NFT
* Publisher: The company that manages how a video game is sold & monetized, sometimes can be the same as the developer

So let's compare the two side by side in a table:

&#x200B;

||Crowdfunding|Auction for NFT|
|:-|:-|:-|
|Is the price fixed or dynamic?|Fixed|**Dynamic**|
|Who can verify ownership of the perk?|Private party: The dev/publisher|Private or public party: Depending on who has the ledgers are and who can view them|
|Can ownership be transferred?|No, not typically: Depends on if/how the thing is tied to someone's identity (e.g. some redemption URL could easily be transferred)|Yes|
|Can the thing be resold by initial purchaser or a subsequent owner?|No, not typically: Depends on if/how the thing is tied to someone's identity (e.g. some redemption URL could easily be transferred)|**Yes**|
|Can the publisher further monetize a perk after first sale?|No, not inherently|**Possibly yes, only if publisher controls the ledger and monetization of auction house** (e.g. owns the auction house or receives cut from auction house).|
|Any limit to how late ownership can be transferred?|Depends on redemption method of the thing and any time limits imposed (e.g. a Steam key can be redeemed anytime before a certain date).|Depends on redemption method of the thing and any time limits imposed. (e.g. if scanning for NPC takes place in time for release, then auctions/transfers must stop before release date of April 2022)|

What we see here with the bold monetization items is that any concerns about additional recurring monetization by publishers, albeit outside the game, depend largely on publisher's control of ledger and auction monetization.

If the NFT ledger & auction house is not controlled by publisher, then the only definitive monetary benefits are:

* The publisher receiving the difference between the final auction price going and whatever the fixed price would have been
* The first and subsequent owners re-selling/re-auctioning the NFT get money, minus any auction house fees

If the NFT ledger is controlled by the publisher, then there is no additional inherent monetary benefits but it allows for control of further monetization.

If NFT ledger & auction house has a controlling interest by the publisher, get out your pitchforks boyz - Them greedy publishers are excessively monetizing our flock of gaming sheeples! /s

# Discussion questions:

Any other differences to consider between pre-release crowdfunding without and with NFT auctions?

What concerns do you have with NFTs outside of in-game like this?  If so, who does it hurt? How much of the concerns hinge on the argument that NFTs not in-game are a slippery slope to in-game NFTs?

Is this type of pre-release monetization preferable to in-game NFTs?

How else could ownership of a pre-release perk be securely transferred between people without blockchain/NFTs?  Should such perks be non-transferrable?

EDIT:

5 hours into this, I have a few key initial takeways from this conversation:

* **There are much easier ways than NFT to facilitate transfer of ownership of any good/service**, including the example here, whether the system of record makes the owner public or not.
* **This example NFT would become worthless** once the perk/NPC scan occurs
* **NFTs require mining to create the token** on an established blockchain, such as Ethereum
* **NFTs do allow for smart contracts** when it comes to establishing conditional validity, reselling, etc
* **Any use of NFT adjacent to any game is seen as a slippery slope to in-game use**I'm sure people would find it nice if a game made some meta jokes, or left you some hints in the game's installation folder, but what if a game required you to delete a file to progress? What if the game intentionally froze up until you ended the task, complete with sending an error report? What if the game completely deleted itself from your computer?

I recently finished playing Doki Doki Literature Club, and without going into details, I thought it was a real missed opportunity that the game didn't do those last 2 things, I thought it would have been perfect, but Dan is a pretty smart guy, smarter than me, I'm sure he considered it at some point, but deliberately chose not to do it, why? 

Maybe there's a technical limitation? After all, how can a program delete itself and leave nothing behind? It must leave some trace. But maybe it's because doing that would go too far, upset people. I would have loved it, the game is fairly small and I would have no trouble downloading it again for another playthrough, for me it would have been a great moment well worth the inconvenience, but I imagine a lot of people would be annoyed, some people deal with data caps, some people would consider it a violation for the game they spent time downloading and installing to just disappear from them. 

So where is the limit? I'd absolutely hate it if a game deleted all the data on my drive or made my computer inoperable for "artistic reasons," those are pretty clear cut hard limits, but are there any below them? Would you be upset if your game deleted itself, even if it's a free game and a small download?For me the overall game experience and the moment-to-moment might be the most important thing, but it's often put into question by titles that actually are rather dull in the moment but *really* shone in their endgame and made the rest of the game feel like this incredible buildup to its ultimate culmination. Just to list a few I have played that I felt do this so well:

* Ghost Trick: Phantom Detective
* Mass Effect 1
* Phoenix Wright: Ace Attorney (the first one and the second one)
* Metal Gear Solid 2 and 3
* The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time

Maaan I wish there were more recent games on that list, but I heard Horizon Zero Dawn actually has a really cool revelation in the endgame and a great overall story. I'm tempted to put games like TLOU and Spec Ops on there but to be honest I'm not sure if I love them for their endings or if the endings are even their high points.

I do believe, that for games to really excell their endings need to elevate the whole thing, unless we're talking less story/artistic titles like arcade shooters and stuff. For any game that attempts cinematic, or writing-heavy plots the endings have to land or it's gonna be like seeing a bad movie at best.

What is it about endings that work so well, when done right? For me, in a game like Ghost Trick, the game goes from being entertaining by itself, its premise, characters and puzzle gameplay, and then the story actually gets intriguing. You start getting invested in its mystery about who killed the protagonist (which turned us into a ghost that can see 4 minutes into the past of dead people) and before you know it this huge epic of a plot is built up with villains, supporting characters and main characters, and it has the real Point of No Return moment and final level where everything hinges on your ability to play the game's core gameplay with efficiency, the music is kickass, the difficulty is higher than normal, and the answers you want are obviously waiting to be uncovered once you complete this level. And once you see the ending there's such a "Ahhh I should've known that!" moment where things earlier in the story finally add up to a larger picture, and the characters are landed safely, and the story is resolved.

Same is true for a game like MGS3. It uses an intro level akin to the "James Bond is in the end of a previous mission" kind of intro, to set up the premise, and focal characters, then shows what's going to be challenging to the player through gameplay and through an inciting event that sets up the conflict of the plot, and at the end of the game some of the earliest stuff we saw i given satisfying answers, after a really high-octane set-piece-ridden series of events that truly bring the best, most entertaining scenes out of the game, and gameplay.

In other words, I would classify good endings as follows:

* Comprehensive structure (Beginning, middle and end, and appropriate usage of those)
* Likeable characters that have drama/conflict that matters to our investment
* Questions that need to be answered before we can feel like the story can end
* High adrenaline, all the best features of the game demonstrated and trained by the player
* A satisfying climax and epilogue, where you feel like you can close the book without too many lingering questions about what happened.

Now, how do you get it wrong?

You know it, let's talk about Mass Effect and why Mass Effect 3 was actually controversial.

**Mass Effect 3's ending**

I'm not going to fully open the can of worms, just address some key points. First off, Mass Effect was popular, and circa 2010 it felt like BioWare could do no wrong and there were memes and T-shirts about Commander Shepard and how awesome Mass Effect was. The games were really awesome, the first one quite boring, but built up the pieces and then a climax for this really cool ending where you went from an average soldier-dude to hero of the galaxy. ME2 followed the trend with this highly modular final level where the characters you led could live or die depending on the player's adventure and final choices. It used the *narrative of gameplay* to tell an engaging story about a deep sci-fi world and characters through the player's actions and textually sound conclusions. Mass Effect 3 was a mostly great game, that then kinda bucked up at the end and despite its controversy I often think people can't really articulate what's actually wrong with it. In other words, it's *a weird one*.

So let's quickly determine what is the fundamental problem with ME3's ending? Why do fans hate it? You'll always hear people start with the notorious Red, Green and Blue endings, and the real lack of variance of outcomes. This is definitely a disappointment after ME2 had us decide the fate of characters, but the truth is actually that most people who actually cared how ME3 ended were people who were highly invested in it already, and the people who were most invested, spent their time before the game shipped replaying ME1 or ME2 ensuring everyone came out alive in the Suicide Mission and probably took a mostly paragon path through player choice. They had a perfect Save-game ready to be imported into the final chapter, and the truth is that Mass Effect 3's ending has, and always did have more variance than just "A, B or C" *if the player has a sub-optimal* playthrough, which is exactly what ME2 also was. If you don't do all the side-content or do enough paragon stuff, some peeps are gonna die in the final level regardless of what you do, so while there's criticisms about which choices and how, I don't think ME3's ending had an actual problem with choices, and if the ending was super incredible, then *who cares* that there is a red, green, or blue filter on the different choices. If you loved the conclusion to the story, I don't think you would actually care that each ending only had minor variations to them, and I think that's the core issue.

The story was not resolved in a satisfying way.

The final mission in this game not only has a weak attempt of making the player feel like their choices are in play, (I'd argue ME3 has a problem with that just in general) it's also pretty dark, which makes you worry you're gonna fail (and it is a doomsday plot, where "no one has ever survived this event before!" so this all makes sense to be dark and depressing). Despite doing a good job of contrasting the direness of the situation with the slim hope of survival, the final level and subsequent climax fail to provide the answers you've been looking for in the story-arc.

This is not the kind of ending that tops the bar of everything else you see in the game, despite having every right to do that. It might be depressing in tone, but it's also rather empty in theater, the gameplay does not really involve active choice-making or important conversations (other than some closure scenes that don't vary in outcome) so essentially we just have a linear story left that the writers decided, in order to wrap up this big trilogy we've been on, and how did that go?

You're given a "reveal" scene at the end of the game that's meant to tie it all together and provide the final slice of gameplay where the player makes a really hard decision, and then all the beautiful music and bittersweet "sacrificial ending stuff" ensues... and then there's bacially no epilogue (now there is, but it's mediocre at best.) and the *conclusion itself* just doesn't feel like it belongs in the same story you've played.

It doesn't check the boxes of what usually good endings get right. The structure is abused because suddenly the entire narrative shifts tone and gear on a heelturn to be about this other concept that hasn't been properly introduced, about what the enemy's true goal is, and that now becomes our goal, but it has no context to the journey *we've* seen as players, so already narrative coherence has gone haywire, and we now have to make a choice, but not through the usual dialogue wheel where you persuade anyone, but a new style of controlling Shepard where you move very slowly, and they don't explain which choice is triggered where or how to do it. It's just something that runs on autopilot once you approach one, with no option to rethink. So the player is not being challenged with difficult versions of the mechanics they're trained in. There are high stakes, but it feels like you're not in a completely different story, that was taken out of another movie, and inserted over Mass Effect, and after making the choice the final cutscenes kinda warp the plot into being this epic conclusion to a theme and a concept the story never presented properly to begin with, and tries to end on a thought provoking note that isn't answering the questions we've been waiting for.

That's the best way I can put it without actual spoilers. People disliked the ending to that game, because it abandoned the story itself, to tell the conclusion to a story of another concept, but this goes over a lot of people's heads, because superficially it's still sci fi, they still talk about "Reapers" and "Synthetic life" and "The Mass Relays" and everything, but the content has been appropriated to new context that essentially has nothing to do with the narrative structure it's inserted into, and that leads to an incoherent conclusion about things the player hasn't been invested in before, with unsatisfying gameplay, and a dissatisfying epilogue, and no true variance in the actual endings that players hoped for.

Endings are hard to make, because you have to top the bar for what the gameplay has been *while retaining it* at the same time, and also provide satisfying answers to the story the players have been waiting to see concluded. And the presentation has to be remarkable. If you get it right, the player will love you and your game, and often forgive earlier boredom in it, but if you get it wrong, it can ruin the entire lasting appeal of the game, and turn fans against it. It's risky business, but it's so good when done well, and largely what has retained my interest in the industry.Man. I just don't get it with people anymore. Maybe I'm beating a dead horse here but as an avid halo fan as well as fighting game fan, I'm really struggling with the state of what folks want from a game these days.

The way I see it, if a game is fun, play it to enjoy it or get better at it. You don't need unlocks, battle passes, or anything along the lines of drip fed content to keep a game fun. A large portion of the Halo community, as well as most other modern shooters, don't seem to agree with this.

Part of what made halo so popular in the beginning was it was just straight up fun to play with friends. That's it, plain and simple. You could sit down and play some matches with either your friends or new random people you'd meet online (at least once halo 2 and live came out). This is what made most games back then survive, they had to be fun enough you could actually enjoy the game in the long run. You had to enjoy the game enough that your goal was to actually get better at the game. Getting good is fun. It can be hard, but it's usually quite rewarding because you instrinsically feel like you've accomplished something.

Fighting Games and racing games are a perfect example of this concept working perfectly in modern time. You play the game because it's fun, you're playing with friends, and you're getting good. Mario Kart to iracing and smash to street fighter, these games are all played because people actually enjoy the game. Sure people get excited for DLC and new content, but it's actual content. Not just skins, or colours for characters (which exist but usually come standard), or even bloody backgrounds for your name tag. 

Which leads me back to my original point and kinda the question I want to ask. Why did folks become so attached to artificial progression based games that don't lead to any meaningful rewards?

I'm seeing posts on the Halo sub (yes I know, plenty of toxic people there) complaining about how they don't have time to grind for skins in the evening and how they won't play the game simply because there's no instant crappy hit of dopamine from getting a slightly different shade of armour. 

Why don't a lot of people play games to have fun anymore? What happened and do you think there is even a way to come back to the before time when fun was the only reason people played?

Sorry for any formatting errors or if this comes off as rambling. I'm on mobile and it's a little more difficult to structure the post.

Sidenote: Nintendo games seem to spawn long term fans that are dedicated to simply enjoying or getting better at their game of choice, even in brand new games by them. They aren't really the kind of games I'm upset about here. But they seem to be one of the real bastions of games that don't have a pointlessly difficult progression.I am having a hard time sympathizing with Viking characters and their goals to basically kill innocent people, take everything they own, and than enslave, rape and finally burn what they can not take.  


I know there is lot of romanticizing and revisionist history lately, but Viking raids were nothing else than cruel, brutal, violent, and evil. One may say wars are usually this way, but wars have a reason of expanding territories, while raids conducted by Vikings were simply and plainly robberies. But with one difference, robbers would usually spare their victims, while Vikings would simply kill everyone, even to point of chasing whoever run away.  


Playing a character who is leading such party of murderous robbers goes way and beyond anything seen in gaming to this point. GTA comes to mind, as game focused on crime. But in GTA you are not encouraged to kill civilians, or at least the game is not encouraging you to do it. Let say in GTA you are lovable rogue, while in Vallhala you are simply a sociopath.  


Further on, I find it hard to understand why would let say someone from UK play a game portraiting, period and people, not invaders, but simply pointless murderers that plagued their shores.   


I must say I find Vikings and their culture fascinating from a historic perspective. But in many ways they are just as morally unredeemable as WW2 Nazis. And I wonder, what is next? Assasin Creed where you play German required to do war crimes ?Back in times, gamers should read manuals to understand how to play the game. Especially if you want to play complex CRPG. Then we got tutorials, but there are still problems like integration of tutorial into a plot (I remember how I spend hourse on Zelda: Twilight Princess tutorial) and sometimes they are annoying.

I'm a bit of a perfectionist in terms of games. And it's frustrating for me to create my character again if I encounter new mechanics in CRPG game. I'm oftenly making saves so I could choose a better build. It's kinda frustrating. So, I played Garry's Mod and some Sonic fan-game demos (like Sonic Project Hero) and just realised what videogames need. The sandbox mode.

I remember times when I used scenario editors when I played RTS games. The same thing I used in Arma 2. It's fun to spawn some venicles and experiment with gameplay to understand more about gaming mechanics. You just spawn a helicopter and just makes a fun on a big map.

The modern example of my idea is Among Us's practice mode. You can change your role on Notebook, walk around in map, play some mini-games, kill some dummies and etc. It's very useful if you want to fully learn how to play this game. I think something like this should be in all other games.I'm not talking about the overall quality of the game here. The story is lackluster, the decisions barely matter and the radiant quests are annoying. But that's not what i wanna talk about. I wanna talk about one important aspect that Fallout 4 not only gets right but its one of the main reasons why i always keep coming back to it: The Open world itself. Even the biggest Fallout 4 haters will tell you that if there's one thing that's absolutely NAILED in 4, it's the exploration. And that is thanks due to, what i think is one of the best designed open world maps in gaming. There are 3 specific reasons why i think this:

1 - The way the Overworld guides you

This is one thing that Bethesda open worlds especially excell at in my opinion and that is the overworld itself guiding you to interesting places. The way Fallout 4's overworld is designed is specifically tailored for you to want to wander, to want to just go in a random direction and see what you find. Everything from the vantage points, the structure of the roads, the angles of the ridges and hills, all of it is tailor crafted to point you in interesting directions. Speaking of which...

&#x200B;

2 - Most of the locations you'll discover are interesting

Now, of course, with a game as big as Fallout 4 not every location is going to be exciting, that's to be expected. But i would say a good chunk of the locations in Fallout 4 are very interesting to explore. From ruined hospitals, old decrepit factories, abandoned apartment buildings, company HQ's and so on and so forth. Helping this is of course the great retro - futuristic design of every part of the world which is a staple of the Fallout universe but i feel was nailed in 4. And even when the locations are not interesting or are just plain boring, they are mercifully short. You can tale as you walk around the world that Bethesda knew that not every single location was that exiting so, thankfully and smartly, they kept the less remarkable ones short and sweet. And finally

&#x200B;

3 - It gives you incentive to explore

Fallout 4 has, in my opinion, the best and most rewarding system for scavengers and explorers that i have seen in any open world game, let alone any Fallout game. Thanks to the weapon modification and settlement building system, practically every single location, from the biggest factory to the smallest basement will have useful junk for you to take to modify your weapons with or enhance your settlements with. It also makes you think strategically about where you scavenge which wasn't something i did in the other Fallout games. For example an abandoned warehouse is obviously gonna have a more likely chance that i'll find duct tape in it, a hospital is more likely to have medical supplies while a Vault or a  Scientific research building is more likely to have nuclear material in it etc. This makes you pick and choose what you'd want to scavenge depending on what supplies you currently had. Hell sometimes i revisited a location multiple times just to pick up what little leftover junk was left

But if you're not into that, no worries, there are other shiny trinkets to amuse yourself with while exploring like skill books, magazines, bobbleheads, interesting stories within the buildings themselves and so much more. There's always been a saying about the 3D Fallout games and that is that these games are the best when you're wandering around, seeing what you find. And nowhere is that more true than in 4. It's blatantly obvious that this game was created with exploration in mind first (unfortunately at the cost of the story and decision making). Fallout 4 has it's problems for sure, but the open world is not one of themDark souls is a game that has always captivated me. There are many reasons why I love the game and its series so much, but one if my favorite things to do is just walk around and think of the world from the lens of a Anthropologist and a
Archaeologist

The game leaves much to interpretation and imagination. You explore many different sections in the world of Lordran, and Its fun to imagine what it was like at its peak.

 The Undead burg all the way to the church are some of my favorite examples. Its fun to think about how many people would have once lived here, what there way if life must have been like, how did they practice there religion etc. Looking at far away structures and thinking about the political systems that must have existed. Say for instance the Burg was probably ruled by humans who created there home as close to Anor Londo as they could get. Blight town was part of a Sewer system for delivering waste from anor londo and from the humans.

The NPCs you encounter along the way help aswell. Many have came from far away lands, journeying to this legendary ancient kingdom. They are all there for many different reasons and they all show up at many differenr points through out your adventure some dying sooner, some dying later. This really helps flesh out world, knowing there are other kingdoms and lands far away. They probably aren't on the scale of Lordran, but none the less they exist and just further peak my imagination and interest.

Something else that the game does wonderfully is its sense of scale. You can see many areas you never get the chance to go to (like most of anor londo, the large portions of walls beyond the burg) I want to explore these areas do badly and unravel their stories and secrets.

Elden Ring will hopefully scratch this itch. But man I just want more games that have you venturing to unknown lands or great fallen kingdoms to find the riches, powers, and stories in its remains.***Preface/Sidetone***: this is not a console war thread, so if you want to argue why X console is trash and Y console is god, kindly take that tribal s\*\*t elsewhere.

\--- --- --- --- --- --- ---

I’ve been mulling over this one for some time, and can’t really come up with a satisfying take, so I came here to take advantage of your collective wisdom and get some real answers.

Profiting from nostalgia for Nintendo (and now also PlayStation) seems effortless these days. Taking a stroll in any mall I see it everywhere. Mario Bros keychains and △OX▢ t-shirts and cups popping up at game stores, bookshops and even H&M. Xbox anything? Never seen it outside of Microsoft's own marketing bubble.

Maybe this is why Xbox celebration of its 20th has this strange, sort of desperate, hollow feeling to it. Like they’re really, really trying for everyone to see and acknowledge that they are, indeed part of this video game history thing.

And here’s the kicker - objectively, *of course* they are! Whatever one’s feelings on Xbox, it’s indisputable. They have been around for 20 years. They are one of the 3 big players in the console space for two decades. They have some beloved exclusives like Halo and Forza.

And yet… it doesn’t “feel” that way. Xbox still feels like the new kid on the block. On a purely subjective level - it doesn’t seem to have the gamer pedigree or nostalgia of PlayStation, Sega or Nintendo. Or even brands like Square, Capcom, or ID/Bethesda (which they now own). What’s more, I think they know this - and this month of celebrating is all about trying to change that perception. It’s like they’re screaming: *“hey! look here buddy, we got nostalgia too - we’ve been around! Remember those old, clunky giant controllers? Remember the Rock on stage? Remember? Oh boy!”*

When compared to Sega and Nintendo, I can understand the discrepancy. Both have been around in the console space much longer, and both are primarily game companies. But PlayStation? On paper it’s not that different from Xbox. Both brands are owned by much larger non-gaming corporations. Both entered the console market relatively late (only one generation apart).

So why is it that PlayStation is effortlessly part of video game history, while Xbox awkwardly tries to create this perception via forced marketing campaigns such as the 20th? I got no good answer to this.**tl;dr (you could read this and get 90% of what I'm saying, the rest is added detail and colour!)**: Games like Satisfactory are so good at modelling detailed environmental interactions that they can play a positive role in sustainability communication, education, conceptualization, etc. They can provide experiences that encourage deeeper reflection, or cultivate broader perspectives on our relationship with the environment. It almost doesn't matter if the developers intend their games to have this outcome, because it appears to be possible regardless of intent. It's also possible that as we all more broadly begin to notice and appreciate these possibilities, this aspect of game narrative will get more attention and appreciation, just as other social and cultural issues have over time. 

I've played a lot of Satisfactory recently (a first-person building and management game still in early access) and one thing that stood out to me were the emergent ecological narratives, something I would be more sensitive to as a student of this area, and something that I'm not sure was entirely intended by the game developers, but I'm hoping is worth a brief discussion. 


As some important context, the game setting is futuristic science fiction: the lore combines to suggest that all kinds of technologies exist from interplanetary travel to near-instant fabrication of multi-story buildings. Our task is to work as a corporate drone bee, extracting resources from the planet we've been assigned to. This is where I first felt an ecological narrative building, because this mindset of viewing nature purely as a resource to be extracted is a common point of critique in sustainability. As an alternative worldview, others suggest seeing nature as having intrinsic value in itself - because it is beautiful, for example - rather than seeing value only so far as it has some use to humans. As you land on the planet in your drop-pod, it's well...gorgeous, frankly. It's hard to miss that intrinsic aesthetic value. In only its starting few minutes, the game’s done a pretty good job I think, of representing both ideas. You’re here to treat this planet as a giant resource pool, but it’s also very beautiful. 


A little further into the game I am tasked with recovering a gold-like ore called Caterium. In my play through taking what I imagine is a common route for new players, acquiring this new resource means heading to a small island area and deploying some mining drones. Notably, this little pocket of space is also occupied by an alien bird creature. Because the space is confined, my presence feels highly disruptive. The once peaceful little nook is now flooded with the sound of a dozen mining drones, and as I work to extract these resources, I am constantly spooking the bird, causing it to flutter off - not that it really has anywhere to go. I am sensing an ecological narrative slowly bubbling up. There's no overt text or anything pointing this out, but it emerges from the environmental storytelling in moments like this: I am a disruption. I am changing the environment around me. 


The first tier of power generation in the game, Biomass Burners, are also illustrative here. For one, they use leaves and wood as fuel. That beautiful environment I landed into quickly shifted in perspective from intrinsically to instrumentally valuable as I “re-saw” all those pretty alien plants and trees now as *fuel*. A few things are interesting about this. Firstly, foliage appears to respawn either very slowly, or not at all. As the player's base slowly expands (and with that, its hunger for power) they might notice like I did, they are defoliating the area around them. A circle of heavily picked land grows ever outward from my base. Later, after unlocking access to vehicles, it struck me that when I run over those same leaves, I destroy them. I assume by this point most players aren’t still fuelling their base with leaves and wood, but maybe they still remember those resources had some value, as I did. By driving over and destroying them, I feel a slight tinge of guilt. What’s curious is that it comes from appreciating the instrumental value of leaves and wood as fuel, but the result is similar as if I valued them intrinsically - environmental destruction is occurring, and the game systems motivate me to care, if only a little, about that. They certainly motivate me to at least notice. I find that very interesting. 


Further into the game I unlock the second tier of power generation, and at this point I am increasingly suspecting the game is pushing an ecological narrative. We could have any kind of technology here; the context is far-future science fiction. Yet my next task involves building coal-fired power plants that spin turbines by boiling water into steam!? It's so oddly antiquated in an otherwise futuristic game, that it feels intentionally so. 


Notably, these power plants will require water to boil, and the water extractors can be established on lakes, where supply is theoretically finite. Congregating at these lakes are more alien creatures - these ones vaguely resemble whales, but with legs. I get excited at the prospect of another potential ecological narrative looming around the corner. "I am going to boil this lake away" I say to myself. "These whales are going to migrate away or languish in a dry bed wondering where the water went. It's going to be wonderfully horrific."


I've never seen a game do this before, so I'm excited. Even more so because the game has been telling this story emergently through the environment and my own complicated, unpredictable interactions with it. There's a wanky word here that's uniquely appropriate: didactic. It means "intended to teach, particularly in having moral instruction as an ulterior motive" and has connotations of being patronizing. What excites me is that this game's ecological narrative is not didactic. It's not preachy, or patronizing. I think that’s because this is also a story I wrote, or in Rimworld creator Tynan Sylvester’s terms, a story that I ‘generated’. The game is a story generator, more than a storyteller. I think that helps it avoid being didactic –  it’s hard to be patronizingly preachy when you are both storyteller and audience, right? 


I install a dozen coal plants, alongside multiple concrete pylons to monitor water levels, but they never drop - not even slightly! Fark! The game isn't coded to track this outcome, and it may never be. I don't know. I’m a little disappointed, but I also know that I have this unusual perspective with some unusual expectations! It's not an entirely unexpected outcome anyway, since other resources like iron and copper are also infinite, but for various reasons, I'd built up hopes of something else. 


So perhaps I saw something there that isn't. But it's so close to being achieved, even if accidentally, that I also feel a need to highlight all this. In other examples I mentioned from the game, we’re already there in terms of the game’s ability to cultivate reflection and encourage mindfulness. It would change the core gameplay dramatically, quite possibly for the worse, if the game introduced resource constraints as others have. Oxygen Not Included has resource constraints as a core gameplay feature, for example, and the game is built around that as a result. Notably, people in that subreddit talk quite a lot about having “sustainable” bases – they’re engaged in sustainability discourse and conceptualization without fully realizing, perhaps). I am not here saying the game SHOULD have allowed me to boil that lake away. This isn't an argument, just a commentary and reflection. I’m interested that two games can have two opposing resource models, yet still both provide fertile grounds for discussion and thinking about the environment and sustainability. 


It's very exciting for me as a student of this stuff, to see just how close a game has come to modelling environmental interactions in a way that are personally relatable and tied explicitly to my own agency and choices, and in a way that was not didactic. It's a potentially powerful experience to accidentally destroy a species' habitat in pursuit of "development". Equally, it can be compelling to be presented with multiple paths to development, each with their own pros and cons, ecologically, and otherwise. I strongly believe there's untapped capabilities in these kinds of narratives to change attitudes, educate, and empower people to imagine alternative futures, or even just better understand a very complicated present. My hope is that as those possibilities become clearer, developers will become more aware and appreciative of them. They may realize that even without intending it, their games are already capable of ecological narratives. It’s possible they can shape that further without adding greatly to development time or costs. It’s possible that extant work – things already happening – are simply appreciated more broadly. 


We are a lot closer to games playing a positive role in sustainability communication than I realized. The sheer fidelity of modelling in emergent, sandbox games is already creating the possibility for this, regardless of the developer’s intent. As the corporate-instructed industrialisation and colonisation of my planet continues, the factory grows ever larger, and hungrier – and the natural environment around it ever smaller, more diminished. Satisfactory frequently invites me to notice and reflect on my environment and the relationship I have with it, but my other big realization is that it’s possibly achieved this without even explicitly (or primarily) aiming to do so. It all could be be, as one lover of trees would put it, a happy little accident! 


Thought it’s a baby step just to point at all this and say “Look! Interesting! Maybe even helpful?” I feel it’s an important one.I personally think it is to address the people who often skip dialogues or cutscenes. Then they get lost or get bored about how videogames are just pointless actions.I'm a few hours into the campaign, and I love most of it. The narrative and characters are fun, and the gameplay almost just right. Been having a blast with the grappleshot, and immediately leveled it to max when I had enough points.              

But what makes the grappleshot so much fun is so severely punished by the amount of damage you can recieve out in the open in what feels like one shot. I feel like the gunplay and melee weapons screams "push-forward-combat", but when I play aggressively I often find myself going from half shields to dead because stuff outside my viewport decided to shoot me at the same time.                    

I guess the intention is that you have to take cover for your shields to recharge, but it kind of breaks the flow of combat for me, and the whole thing feels awkward at times. Snipers and fully charged plasma pistols seems to be the main culprits, everything else has been perfectly balanced.              

DOOM is the only reference point here I can think of, but giving the player some longevity by rewarding melee kills with shield regen would make it a lot more fun to be a one man army wrecking a base full of brutes and elites, I think.I've been playing Halo Infinite and they added a grappling hook that you can use for everything, you can use it to get weapons, to lunge into enemies and melee them, you can use it to dodge attacks, to get to places where you otherwise couldn’t, you can even use it with later game upgrades as a spiderman web of sorts that allows you to swing across the levels. 

 

The problem is taht the game has pother upgrades that fit the same slot as the grappling hook, stuff like the ability to scan areas for enemies, produce barriers out of thin air, or simply the ability to dodge left and right. 

 

There’s really no reason to use these abilities though, because you can use the hook for most things and the rest of the things get replaced by other systems; you don’t have to scan areas for enemies because you have a map that shows you any nearby enemies, that without taking into account the damage indicators which already let you know about where your enemies are at. 

 

You don’t need the barriers or the dodge because you can simply use the hook to move throughout the level or to speed up to nearby cover. 

 

This has led me to just use the hook, because similarly to the whip in Castlevania 4, you can do everything with it, there’s no reason to use any of the other upgrades, at the very least not in the usual “easier” difficulties, such as normal or easy. 

 

What do you think, was it a misstep from 303 to fit all of this upgrades in the same hook slot?Another rant about open world games, how original. But please, hear me out, I'm trying a slightly different angle, or at least hope I do.

Complaining about open world games is nothing new. However, I think it is more productive to start with their original ambition from a player's point of view. This is what I call the dream of open world games. To be fair, it is my dream, my vision when I first heard of and started up one of these games, a long time ago.

Open world games intrigued me. I associated them with the feeling of adventure. For me, these games were all about feeling like a character in a different world, an adventurer, an explorer. A bit like a character in a novel or a movie, but not on rails. If I try to sum it up, the dream of open world games is really this: **freely exploring** a world that is full of **unique** content. Because this is what being an adventurer, an explorer is all about. Uncovering new secrets, being rewarded for exploration, coming across new adventures around every corner.

Unfortunately, I feel this dream has only very rarely been partly realized in games, never fully. Most open world games fail at the second aspect, some even at the first. They are games first, open world second. Gamification is a key word here. Open worlds are, for the most part, not a freely explorable world full of unique content, but a genre. A genre that is defined mostly by:

1) shallow content

Most Open world games sadly have very unimaginative content, both with regards to quests and to the actual world. The quests are often simple fetch or kill quests. The world feels lifeless, there are few characters to interact with, nothing really to find or explore. Climb a mountain and there is... nothing, or maybe a quest with generic loot or a temple with nothing interesting to do, aside from ticking a box ("location completed"). Even if the game looks beautiful and has unique looking locations, there is usually nothing to do there (e.g. AC: Origins).

2) repetitive content

No need to really talk about this in detail: everyone knows the copy-pasted quests (fetch, random, auto-generated, repeated, generic etc.) or the world/locations/characters (forts, bases etc.). 

All of this is sad, but also ironic: Open Worlds are, from a naive newcomer's POV, all about being an adventurer who explores a world, comes across interesting locations with unique stuff to do. It is, in a way, about that whole LotR or real world explorer or Indiana Jones - type of feeling. Yet in reality, it is the **exact opposite**: You are not exploring a unique world, but ticking off boxes, discovering locations, finishing quests to complete the game. You are playing a genre.

The problem is, and this is where it gets a bit depressive: can this really be changed? Can enough unique, interesting content realistically be created to populate a real open world, also with regards to financial concerns? 

I know there are some great open world games. But (a) they are the rare exception IMO and (b) even they do not fully realize the dream I described above. Witcher 3 is a great game, but mostly due to its quests. The open world often has little in it, aside from repeated content. If you just randomly wander through the forest or landscape, how often will you find something truly new and interesting? How many unique, hidden locations are there, with something to do as well? I know there are some, but enough to really make exploration feel interesting after 5-10 hours? It is similar for RDR2, which has the great random encounters, but that is more flair, backdrop while getting to the next location, not really a reason for you to actually ride thru the wilderness to explore it. 

Of course there are the Bethesda games, and they might be the very rare exception...As the title says.

And when we're at it, what's really artificial difficulty without a context?

-Back to the title, so basically in some RPGs or Hack & Slash games some enemies get ramped up on damage *and* hp.

For example, in Bloodborne enemies in the endgame have certain VERY slow attacks that have a long wind up but fast "swing", these attacks often one shot a regular player unless they are overleveled or are running pure HP builds. Is this artificial difficulty?
I always assumed that the room for mistakes simply gets reduced as less mistakes you have to make in order to survive not getting killed, regardless of how resilient the boss is (I. e. the boss might as well be a glass cannon and/or it's strategy isn't too complicated)

Is having various enemies attack you at the same time also artifical difficulty?
In the souls games there is always that part where a lot enemies come all rushing to you, specially in Dark Souls 2.
Is this artificial difficulty? I can't personally comprehend how come such thing is called "artificial difficulty" when the group of enemies can still be killed by pure skill. Of course it's not some insane puzzle, but the game certainly demands you to *skillfully* go through the horde of enemies. Bloodborne also has *many* scenarios where 10+ enemies go against you, but alas, nobody complains its artificial difficulty. 
In bloodborne you have superior mobility but i don't know how the hordes of enemies stop being artifical difficulty when hordes of enemy don't stop being hordes of enemies. 

Regardless of what that might sound like, Devil May Cry games also throw *A LOT* of enemies at you and that's like... 90% of encounters lol.
In DMC5 however, there is a mode called "Dante Must Die" where enemies are more aggressive, do more damage, have more hp and are harder to stun for a combo.

Hmm... this seems to be way worse than Ds2 or Bloodborne's scenario... hmm. How come this doesn't get called "artificial difficulty"?

Does the tools that the game give you matters? Because a "tool" could be anything, ranging from mechanics to the use of the environment.

In DMC you have many tactical options to attack and defend, varies in character but overall they are somewhat versatile.

In Bloodborne you have superior mobility and a skill called "spacing" which is basically getting out of the range of enemy attacks and you also have dodges which give you iframes, many attacks require you to known their timing and dodge at the... right time... this is a part of having skill. 
Also, many endgame-content bosses in Bloodborne are tanky as well has have insane damage output, and on top of that their strategy is also not a walk in the park... so... is this also artificial difficulty? 

Increased damage = less room for mistakes

Increased hp = More time required for the player to withstand the boss's attacks. In other words, it requires the player to be more consistent over time. 

In Dark Souls (2) you have MUCH more tactical tools than in Bloodborne, you have bows, backstabs, spacing, more accesible spells and... your own strategies. Enemies in Ds2 are way more dumb5thsn than any other daek souls game, making it easier to manipulate them to do certain things.

Or let's say Contra games... Contra 3 is accused of being very artificial... uh, right...
I mean, it "makes sense", you get killed in one shot while enemies storm you with bullets and enemies... i guess it doesn't require skill since the precondition that it's "artifical difficulty" makes it seem like it. See?

Does Contra 3 require a *great* amount of skill? Yes.
It's first level isn't too hard, it's second either, and after the third things start to get more complex, as you now need to have very precise positioning to avoid getting hit. 
Enemies are very dumb, but hey, since they aren't relatively tanky and can kill you in one shot then... they are artificially difficult? 

So... is it artificially difficult?

In Doom 1993 many enemies with insane hitscan attacks are thrown at you, the game doesn't tell you or even teach you any indication of taking cover to avoid damage, or moving around enemies really fast, also many enemies have increased hp and damage, is it artificial? 

Is Outlast artificial? Many enemies can hear even a single mistaken movement of yours and can catch you pretty fast. 
On the harder difficulties you can get one shot by many if not all enemies. Sometimes you don't know where to go and you are forced to explore mindlessly to discover paths or maybe just know the map in case you have to circle around the enemies. 

Oh, let's not forget when you run out of batteries... there many ways to get batteries they are relatively hidden all over the place and you can just explore to seem them glowing and are easy to spot... if the player mussed the batteries and is now forced to go all in the dark to go search them with the possibility of encountering an enemy(because of "no return" sections of the game)... is it artificial difficulty? 

Is Cod Zombies artificial difficulty? In round 50 zombies can literally take some insane damage to the face and still live, also they come in 100+ armies.

In cod zombies you can run away in the labyrinthic map and shoot/attack at the right time and place... just like in Dark Souls 2, Bloodborne and Contra...
You can upgrade and prepare yourself to said challenge... just like in the previous games.

Stuff here is getting complicated and clearly there is some things I'm not getting about the definition of "artificial difficulty" and this gives me the impression that any sort of "unfairness" perceived by the player is automatically called "artificial difficulty". 

The only reasonable examples and definitions I could find of 'artificial difficulty' is [this one](https://videogaming.fandom.com/wiki/Artificial_Difficulty)

Edit: The only thing I can relate of being called "artificial difficulty" is with GTA Online's AI which sometimes has near-perfect headshot aim. But I also fail to acknowledge this as artificial difficulty outside of my experience, as I have seen videos of people simply having more skill than me, either by having better positioning in the gunfights or doing various strategies to outsmart the incredibly stupid GTA enemies.Personally, I feel that the transversal is the most important mechanic of any video game. It is absolutely essential for the act of travelling around a game's map to be fun and engaging since that is what you do 70 percent of the time in most video games.

A lot of games have horse riding as the main form of transversal, which is excruciatingly boring, atleast in my experience, and there is little to no interaction or player engagement. You can do pretty much nothing other than push the joystick forward and maybe enjoy the scenery which becomes monotonous after a while.

The worst offenders are the recent Assassin's Creed games: Valhalla and Odyssey. And also Red Dead Redemption 2, or even Witcher 3. These games offer horse riding and ship sailing which aren't entertaining enough.

But there are also games where transversal is actually given attention to. Such as the Batman Arkham games - where you use a rope launcher and also glide around Gotham, Spiderman PS4 - where you web swing your way around New York.

I even enjoy transversal in games like Watch Dogs or GTA because of the car driving. Cars are faster than horses which makes it satisfying as you cover more distance at any instance of time so it doesn't require so much patience, and another important thing is that driving is more complex and engaging since you have to dodge and find your way through other cars on the road.

Even the older Assassin's Creed games before Origins had fantastic transversal mechanics. You could run on rooftops and parkour your way through the cities.

Transversal should never be overlooked and in my personal opinion, bad transversal ruins any game for me. Especially with the rise of gigantic maps in today's games.

&#x200B;

Edit: Sorry everyone, kindly forgive the major spelling mistake Something that's been on my mind is how quick time events are handled by Interactive Movie Games (I know that's a really cumbersome title for a genre, but I'm unaware of any decided term for them). In a lot of these games (most notably Telltale games) if you fail a QTE, your character dies, and you go back a few seconds and redo it. This is stupid for a number of reasons. For one, it destroys immersion. It rips you out of the feeling that you're in a fluid story. Similarly, it ruins the suspense. If you know that no matter what, even if you fail, you won't have to live with the repercussions, then the QTEs feel meaningless. If these QTEs have no effect on the story (you'll succeed them eventually no matter what), then what is the point of them? It's not like they're fun or interesting gameplay. At best, you're good at them, and they just pass by. At worst, you're not good at them, and you just fail over and over, watching the same cinematics every time.

My point is that, if these games purely exist to tell a story, why interject them with this pointless minigame that has no effect on the story whatsoever?

Now, when QTEs are done right, they're great. Take Supermassive Games (they made Until Dawn, The Dark Pictures Anthology, among other things). The QTEs in those games are tense and fun, because you know that whatever happens, happens, and you'll have to live with the consequences.

Obviously, the biggest problem with this use of QTEs is that it forces developers to either: keep coming up with reasons why the protagonist(s) aren't dying when they fail a QTE mid-combat, or to make their games much more dynamic in terms of the branching storyline.

I should also say that this doesn't just apply to QTEs. I don't think any choice the player makes should cause the game to go back in time. The developers shouldn't put in dialogue options, for example, that lead to the character's death and return the player to the choice. It's deceitful, since a lot of players will end up completing the game with the idea that there is more choice than there really is, assuming they didn't choose one of the "fake" options.I'm a long term escape from tarkov player (4,5 years, 2000h+) and i'm still amazed by the map design Battlestate Games is doing here:

* From a Map Design point of view, the maps are straight up awesome. Each line of sight, each hallway, building, access and entrances are thoughful.
* Loot is placed, most of the time, logically on the map. While there are some exceptions, you will usually find loot where it should be. For instance, if you are looking for PC parts, this will be in computers, in pc stores or server rooms.
* The loot does not magically highlight. Even that many lootable items (e.g. a cabinet or weapon box) are always the same, the items are placed in a realistic way. I'm playing this game since 4,5 years and frequently recognize loot where I didn't looked or just didnt recognized it in the past.
* The lootable item's blend into the map. In other games, like hunt:showdown or even pubg, it's just random loot in buildings. You enter the building, you see the loot. In tarkov, you have to "search".
* The maps are extremely detailed
* The maps tell stories
* Objects or locations of the maps make sense. For example the shopping mall with all the different stores, a power station on the map, a lighthouse, a shipping/receiving building on customs. The map does not feel crafted for the gameplay, the first priority seems to build a realistic location.

I think thats straight up awesome. From a gameplay point of view this leads to a deeper gameplay, even after hundreds of hours you will find new things and can be a true "master" of the map which is very beneficial when it comes to pvp. From a atmosphere point of view it creates just a deep and dense immersion. I think its a big contributor to tarkov's atmosphere in general.

I've played also the whole battlefield series and with the disappointment bf2042 is, i'm too very disappointed of the downgraded graphics. Offices or buildings just look awful and lack details which really hurts the atmosphere. Compared to battlefield 1 oder battlefield v, it's just a huge back step.

It didn't experienced better atmosphere/map design than tarkov offers and really hope other games take a look at that. It just creates so much more immersion and atmosphere.

What do you think? What are your thoughts on tarkovs map design? Which games offer similar map design?I was watching a [YouTube video by Stephanie Sterling](https://youtu.be/SRAWaole51M), formerly Jim Sterling, and she believes that a review should mention the environment in which a game was made under. Specifically speaking, that if a game is made in an environment in which it's employees have been subject to exploitation, that should be mentioned in the review. She was specifically speaking about games made by Ubisoft and Activision. I admit that Stephanie Sterling isn't everyone's cup of tea but she makes a good point. She also named studios like Quantic Dreams, Rockstar and Riot Games to name a few others. The case she makes is clear: That the bigger companies like IGN and GameSpot covers it on their site but never really include the exploitation in the *actual* reviews themselves. Sure, they mention it here and there, sometimes in the review (or on the website), but they never outright condemn their behaviors in the review. Even companies that have known to show contempt for those behaviors, sites like Polygon or Kotaku for example, will trip over themselves to cover their games while at the same time condemning them. Chosing to have exclusive previews, interviews with the studio heads or PR and extended gameplay sessions with their shiny newest game possibly implying they only care about the clicks either way. 

**Let me be clear: I think it 100% matters to know what kind of company that you're supporting because it's your money and you should know what kind of company that you're giving your money to.**

That being said: I'm of the mind that a review should be about the product not the company, however I have been softening on my feeling about the subject. In my opinion the two are impossible to separate, however my thoughts are a review should be as free from bias as possible. My honest opinion is that it's impossible to be completely free of bias of but as little as possible. Given that a review is an opinion a little bias is expected. I'm totally fine with say GameSpot, adding a paragraph, or link to a story about the review or stating that Bobby Kotick is an terrible human being and protects abusers. I would even mind them putting a link to a detailed article in the review from them or some other site. I think that these discussions about what kind of  developer the company really is could easily derail the review or even cause brigading. Sure, we know how awful Ubisoft is as a company in that regard, but what about other companies where there are just allegations or the investigation is ongoing? Should those be mentioned even if there is little or no proof? I'm playing devil's advocate there but it's a question that need to be considered. It's often impossible to separate the truth from opinions. 

I think it's hard to take a site seriously if they spend a paragraph or two bashing on a company explaining how bad the developers are, while praising the product itself. But if a company outright refuses to cover a game by Activision that would be taking a real stand. 

*I have been sitting on this for a week or two, but now with the controversy of the VGA's how Keighley said one thing and featured a Quantic Dream game in the show, I felt that I should mention it now.*Since this is r/truegaming I wanted to discuss the game design achievements of It Takes Two which certainly merited an acknowledgment. I don't consider awards to be awfully prominent, but I certainly appreciate it when something great actually gets a win, which can give it a boost and help new people find it. 

It Takes Two was both a technical and creative marvel in my eyes. 

First of all, there's possibly more mechanics within this game, including chapter mechanics, set pieces, mini games, mounts, and temporary abilities that it blows my mind away. You really NEED to play this game to know what I'm talking, but basically my friend and I were continuously in awe of what we were playing. 

Second, the art direction is as near perfect as it gets. So much visual variety across different levels, everything graphically polished, but most of all - aesthetically creative. Game looks pretty af and there's some legit trippy sections in it too. 

And of course, there's the coop aspect. Their previous game, A Way Out was an enjoyable cinematic coop experience, but It Takes Two really took it to another level with the polish and variety in mechanics and visuals. And each and every mechanic, set piece and puzzle is designed to incorporate 2 people playing. And that made the game a perfect vessel for us to create our moments and stories within the game while we followed the actual campaign. The story itself isn't too mindblowing, but by no means is weak either since it did what it was going for. One more interesting thing was how they converted metaphorical concepts into video game mechanics. Don't wanna spoil anything here. 

So, what do y'all think about It Takes Two? How is it gonna impact the future of coop games? Or hell, games in general, when it comes to the amount of mechanics and variety it gives?I know there has been a lot of discussion on how mini maps work and how they can easily allow a player to tunnel vision on the navigation and not look at the beautiful world created. So is there any meaningful discussion about this phenomenon in general?

Recently I finished Far Cry 6 and was struck how little I remembered of it and all the other Far Cry games. Avoiding the litany of similarities to the old games I also realized I was never looking AT the world itself. I would see a vista here or there but overall the experience is dominated by running to and from objectives, getting items, or killing enemies. Never once did I stop to smell the roses in Esperanza or anywhere else despite how nice the environments were. It's like the health bars, objectives, mini map, and crosshairs are all I looked at. So when I finished all I remembered is what I did, not anything about WHERE I did it.

I'm sure we've all had this experience in some game but I'm curious how you feel it impacts other more immersive experiences? 

Immediately after I realized how much other games allow this to happen. Persona 5 and other jrpgs are so full of menus, convenient fast travels, and transitions that sometimes you barely see the world amongst the mad dash to get everything set up. In Ghost of Tsushima or the Witcher so much time is spent spamming A to pickup any potentially useful item that I barely look at interiors I just mash and move to the next item. It's like the whole world falls away and it's just item outlines that need to be grabbed. But I still like these games a lot and remember the worlds for other things. 

So is there any acknowledgement of this outside minimal ui options? Do you have games that you'd like to immerse yourself in but the UI or systems make you tunnel vision too much? Is there anyway to have objective markers and other UI while avoiding this problem? Because now that I've noticed it I feel like every game I play I am constantly telling myself to slowdown. Feeling that once I enter "flow state" it's really me tunneling on my objectives ignoring the set dressing and graphics that are actually building the world. 

Thoughts?I think The Game Awards is designed to advertise games, not recognise excellence. Maybe this is an obvious point to some, but they present themselves as legitimate awards so I want to provide evidence to the contrary.  
  
1. When you think about the range of skills required to produce a game, The Game Awards recognises almost none of them. The awards are for narrative, direction, art, audio, score, and acting. In other words, they’re recognising the things that stir emotions in people, because people will be more invested in who wins and therefore more likely to tune in and discuss them. I want to see awards for things like Best Level, Best Mechanic, Best In-Game Animation, Best Difficulty Balancing, Best Game Design.  
  
2. The media shouldn’t be voting for who wins. This is very bad. The winners should be decided by talented people in the respective fields. For example, Best Level should be decided by respected people with expertise in level design. Or even if those people just decided the shortlist, which was then voted on by a larger group of active and successful developers.  
  
3. Game of the Year should be abolished. Games are so varied that a single GOTY category is never going to be sensible. Better to recognise Best [genre] Game instead.  
  
4. Abolish Most Anticipated Game. It serves no purpose at all other than to build hype for marketing purposes.  
  
Until these things happen, TGA has no real prestige. We can all get excited about it etc but it means nothing. It’s just another way for the industry to advertise games to you.I remember back in the Xbox 360 / PS3 days, there were websites dedicated to hunting achievements (or trophies) and accumulating a high achievement score on your account. I was an active member of [www.xboxachievements.com](https://www.xboxachievements.com) which seems to still exist today. It was a kind of interesting culture, where sometimes you'd rent a game from Gamestop to just quickly smash out some achievements.

14 years later I'm a bit more grown up and play games less, but I do feel like there was something I miss about "completing" games in this way. With that said, it seems like there are just so many games cheaply available now on platforms like steam, and I imagine it's so diluted there is little to no prestige for "100%ing" a lot of games. Does any culture like this still exist? Or is it more about self-set goals and restrictions?Basically see title

&#x200B;

I've realized that there's a specific experience that I enjoy in games: a big world that functions without me and my utter unimportance when the game starts. But eventually, through hard work I can gain meaning and start affecting the world in some ways. In Bannerlord this means joining a faction and participating in sieges, eventually being strong enough to capture cities on my own or create my own faction. In X4 foundations this means making other factions stronger, simply by supplying them with goods. In Avorion this means having a fleet that allows me to combat factions, and station building to stake my own claim. And in Crusader Kings 3 I start as an insignificant count, but can eventually lead my family to multiple kingdoms.

Bonus points if the AI in the world has the same capabilities as the player, just has bigger stats/wealth/influence etc.

The above are differentiated from e.g. 4X games simply by the fact that everyone in 4X games starts weak and gradually becomes stronger. I am instead looking more for a world that already exists and works, and you are thrown into it to find your way to strength, power and influence. In a way this may necessitate "simulation/sandbox" games, but I am not sure. Further, I think that there has to be meaningful changes you can make to the world, so this may disqualify some labels/genre descriptions.

It's possible that something like "Economy simulation" games that are not tyccoons would fit the bill, but it feels somehow inaccurate.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

I know that there isn't many more games following this exact principle and I'm not here looking for suggestions (feel free to add those to e.g. [this post](https://www.reddit.com/r/gamingsuggestions/comments/qs8hmt/looking_for_simulation_games_andor_ragstoriches/) though). I'm instead looking to see if one definitive genre label or at least a compact "genre definition" could be composed to describe the experience described in the beginning.

&#x200B;

I realize this is a bit of a strange post, but I think it's an interesting challenge to think about!Games have a pretty damn high cruelty potential. Removing the ladder when the sim is in the pool, boiling/freezing/amputating bothersome raiders in Rimworld, Mortal Kombat in its entirety, most shooters, et cetera. I'm sure you all know this already.

But this makes me wonder, *why* do we do this? I'm far from a violent person but i'll happily do awful shit to bits of code. Where does this come from? Some kind of inherent violent nature we can't express in real life? Or maybe its just 'fun', but then *why* is it fun?

My first guess is that game people are so obviously not real and don't act like real people, so our empathy doesn't kick in. But in that case, how much would it take to make you go "Okay, this is screwed up, i don't want to do this."? I think this question is especially relevant in VR, where you'd have to personally, i don't know, push someone off a cliff using your actual physical hands. Yeah, currently most VR people look like mannequins, but give it a console generation and they'll be photorealistic; I think i'd have some hangups about it then.Similar to a previous post that I made a few months ago, I really like the idea that the Far Cry series seems to want to bridge between the two concepts where the player is placed in a wacky world where the law does not exist and the player is able to do whatever they wish.

But at the same time, the story and context of this world that they are thrown in is also a reflection of a certain reality that pushes the player into questioning their actions or the actions of those involved.

This was found in Far Cry 2 where you are tasked to hunt an arms dealer when Africa itself is not that stable and is full of other dealers and businessmen who are willing to take advantage of the instability and exploit this for their own gains.

Similarly, you are a mercenary and you are using your trade to gain some revenue and recognition for doing certain work in a place that is ripe with instability and corruption.

But this was truly a game changer in Far Cry 3 where the protagonist was originally a true constrast with the world that he was thrown in. The protagonist was a carefree rich white character but ended up in a truly hostile and really crazy island where it is full of psychopaths and criminals.

The antanogist is truly as psychotic which is terrifying because there is no supernatural element and the fact that a human being like that is capable of existing is truly terrifying.

And along the way, the protagonist is learning the ropes and adapt to the environment which reflect the power fantasy of the player where they can do anything and this transfer of information also reflects on the reality that in order to be able to live in that fantasy, the player has to be put in a place where the law does not exist, similar to Grand Theft Auto.

And as the protagonist is becoming more psychotic and different than his original self, this scares his friends that he is trying to save and makes the players question their own actions.

And this is where Ubisoft truly wanted to take advantage of this and it is where we wee the Far Cry games becoming more frequent

In Far Cry 4, the protagonist is meant to pay the final respect of their relative and ends up becoming a revolutionary. There is not a strong motive to do this other than there is a charismatic villain who, if you look into the layers of the character, is willing to do anything for the sake of stability.

And to some extent, the villain is willing to be fair with the player like in the first 10 minutes where the player is captured and if the player will indeed wait until the villain returns, you will be let go as promised.

This reflects on the conditioned trope that since the villain is indeed deemed as a villain from the start, the player can indeed question their biases and fears, even if the villain is already that terrifying.

Other than that, the story is about a revolution and the protagonist did not seem to be a character of reflection to the player or a reflection of the environment that he was placed in.

Far Cry Primal is not a game that I played so I cannot say much about this and I cannot say whether it is a reflection of something in particular.

Far Cry 5 and New Dawn are almost the same thing as Far Cry 4 but with a different twist.

The setting is in rural America where the people there are more isolated and closed off from the rest of the country and the government does not want to get involved but is willing to get rid of it because they do not want its existence to reflect their perception of corruption or incompetence.

The protagonist is a deputy so you are believed to think that you are a good guy and the villains are a tight-knit religious-like cult and the leader is just as charismatic.

But if you look into it deeply, the cult and the revolutionaries are also reflections of the culture of America and its concepts of freedom, militarism and the actions that deems justified to spread these ideals.

It is an irony of its ideologies because the protagonist is willing to spread freedom and democracy through violence and the villains are willing to spread their ideologies through violence and manipulation.

It is a reflection of how America has allowed and still allows the existence of cults, religious fanatics, gun-loving groups and other societies with questionable or complicated ideals because it is a reflection of their culture and politics and policies.

And in a way, the cult leader was technically correct into believing that he can save his people and in his prediction that their existence will end in a nuclear apocolypse which how it ended (if I recall correctly, because the government wanted to make itself appear tough by doing the very thing that it also allows to exist and deems justified  .. theough the use of violence and weaponry)

So this is also a reflection of the player's actions in the context of the gun-loving American culture which was coincidentally, released during a certain era of a certain American president.

Far Cry 6 is also a different version of the story of revolution and the wackiness of what you can do like the weapons that you can use and other armaments.

The villain is also a ruthless dictator but the thing that makes this character different is that he is a practical one.

He uses his son to teach him how to be a dictator like him but it is not clear if he is manipulating him or whether he does not believe in the reasoning of his actions

And when he comes into question about his actions in news interviews, he throws back answers that makes you realise that his actions are not so different from others like using slave labour to produce a cancer cure when even other companies and nations produce products that are worked from the sweat of sweatshops, child labour or even of prisoners who get little in return.

It is not clear of he is manipulating the situation in his favour but it brings into question on whether he is so different from everyone else or from other dictators throught history.

This also reflects on the protagonists desires on wanting to overthrow a dictator but the means of doing it and how to rebuild it also comes into question such as what to do with the dictator's son and other relatives or whether to change the traditions of the nation that many of its citizens are accustomed to.

One example that is brought up is that one of revolutionaries is a part of a LGBT community but the nation has complicated ties with the community and if the attitude does not change, then this person will have to fight in another revolution of her own and will render the original revolution as pointless since her own ideals and culture do not also become accepted and she will still struggle to find accepted.


All these ideas are quite good and can invite discussions amongst players.

But I must admit that not many people are truly looking into the hidden depths behind these stories and trying to analyse what the games are trying to say.

But I cannot say for certain if the games' execution in telling these stories still remain to be desired, or whether the players do not seem to care or notice.I feel like, due to streaming and other kinds of videos, certain games can fall under this umbrella of "I'll watch it, but I wouldn't play it." Currently watching a girl play Before Your Eyes and to me that's a prime example for this type of game. And looking at the sales as well as the nomination for The Game Awards, this particular game appears to be doing well for itself. However, for games that are less fortunate, I can easily see a big streamer turning on thousands of people to a new game that doesn't have "longevity", a quick 2 to 5 hour story, and then these people just won't buy it because they feel they've already experienced it.

Watched someone else play Little Misfortune, and said to myself, "you know, the game's on sale, and I enjoyed watching this so much I'll buy it even though I have no plans to play it", and... I never did. As noble as that idea sounded in my head, I couldn't bring myself to buy a game I didn't want to play. I do wonder, though, if others have done something like that.

And while the title specifies "indie" games, this could potentially be an issue for AAA games as well. Life is Strange happened to be a success, but I can picture an alternate reality where that game bombed due to an audience that felt "I've already seen that." Maybe the key to sidestepping this is to have branching narratives, as all three of the games mentioned in this thread have, coincidentally, so that way viewers will be encouraged to buy and see "what can I do differently from the streamer?"If you're wondering what I meant by Ludonarrative Resonance, it's this: games that do such a good job of marrying the gameplay and narrative experiences that they don't feel like separate/distinct things.

For example, in a game like Red Dead Redemption 2, there's a distinct sense that the gameplay serves the story being told, and the story could work just as well as a movie or a video game. The interactivity of the game doesn't enhance the story experience in a significant way.

Contrast this with a game like Hades, which has a narrative structure that works only because it's a video game.

It's a roguelike, so everything from power-ups to the levels is randomised. However, the game changes things up by having random characters—who also play a key role in the story—be part of the gameplay loop as gods giving you those power-ups.

On top of that, you also have this very complex dialogue system that reacts to everything I do, so characters notice and respond to my actions in-game.

This results in a game where the main plot, the side stories, the characters, and the dialogue are all connected fundamentally to the gameplay. Story never interrupts gameplay, but is an integral part of it.

Hades could have gone the easier route and just added cutscenes every time you finished a run, but the game is so much better because of this careful design work.

P.S. I understand this sort of unique design wouldn't work or would be too time-consuming for many games, but it's an ideal that more games should strive for, in my opinion.

P.P.S. If you're interested, you can [check out my video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Hu2HoF1P9pM) on this topic.**!! Please no unmarked FFXIV: Endwalker spoilers in this thread, as it's only been out officially for a day !!**

I've seen the discussion of 'meaningless' dialogue choices a lot in this subreddit, but I thought it would be interesting to focus specifically on FFXIV's implementation of these and why I think it works so well. Specifically the types of dialogue choices you see a lot in the Shadowbringers expansions.

I think one of the most important conversations around player 'choices' in dialogue or cutscenes is **expectation**. If you have make a choice between who lives or who dies, you expect one of them to live or die. For that decision to have weight.

But FFXIV is VERY focused on dialogue options with basically no impact. There are a few exceptions, but in general the most change that will result is a change of the text in the very next NPC line and nothing else. Often their animation remains exactly the same.

FFXIV: SHB expansion does a good job of setting up early that your dialogue choices don't matter to gameplay, which is wonderful **because it frees you up to express your personality**.

**The downside of dialogue options that matter is there will almost always be a 'right' choice. A 'true ending.'** There's little room for self-expression as your character because you're not trying to express yourself in dialogue, you're trying to choose the 'right' answer.

FFXIV may be an MMO but it has a very linear story. The story of the expansions, especially HW and SHB has led to critical and audience acclaim, and the strength of that choice is now helping to skyrocket their player count. It's no longer an exaggeration to say FFXIV is on track to overtake WoW soon.

A generic-ed example of dialogue choice is where a group of scared villagers think you're demons in disguise. It's very clear nothing you say is going to change what they believe because they're all panicking. So there's no expectation that you can change the outcome of this situation with words.

The options:

1. *"Please! We're not demons!"*
2. *"..."*
3. *"Uh... quack?"*

If you choose option 3, Thancred says: "...that will seem a lot less amusing when we are forced to kill them." The implication is not that you could have changed anything, but that you are definitely making things worse.

The beauty of these choices are that there is no pressure, no consequence that makes you want to reload and try again. **Your dialogue choices are like clothing options.** It doesn't change anything but the way you see your character. But that is so SO important for an RPG.

Another example:

1. *"Enough!"*
2. *"You bastard!"*

I've found myself taking up to a minute to decide and thoroughly enjoying the process. **It's really brought the roleplaying element back into an RPG.**

But as much as I've appreciated how well FFXIV has started to embrace this (and the players seem to almost unanimously enjoy it as well), it makes me wonder where that line is between flavor and expectation.

What are the dangers in setting up purely cosmetic dialogue options? How do you teach players that they don't matter and to just have fun in a first playthrough, when you don't know if it matters or not? Are some RPGs just unsuited for dialogue options at all?

**Do fake dialogue options lead to a break in player trust if they turn into 'real' options?**[https://quartz.ubisoft.com/welcome/](https://quartz.ubisoft.com/welcome/)

So, personally, I don't see any benefit to this to any gamer. It's a means for Ubisoft and maybe the top 1% of influencers to cash in on collectors who "need to own" ultra-limited MTX, or items previously owned by celebrities and content creators.

IMO, this will detract from the fun of casual gaming in the same way esports/ranked matchmaking changed online gameplay. Where before people played online just to play online, now they do it to rank up or win prizes. NFTs will mean players no longer play just to enjoy the game or even to grind/earn items, but to possibly sell those items and profit, blurring the lines of recreation and business further.Okay, I know, I know, this may sound silly, but it’s a question I’ve had for some time.

Usually rumble support in games is seen as gimmicky, a lot of people diss it as a gimmick that started and stayed as nothing more than an aspect of the experience that serves to “enhance” it in a fairly minor way, and those people are usually the ones that go as far as to even recognize or think about vibration or rumble feedback in games as something relatively significant for the experience.

However.

I noticed a trend in many gaming forums where the question on whether YOU, disabled haptic feedback or not, would come up.

Surprisingly, there are tons of people who disable rumble, either because of preference or a particular kind of disability.

What I did found interesting about these answers though, was how people would explain times in which they turned off rumble or vibration, and despite not consciously being aware of it when enabled, they definitely felt it missing when turned off.


I conducted this experiment myself with many games and found myself in a very similar situation.


This got me to think about the idea of people skipping cutscenes, and how that’s usually something frown upon because you're deliberately missing a very significant part of the experience; eventually the question came up in my head.

Is haptic feedback an essential part of the experience?


An essential part of the game?


Like if a developer builds their game and design it around a particular “feel” they’re trying to provide the player with, then it’s only fair to assume that haptic feedback, rumble, vibration, or whatever… Would be part of that gameplay experience…

Right?For a long time I couldn't grasp, what made Warhammer II so different as a sequel.  
Many called it a glorified standalone expansion pack and to be honest, I kind of agree.  
And it describes exactly the difference I'm feeling and want to talk about.

What Warhammer II does, is, expand and improve upon the first game massively while rendering it obsolete for everyone owning both.  
Many game series have destinct entries, where they differentiate enough to warrant an existence of each.  
Yes, oftentimes a sequel improves upon the formula and is objectively the better game, but in the process it makes it quite different. Which gives the prequel a reason to stand on it's own.

The Total War: Warhammer Trilogy operates a bit differently.  
If you own the game prior, it sort of is integrated into the next game.  
You can access the **combined** map of the games you own and all the playable factions, which come with each entry.  
This means, when you play the second game, you sort of also play the first game.  
Yes, all the changes made over time are there and it is not the exact same experience.  
But since most of these changes are improvements, QoL and more fleshed out content, it is generally preferable over the first game.

What I personally like about this aproach, is, how it doesn't separate the content.  
You always play with the full feature set and the most polished version of the game, while not really missing out on content of prior entries.  
For a game like Total War Warhammer this way of doing things fits perfectly.  
It would be a shame to have the map, factions and features split up into multiple games and no way of combining them.

What other series could work well with sequels more akin to expansions than a true standalone title?  
What is you opinion on it? Where would it not work well?I want to preface this by saying that I love this game. The story, the characters, the interactivity of the world, it's all in a class of it's own. The game has an Overwhelmingly Positive on Steam, and it absolutely deserves the praise it gets.

I had two separate playthroughs, one with my wife on Classic difficulty, which we stopped in Act 2 around Driftwood, and a separate file where I played alone on Tactician. My main character was Fane, who I played as a mage. For compaions I used Lohse as a ranger, Sebille as a rogue, and the Red Prince as a Fighter. 

I've completed or extensively played almost every other modern CRPG excluding Pillars 2 and Tyranny, and have a lot of experience with the older infinity engine games, Fallout 1&2, as well as Neverwinter Nights 1&2, Knights of the Old Republic, Dragon Age, etc. So keep in mind, that this is coming from someone who is very familiar with CRPGs in general, and that someone who played Divinity as their first CRPG may have a completely different experience or opinion.

Having said that, this is the hill that I will absolutely die on: *the combat and it's derived systems are some of the worst, if not the worst, of any RPG combat system to date.*

Larian Studios attempted to reinvent the wheel, and in doing so they created a system that seemingly provides more choice, when in fact it restricts it. Heavily.

**The main pain points:**

* Bankable action points
* Excessive teleport/jump abilities
* Revolving itemization/inventory
* Excessive statuses and stun lock type crowd control ability
* Separate armor and magic HP pools
* Unbalanced ability score system
* Multiclassing with no downsides
* Enemy AI does not play by the same LoS rules
* Everything is on fire, always



All of these things combined serve to make every single encounter exactly the same:

Bank AP -> Teleport -> Spend banked AP -> Burst damage to strip armor type -> Infinite CC

Enemy targeting is incredibly limited. Magic users will unequivocally target low magic shields and physical damage dealers will target enemies with low shields. To do anything else will result in the enemy using this very strategy on you, resulting in failure. So lets go over each of these one by one and how they not only cause problems on the individual level, but also serve to compound problems with each other.

**Bankable action points**

There is a reason that no other CRPG or tabletop does this. If you can in any way prevent damage for a certain amount of turns you can almost guarantee a free kill or at the very least ensure that you will strip armor of an enemy. Example: cast chameleon on your self, wait two turns. You have full AP. You can now spend it, and that will result in insane burst damage. But wait: you don't even need to do this because skills exist that allow you to spend AP you'll earn later, now. The enemy uses this strategy often, it's very frustrating to see each enemy get several actions *per turn*. 

A better system would have limited every character to single action per turn, with possible bonus actions for moving or smaller spells similar to Pathfinder or DND. This would allow the player and enemies to trade actions and interact more often. It would result in much less "instant" deaths from both sides. From an immersive perspective, it doesn't make sense that you will somehow be able to act more often later, just because you didn't act now. Inaction is in effect an action, it's a decision to do nothing, it takes the same time. Perhaps the game needs more reactive skills like XCOM, but I digress.

**Excessive teleport/jump abilities**

Teleports or teleport like abilities (cloak and dagger, phoenix dive, flight, tactical retreat, ect). All of my characters had at least two of these, and while it's easy to say "just don't use them", it's another example of "If you don't, the enemy certainly will." There is hardly any object permanence when it comes to character movement in this game. The funny thing is, it is almost necessary to spend a lot of time setting up your characters' positions pre-battle, only for it to not matter after a turn or two as every character/enemy will end up using multiple teleport/jumping abilities resulting in the battlefield looking completely different from two minutes ago. This makes formations during combat simply ineffective as the enemy will simply pass around you. It also makes certain traits like the one that ignores attacks of opportunity, wasted, when you can simply teleport, jump, or charge to get around them.

I think Divinity: Original Sin 1 did this better as it only allowed the scoundrel to jump. Allowing every character the option doesn't make for an interesting combat system if positioning almost never matters.

**Revolving itemization/inventory**

This one is pretty simple but has a huge effect on the game. Gear comes and goes way too quickly. Do you like that new weapon or armor you found with an interesting spell from that boss you killed at the end of that epic dungeon? Have fun using it for an hour because it will quickly be replaced by something you found in a barrel on the side of a road.

If you're unwilling to trade out your fancy old gear for that new green, then equipment deficiency will become a real problem. You will be massively undergeared because the game *expects* you to constantly replace your gear by searching every barrel, stealing from every character, and buying every chance you get. Even a few levels of difference can result in almost half the armor/magic hp, which can put you at a massive disadvantage. It's almost like they saw that people like constantly changing out their gear in games like Diablo and somehow thought that would work here too. It doesn't. 

**Excessive statuses and stun lock type crowd control ability**

Once you've successfully stripped off the enemy's shields you can sit back and relax because CC (Crowd Control) is in no short supply. This is makes some of the boss battles extremely disappointing. And because the game expects this, you will almost never have any fights with just a single big baddy. If you see one, rest assured that many summons are sure to follow. 

One example is the fight against Mordus. Once he transforms, if all his lackeys are down and you've removed his shields, he is now zero threat. Even though he has well over 1K HP, it doesn't matter. Because every turn you will have someone knocking him down, setting atrophy, silencing, ect. For nearly 6 turns I sat and played as only my team got to take actions while he was lying on the ground.






This type of encounter design is boring. All the difficulty of the encounter is front loaded, and once you've stripped armor off it might as well be over, which leads me to my next point...

**Separate armor and magic HP pools**

Remember that last encounter? My mage certainly doesn't. Because for the majority of it he was doing nothing important. While the boss had zero physical shields, he still had nearly full magic armor. Meaning that any damage my mage would do simply wouldn't matter. The HP for the boss was long gone before his magic armor ever came down.

This type of split system results in limited target acquisition. Magic users go after weak magic armor, physical damage dealers go after weak physical shields. But they almost never go after the same enemy. While Divinity: Original Sin 1 certainly had issues with excessive CC, I think other systems have already solved that issue with resists and saving throws. If you really wanted to stick with this type of system they could have made it so that your physical/magic pool can never be larger than your current HP. This would allow for combined arms to come together once the vitality HP pool is being attacked. But I guess with the current CC system it would just result in even more CC.

**Unbalanced ability score system**

Warfare. Everyone needs warfare. Did you build a Rogue or Ranger without warfare? Congratulations, you've massively hurt your damage potential. The game's ability scores are a massive trap, and the game does not tell you this in any way. If you delve into the tooltips you will see a single line of text "(multiplicative)" next to the warfare score, and somehow that is suppose to serve as vital information for how to build your character.

If you build your character the way it would intuitively make sense to do, i.e: a rogue with dual wielding/scoundrel, or a ranger with huntsman/ranged, you will put out much less damage than either of those characters with the absolute minimum in their respective class attribute with a maxed out warfare skill. This was known about and reported as early as the original beta and was never resolved. I suppose the developers thought having a simple skill for damage was the best option. It's just disappointing that you would never discover this by simply playing the game. Again, the system leads to less diversity in order to be effective. 

**Multiclassing with no downsides**

This one is more of a problem with skill/spell LVL locations than the ability to multiclass itself. Almost all the overpowered skills are at LVL 1 or 2, so it's trivial to acquire them. In fact, it's highly possible you'll even have the prerequisites for these skills simply from items. You could acquire all the best skills in the game for free, and have them on every character. The utility they provide in allowing you to front load your actions or instantly move around the battlefield is worth more than the 10-20% those attributes would provide if they went into your "main stat."

Other systems like Pathfinder definitely have problem with class dips, but in Divinity you might as well just dip into everything. Imposing limited restrictions results in creative solutions. Without them every character ends up feeling nearly the same at the end of the game.

**Enemy AI does not play by the same line of sight rules**

Standing in smoke and unable to shoot out because you don't have line of sight? Well the enemy can shoot right through it, no problem! Unable to attack the enemy standing right next to you? Not a problem for the enemy. On top of this the number of times that I initiated an attack from range with zero indication that it will miss due to LoS was way too high. It happened in nearly every fight. Sometimes you do get a yellow text indicator that the attack will miss because something is in the way, other times it's just "fuck you, I'm a rail here to block your shot" Of course these are almost never a problem for the enemy AI.

**Everything is on fire, always**

All in all, I found myself enjoying this game most when doing the social and investigative parts. When I first made it to Fort Joy and Driftwood I played for hours and hours, not wanting to stop. But when I knew a large encounter was coming up I'd often stop playing the game for days. This is the first CRPG that has provided me with that experience. I'm not a stranger to difficulty or having to reload fights either, Pathfinder was absolutely brutal and I loved every second of it.

Having said that, knowing that Larian is developing Baldur's Gate 3 has me really excited as it will hopefully have the excellent world building, character design, and dialogue they are known for, with a combat system that is actually tried and true. Trying to reinvent the wheel can be admirable, but sometimes it goes up in flames. Like every floor/object/character in Divinity: Original Sin 2.Now a days it seems like everywhere I go on reddit for gaming subreddits, a large portion of them seem to have an overall negative outlook. Cyberpunk 2077, New World, Halo Infinite, CoD, Battlefield, etc. And this seems to be a trend going on for a few years now. It got my wondering, is gaming getting worse. I decided to see if any data collection has been done on this topic and I have found some analysis and graphs of metacritic reviews going up till 2019. I've combined this with graphs of revenue and "number of unique games" in the following picture. 

[https://i.imgur.com/GZoKCZ4.png](https://i.imgur.com/GZoKCZ4.png)

Now personally someone who has been gaming since the 1990s, I remember really feeling like gaming was going mainstream between 2005 and 2012. This is also around the time that we saw significant changes in average user score. While I included in the picture some of my thoughts on that, I'll talk about them here. The large drops could have been a result of gaming going mainstream. In short more people = more gamers = more reviews. This also means more money. It is during this 7 year period that we saw the rise of modern day monetization practices alongside the mainstream rise. 

So with all this data in mind, do you feel that we're in and getting worse in a period where games seem to be getting worse?I don't complete many games but the games I do complete are paced very well and don't have endless amount of side content. Although side content is optional there shouldn't be so much of it that it either feels like they have to put it in there or that the main arc was an afterthought

My favorite game right now is superliminal and the reason is quite simple it tells a story and is interesting mechanical and cuts out all the fluff. Now superliminal is on the extreme side of the spectrum. It is very short and can't be used to compare to grander titles. 

Now most AAA games need to be longer but I feel like the the length is often very artificial in both the main arc and the fact that there is an endless sea of side content. 

They have to either make the side content interesting or maybe that the side content pushes some kind of intrigue or story. There should be some impact to something when doing a side activity.

And the main story or arc should be impacted by the sidecontent both indirectly and directly. And it should feel like things are changing in the world and that it doesn't just stay static.

I have heard people talk about you should have some self control and not do everything in a game but that only matters if the "everything" is boring. I shouldn't be the what I should or shouldn't experience that should be the developers and publishers problem. More content isn't always better. It is almost always better to leave wanting more then to bloat your game full of things that are just there.

This was alittle incoherent but I hop you guys get the jist of what is am sayingI am a big fan of exploration heavy, immersive sim type games - think Prey, Dishonored, Alien Isolation, DXHR, etc. I finally got around to playing through System Shock 2 for the first time recently, and all I can say is wow. I *cannot believe* this game was made in the 20th century.

Behind the admittedly rough opening segment, the game is very recognizably modern - very similar to Prey. You have all the staples of a contemporary AAA title - voice logs, tile inventory system, complex upgrade tree, hacking system. The levels are expansive and interconnected, it still looks futuristic, and it really feels like you are exploring a real place. There are even a bunch of unique mechanics that I have not seen in similar games, like the research system, armor system, and implants.

One thing that really struck me is how *little* the industry has innovated on that core gameplay from 1999. The core gameplay is nearly identical to that of a modern immersive sim - find room, explore, avoid / attack enemies, loot containers, upgrade character. Sure, there have been some innovations such as Prey's recycling system and the alien from Alien Isolation, but the core remains the same.

That got me to thinking. IS there any room for innovation here? Other than improvements to existing systems, such as a new crafting system or new powers to use in combat, can the core gameplay loop be innovated on in any way? I am honestly not sure. Perhaps adding Metroidvania elements, or fully destructible environments could work? Would love to hear your thoughts.There has been a noticeable shift of how games are monetized over the years, where it is now common to monetize games either largely or entirely through microtransactions, where game publishers sell items with an unlimited supply to consumers at arbitrarily high price points. These microtransactions have become much maligned by the gaming audience as a whole, particularly loot boxes, one of the most insidious forms. There hasn’t been a lot of innovation in terms of game monetization since the loot box, which is unfortunate as players have become disillusioned with the current free to play system.

I propose a new form of monetization which only offers a digital currency for sale, which is exclusively used for players to buy and sell in-game items amongst themselves. The key to this is that all exchanges are taxed, removing money from the system and requiring additional funds to be added to the economy by the playerbase. This system already exists in the Steam community market, where any item sold is taxed (10% to the game publisher, and 5% to Valve), though to my knowledge this has only been a side form of revenue for publishers, without any games taking advantage of this as their main form of monetization.

This form of monetization provides several advantages over a more traditional method of microtransaction, with the most immediate being fairer pricing. Almost all microtransactions exist outside of supply and demand, with the supply being infinite and the price generally staying constant. This would make the pricing seem more reasonable to the players, as it would be more in line with what the item is actually “worth”. In addition, it would also prevent the justifiable backlash from players by seeing a supposed “micro” transaction being sold by the company at an unreasonably high price, both by potentially lowering the price according to demand, and having the prices be set by other players. Depending on which digital currency is used, players also might be able to “cash out” to some extent. For instance, if this was done on Steam, a developer could forgo the middleman and just use the Steam wallet balance directly, which will allow players to cash out by then using their Steam wallet on other games on the platform.

How would you feel about a game using this “tax” method as their main (or only) source of revenue? Would it be received by the player base better than a more traditional form of free to play? Could it still be profitable enough for the publisher? Would this overall be a worthwhile idea?How important is it to you, do you pay attention to it when buying a game, what kind of non-linearity do you expect?

Take RPG for example. Most people expect or want to see an open world that can be explored, the ability to go through quests in different ways, the class / characteristics of the character that will affect the gameplay and thereby diversify it, endings that depend on the player's actions, etc.

The problem is that some elements can be limited or broken. The world can be open, and even large, but the developers will not let you go further, because you did not complete some quest, did not talk with such and such an NPC, items are scattered across all the boxes , shelves, chests, but you are unlikely to find good items here, because, as you know, the best items are closer to the end of the game, the nonlinearity that is present in the game, but we make all possible choices at the end, etc.

As an example I can cite Fallout 1. An old game with bugs, to some extent unfinished, created by several people, managed to surprise me and show that non-linearity and freedom that I did not expect to see. Go wherever you want, kill whoever you want.

If we are not talking about RPGs, then I can cite as an example such a game as Heavy Rain (possibly Detroit, which has not been completed), where there are also different endings depending not only on the player's actions, but also on the death of the characters.

I’m still a cretin and I perfectly understand that there are conventions in games, it’s impossible to make them all like that. With some things I am ready to accept, with others - no. I have always preferred non-linearity, because the developers give the player a choice, and everything else is up to the player.Ever since Splitgate blew up a few months ago people claimed that it would be dead as soon as Halo Infinite released. While it has certainly lost players since that boom in popularity, now that Infinite is here I don't think people anticipated the many issues Infinite would have. We've all seen the complaints about progression and playlists, but personally the biggest thing Splitgate does objectively *better* is the flow of Matchmaking.

Setting aside the fact that you can actually choose what game modes you want to play, Splitgate has blazingly fast matchmaking. If you want to use the bathroom in between matches, you're probably going to miss the first few seconds of the next game. I've yet to time how long it takes, but playing one game to playing the next (not loading in, actually playing) is at most a minute wait. I think this is super important for keeping players *playing*. If a game gives me the chance to think "should I play another?" then it has failed. If it takes more than a minute to get into a 4v4 10min game, it has failed. You queue up once in Splitgate and you just ride the matchmaking for as long as you feel like playing (which is usually longer than you originally planned). Match ends, check out a lil scoreboard, you get about 30 seconds to vote for the next map, load up, boom you're in the game.

The flow of Infinite's matchmaking is horrendous, and I think it actually reduces the amount I play. When you search for a match it might not take *too* long, but loading the map, waiting for others to load, starting up the game, and watching the little intro animation feels like it takes forever. When 10% of your time on a game is spent *waiting*, what the hell are you doing? I'm willing to wait a few minutes for a well balanced game of Dota or Valorant because they might last an hour. Asking me to click "Play" and wait 2 minutes after every game of Halo to start playing again is a huge failure. It's something that indie developed Splitgate has knocked out of the park, while Halo-freaking-Infinite lags behind.Most multiplayer PvP games now have some level of cross play. While on paper this is good, it’s actually hurting mouse and keyboard (MnK) more than others due to high aim assist given to controller inputs. 

Aim assist is obviously necessary for controller, but it is high enough in many modern shooters that controller is significantly outperforming MnK in many of the skill brackets (Apex Legends, Halo infinite, warzone, etc.) This is especially noticeable among more casual/median skilled players, since the learning curve for MnK is much steeper than controller with high aim assist. 

Probably the best solution to this is to allow players to “opt out” of cross play matches. This keeps both camps happy, and still allows cross play when you want. Unfortunately, this isn’t an option in some games, and players are forced against other inputs. 

The other option is of course to tone down aim assist. But this might just flip the problem, angering controller players. I also don’t see many big games doing this because more casual controller players will perform worse, and might get frustrated and stop playing the game.

I am in favor of both being implemented, because I think a larger skill gap on controller will only benefit the games longevity in competitive circles. But at the least, **optional** cross play needs to be implemented in all of these games. It’s probably not possible to completely balance both inputs so we need to stop pretending we can. 

What are your thoughts on this? 

**Personal Note:**

As a big Sega Dreamcast fan, I felt I had to at least try to play through Shenmue I and Shenmue II, even though I wasn’t too excited about it. A while ago I came back to Shenmue I (after a hiatus), finally finishing it and found it to be highly flawed, which made it difficult for me to enjoy the game. Still, although I was reluctant at first, I decided to persevere and give Shenmue II a chance since I’d heard that it improved on the original in important ways and had a much larger and more vibrant world. Playing through this game was part of my search for games I would consider my favourites and best of all time. I ended up being pleasantly surprised and I’m glad I gave this one a chance since it actually became one of my top ten games of all time, though I still consider it somewhat flawed, and perhaps a bit slow paced for casual gamers.

**This is a long review! (and may contain a few spoilers)**

**Introduction:**

Work for Shenmue originally started on the Sega Saturn in 1996, and it was conceived at some point as Virtua Fighter RPG by Yu Suzuki. Eventually work was shifted towards the Dreamcast, and the first game was released on the Dreamcast in 1999 (JP) and 2000 (EU, NA) to critical acclaim, although some reviewers at the time, for example, Frank Provo, writing for Gamespot (US) in 2000, noted the problems it had that kept it from being what it was hyped up to be. In my own review of Shenmue I for the Dreamcast, I noted the slow pacing, the inability to save anywhere outside of, the protagonist's (Ryo’s) bedroom, the clunky controls, the different game styles, like forklift racing, that do not work well, the lack of direction, and general tediousness, and lack of story progression. These were all elements that prevented the first game to truly be a more mainstream action-packed fun game for most gamers in my opinion.

The first Shenmue was the prologue of the story where Ryo Hazuki’s father gets killed in his dojo in Yokosuka, Japan by the main antagonist of the series, a high-ranking member of a Chinese cartel, Lan Di. This prompted Ryo to try to find Lan Di to exact his revenge. The last game leaves off with Ryo heading for Hong Kong, in the hopes of finding Lan Di, and it’s where this game picks up the story. Originally there was supposed to be a game or part of one about the story of Ryo’s trip to Hong Kong on a ship, instead that was released as a manga. The second game starts of with Ryo’s arrival in Hong Kong’s harbour.

This game was never released on the Dreamcast in North America, the Dreamcast version only saw a release in Japan, and Europe in 2001. It was released in North America on the original Xbox a year later in 2002, however, since there was no version of Shenmue I for the Xbox, the save file from the first game could obviously not be imported. I have the original Dreamcast PAL version, and the Steam version, but decided to play an emulated Dreamcast PAL version since I have my Dreamcast stored right now. The Dreamcast PAL version has Japanese audio with English subtitles.

**Gameplay**:

The game makes important changes to the gameplay in the first game. I’m guessing that the team that worked on Shenmue I learned what worked and what didn’t, based on reviews and feedback, as the first game was so experimental. They tweaked the gameplay to improve on what the original had fault with. Finally, you can save anywhere in the game. You don’t have to trek all the way back to your room for that. Also, you don’t come back to the same bedroom every day, with the same routine boring routine, for a refreshing change of pace. Additionally, waiting for important appointments or events is much better now thanks to the ability to fast forward in time for that event. Previously the game had a game time that you could not fast forward in any way, even if there was little to do while waiting for an event. Instead of having to explore for yourself of where you have to go, this game has a much better sense of direction, with people that you talk to guiding you where to go, just go around and ask them. Oftentimes they will even offer to walk you to a location you are looking for. All of this really helps with the pacing of the game.

It’s true that you don’t have the small town feel of the first game, with characters that you get to know and converse with as in the first game, but still overall I feel that the improvement in pacing and direction more than makes up for this. On the other hand, the world of Shenmue II with its initial setting in Hong Kong (for the first two discs), which moves then moves on to Kowloon (third disc), and finally Guilin in China (fourth disc) is huge and beautiful with plenty to explore. The game feels vast and does have its well-hidden secrets, for those that like exploration in their games.

The gameplay is still similar to that of the first game. Much of it has to do with talking to people figuring out clues of how to find Lan Di, and about the mirrors that Lan Di wanted to get from the Hazuki dojo. Aside from that you have your QTEs (quick time events) which are much like in the first game. I used a Logitech controller that has a circle D-pad so that helped to mess up my inputs making it difficult to do some of the QTEs. Some of them can also be a bit too fast, but if you do them enough you can memorize many of them. Remember to save when doing long QTE sequences. Outside of that you still have places to practice your martial arts moves, and this game, thankfully, has a lot more action and fighting than the first game. The way the story unfolds it feels at times like you’re playing a Kung Fu action film.

The QTE based work to earn money, and in exchange for stay, for example, moving boxes at the warehouses, or moving books in the library, can be a bit tedious but doesn’t feel as unfair as some of the tasks in the first game. Although there are times when you need to earn a lot of money, for example, come up with $500 to meet Ren, and depending on how you want to achieve that goal this could take a long time, there are tricks to doing this quickly. For example, some gambling games are based on chance. You can play them, and if you win, you save, and do it again which could end up earning you a lot in little time. If you lose, don’t save the game, reset it and start over. This can make this task take 30 minutes instead of hours and hours. There are also many other tips that can help this game to speed along. One of which that fans from the first game may like is that you do get your bag stolen at the start of the game, so you may want to buy stuff at the outdoor stall nearby to help you keep some of the value. A lot of the minigames themselves however, based on gambling are honestly tedious and not fun. I found the fighting to be enjoyable especially after building up some basic techniques (I’m a fan of fighting games). I haven’t played a lot of Virtua Fighter, but I like the fighting in Shenmue II better than what Virtua Fighter I’ve played. There are also some puzzles in this game which can become a bit tedious, but most of the game is fairly doable and not too unfair. Honestly this game would have been even better if it were possible to unlock a fighting game mode at the end of the game. The fighting really shines in this game.

Again, from the gameplay perspective the QTEs, when executed poorly, can be one of the worst and most frustrating parts of the game, especially when they are so fast, or you are using a D-pad which may register wrong inputs easily. Though overall considering how the story progresses and being full of action and variety the gameplay is fairly balanced and solid.

**Graphics, Music and Tone:**

Aside from the fighting, I think this is where this game really shines. For a Dreamcast game the graphics here are amazing, on par with the Gamecube and Playstation 2. Hong Kong is a beautiful, vibrant, sunny, varied, and bustling metropolis that is a pleasure to explore. It’s a lot to take in, all of the streets, the Harbour, the Warehouses, the shops, the mall, the different districts, parks, etc. It almost makes you feel like you are travelling there and appeals to me as I travelled quite a bit before the COVID-19 pandemic (and some other issues) put a stop to it. When Ryo comes into Kowloon by bus and it goes into an aerial view of the bus coming to Kowloon it reminded me of travelling again and made me kind of feel like I was on that trip. Kowloon is also huge and beautifully designed, there are lots of malls full of shops and people.

The relationship and chemistry between Ryo, and the badass Ren works very well, considering their different personalities, with Ryo being the straight man, honorable, righteous and honest, and Ren being cunning, sly, and artful. It’s sort of an unwilling or unlikely partnership reminiscent of a Kung Fu buddy film. Ren is always doing stuff on the sly and has tricks up his sleeve. One of the most memorable parts of it for me are when they are roaming through the floors of the building, running from the cartel men in QTEs, and fighting in fast paced action, this exemplifies what I described above. The other characters are important in the story and memorable as well. The story of Shenmue does also move along quite a bit, much more than in the first game, and we learn about Ryo’s father and his relationship to Lan Di.

The final fight on the roof on the third disc seems like the end of the game, but in the fourth disc, with new clues to Lan Di’s whereabouts, Ryo is headed for Guilin China, where he finally meets Shenhua, a main protagonist of the game. Most of that part of the story involves them wandering through beautiful surroundings on the way to the village, talking to each other, and participating in QTEs.

I have to say that while I really enjoyed the story and action in this game the ending with Shenhua seemed rather strange to me, as it implied, she had some magical powers, which doesn’t really seem congruent with the rest of the game. It did leave me wanting to see the conclusion though.

I really enjoyed the music of this game more than that of the original. It had less of the traditional music of the first game, and more movie thematic type music. A lot of the music was appropriate depending on the nature of your current actions, for example, when the situation was tense. The game still does have some traditional East Asian inspired music as well.

**Bottom Line:**

This game improved on the original in many ways including the ability to save anywhere, fast forwarding to important events, much more direction, guiding you where you need to go, a much faster pace, and being loaded with action. It is filled with QTEs, and 3D fighting sequences which are very enjoyable if you like 3D fighting games. The QTEs can be frustrating if they are too long, quick, and made worse if using a controller with a D-Pad that can easily register wrong input. The world of Shenmue II, namely, Hong Kong, Kowloon, and Guilin are huge and detailed with tons to explore, many side quests, mini games, and well-hidden secrets, and beautiful scenery to look at and wander around. A lot of the game feels like a Kung Fu buddy action film. The chemistry between Ryo and Ren is great and they make a great team. There is quite a bit of story progression, and we learn more about Ryo’s father and Lan Di. The music is very good as well, although some of the jobs, mini-games, and tasks you have to do can be frustrating and tedious. If you don’t know some of the tricks to make money fast, etc., in this game, the parts when you need it can become tedious. Overall, the positives of this game really outweigh the negatives, in my opinion, and this feels like the Shenmue adventure that the first game failed to deliver.

One of the swan songs of the Dreamcast (although that might more properly be Rez), this game is a must try for those that are into action games, along with life, and social simulation. I would personally recommend that casual gamers just watch Shenmue the Movie, which is a film based on the enhanced cutscenes of the first game (included in the original Xbox release but available now on YouTube), instead of playing the first game, and just play this game to have a more enjoyable experience. Considering all of its positives this game ended up in the bottom of my top ten games of all time, which is saying a lot.

(Side note: as you already know the game is now widely available on Steam, Xbox One, and PS4)

**Overall: 9/10 Amazing**In asking this I do not intend to belittle the effort that goes into video game music nor its importance to the experience of a game. Some games live on their scores and the great composers like Koji Kondo, Nobuo Uematsu, Martin O'Donnell deserve recognition just as game designers/directors like Miyamoto and Kojima do.

That said, I can't help noticing that music never... fails? Sometimes a game is ridiculed for all sorts of reasons but we might say "it's still worth it for the soundtrack". Final Fantasy 13 and certain Paper Mario games spring to mind. When does the opposite scenario ever come up? I have seen criticism of the newer Dragon Quest games' scores, but I question whether that criticism would exist if news of that composer's questionable political views hasn't come to light as well.

Given just how often a game's music is said to be a masterpiece, or how often the comment that a game has one of the best soundtracks of all time comes up, I feel that this is one area where getting a pass is relatively easy for the designers. Am I wrong? If not, why might this be?A very often repeated complaint about MP shooters is trash-spawns, Indie and AAA alike

Spawning in enemy line of sight, spawning in combat zone out of cover, spawning under artillery fire, hell even spawning into a damn molotov you threw before dying, all that crap

So I was kinda shocked about how little is that happening in Verdun, at least in the frontlines mode. No matter how close to or far away from action it throws me, Im always quite safe at the moment of spawning

Not only do I NOT remember EVER being spawned right into opponents iron-sights, but this bloody thing can even adjust the stance you spawn in, to be able to put you into a shallow crater.

There were times when I was spawned right into a zone clouded with Yperit (speakin of Yperit, I reccomend not to inhale it, medic researchers say its not good for your health, kappa) but then it does which smart thing that would have never occured to an average AAA dev? Yeah, thats right, spawns you with a gasmask already put on.

They are also trying to make squad based spawns balanced, sometimes it lets you spawn right into a contested trench, but often it does not and instead uses a crater slighty behind the trenches, to prevent a snowball effect

In fact, the spawn distance from trenches seems, in general to vary a bit, whether u use a teammate or the fixed spawn point; Im not sure about the details here, but I feel like its either based on the number of players already in the trench, or on how close the opponents are to the trench, rather than willi-nilly, though I couldnt swear on that

Actually, so far, I remember only one case when I got pwned right on spawning, and that was with a grenade, which, considering how busted and spammable they are, is probably inevitable. I wouldnt even be surprised if that had been a case of the system getting logic-bombed (literally, Lmao), because every single concievable spot had a nade flying to it. 

Thats a single occurence in about 15+ hours of playtime since I reinstalled it a couple weeks ago

For comparison, In RO2/RS(2), BF1, CoD Mw/Cw, I get cucked by spawns at least 3 times per hour on average

Tl; dr

The spawns in this game(mode) are 10/10 and the whole industry should take a note from it

Feel free to post your experience with the games spawns and/or examples of other games where you liked the spawn systemI love to play as character who using magic. Like most of 2000s kids, I really liked Harry Potter movies and Avatar animated series. Because videogames are great place to become a wizard, I'm always picking wizard class. Because I'm big fan of Avatar, I love to use elemental spells to deal damage. But I just realised that mostly attacking spells are just useless. Yes, they are beatiful and look cool  but it's just a waste of mana unless you want to defeat a monster who is wrak against elemental attack. Using weapons is more practical to deal damage.

It's rare to see interesting magic systems in RPG games. I just noticed that Skyrim's destruction spells are just uneffective unlike conjuration and illusion spells. Why I should spend so much mana on fireballs if I can just cast an illusion spell to turn my enemy into my ally? Or just summon a monster that will fight for me?

There are some exceptions, of course. Elemental attack spells in Persona 3 are extremely useful to gain more turns. But moments when attack spells have a sense to be useful are extremely rare in gaming. Mostly spells are feeling more like instruments than weapons.Developers often include the ability for the player to play specific missions in a single-player campaign only when they have completed the entire campaign once.  I believe developers who choose to include this feature should allow players to access it immediately.  

If you played some of the earlier missions in a game on a different platform or lost the save data, a mission-select feature available from the start allows you to get back to where you were far quicker.  This also gives players more of an incentive to buy a different version of  a game or a copy on a different platform since they won't have to start the entire campaign from scratch.  

The only counterargument I have seen against this change is that some players would use this feature to skip to later content, deprive themselves of important story and gameplay content, and then get mad at the developers for creating a camapign that isn't enjoyable for them.  However, movies have allowed you to select a scene from anywhere in the movie from the start for 20 years yet this hasn't been a big problem.  Very few people buy a 2hr movie, watch 20 minutes of scenes from different points in the movie, then get mad at the filmmakers for not creating a coherent narrative from just those scenes.

Developers shouldn't prevent players from being able to enjoy their game just because a tiny group of different players chooses to destroy their own enjoyment.There's a thing I notice in gaming communities (maybe this is universal, but let's stick to games for now.)


Someone comes along with a suggestion for improvement, and immediately hardline "conservatives" (I'm not using this in the political sense) come out and immediately shoot down the idea.  And they will come up with the most contrived and ridiculous reasons.


In such situations, my rebuttal is always this:


Imagine if the proposed change was already the status quo since the beginning.  Would you be starting online petitions to get it changed?



If Starcraft 1 never had a 12 unit selection limit, and instead allowed unlimited selection like most other RTS games, who would be crazy enough to demand that they limit unit selections to 12 units?  And who would be crazy enough to support the idea?


If Path of Exile supported gamepad as an option on PC just like its console version (or just like Grim Dawn), who would be crazy enough to demand that they remove this feature and force mouse and keyboard on everyone?


And yet you'll have people defending these things with extremely convoluted arguments.  When you just know that if the situation was reversed, the same people would argue just as passionately for the other side, because they always blindly defend the status quo.


"I'm sure it's a good idea, but I don't care about your proposal and I selfishly prefer that development resources be spent on things I do care about" is a perfectly valid answer, but most of these people never reach that level of self-awareness.


So let's spread the technique where we always try to imagine the proposed change as being in place from the beginning, and trying to imagine what kind of reception a proposal to change it back would receive.


Edit: To avoid misunderstandings, this is a technique to try to free ourselves from the bias towards the status quo.  Not every proposed change will pass this test, that's the whole point.  If we can easily imagine getting outraged and starting online petitions to go back to the status quo, then that's useful to discover.  


An easy example would be adding a whole bunch of pay2win mtx to a game.  "Imagine if they were there from day 1, would you be writing online petitions to get them removed?", the answer would be "Heck yeah, of course!". Etc.This sounds like a special topic, but it's actually simple and something I observe more and more in recent games.

# How authenticity is killed for the sake of convenience

Take "Tales of Arise" for example (Spoiler alert)  
This game has a powerful quick travel function which isn't even explained ingame, not even as a teleport. (it's just for convenience)

Towards the end of the game you travel with your party to a distant planet despite this being a long journey, there is always the possibility to simply quick travel back to the first planet, like the planets are just merely a few seconds away.   
This isn't reflected by the story the slightest. Sure you will spend some time on this new planet and players still might wanna fulfill some quests. I suppose that's why games back then telegraphed points of no returns into within their dialouges. The game kinda make it look like it's an journey you can't expect ever coming back from, but the quick-travel system tells otherwise.

Since later in the game you return from the planet anyway I see no reason why the game shouldn't lock the player to the planet. There is nothing on the first planet you can't do on the 2nd, no possibility to softlock yourself. Still for some sorta reason the developers are too afraid to lock the player according to the story to a single place breaking the authenticity between gameplay and story a lot.  
There are even examples in the game that are on a smaller scail, like raiding a ship. Even on this small sequence you can teleport back and... "raid the ship again??"  
This reminds me on a situation in Dragon Quest 11, in one of the earlier mainquests you are locked in a cursed canvas, at least according to the plot, but you can always just teleport back to the surface, if you know talk your party members, they basically tell you that we have to escape from the canvas...??

So in summary, you have to visit the canvas again, to let yourself get trapped on purpose, so you can escape "accordingly" to the plot. Up to this point I can't take the game serious anymore and it's a way too huge break between what you do and what you are told you have to do. It looks like the developers are really too scared to take a little freedom away even if the situation would require it.  
   
Except from MMOs (which are stricted anyway due to their online component) I never encountered such an behaviour in older games.

I mean sure, if the developers don't like it or fear to much backlash for whatever reason I would rather expect they would make sure that such situations would never happen in the story, so you won't have to question the whole construct. I mean in some sorta way it already illogical to teleport back and forth between the town and the dungeon boss, but at least it's understandably no reason to lock the player, you can better justify it with "the party just turned back to restock supplies and because this would be too tedious for the player, we fast forward"   


# A poster example of mine, how a (temporary) point of no return can invoke interesting feelings

This game is quite uncommon an already pretty old so I'm not sure how many of you can relate with that example, but it's the best I could think of, that really blew me away.  
There is that game called "Summoner 2" where you play a reincarnated goddess and queen in once. The game is structured around your kingdom, you travel back between the castle and several exotic location. Towards the middle of the game while you explore an arctic place, something important within the story happens. In short:  you find yourself in an strange underground place, full of dark but also bright colors, all of the inhabitants were masks and you can't speak the language of most of them, even worse, you are completely divided from your party, you are alone and the place is unlinke anything you've seen before in the game. You might encounter a few party members again later on, but most of them are brainwashed or trapped. It's really a dreadful but at the same interesting feeling, because the place you land on is also civilized, there is a town, a new culture, and some logic to the place, it's not just an dungeon you escape from.   
I really know back then when I played so far in the game I was homesick, you have to know that the arctic place was already a long and stressful dungeon-like place.

I wanted to be back in the castle with my companions where I was the boss, where everything was familiar and where I definitely would find new interesting activities (because the game always gives you new after a trip.) but I couldn't and it was absolutely logical why. Imagine I could just teleport back and forth between every location of the game, like Tales of Arise. Would this feeling be still the same?

You probably spend 8 to 10 hours in this new location, it's basically a second world map, with its own locations. You feel uncomfortale but after a certain time I could more and more adapt to the place until it became a second home, eager to see what I find next. While you strifing further to your goal coming back to the surface. This feeling when you finally come back to your castle in an familiar location it feeled like one hell of a journey and it was such a great feeling being home again.

I think this feeling can only become invoked when the player doesn't have the opportunity to come back.   
I know this is a pretty huge example on a much larger scale, but now imagine that back then a game had the guts to break basically the ground under your foots to throw you into unexplored terrain and a modern game like Tales of Arise doesn't even dare to restrict you on a boat you raid and where spend not longer than 20 minutes. Such a scenario like in Summoner might be unthinkable in todays times.  


# Anxiety and fear of missing out as possible reasons

It's a classic, before even playing a game, a lot of people ask if there is anything they can miss. This is of course not exactly the same topic, but it shows to me that there is always some fear when the game guides you to a place you can't return from (temporarily)   
"Can I go back? I must check the guide at once", "what is if I missed a chest back then?", "am I strong enough for this new area"  


These are all legit questions, but they also show a distrust to the developer:   


\- instead of just letting the game take its course, a lot of people inform themselves immediately and even take possible spoilers into account. 

  
\- At the same time I would definitely expect from a modern game, that it telegraphs clearly when I leave a place I can't return to permanently. 

  
\- The question of the right "level" or "strenght" can be simply solved by designing an boss encounter before the new location or something similiar, that serves as a gatekeeper that ensures you are strong enough  


\- and of course a lot of features of the game don't have to be bound to an place. There can be still shops on the new place, still easy enemies you could farm if you are underleveled, healing sources and so on.  


I believe because of that anxiety, a lot of developers fear to take the player into a situation that isolates you from the content you experienced before, although still writing such situations, creating a huge gap between plot- and game logic, which makes such events way less effective and downright unbelievable, leaving out all the potential, Summoner 2 demonstrated so greatly back then.  
Sure there is nothing wrong about a little convenience, but I believe there should be clearly a limit that doesn't clash with the inherent logic of the game world.  
Personally to me it really ruins that feeling of  a "journey" by showing you how artificial position and distance actually really is within the game. I'm not sure how to express my thoughts on this clearly, but maybe you can relate to.  


Would be eager to hear your viewpoints and experiences about it.I have to admit While Halo 1 and 2 put the OG Xbox on the map and makes it one of the stand out titles for the console itself. I felt like the OG Xbox didn’t sold as well as the ps2 despite the OG Xbox being the most powerful of its 6th generation. I also noticed that most of the multiplatform games on the OG Xbox are cheaper than the ps2 and GameCube which that’s good. But anyways, can anyone tell me what are the contributing factors to why OG Xbox didn’t sold as well as ps2 in terms of sales and popularity.EDIT: The survey comes to an end not and we thank everybody for participating, commenting and contacting us via DM! The winners of the lottery will be drawn and contacted shortly. Once the resulting paper is accepted for publication after the peer-review process, we will contact the mods again and post the results here if people were interested. Cheers & stay healthy, u/IntLab

&#x200B;

Hi /r/truegaming,

We’re a team of games researchers from the Interaction Lab at the University of Saskatchewan, Canada. We’re interested in understanding peoples’ perceptions of the use of performance enhancers (e.g., caffeine, brain stimulation, medication) in competitive gameplay contexts.

If you have experience playing video games, we would love to ask you some questions about your opinion on certain potential performance enhancing methods in gaming. **While we do require that you have some video game experience, no knowledge about performance modifiers is required.**

The survey should take approximately 10-15 minutes to complete (caveat: the survey does include open-ended questions, so this is also partially dependent on the length of your replies). Each participant can enter into a draw to receive one of five $100USD Amazon gift cards.

Please note that confidentiality will be maintained throughout the study: the entire process and data will be anonymized.

You can find the survey here: [https://hci-mturk.usask.ca:8401/](https://hci-mturk.usask.ca:8401/)

The survey will remain available until December 15th. (Feel free to share the link!)

If you have any questions, please don’t hesitate to ask via commenting on this post, writing us a message or emailing to the person of contact listed in the survey (i.e., Dr. Friehs from the University of Saskatchewan; maximilian.friehs\[at\]usask.ca) – we’ll get back to you as quick as we can!

Thanks so much for all the people participating!There's nothing worse than jumping back into a game that you were quite far in, only to realize you've forgotten how to play, whether it's basic controls, item interactions, crafting, etc.

A game that has a permanent tutorial on the main menu is Vermintide 2, and I'm thankful for it (even if the game isn't too difficult to get back into).

What usually happens is that I have to start a new account, then sit through the infinite amount of cutscenes before I can start the tutorial. And if there was a specific thing I wanted to practice, I might have to run through the whole tutorial or first few missions before getting access.

The best option would be to have a limited sandbox mode where you can see tutorial tips and have access to everything. What do you think? Would that be a mostly-unused feature on games and not worth the developers' time?

EDIT: While we're at it, why not have a recap feature that catches you up on the story up until your saved checkpoint? TV shows will do it, so why not games?

EDIT 2: While we're still at it, why not have a completely skippable tutorial and separate it on the main menu? That way, you aren't forced to run through a tutorial if you start a new game.I just remember my school days when I played a lot of Java games. Most of Java games, unfortunatelly, don't have russian localisation (my native language) and I'm happy that my mother knows english well. Then I started to play old SNES games on emulation which are, of course, mostly don't have localisation. And now I have high grades in english at university. And I can talk with many people on Reddit. That's miracle!

I never though that learning other languages is so fun! Because I'm a weeb person, maybe I should to start learning japanese. Firstly, of course, I should learn basics. And then play games on japanese. Maybe I should also learn chinese.More specifically while not being the worse game ever, it was certainly put through the worse development cycle ever.

And now the developer, WB Montreal, is responsible for the next batman game, an online grinder where you don't get to play as batman so I find there previous game worth revisiting.

Hot off the heels of the much celebrated Arkham City a new team from Canada was brought in to release the next title while we waited for the final game, Arkham Knight.

While initially the reaction was mixed, since then there has seemed to be a unanimous appraisal of this title as some secret masterpiece. Or at the very least criminally underrated, but to say I disagree would be to belittle how truly awful the game really is. So awful that it makes an interesting case study (and I in no way mean to bully the people who worked hard to make it reality. It was obvious they wanted to make Arkham Origins 'good' so they certainly didn't phone it in).

Referencing their hard work, it is also significant that such a game could be completed by a team allowed to produce a finished product. This isn't Cyberpunk 2077 or Godfall. The game was neither incomplete or a cheap knock off. It was an attempt at something great which fell flat on its face.

NOTE\*: I didn't play the multiplayer so I am only commenting on the single player campaign.

Firstly WB Montreal decided to put the Menu Screen options into the Batcave. The Batcave is only accessible through fast travel which is already something you don't want. It is barebones and limiting; since this was an attempt at something new it could have been amazing, but instead it was underwhelming.

So what did they do with this new Batcave hub? They turned it into a menu screen where you activate quests, change your bat outfit, and play the challenge rooms. All that was streamlined into menu select in the previous games since it served no purpose in the world, but WB Montreal decided to hide this select screen as a supposed 'new' feature of the world.

So not only do they stuck players into fast traveling in-world to access these side options, they hide it behind something as iconic as the bat cave as to suggest there would be something more. All it does is break up the pacing by making players stop by every know and then to get important quest items rather than having it airdropped at your location like in the previous games.

So about that, what about fast travel? Well fast travel is bad game design, it only exists when it has to as a necessary evil. Yet a big portion of the game is structured around unlocking towers to gain access to the fast travel locations.

Well what, is the world a massive open world? No, but there is a long bridge... :(

The developers designed this world by slapping on the Arkham City map and then connecting it to a lesser inspired version of that map via a long bridge. A long bridge with nothing. To compensate they add wirings that allow you to grapple boost across but all the bridge does is force you to fast travel. Once you have unlocked the fast travel point in both Islands you don't need the rest, they are just filler.

Tower unlocks in games like Assassin's Creed, while annoying, are about scouting out new areas. But these aren't vantage point, just random areas you cross and recross, they serve no purpose besides being tedious and time consuming.

One aspect of the Arkham City map was wonder tower. You had to go around this walled off area and take longer routes. It has a story purpose to reinforce an idea that you are in a prison complex.

Well Arkham Origins take place before this part of the city was sectioned off so I guess this would be an opportunity to fix that problem. But no, the developers just slapped on a giant complex called "GOTHAM CITY LIGHT & POWER" that we can't glide over.

If the Montreal team had done more than just copy the successful city game they could have found obvious ways to improve it, but instead they thought all they needed was Arkham City again but with additional crap stuck on top.

So now we don't just have the wonder tower area, but several other large monoliths stuck in our way. And unlike in City it is not marked on our map, so we have no idea. We are given this illusion that we have this open area to explore but there are giant red blocks and invisible walls blocking our way. There is the Petroleum Facility were Enigma is headquartered, the Hotel, and the aforementioned energy complex.

So we have a team who designed an open world where watch towers were placed in random off location areas (like on a floating island) so that we can unlock fast travels to get across a very long bridge and glide *around* areas that we otherwise could go over. Worse, the purpose of the world is to glide over obstacles you would otherwise have to face on the ground, but Arkham Origins doesn't care about any of that.

It is trying to replicate Arkham City without understanding why its features were good (or bad). The Enigma trophies are just copied and pasted from the last game but with less context. We don't 'know' who enigma is at this point so we need an excuse for more puzzles and hacked cameras. They had an entire universe of alternatives to the riddler but instead we get nigma without the riddles.

The combat system was according to Rocksteady (the original developers) meant to replicate Guitar Hero. You get a rhyme and keep hitting the right buttons. But Origins wants to add more. It doesn't revitalize the combat system, it just brings the same things and thinks more is better.

Now enemies exist to break your combo which goes against the principle of the combat system. You are suppose to be having fun, not grinding to beat tough guys. Usually there would be one armored guy to mix up the gameplay. In Origins we are given several.

So now when thrown into a group of baddies we have to stop the flow to stun an enemy, hammer them, vault over another enemy, rinse repeat. It makes the encounters long and boring, not difficult. So what is their solution? They add the shock gloves which defeats the purpose of even having the stun move in the first place. Adding more shields and armor isn't fun when they aren't strategically placed and allowing us to cheat the system with shock gloves isn't the definition of fun. The Ninjas meant to break your combo with double counters are just lazy QTEs thrown into slow the pacing.

If batman flies across the room to hit them, we want a continuation of his chain of attack. But the ninja slows down time when you hit them so you have to counter their attack. This does the opposite of making the combat play to its strengths, it just reveals how shallow and empty the combat system was all along.

The Bane enemies are this but worse requiring TWO stun beat downs to knock out and Origins doesn't just throw one of them at a time, but several in a single encounter. They also have red shockwaves and charges which can only be resolved by vaulting away (breaking up the combat once again).

So what about new items? Same as before but less useful. The glue grenade is the ice grenade but it can't freeze water so it removes a primary traversal mechanic. The stun grenade is the glue grenade but does even less.

It is bad game design to even have repetitive items. The upgraded bat claw can be used to stun enemies together which is already pointless since we have two stun weapons. It also give three free KOs during predator mode which defeats the purpose of having predator mode. Just remove three of the enemies from the encounter and you will get a more fulfilling treatment.

Making bad level design and then giving players the tool to cheat the design isn't a solution, it is just a sign of how bad things are. The Predator maps are like whys very bad.

In the GCPD you have a bunch of offices cornered off but no roof so you can isolate enemies right next to each other with walls. So really there is no design besides drop down on enemies and zipping back up. The walls are just there to make things easy. No need to separate enemies, set traps, or find breakable walls.

Oh yeah, and they add MORE armored guys in predator who you CAN'T stealth kill (excuse me, knock unconscious). The best you can do is bat claw them off a ledge but even then that reveals your presence. So if you want to stealth the entire map without anyone knowing, you aren't allowed to. That is called bad game design.

Some of the other predator maps are so bizarre as to where the vantage points are set that I have no words. The map in Black Gate was also very much like the first Predator Map in Asylum. Asylum gets off for being a first try, but Origins is the third game, it should be held to higher standard.

Especially since the Black Gate predator arena is end game material while the one in Asylum is just an introduction to the stealth gameplay.

Visual design? 2-D fire sprites are painfully obvious in the End Game when emotions are running high. The soft art-design lets the game get away with lower textures and more washed out colors, but not with its broken frame rate.

This supposed blizzard also goes a long way in turning the world black and white. Colors don't pop out, everything is dry and depressing.

One more thing on world layout: The Mall area outside the Museum has its glass covering closed. This may show that the area is in less ruin than in Arkham City, but it defeats it own purpose by blocking players from gliding back down to the outlet. Instead we can only access it through specific areas.

The dungeons? Straight lines. No seriously, there is no obstacles at all. Every building is just a one way route to the boss fight. Areas like the Hotel are made to look open but you can only play them in one order. No backtracking either.

Why is this bad? It ruins the purpose of clever thinking and restricts the level to just a sequence of beat-em' ups. There are fake vents in multiple areas. And vents you can open serve no purpose. Supposedly Batman finds vents to get around certain obstacles, but in Arkham Origins the levels are perfectly linear so the only place to go is through a vent.

Again, they have fake vents and fake doors as set dressing to give the illusion that this is not a video game level, but instead it just makes it painfully obvious that it is just a video game. The Ship tries to replicate the Steel Mill in Arkham City. Same stuff happens. But while in City we reach a central room from which we branch out, the Ship has nothing of the sort. Even the water section is linear with no obstacles (just point and drag).

The Hotel is supposedly the magnum opus of the game, but even then it is just opening doors, fight more people, move forward. There is literally a roller coaster segment which if the developers had any sense of irony, would be gesture to how "on-the-rails" everything is.

Story? Oh this is the part people praise, some people even claim it is as good as a classic Batman graphic novel. What if I let you on a little secret? **There is no story.**

Someone else on YouTube mentioned this but apparently a lot of people were bamboozled into thinking there was one. Like the dungeons, there is set dressing to give the illusion there is a conflict, but that is all a lie.

Don't get me wrong, there is a premise. Black Mask, an old time mob boss puts out a hit on some vigilante nut job on Christmas. GREAT. Premise = story. But it is just a lie.

The assassins have nothing to do with the story. They appear at random times as detours and then get relegated to SIDE QUESTS. Do you know how insulting it is for the main premise that you sold the game on to be relegated to side materially? It shows how little WB Montreal was interested in their own plot.

So what did they replace that with? Nothing. No really, nothing.

*SPOILER WARNING*:

So, it turns out Black Mask was actually the Joker. So why does the Joker care about Batman? Because Batman saved him from falling down a bui- wait, that hasn't happened yet.

Joker has no reason to care about Batman. He doesn't care about the profitability of his crime network. He is introduced as a nut job who wipes out half of the black mask thugs (somehow, never explained how) so he has zero reason to keep this hit going because he doesn't care.

He has a supposed meeting in the Hotel to discuss this issue pretending to be Black Mask but he has ZERO reason to pretend. He reveals himself openly and people just accept. So he has no conflict. He is just playing the role of Black Mask and stringing us along on this fake Assassin quest until surprise, Batman saves Joker.

So what about Bane, why is he working with the Joker? No reason at all. He doesn't want the money. He doesn't like the Joker. So why is he in this 'story'? Because there is no story, it is just a montage of character relationships with no central conflict.

Jim Gordan is in this and Batman builds a relationship with him. He builds a relationship with Joker. He builds a relationship with Alfred. But none have any reason for happening since they are all disconnected.

Batman isn't famous yet Bane is dedicated to killing him for some reason. And yet he works with Joker for no reason since Joker doesn't even want him dead. Joker wants to perform a messed up game to prove Batman can kill, so why does Bane care?

Why is Bane even here? Who cares, this story doesn't have to make sense because it is just an excuse to stick a bunch of characters together.

Arkham Asylum: Joker takes over the Asylum to help build his titan army

Arkham City: Hugo Strange wants to activate protocol ten while Batman is poisoned on a ticking time clock.

Arkham Origins: ahh....

Like the rest of the game it is set dressing with no substance. There are cool scenes that are completely disconnected and have nothing to do with the game (like the Joker sequence).

Arkham Origins plays it safe while doing nothing. It copies Arkham City yet reveals how shallow the core of this series is by making it without substance and added mind numbing filler like more armored foes, and long bridge, and pointless monologues.

The Boss Fights? Deathstroke is glorified QTE. Copperhead? Just another combat arena. Killer Croc? A less inspired version of the titan battles in Arkham Asylum with a QTE.

The final Boss? It was just like the drill battle in Arkham Knight. Sneak around and get Bane next to an electric fence but with no detective vision. Seriously, this series isn't known for its boss fights, but Arkham Origins does nothing with its own.

And for the supposed central piece of the game, they actual had a joke boss fight. That tells you how seriously this game takes itself.

It is bad not from a lack of effort, but misplaced effort. They copied Arkham City without understanding what made it good and ended with a souless game that plays it safe yet somehow fails on every level.

I don't have much hope for this new Batman game, but if WB Montreal wants to learn something, they should stop focusing on more and learn to try and improve features by finding out why they work.

And while everyone is entitled to their own opinion, I suggest people who harp on the fact that Arkham Origins is underrated go back and actually play the game. Which is not in the end a worth while experience.So, I've watched that one popular video (by Nick Robinson) about this topic years ago and was confused why the author missed some qualities of what "second person view" means, but recently I've discovered this video in my recommendations once again and decided to express my worthless opinion.

My thesis: games with second-person view are games where the player is the narrator, games where the main characters act based on the player's decisions and the player doesn't directly control them or games where player sees the character they control through the eyes of another character.

What are the properties of a first-person view game?   
\- camera view is set in the perspective of one character  
\- you control that character by giving directional inputs and action inputs

What are the properties of a third-person view game?  
\- camera view is following one character  
\- you control that character by giving directional inputs and action inputs

Second-person view is all about having "you", the player, as part of the experience. Either something should be happening to you or because of you. Something separate and controlled by the player can affect the character that the player associates with themselves, or the player might not have a character that represents them but have the power to affect other characters.

Based on that, what would be the properties of a second-person view game?  
\- either player sees the playable character from the perspective of another character, who cannot be controlled and is affected by actions of the pc   
\- or the player is their own entity that gives orders/does something to the "playable" characters

By that definition, I would say that strategy games and life-sims are also games with second-person view.Now, i know Arx Fatalis was supposed to be an Ultima Underworld game but that idea got scrapped, even though you can blatantly see the Ultima influence in it. But that's neither here nor there, what i wanna talk about is how interesting and compelling the world of Arx Fatalis is, especially as someone who really isn't that much into medieval fantasy games. And, in my neverending quest to shill anything made by Arkane Studios i'm gonna do just that.

&#x200B;

First, when i first booted up Arx i was expecting a typical dungeon crawler but the moment the openning started i was hooked. The very premise of the world itself is downright fascinating and really original. A world where the sun has collapsed, making the Earth uninhabitable so all the different races on Earth moved all of their towns and cities underground in order to survive but, of course, the squabbles that they had on the surface they developed underground as well, even more so. Medieval fantasy games are usually set before everything goes to shit and you, the protagonist, are supposed to prevent the coming catastrophe. Here, the catastrophe's already happened, you're just gonna live in that world.

&#x200B;

Second, one other thing that impressed me is that Arx doesn't treat races like orcs or goblins as stupid dumb brutes. The openning itself demonstrates this perfectly as you get captured by goblins and thrown in a jail cell. Goblins...having jail cells where they keep prisoners. Not only that but the jails are under the control of a Goblin administrative office where you can find notes and letters that the prison administrator has written. Goblins. A race portrayed as nothing but stupid cannon fodder in most mediveal fantasy games has a  prison administration. Same goes for the orcs. A lot of them won't even be hostile to you, you can just talk to them and even get a sidequest or two from them as well.  Like that's so fucking cool

&#x200B;

And third and final, Arkane really went in on the whole "Society went underground" premise. This isn't a typical dungeon crawler, not at all. It's not just going to be dark hallways filled with monsters (Don't get me wrong there's plenty of that but it's not exclusively that). There are towns, villages with people living in them, tavern keepers selling goods, farmers taking care of livestock, bards singing songs etc. Every single place you visit feels so lived in and spacious which is a great mood changer from the claustrophobic hallways and dark corridors where you'll be fighting in 

&#x200B;

I've lost count how many times during my playthrough i said "Look at that cool thing". Arx Fatalis is easily one of the best medieval fantasy games i've ever played and also one of the best RPG games i've played periodHi gamers so this is a topic that I'm finding myself thinking again and again when im playing a game.

Games like skyrim and fallout 4 lets use skyrim as this exemple, ok im in whiterun and i have to go to riften to start the thief guild quests," do i fast travel to riften?" This is the first thing that pops in my head,  if i do and this is something that I've always notice when i fast travel, i feel lazy and that im not enjoying the game as i should.


"Do i walk to riften?" This would allow me to explore caves see the beauty of skyrim, i could get high level equipment exploring tombs, not to mention i would get to upgrade my character and just feels right, but i get that feeling when walking around the world "this is tedious" but not all the time, sure walking miles to get to point a from point b can be a drag, specially when you have other quests to do.

Games like watch dogs 2 and red dead redemption 2 i never fast travel, theres always something going on in the world and i think its worth it to keep that fast travel button away.

So in closing, at times i feel like im lazy when i fast travel, missing all the beauty of the world and maybe missing some upgrades, while not fast traveling allows me to see all the beauty of the world but it can get tedious if you dont do it right.

What do you think?Just to get that out of the way at the very start: no, games don't make you more violent, games don't make you a mass murderer. This post is not about that. 

However, I can't help but notice how many games are build around killing someone or something. I just had a look at the 50 most played games on steam and 39 of them had killing as a core (!) mechanic. It seems the only games that do not usually contain killing are sport and simulation games. 

One problem I have with that is that it seems pathetically lazy from the developer side. Games can be so much different things, but in the vast majority of games the gameplay is just the usual stabby-stabby or shooty-shooty. And why do you do shooty-shooty? Well, because enemy bad. 

My other point is that I wonder if developers make primarily games about killing because that is what people want. What would it say about people if that is what they primarily want? Would a shooter sell worse if it were about laser-tag instead of world war 2? Has killing something just become such a common trope in games that devs and players don't even think about doing something else, anymore. 

Am I the only one who thinks that the prevalence of violence/killing in games is a bit odd. And am I the only one who thinks that there are many games that could profit from not being mass-murder-simulators (in terms of gameplay) and should instead try to look for other ways to make the gameplay interesting.As a long time fan of immersive sims, from the original System Shock all the way to Deathloop i feel confident in saying that Prey is the best immersive sim i've ever played. Yes, even better than the original Deus Ex. The way it mixes exploration, story and RPG elements is one of the most seamless mixes in the genre i've ever seen. But that's not even the best part. The best part, for me anyways, is the amount of ways you can work around a problem in Prey. The game is so dynamic with the ways you can traverse around the space station it's overwhelming sometimes.

For example, say you wanna get from the bottom floor to an upstairs office but the door to the upstairs is locked. Now, you can:

\-Use your hacking skill and hack the door open

\-Use the GLOO gun you're given to make platforms to climb up to the office

\- Use the toy Crossbow to shoot foam darts at the control pannel on the other end and open the door that way

\- Move some heavy furniture nearby and make a path that way if you strength's high enough

\- Look around the place to find the code to unlock the door (The code is randomly generated on every playthrough)

\- Look around and find a vent or a secret passage and climb your way up the top

And that's just the amount of solutions for this one particular problem. A locked door. Something that would otherwise be so benign has multiple way to accomodate your playstyle on that particular playthrough. The entire game is like this.

\-Wanna be stealthy? No problem, there are specific stealth skills dedicated to that

\- Wanna go guns blazing, blasting your way throughout the space station like some sort of Space Rambo? The game's got you covered

\-Wanna be a loot whore and take everything in site? Done and done my friend

\- Wanna use space magic, teleporting yourself straight into the enemy's face and blasting them away, or turining into a piece of furniture to hide from them like some sort of mini Prop Hunt? The game's got an entire specific skill tree dedicated to that

The amount of freedom you have gameplaywise is downright insane. Not since the first Deus Ex have i felt such freedom in playstyles and, like i said, i would argue Prey does it betterMany regular posters here at [r/truegaming](https://www.reddit.com/r/truegaming/) may often wonder how to improve their posts to better improve possible discussions, but have been unable to get the feedback they desire in any form besides a downvote. This monthly post is designed for frequent posters of [r/truegaming](https://www.reddit.com/r/truegaming/) to receive the feedback they'd like in an organized fashion.

If you are seeking feedback for your posts, we recommend linking to your threads and explaining your thought process in posting them. Explaining the reasoning behind how you posted may be key to finding out what you did wrong and what can be improved. We also recommend including what type of discussion you wanted to start within your threads, and what you believe your own strengths/weaknesses are as a discussion author. This way, people can gauge how you see yourself and can give feedback appropriately.

If you would like to give feedback, we emphasize to please be constructive and polite when doing so. This post is designed for posters to learn from their mistakes, and in order to do so, a decently-sized explanation of their mistakes may be needed. Please also consider replying to those who may not have any replies yet, for even the smallest amount of feedback can help discussion authors.To preface my post, I think toxicity is part of the retired posts, but my post isn't necessarily how to deal with anger over toxic players, but an intentionally toxic gaming community that embraces toxicity and celebrates it as a badge of pride.

Over the past decade or so, I've played several multiplayer video games that are inherently competitive, challenging, and include PvP. As referenced by many threads in the past, this often breeds toxicity in the multiplayer community. Toxicity usually refers to ruining the game for others, playing in an inherently selfish behavior that often is a detriment to the team, involves excessive trash talk or taunting, and usually involves cursing and slurs.

Gaming communities handle, treat, and react to toxicity in different ways

* Outright disapproval of toxic behavior
* robust systems for punishing toxic behavior
* embracing toxic behavior and criticizing those who wish to change it

The first competitive multiplayer game I played, Starcraft 2, had no tolerance for toxicity. Friendliness and good sportsmanship were expected from every player. It was common for both players to send "GLHF" at the beginning of a match and to type "GG" at the end of the match to gracefully acknowledge defeat. A common saying from a pro player was "No GG, no skill." This attitude of good sportsmanship gave the game a feeling of professionalism. There was the occasional display of bad sportsmanship, but it was not tolerated in the general community.l

The second competitive multiplayer game I played, Dota 2, is usually thought of as a toxic wasteland. The game is widely known for frequent displays of racial and homophobic slurs, intentionally losing matches, poor communication, etc. The Dota 2 community despised players who acted like this. The Dota 2 game client has a robust method of reporting players for toxic behavior. Players guilty of such behavior can lose access to text chat, voice chat, and even be moved to a "low priority" game queue where they are only allowed to play with other toxic players. The game developers realize the toxic behavior and implement many methods for mitigation.

The third competitive multiplayer game I played and the main reason for me making this post, Halo multiplayer, has one common behavior across all the games: teabagging a dead enemy player's corpse. Teabagging itself spawns countless discussions on game forums. Is teabagging disrespectful, harmless taunting, a virtual mocking of sexual assault, an unchangeable and everlasting Halo hazing ritual, etc.

Even agreeing on whether teabagging is toxic is a controversial topic, especially in the Halo community. Some gaming communities view teabagging as disrespectful, crude, and unsportsmanlike. The general Halo community views teabagging as a badge of pride. Players go out of their way to do it as often in possible in the game. Those who dislike teabagging often get angry when it is done to them, which only further increases the behavior by toxic players. I've seen player make comments like "I will drag my sack across every single enemy I defeat." If you criticize the practice of teabagging, the Halo community shames you, usually calling you weak, thin-skinned, and a baby. In game, there is practically no way to report a player for teabagging.

Comments in defense of teabagging are

* "It's not that big of deal. Quit worrying about it."
* "Grow some thicker skin."
* "It's never going to go away. Get used to it."
* "We don't want sissies like you in our gaming community"
* 'It's virtual and harmless"

~~Comments like these echo similar tones to responses to calls for progressive change. Any of the above statements could have been made by a male boss, talking to a female employee about the state of workplace harassment in the 1950s.~~    
Edit: I am clearly wrong on this statement.  


 I feel like my concerns about teabagging in Halo are overlooked, laughed at, or ignored. Is this my personal axe to grind? Am I making much ado about nothing?

I enjoy playing Halo multiplayer games, but I do not enjoy the toxicity of teabagging behavior. Are my only viable options to ignore it, or stop playing Halo? I don't get angry or upset over the behavior, but I wish it to change. That doesn't seem likely.To give some context, I like playing games on hard and in general like games that push the player.  I find playing on increased difficulties can create satisfying moments that simply cannot be found, at least for myself, on lower difficulties.  I was once pretty vocally against games not designed for it throwing in an easy mode just so more people could play.  My thought being that designing an easy mode for a game inherently hinders the way some developers would approach the game design and may result in not all users getting the the end result of the developer intention.  Even though on the surface having an easy mode would not affect my choice to play on hard in any way, there may be design decisions under the surface that the player would never know about that did, in fact, result in things about the game being changed.  The risk of such a scenario was too great to me and I mostly ignored all arguments to the contrary.

I recently found myself arguing against my very points above for a different reason than people wanting games to be easier: I want more games to have an optional hard mode.  My frustrations come to light because I enjoy pokemon.  I do not buy the games new and have not for several generations now, but I do indeed buy them used in an attempt to not directly support the company.  I am a pokemon addict.  I find the games becoming easier and easier to a ridiculous degree.  Not because I'm getting better, but because the games are outright removing options the player once had to create challenge. Or adding features the player has no reasonable level of control over without going out of their way to make things more challenging for themselves in a tedious manner.  I find them removing options that alienates me as a player for wanting more pushback from the game, and in that feeling I suddenly have an understanding of WHY people want easy modes in some of my favorite games.  I feel some level of commonality in that alienation that I'm sure those wanting some games to be easier feel.

I have not necessarily changed my stance on the issue.  Maybe I should just move on from pokemon, as an example, forever.  Maybe I'm a huge hypocrite and the developers should bend to my desires, but not the desires of others. Maybe the games just aren't for a player like me and that's okay.  But I imagine for many that situation is not okay.  This is tough, because I can personally really value a game with options like The Last of Us 2 that has so many options that realistically anybody could play while I also value the From Software suite which is designed for a specific experience and a particular challenge level.  I was able to fine tune TLOU2 to provide the perfect level of challenge.  While at this point I have played many of From's games so many times that they have actually become too easy.  If the options were there to make it harder, it would be an option for me to derive more enjoyment out of them.  The more and more I think on this, the more I think I've been wrong all along and giving the players the options to cater the game to the way they want to experience it is best.

I wonder how some of you feel.For everyone enjoying you Free to Play games, I have some interesting thoughts for you to consider. While battle passes have been a good form of monetization and created "mostly" healthy relationships between players bases and developers this will not last forever. In fact, judging by the reaction the Halo Infinite's battle pass this system is probably due to implode in the coming 3-5 years as devs and publishers get more brash with what they are will to freeze behind a pay wall. (Mostly referring to Halo Infinite choosing to sell color variants for $10 a pop -.- when this use to be a free feature in the game) This however is not the big topic I wanted you guys to think. What I'm really here to talk about is your right to the owner of the cosmetics you've purchase once a game server is shut down.

So where start... you probably won't like this but the best place to look for similar examples is the NFT market place. While not the most popular topic, I think example of rug pulls in the NFT space are the most explanations of what is likely to happen when a live service game shut down for good.

So, what is a rug pull? Effectively its a scam which involves you buying into some kind of product, for this example we'll say you bought one Monkie NFT for about $1000 either because you like the Monkie or want to bank roll it for returns down the line. Now in a normal NFT purchase you would always have the option sell said NFT if there is a buyer for it. With a rug pull, the team who created this NFT set, waits or their project to sell out, and then shut down the network running the project. POOF!! Everything is gone, including that new swanky NFT you just purchased. All because the team planned to terminate the server and leave you high and dry, with out a Monkie Jpeg to your name. While I'm not saying this is this all NFT projects do this, it is a fairly common occurrence.  When we reframe this in terms of videogames (Where servers are dropped when the player base does) the question arises. What will happen to my well spent Vbucks when the servers close for good?

The short answer is its gone, the real answer is that epic just fleeced you for a ton of money over the course of however long you played the game for. So did Activision, EA, Microsoft or any other studio/publish that you bought a battle pass from. You see, while you did pay for a right to use the the skins and sprays which epic provided for you, there was one thing you failed to over look. You never had the chance own it outside of the company server. You will never get it back once that server goes off line. You never really owned it to begin with. You weren't paying for the right to own the content, you we're paying for the right to license it and being told you own it. This is the "secret", and ultimately pretty scummy practice underlying Battle Passes and if features like customizing colors and emblems is being monetized now, in Halo then there is a grave next few years until we get smarter about these systems and the value of what we're paying for. 

Edit: I'm just putting this here to keep from hearing the same arguments on repeat.

1) When you buy a Battle Pass you are paying for content, IE a product not a service. Generally most games with battle pass are free to play at a point of service games. 

2) yes games servers shut down, congrats you read the article. At least something got through to you. Yes these services shut down, it's inevitable so I'm saying players sinking money into these passes is probably not a good thing considering what they're actually getting out of it. 

3) When you purchase the license for software you don't buy it bc it's nice and shiny, you purchase it bc it has some garuarnted function you want access (Adobe suite programs, ableton, Ms office suite etc) 

4) A rug pull doesn't have to be an outright scam, it could happen at a later date and still be just as painful. People feel losing $1000 in a day a Hella of a lot harder then $10000 over the course of a year.

5) The big difference between a rug pull and what will happen with battle passes is that here you can actually find out and in some cases are told that your purchases will disappear eventually and that the devs are more shameless about pumping out things which easy effort to make and generally considered a standard part of creating a game (ie should be included in the base game in some form)

6) If you want an alternative to this system, maybe devs should just go back releasing complete games at full price, and offering dlc as extended content. At least that way you can still refund your purchase if its shit.I'll use Skyrim as an example because it's the most baffling case of a game being released multiple times across **three** generations. Despite being one of the best selling games ever, consistently being played, and *still* selling decent numbers, Bethesda put out 2 and a half expansions for the game over the course of about a year and called it quits. So my question is why would they not at least put a small crew of a dozen devs together to make new content basically forever? You would think if Bethesda wanted to, they could sell a new expansion for Skyrim every year and make *bank*. The same goes for GTAV and RDR2 singleplayer DLC. They spent several years and hundreds of millions of dollars creating these worlds, why not just add new content to them?

I'm not asking for every game to turn into a live service. I'm just confused as to why these developers wouldn't capitalize on a world they've already built in favor of spending another 8 years creating a new one. Throw The Witcher 3 in there as well, why wouldn't CDPR put together a small studio to slowly work on new stories when the game still sells?

Is this something you would like to see? Should evergreen games like TW3 and Skyrim be abandoned after a couple expansions, or should devs set aside some resources to expanding them? Can you think of why this wouldn't make sense or why devs don't do it?Most games nowadays are made with maps that are easy to read and understand. This causes game designers to shy away from implementing multiple levels in zones, instead opting for a flat surface with some cliffs to make everything look clean on the map.

Games that are praised for their level design tend to not utilize maps, instead letting the players discover the route on their own. Take Dark Souls for example. [Just one area looks like this.](https://darksouls.wiki.fextralife.com/file/Dark-Souls/Sen's_Fortress.png) Even with a map, it would be extremely tedious to figure out where you are and where you're supposed to go next. Despite that, people appreciate the depth of the world design. 

A game that has a pretty vertical dungeon design is [Darksiders](http://dl.gamesradar.com/guides/DS2_The%20Shattered%20Forge%20Map.jpg). The map divides the floors into various levels. Getting accustomed to the map takes quite some time, as it is not something we are used to. Despite this, the route is largely straightforward, negating the advantages of a vertically designed map.

Another example of good design is the Blackrock Depths dungeon in WoW classic. There is so much content and several ways to progress through the dungeon. Even with a map, you won't know what you're supposed to do to get to the next step. You will need lots of backtracking or the help of a guide. Nowadays everything in WoW is flat or a railroad experience with only one way to progress.

If we were to apply the design principles of current 2D maps to a vertically designed world, we'd get something similar to a [Minecraft map](https://i.insider.com/607f464474da0300181e2d56?width=700). It has no relevance whatsoever when it comes to underworld content, which is the place where you spend most of the game, making the map much less useful.

I would personally like to see world design that isn't constrained to 2D maps more often. It is more interesting, has a more fun learning curve and allows you to figure out routes or skips that are not normally intended as a part of the game progression.I was recently replaying FF7 Remake and Resident Evil 7 (how fitting) to get the platniums on both games, and I was reminded just how good the Hard Mode options on both games are. Typically, most hard mode settings you see in games (and difficulty options in general) are pretty basic increases to enemy health, enemy damage, player damage output, player health, and so on and so forth. In the worst cases though, games such as God of War (2018) and Resident Evil 3 Remake take hard mode settings WAAAAAAAY too far, spiking the difficulty up to an insane degree and making the game (specifically its combat) feel more like an unbalanced slog of pain rather than an engaging optional challenge. FF7R and RE7, meanwhile, have Harder difficulty options that feel more tailored and nuanced, expecting players to have a good amount of knowledge of game systems and mechanics to succeed.

FF7R's hard mode, in addition to standard increases in enemy health and damage, adds a degree of resource management by limiting the amount of mp the player can refill on a chapter to chapter basis AND completing disabling the use of consumables. This forces players to think carefully about how they want to utilize their limited mana reserves, such as whether or not they should exploit a boss's elemental weakness with an offensive spell or use some MP to heal a party member, while also making tough choices over what kind of materia and magic spells they want to bring into battle. On top of that, many bosses and regular enemies employ new strategies and attacks on players to provide interesting (even if not always fair) remixes to fights they've already learned. RE7's hard mode follows a similar design of remixing content and putting limits on what the player is able to do. In addition to limiting saves, check points, and ammo/health resources, the game also completing remixes item placement, enemy placement, and boss behavior to give players a completely fresh experience that plays with your expectations and surprises you in meaning gameplay-oriented ways. Both games also provide meaningful and tangible rewards for playing on hard difficulties: both provide trophies for beating hard mode, FF7 gives additional weapon xp books for beating specific bosses on hard mode, and RE7 rewarding the player with infinite ammo.

We need more Hard Modes like these that are well-crafted, provide interesting changes, and have tangible incentives for beating them. And as game difficulty shifts towards customizaibility and allowing the players to alter the difficulty to THEIR specific liking, I think tailored Hard Modes like FF7's and RE7's that demand a lot more from the player besides grinding or trial and error (and reward players for overcoming the limits imposed on them by the mode) aren't getting enough appreciation.I just tired to see this. I remember times when Five Nights at Freddy's was hyped and many people tried to guess the storyline of this game. To be honest, Scott is not good at making stories, and people tried to fill in gaps via theories. Of course, FNAF is not the only example. Dark Souls is known for this. Some people believed in legend that Hidetaki Miyazaki maded it because he had difficulties when he readed fantasy books in english so camed now with idea to share same experience. It's a myth and developers said that they maded uncomplete storyline in Dark Souls because of schedule, but people enjoyed to make theories so they decided to make it as a feature. The same we can say about Hollow Knight. And then we have Limbo, a game where you don't have sense what's going on. Why boy is here? What this place? Why there is a big spider? What happened here? Developers are just  playing guessing game with auditory.

I saw it in other media like in anime. The proper example is Angel's Egg, where nothing is explained. You don't know what the shit is happening. Neon Genesis Evangelion due to schedule and low budget had last 2 episodes that doesn't make sense, but people theorised too much about happening here. I just don't understand why authors are not making normal storytelling and instead they are leaving easter eggs, hints and everything. Making mute storytelling where nothing is explained but through ambiguous hints doesn't make sense. Many people see it fun. But for me it's only prevents the author from conveying his idea to the public. What if author's idea is actually simple, but people are discovered instead different idea from title and they checking Bible, Kabbalah, whatever shit. Serious, some people tried to understand Baldi's Basics plot through Bible and comparing to 7 deadly sins. But this is a parody game that makes fun of these types games. It even have a schoolboard with text "Put lore here".

I think making storytelling like this is not raising work's cultural value. Many famous classic works (including literature, of course) have normal storytelling where author explains what happened. Would it better if Dostoevsky's Crime and Punishment had similar storytelling like in Limbo game, where you should to guess what the shit is happening instead of enjoying the story and what author maded idea? I think not. I just tired about it.Hey!

I rarely see this topic being discussed, so I wanted to bring it up. I recently bough Horizon: Zero Dawn on Steam. Although I was very excited to play it, I was hesitant after reading some Steam reviews criticizing the game's aggresive terms of service. Basically, the game is ported by a Chinese company, and to play, you *have to* give it access to you network data, you device data and much more. I haven't been able to find any articles about it, but a lot of costumer reviews were pointing this out and recommending everyone to refund the game. Now I'm not sure if I should refund it and buy another game or just play it.

On the one hand, I'm against this kind of data collection, since I feel that it invades my privacy. And if I have the chance to avoid it, I'd definitely prefer to do that. On the other hand, is it really that bad? Is it any different from what companies Facebook, Google and Microsoft do? Then again, vote with your wallet, right?

I'm curious to see how you guys feel about this.

Edit: I thank you for all the responses. It's interesting to see how these opinions are very split. Some are arguing that it means nothing in the grand scheme of things, and that I'd only refund it to feel better about myself. Others are telling me to refund the game, heck I've even seen comments recommending piracy or switching to Linux. Certainly an interesting debate.I watched [this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_gXlauRB1EQ&ab_channel=PeopleMakeGames) video lately and it reminded me of this whole thing immediately, then I remembered that no one has ever really called them out on this issue in specific.  

Before I get started I'm posting this thread here because I don't really know where else to, and the Roblox subreddit doesn't seem to be very tolerant of criticism of the platform or company.

Basically, back around 2010-2013, there was a massively popular game on Roblox titled 'Deadzone' that was made by a developer then known as 'DeadzoneZakZack'. It was basically DayZ but on Roblox, made a fair while before Apocalypse Rising, its competitor, became popular.  

However it wasn't long before the cracks of toxicity and hacking vulnerability of the platform began to show. Within mere months of the game becoming popular, it was pretty much dominated by cheaters. It wasn't long before the game, on a platform that is supposed to protect its creators from having their work stolen, *was straight up ripped and reuploaded by other users without consequence.*  

Some of these rips became more popular than the original game itself, despite being straight up clones and often not even updated versions of the game. The developer, DeadzoneZakZack, despite being one of the most popular creators on the platform at the time, received little to no help both with taking down ripped clones of his games stealing revenue and players, or with actually patching the vulnerabilities which made ripping the game in its decompiled form to then be reuploaded with ease to prevent future rip-copies.  

The developer, who obviously already made very little from Roblox's shitty business practices giving developers what nets to less than 25% of the earnings from their games, voiced his frustration both on and off of the platform, and eventually, ultimately, moved on from Roblox - his Roblox account even being allegedly hacked which resulted in it being deleted. [Here is an old video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MVRWmHZRgbc&ab_channel=CodesterProductions) back when he quit, explaining why and stating the main reason as the game being ripped and reuploaded with no consequences.  

Fast forward to 2014, when the game 'Unturned', a name you'll likely recognise better, was released to Steam by the same developer formerly known on Roblox as DeadzoneZakZack. Back in the day the game was a pretty big hit - it had gotten tens of thousands of players, with a peak player count of just over 62,000 and still maintains a fairly large playerbase of around 25000/day, seven years later.  

Now then, back in 2014 when this game began topping the Steam indie charts, do you know what Roblox did? [They published an article, that, to a degree, straight up *took credit* for DZZ's success](https://blog.roblox.com/2014/07/from-roblox-game-dev-to-steam-sensation/) despite being the very people that drove him off of their platform. Essentially, they were saying that Roblox was the 'launch pad' for his success with creating Unturned. No mention of their lack of response with his constant complaints about the lack of moderation on Roblox and the outright plagiarism of his game on numerous occasions, just straight up saying "Look! This guy was successful because of us!" when the truth is, he was successful ***in spite of*** Roblox's bullshit. He knew when to pull away from the platform, relearn game development on Unity, and basically rebuilt his dream project from the ground up and put it on Steam when it got the popularity, revenue and protection from plagiarism and cheating that he deserved from the beginning.  

Obviously there's been no end of Roblox's corporate shit and being even worse than companies like EA, but I just thought I'd write something on this to make it a more known story about the time Roblox drove the Unturned developer off their platform then tried to take credit for his success.EDIT: Going through the comments, there's a bunch of devs providing more info, but I also feel the need to add this:

People would make games regardless of if anyone bought them. Engineers would continue to make advancements regardless of if anyone uses them. That’s what passion is. And while yes, gaming has become hypercommercial, its sometimes important to look “past” the game, or the price tag, and see the bigger picture. 

——

Since the dawn of 3D game engines, two methods of lighting existed: Baked lighting, and dynamic lighting. 

Baked lighting looks fantastic. It uses an offline process, called "baking" or "building," in which a path tracing system calculates physically correct lighting bounces, shadows, and color spill. If you've ever gone "Wow, this looks *real"* you were almost certainly looking at a scene with baked lighting.

Baked lighting isn't actually realtime. Once the lighting is calculated, it's saved as a texture called a lightmap. The lightmap is stored in VRAM and rendered just like any other texture. This is great for performance, it means the scene appears to have fantastic, VFX quality lighting but at the speed of a regular texture.

Unfortunately, baked lighting has other issues. For starters, it really only works for static scenes. It doesn't allow for dynamic sun movement, or weather effects. To see the efforts that engine developers still go through to get baked lighting to have even a sense of dynamism, have a watch of this fantastic talk about lighting in the CoD MW19 engine:

[https://cs.dartmouth.edu/wjarosz/publications/seyb20uberbake.html](https://cs.dartmouth.edu/wjarosz/publications/seyb20uberbake.html)

Calculating lighting is also slow, which reduces artist throughput and overall productivity. Not good in todays tight deadlines!

\-----

The other kind of lighting is broadly referred to as "dynamic lighting." This is a catchall term for any kind of lighting that's simulated at runtime. Each engine will have their own implementations and algorithms. The advantage of dynamic lighting is that it's instant--you can see the result is it in realtime, and so it can be used for things that move. Muzzle flashes, particles, and car headlights are all examples of where dynamic lighting might be used.

Dynamic lighting \*can\* be used for moving sun effects or weather, but it has issues of it's own. Because it's a genuine calculation running every frame, it's tougher on the system and performs worse. Additionally, the quality is much worse, since there's isn't enough time to calculate things like bounced lighting or light spill.

Postprocessing usually steps in to try and make up for these problems, using SSGI, SSAO, screen space reflections, and more. These can all look great, but do fall apart in unusual circumstances. 

\----

Enter the new third option: raytracing. Raytracing provides the holy grail as far as game lighting is concerned--the quality and accuracy of baked lighting, with the speed of dynamic lighting. For a game artist, this is a *huge* win. If baked lighting could be eliminated, iteration times could be sped up immensely and the end result would look just as good.

But now, as nVidia, you have a bit of a problem. You have this feature that's amazing for developers, but the whole point is that it *looks the same as the old* methods. 

You can show a side by side, baked lighting on the left, RT on the right. You can say "The scene on the right performs worse, but it's done in realtime!" and all consumers will see is "The scene on the right looks the same and performs worse, so what's the point?"

And now you have developers with their head in their hands. This is a true, genuine innovation in game tech--possibly the biggest in a decade. And rather than use this opportunity to educate consumers about how games work, or about the struggles that engine developers go through, they create "RTX ON" which instantly becomes a meme.

To this day, it's still extremely misunderstood, and it frustrates me that it very rarely comes up on discussions of RTX.In games like the Fallout series for example, vendors that you come across in game often have a limited pool of money to spend on items that you sell to them. What is the purpose of this from a game design standpoint? What does it add to the experience? It seems like little more than an annoyance to force a limit on the spending cash of NPCs on your wares when you interact with them directly, then having to make your way to another vendor to sell the rest of your goods, which is a process that can repeat if that vendor doesn't have enough cash. This only worsens as you get further into the game and find more valuable items, forcing you to travel to multiple of the richest stores in the game to sell all your loot when you've reached your weight limit or have run out of inventory space.   


Having to do this eats up your valuable time doing a slow, repetitive task. Fast travel to vendor, load in, walk to vendor store building, load store, comb through the list of stuff you have making sure you don't accidently sell something you're using or going to use, press the key to sell a hundred times, exit store because Fallout 3, 4, and New Vegas don't let you fast travel from inside buildings for some reason, repeat until all goods are sold. I fail to see how this process would ever be fun.  


For RPG's that don't feature fast travel like Kenshi, I can kind of see what they might have been going for, like the journey between cities to sell your goods is a part of the adventure itself, but when you're carrying around goods worth several thousand of whatever currency is being used in the RPG the optimal thing to do would be to completely avoid any and all conflict and just beeline for the next city to sell your goods so you don't risk losing a ton of cash. Of course, I'm a very risk aversive person by nature, but say you were a risk taker, and you kept taking all opportunities to nab more goods along the way. Well now you've got even more goods to sell that the vendors won't be able to afford, forcing you into an endless cycle of running to different cities to sell to and never getting out of the area you're in. And I get it, that can be interesting for the risk involved in continuing on with a ton of loot on you, but the actual selling suffers from the same issues of being slow and repetitive, it gets old real fast in my opinion.  


It seems like a detriment to the games overall experience putting in such a repetitive process to do something that's generally pretty integral to the game. In most RPG's the majority of the money you're going to be making is going to be from loot that you've taken from locations, containers, and people. You can of course choose to simply not loot from anything ever to circumvent this whole issue, but you'll be markedly poorer and less well equipped from this decision, which can be absolutely killer if you're playing on the highest difficulty. It seems to me that allowing the vendors to have an infinite amount of money to buy your goods would be far better for the game experience, cutting out the fat of having to navigate to the selling location and going through the UI to sell everything multiple times because the vendor couldn't afford all your things. 

If this was a late game issue maybe it wouldn't be that big a deal, but more often than not I run into this problem by the early-midgame. It really seems like a hindrance and nothing more to me. I just can't see any other possible reasons other than immersion, I guess? Sure, a guy running a bar probably wouldn't be able to afford to buy all the goodies you're selling in reality, but I couldn't take being shot thirty times in the chest in reality. I can suspend my disbelief either way. Oh geez and that just reminded me of when vendors are only willing to buy certain kinds of goods. I think everything I've said also applies to that so I don't think I need to go on about that.   


What reasons do you think that developers have to keep implementing this "feature" in their RPG's? Because from my experience, it seems like nothing more than a repetitive, boring drawback that eats up your time and distracts you from the actual fun parts of the game.How good a game feels differs from person to person and depends if you just overall like a game or not, well obviously. But ppl seem to lose all sense of objective quality just because they like a game. Why?

I just finished HZD a few days ago and while it was one of the better games in recent years i still saw the flaws. Same with other games. 

But its kinda weird that as soon you try to adresse these flaws somewhere, usually you will get many bad replys and hate in general.

I mean sure nobody like if someone shits on a game you love and in these forums of course mostly there will be ppl around that like the game so its kinda natural.

I just think we as gamers somehow lost the ability to talk things over and just react with hate and disrespect too fast. Its not that i didnt done that myself and it also depends on how the person adress the complains. How much did he played? How good are these arguments?

But even when there are good arguments which are just basic facts about technical issues or bad AI or missing gameplay elements, lack of content and so on and if the person just seeks true help in form of a second opinion (like well i dont get it) often they just get smashed from the fanbase.

What is that about these days? 

I think we even more need t discuss these things because many games in recent years where, well at least underwhelming. But usually there is a fanbase which think its a masterpiece and ppl that think its utter trash. 

Its not enough any longer that a game is "alright". Saying a game is good like a 7/10 doenst mean its bad and if the game just was way better for you personally that might be just to personal preference and the fact your playstyle made you miss some flaws naturally.

Even when i really enjoy a game i usually see and accept its flaws but that doesnt seem to apply to all gamers. They feel the need to defend their beloved game at all costs.

That is just something i dont get. How is your feeling about that?Battle passes have a variety of flavors, but generally speaking, they 
- present a series of daily or weekly challenges
- reward players with XP for doing said challenges
- provide cosmetic or similar prizes for gaining said XP

While it wasn’t the first game to offer this general system, Fortnite popularized the battle pass system in a big way. It’s why Fortnite can be free to play but still make so much money. The battle pass gives game companies many ways to upsell or offer additional prizes for real money (ex: buy XP, buy cosmetics, buy the pass in the first place, etc.)

Here’s the problem: I don’t think the model is nearly as much fun or appropriate in a non-battle royale context.

Caveat #1: I’m focusing on shooters here, specifically. I believe MOBAs and other genres have done battle pass-like systems. They may work well. I haven’t tried them.

Caveat #2: I’m going to focus mostly on Fortnite vs. Halo Infinite here, as that’s where I have the most experience. It’s quite possible another arena shooter does this better, and I simply haven’t played it enough. Happy to hear counter examples!

Problem #1: Incentives and teamwork

Battle royale is mostly an individual sport. Yes, you can grab 3 friends and play as a small team, but it’s still typically 20 or more teams/individuals all vying for victory. For this reason, your choices have little negative impact on other players. If you want to “visit 5 named locations in one match” or “jump through rings on a speedboat” or “spend 18 minutes finding a rocket launcher to complete a weirdly specific kill challenge,” that’s your choice. Have fun!

You could argue that weird challenges sometimes make your opponents play in weird ways, and maybe you’d prefer your opponents took the main objective more seriously. But at worst it probably just makes getting an occasional win yourself a bit easier.

In contrast, any challenge other than “win a match” or similar has the potential to create bad incentive structures in a 4v4 game. Suddenly, my quest to find that one rocket launcher might mean I waste half a capture the flag match hovering nearby a weapon drop spot rather than capturing or defending flags. My quest to get 10 assists might incentivize me to not finish kills. And so on.

Problem #2: match pacing and flow

One liability of battle royale games, from PUBG to Fortnite, is the likelihood of downtime. Even if you prioritize dropping in a crowded area, you will still spend many minutes per match on your own, at most running to a new landmark or scavenging a few extra supplies.

Guess what? This is the perfect opportunity for battle pass challenges! What better time to “find the secret base and take out the gang leader” than during these downtime phases? Each match, players can goof off, take on challenges, then “get serious” if they make it to the top 10. It’s a natural loop.

In an arena shooter like Halo? There’s no such downtime. Instead, you often have to choose between playing the objective or completing your challenges.

Battle passes bring in the big bucks, so it’s hard to see it changing from a business perspective. Still, I can’t help but feel non-battle royale shooters need a different model.

Agree? Disagree? Is there an arena shooter I’ve missed that does this well? What would work better?The most prominent thing that I took from my experience with The Medium is how I hate the camera system in the game, I wasn't necessary against the fixed camera in horror games, but now I believe it's just an outdated hardware restrictions workaround as some say, Maybe they did not get it right, but even though I can't imagine nor remember any recent game with a well-implemented fixed camera system.

It just doesn't add to the horror element anymore and it restricts the gameplay, it will obstruct your movement and it will limit the combat because of how difficult the targeting is without controlling the camera. It also makes it difficult to recognize/remember places in the game let alone how it breaks the immersion with every shift of the camera.

I used to love this kind of games, I remember the first few games of Resident Evil and Silent Hill though what I don't remember is the frustration that came along with the medium.There are people who consider Dark Souls 1 to be a metroidvania game. I personally do not consider it to be one, as to me a metroidvania is more than just non-linearity. But I recently found /r/ImmersiveSim, which states in the sidebar:

|Immersive Simulation is a video game design philosophy that attempts to immerse the player by simulating a believable and compelling universe, world, and/or environments. 

That got me thinking, what if we should stop looking at Metroidvania as a strict genre of 2D games that combine platforming and exploration, and instead back it up to be a design philosophy that informs game design instead? 

Looking at it like that, I could see how people would argue Dark Souls 1 is a metroidvania. 

Part of this stems from a frustration I have with these sorts of terms. For example, "Roguelike" has come to mean almost any game with permanent death, whereas originally it meant games like Rogue: Top-down d&d based dungeon crawlers. Games like FTL are clearly not any of those things, yet are described as Roguelikes, or at the very least "Rougelites", which while more broad, would still suggest to me some attempt at copying Rogue beyond just permanent death. Are we eventually going to get to a point where we call games like Mega Man "Metroidvania-lites"' because they have nonlinearity? What about open world sandbox games like BOTW which don't have a set order? Are those Metroidvanias? 

The bottom line here is that I think trying to label everything as a Metroidvania or not will simply dilute the term. Rather, I think we should start referring to it more like a design philosophy.One of the things that detract from open world games is the repetitive travel between locations during the mission. Even with fast travel you still have to pull up the map which distracts from the mission. If a feature was added to automatically fast travel to the next location of a mission or even to the next mission it would remove a lot of fustration with open worlds. This solution would also sastify people who aren't a fan of open worlds because functional the missions would play just like linear games. Players could be free to explore the world outside the missions just for the joy of it and not because they have to.Hi everyone!

I'm a third year psychology student at University College London, currently writing my dissertation on video games and personality traits. I'm looking for participants willing to take a short questionnaire. It should only take about 10-15 minutes to complete it. You can do it on your phone/tablet, but it's viewed best on a computer. I'm looking for a large sample, so participation is very much appreciated.

You can find the survey here:  https://research.sc/participant/login/dynamic/923E96A8-1A17-4C08-BD0C-231FCAB3B09F 

Thank you in advance!The first thought that comes to my mind is that people are more interested in going guns blazing than being careful and deliberate.

However, I still keep in mind if there is a niche group that wants elements of stealth, strategy and care as a game mechanic, or at least, whether the developers can encourage this approach while also penalising other methods.

There are a few examples that come to mind where this does was attempted and showed some early promise.

For example, in Assassin's Creed Brotherhood, your avatar is not that different from other NPCs and they have many tools that allow them to blend in while also having tools to indicate the player that an enemy is nearby but without revealing all the details. Things like whispers and a rough compass give the players brief information that they are at risk and the most recommended method is to simply play it cool and blend in.

It builds a blend of anxiety and caution but also a means of careful strategy and focus.

&#x200B;

Another example that comes to mind is the Last of Us multiplayer where stealth, careful strategy, slow and deliberate controls and crafting are key elements in multiplayer. 

You are encouraged to use your wits because you meant to play the role of a survivor who has to use whatever resource that they can find to stay alive or at times even avoid fights if this means staying alive. Since the aiming system is slow and deliberate and health is low and avatars can crouch and hide, players are encouraged to use their wits, grit and bravery to obtain their goals.

&#x200B;

Also, another example is Spies vs Mercenaries in Splinter Cell. I did not manage to play this part of the game but I understood the asymmetric gameplay where the mercenaries carry weapons but their field of view is limited since the camera is in first person, while the spies have to use stealth and carry no weapons or firearms but their camera is in the third person. This gives off an atmosphere of uncertainty and caution.

 

Obviously, I can also add other games where stealth is also added or can be utilised by players but this is not as heavily encouraged or are just one of the many methods that they can use to complete the objective. Things like in FPS games like Search and Destroy modes, stealth is used in clever ways that make players try the ninja defuse. Some FPS games encourage this more than others like Rainbow Six Siege and Counter Strike where there are no respawns and careful aiming and teamwork are necessary.

Other games such as strategy games can involve stealth as an option like building a secret base where the other player has to find it before it is too late.

&#x200B;

This concept of blending caution and strategy is a unique opportunity to invite players to try different combinations and experience memorable games.

This is even more of because the stealth genre seems to be a niche genre because while stealth games do not indeed exist, there is a certain "niche" on how to implement stealth "correctly", so to speak because most stealth elements are done in a casual manner and not with as much depth such as social stealth or simply hiding with a bush. Games that utilised stealth carefully and deliberately seem very few nowadays like Hitman, Thief, Deus Ex, and in some Assassin's Creed games where they add other elements to encourage caution like limited health, limited tools and difficult and intricate AI.Specifically, Cold War. I've spent my entire shooter-playing life, starting at about 12 (20 now), consistently placing in last place on every leaderboard. It was a major cause for celebration if I got even one kill in an even remotely competitive match. Then, I bought Cold War.

I'm good at it. Really, really good, compared to before. I don't want to brag, but I actually somewhat consistently win free for all matches, to the point where I can consider myself a serious competitor. That is not true in any other FPS game.

I find myself able to easily enter high states of flow, especially when listening to my 'energetic music' playlist. Everything just seems to click and my mouse and my brain move at the same time and as soon as I'm thinking of someone, they're already dead. 

I have not seen this experience anywhere else on the internet, so I'm asking now. What could explain this? Thank you all!

EDIT 1: Just to clarify, I have tried multiple other shooters since playing Call of Duty. I have especially given Halo my all. I'm just not good at it. I get my ass kicked in CS:GO, too. I have a long and storied history of trying multiple shooters, playing them for about 20 hours or so, and then getting discouraged because I suck and regretting the purchase in the end.

EDIT 2 (Responding to a really good comment that got deleted unfortunately :( ): I'm aware of that mechanic (Skill Based Matchmaking, and how it is sensitive enough that one 
particularly good/bad game can move you several brackets), and I play with it in mind... I typically am able to get into the bracket where people start using tactics such as camping in corners and flicking sniper shots, before getting knocked back down to about my skill level. Not much in the way of team organization or patience, but plenty of raw skill in the game..In 2019, gamers flocked by the million to re-enter Azeroth and World of Warcraft Classic.  They began epic grinds, taking a shot at titles from a bygone age in the pursuit of the dimly recalled aspirations of their youth.

Did they succeed?

It's fair to say that people tried really hard, and perhaps lost some things along the way. Jobs, relationships. People went High Warlord and no-lifed the game, sacrificing sleep and health. Gamers tried and inevitably failed, not because they were bad people or bad players, but because they had grown up.

And this points to perhaps the biggest letdown of World of Warcraft Classic: that the experience of re-playing it as adults can never match the experience of playing it for the first time, whether it be as children or just as younger adults.

And that feeling ain't just about the game. It's also about your life when it happened. Were you a student? Living with your parents or in dorms? Was it a simpler time of more joy and less responsibility? It was for me.

Taking this a step further, let's talk about gamer complaints. About games, about studios, about each other, but seldom about themselves. I have a sense that many complaints directed externally by bitter, unsatisfied gamers may disguise a more vulnerable reality: that they can't ever have recapture thier childhood and have the "first time" MMO feeling again. 

Asmongold has talked about this phenomenon many times. About a fantasy of zero responsibility and gaming forever. About fear of the realities of growing up and the mortality of his parents. And he perhaps more than anyone else embodies and personalizes the futilty of the pursuit of childhood by playing video games.

I was inspired to spark this discussion here by a conversation I had with Classic WoW creator Melderon: [Can you recapture your childhood by playing video games?](https://youtu.be/M7KRsDccwkM)Inspired by /u/Jynweithek3 's comment in another thread:

""Why do we embrace the chaotic and evil nature in GTA games when we're far more likely to choose the morally good option in games like Mass Effect?"

I often see comments here along the lines of "I can only play good characters in rpgs," which I'm guilty of myself. If there's a narrative choice to be made, I generally don't like playing the cruel villain.  Yet when it comes to the above question, I rarely have any issue being an absolute monster in games like  GTA. 

A couple guesses on my part, but I'm curious how other people feel about their playstyles:

* Player control, and ownership of their actions. Acting horrendous is expected in GTA, and I'm interacting with the medium in the way the developers intended. I shouldn't second guess tossing someone out of their car because that's what I'm supposed to do, right? I suppose this concept has been played with in games like Bioshock or Spec Ops: The Line.

* Narrative and emotional consequence. For the most part, horrific acts in GTA really don't hold any moral weight. Every character or NPC is an awful caricature of bad people, and most of the action is intended as light hearted or satire. Choosing to drive a tank Los Santos doesn't really feel "real", nor does the world really react to it beyond a 5 star warning in potential game over. Conversely in an RPG, you can have story consequences for your choices impact way down the line. From "you let the rachni go?!" to "Crono ate my lunch!"



**tl;dr:** Do you have contradictory habits when it comes to "moral" choices in different gamesHey guys!

I'm a gamer and a student trying to finish my Degree. For my dissertation, I'm studying why people buy appearance-based virtual goods such as cosmetics (Skins, Courier, etc.) and treasure chests in competitive games, namely DOTA 2, CSGO, and Valorant.

If you guys are 18+ years old, an active player, and have purchased in-game items such as Heroes Skins and Treasure Chests in Dota, or Weapon Skins and Weapon cases in CSGO and Valorant. You guys are the perfect gamer for this study! Therefore, if you guys are interested in participating or know more about the survey, please go to the link below. 

[https://www.isurvey.soton.ac.uk/41510](https://www.isurvey.soton.ac.uk/41510)

If you have any questions about this study, please post them in the comment. I'll be happy to answer them!

Thank you for reading this post, and have a good day!

P.S. Shout out to the mods for allowing me to do the survey here. You guys are amazing! :D# I find it difficult to become surprised in most modern games

*Let me say this first, this topic is NOT exclusively about open-world games. It might be a common thought for open-world games, but it's something I realized in almost every modern game that features nonlinear segments / optional activities / side-quests across all genres.*

So i'm playing Shin Megami Tensei V right now. For these who don't know the game. It is an "monster-catch" JRPG with wide open areas, while not being an open world game it allows a lot of freedom to explore larger areas, there is a lot to discover and many rewards that incentify exploration.

But after a while it kind of exhausted me and I was taking a moment reflecting, why that could possibly be the case. Then I realized I actually don't really "discover" I just follow the breadcrumps or should I rather say, the exact locations of the "secrets" the map already told me.

You have to know, every treasure, every sidequest, every sidequest objective, the mainquest objective, materials, enemies, optional bosses, friendly NPC's you can talk to, other stuff that is open to be found. All of that will be automatically marked on your map and is shown on your minimap.  
So when I go into a direction, i'm not doing this because the place looks interesting, i'm doing this because the game already told me it's interesting. So in some kind of way,  "yes I explore" but I not really "discover", because the game already did that for me.  
And so after a while, what could be a fascinating stroll through an post-apocalyptic landscape it turns into tedious work, like i'm about the color a picture book. All the content is already layed out to me and all I have to do is completing all of it, until I go to the next area repating it, the result is that it feels way more mandatory than it should, in my opinion.

I'm a the point where I actively disabled the minimap (thank god it's possible) and force myself to not to open up the map of the area, what the game sometimes does automatically to mark new objectives to your mainquest...  
It doesn't really feel that satisfying restricting myself, finding/missing things where I know that they are actually not really hidden or "special", but the flow of exploration enhanced quite a bit and I feel like I explore now more at my own pace.   
It's by far not a perfect solution or fixes any problem I have with the game in this department but its my only option to enhance the experience.  


# Old games teached me too much information is the problem

This is no bash against SMT V especially since it's series isn't that much known for exploration, but it's approach is pretty symptomatic because I believe they basically just follow some sort of established standard implemented by way more popular series/genres.

I presumed it already, but to really feel the difference I played one of my favourites pc games back then again. Gothic 2: Night of the Raven. This is an old Action-Roleplaying game from 2002-2003 made by the Elex developers.   
In this game you also have a lot of quests and tons of things to discover, but since it's from an older era, it lacks a lot of navigational features that are deemed as an standard nowdays. So for example the  map is an item in the game, you have to buy it first and then it shows you the landscape drawn, like you would expect from a map.   
Besides your position and the drawing there are basically zero informations. You don't know the exact scale, you don't see any quests, objectives, items, enemies. It fulfills it's purpose, help you navigating through the world but it conceals and abstracts all the information a map like in SMT V automactically provides.  
As a result no matter where I was going, I felt a big feeling of surprise and anticipation not knowing what I could find around the next corner and this although I know the game already a lot.   
I heard from a lot of people who played Gothic that they love to explore the game world. I strongly believe this is because the game informs you a lot less about its content.  
It's up to you alone to decide if something is worth for you investating it or not.   
In (most) modern games, this task is completely outsourced to the game itself.  


# Other examples and how a maximum of information has become a standard

Take a game like Fallout 4 for example. In Fallout 4 you have an radar on the upper corner of the screen, each time you get close to an "important location" inside the open world of the game, you see a mark that tells you you're nearing towards something "interesting".   
The game marks definitive places, the designers crafted with an intent automatically for you.   
So by the sheer implementation of the marker, the designers placed on purpose on the map and your radar, you already know that there must be something interesting, so you become automatically influenced by this small information.  
I became distracted by the game each time although I tried to do something else, but the game already told me with its radar: "hey there is something mysterious up head don't you wanna go check out!?"  
While I haven't played it I guess the same goes for Skyrim.  


Fallout 4 still does a way better job than something like SMT V in terms of exploration of course, but because of such small details, discovery is still not as effective as in Gothic. A lot of games share this issue in my opinion. The most recent example I can think of besides SMT V, is Ghost of Tsushima, like in Fallout 4, the game tells you the distance of the next "interesting" location along your way, alongside a lot of other features which effectively allows you to probably not miss anything special, what was created with purpose inside the game.

While SMT V just being an JRPG it shows to me that this "navigation-sovereignty" is what kinda becomes standard into bascially every genre. Witcher 3, Doom Eternal, Kena: Bridge of Spirits, Ratchet & Clank Rift Apart, Forza Horizon. The list is basically endless.

I think even the minimap of Metroid Dread is way too powerful to really give the feeling of an Metroidvania since I basically just followed the layout, which is more helpful than the actual gameworld itself, as crazy as it sounds. The more abstract map in the older games worked too and did a better job to keep a feel of surprise, to my experience.  
A way better example would be Hollow Knight, where I really had to find out new places for myself, ironically it's also an bad example, because even this game allows you at some point to reveal the whole map towards the end of the game this was the point where the feel of discovery was dumbed down again.  


# Indicators and the demand of larger target groups

I also think a lot of problems especially completionist have is when content in a game becomes indicated, but you're not told where it is. A good example would be if a game tells you "you have found 4 of 5 Secrets in this level"

I know that this might be a problem, but I think the root of it is the indicator itself, because without it, you might have missed the information, but also you wouldn't bother about it until you stumble upon it on accident, or not, but important is that it wasn't in your perception previsouly. So the better approach would be that the game tells you when you found a secret, but it doesn't show you how many are still left, I mean these are secrets anyway.  
So yes I even believe the famous percentage marker is more problematic than helpful.  
Yes, it can be very helpful if you play pragmatically trying to effectively seek out all of the content inside the game within a shorter amount of time. But to me as someone who likes to seek out things for themselfes, it leaves a sour unsatisfying taste left upon my tounge and it's quite unfortunate, sure it's not gamebreaking but I think a lot of potential becomes undermined, by the overabundance of information told by the game.  
With the increasing demand of an larger demogrpahic I have no real solution for this for every target group, because even with toggles, games are rather designed to be played in a certain way and discovery still doesn't feel rewarding if you know in the back of your mind "if I activate this I now become shown where all the hidden sidequests are"  
I know from playing MMORPG's like WoW Classic, that a majority of people just load up mods like "questie" that show them the location of every quest on the map, so I suppose a lot of people want that convenience.  
So I suppose it's a matter of an desicion that can't be really compromised.  


So what is your impression if you compare exploration between modern and older games?   
Do you think I overreact and game worlds are still fascinating as ever to explore?

Is it easy for you to completely ignore goal orientated minimaps?  
Maybe you can think of games that actively resist the trend? Is there something important I miss about this?As we know, NFTs are controversial for a variety of reasons.  But the feature "proof of ownership" could be a beneficial one to consumers, if only Governments around the world weren't completely captured by industry and actually served the public good.

&#x200B;

Imagine when you buy a game, you receive an NFT declaring your ownership of the entirety of the content contained in your copy of the game.  Not a "license", but true ownership, backed by law and international law.  

&#x200B;

This lets you prove you own a game, and companies can't revoke that ownership by shutting down a server or banning an account.  Also the law should be changed to grant you the right to use that content however you choose.

&#x200B;

\- You can legally use the content you own for emulation, fan ports, fan translations, etc.

&#x200B;

\- You are legally entitled to copy or download the content you own from any source, if you happen to lose your disc, or an online storefront goes out of business, etc.

&#x200B;

\- If an official port, remaster, or remake is released, you retain ownership over any content that is unchanged - you only pay for any additional / changed content.  The exact value of these changes should be calculated by some legally defined formula.

&#x200B;

NFTs could be used to protect the rights of consumers to ensure that they own the content that they buy.  And companies can't revoke that ownership at a whim, or try to double-dip by selling the same content on a new platform, or stifle community efforts like re-implementations, ports, and translations.  

&#x200B;

(Of course, such a consumer friendly law could never happen.)I feel like a lot of games have for quite while had an issue in which they will incorporate gameplay that is shallow or of minimal substance but attempt to make you think what you're doing is more interesting or has more depth than it actually does in other words treating the gameplay as a placebo. For example the traversal sections in Uncharted like part where you climb the train at the beginning of Uncharted 2, the situation may look tense or exciting visually but is essentially an on rails experience that is little more than an interactive cutscene. These kind of segments make up a large part of the game but seem to try and distract players with the concept behind what they're supposed to be doing while the actual interactive element boils down to little more than busy work since you generally have to go out of your way to die, and the actual path you need to traverse I'd very obviously laid out.

Another example is how a lot of jrpgs seem content with gameplay that amounts to mostly spamming the same attacks over and over and grinding the same enemies over and over if you ever start to have issues. With these games it often feels like because the main draw is the story and characters the gameplay is treated more like an afterthought or it's just there to justify being a game, or more so give the player the impression they're putting in more effort to progress and beat the game than they really are.  Obviously these games are popular and a lot of people dont mind this, but I think this kind of design philosophy is worth criticizing and I do feel it's an issue with discussing.I'm thinking there's nothing particularly wrong with this community, *except* its title and its size.  One is a function of the other.  As with so many subs on Reddit, the growth of this sub to a million+ members has caused earlier community values to be effaced.  Ask yourself, when is the last time you thought about a gaming discussion in terms of its *truth* value?  When did you last think some ideas about gaming were true and others were false?  As opposed to a non-stop stream of cultural relativism and everyone's opinions being equally valid, at least in their own minds?

When truegaming was created, what do you suppose it stood in opposition against, as a matter of its cultural practices and community sensibilities?  In contrast, what do you think is the usual drill nowadays?

It is almost a pity not to be able to trivially rename a sub, and take its extant brand identity and traffic along for the ride.  For instance I'd probably rename this sub r/gamingessays.

Why do you think people name subs "TrueWhatever" and what cultural practices do you think they're usually excoriating?  To declare something "true" does imply that something else out there, is false.I took about a 5 year break from gaming in general, now upon returning in my later 20's, I've found myself more drawn toward serious, story driven single player titles, rather than competitive online games, which used to be my preference. 

Both can be immersive for differing reasons, and there's definitely a place for competitive games (especially as a social connector), but when I'm alone I don't find myself having much desire to play them online. 

I suppose I see games now as almost an interactive cinematic experience rather than a competition, maybe reflecting the fact I've mellowed out a bit. 

Anyway, how has your preference in games changed as you've grown up?The football simulation genre is rarely discussed here but is heavily represented in the charts for the best-selling games year in year out. Still,  old franchises are starting to lose steam and even change for the worst, and new ones have begun emerging; thus, the future of the genre is uncertain yet very intriguing.

&#x200B;

FIFA is the big, money-making elephant in the room, so I'll start here. For years it's been described as an almost monopolistic franchise, gathering fans from across the world, including non-gamers as well as non-football fans. The online component, specifically FUT, has been making billions of dollars for the developers by itself. Services providing [game currency](https://difmark.com/en/buy-game-currency) are more sought-after than ever before. The arcadey gameplay, polished presentation, licenses, and overall marketing by EA have made it one of the biggest franchises in gaming. Still, with the frequent criticism of lack of progress and staleness, it's bound to lose sales soon.

&#x200B;

The PES franchise has been seen by a rather significant minority of football fans as the prime alternative for FIFA, with generally deeper and realistic gameplay. Still, the overall presentation of the games and the lack of licenses have hindered its progress as a real competitor to FIFA. However, the decision made by Konami to use a free-to-play model and the disastrous release of the new eFootball have left many older fans disappointed and looking for a new franchise to carry on the realistic football sim flag.

Last but not least, UFL is an upcoming free-to-play game built on the Unreal Engine. We don't yet know much about it, apart from teasers including ambassadors, partnerships, and their use of InStat. Still, it has already started assembling a niche of football fans, mainly those disappointed with the downfall of PES and those shunning the arcade style of FIFA.

&#x200B;

To conclude, the football simulation genre is at a crossroads right now. Established franchises seem to lose direction, developers choose profits over the player's wishes for progress, and new projects promise a better experience for casuals and hardcore fans alike.

&#x200B;

What do you guys think the future holds? Should we expect tighter competition and, thus, higher-quality titles in the near future?When I say old school toxicity I mean the kinda stuff X-box live got a bad rep for way back in the days of the first xbox. It seems that anytime I go to play a AAA game that has multiplayer and there is a chat feature it's like

"oh look an in game chat. I can have friendly banter with the community while I play."

NOPE. Now I get it, this is the internet. I'm an older dude. I've been around this block. I just figured eventually moderation + time would do something... but its like 20 years later, and its still the same. Check chat and it looks like this:

* \[Racial Slur\],
* \[Accusations of Sexual Preference\],
* \[allegations of less than consensual sexual congress with an immediate family member\],
* \[Literal pro-Nazi propaganda\],
* \[baseless kink shaming\],
* & \[implications of substandard mental ability as the result of a minor or major genetic defect\]

I get it, those people exist, what I do not understand is how games companies can go "That's the kinda person we want in our community right there." instead of going "Yeah you're giving our brand a bad name, so were gonna permaban you and refuse you a refund when you go full Karen trying to get unbanned."

Now I know what's said in online chat doesn't reflect a companies beliefs, everyone knows that.... but  when you let it slide for this long and we don't see improvement it becomes hard not to think "Wait, are these guys actually okay with whats getting said in their games? Or do they just not care since they already got our money?" and I get not wanting to draw lines on what people can say and where, but on the inverse if we can exercise our "free speech" to say horrible shit, a company can and should exercise theirs to say "not in my house."

I guess ultimately I just wanna know why are these people still allowed into online games? Why are they not getting banned from their games? It seems like the absolute worst punishment I will see is someone gets "permabanned" and then a week later they are back either unbanned, bought a new game, made new account. Like wtf how to the point that I'm about to add online gamers to the list of things that can survive a nuclear apocalypse, right next to cockroaches.I played Majora's Mask for the first time on my 3ds and i feel the urge to share how much i have enjoyed this game.

First of all, a bit of context. I've been playing games for 20 years, but only recently i've started to go deeper  analyzing the mechanics behind them and why i like them so much. That is to say that i'm no expert and this post aims to learn more, rather than to convince you of my opinions. I will also apologise in advance for my language, since English is not my mother tongue.

I loved Majora's Mask so much because i love to do side quests. It may sound a bit unpopular, but i'm the type of guy who won't finish the main story if all the side quests are not completed. Part of this may be caused by a completionism OCD, but on the other end i really enjoy doing side quests because i feel like i'm actively deciding what to do, instead of being guided.

Of all the games i've played, Majora's Mask has the best side-quest system ever. I'm not talking about the *quality* of the quests (i mean, it may still be true for me, but it's not the focus of this post). I refer to the way the game presents, organizes and guides you through them. I believe that it is the perfect spot between two systems i will now present, with their pros and cons.

**1. The markers system**: the game gives you the complete list of quests available and tells you exactly what you need to do and where you need to go.  You all know this system, as it has been the most popular since, i believe, the ps3 era.

The markers system surely has some pros: first, it's perfect to keep complete track of what is going on, helping that completionist part that we all have in ourselves. Second, it may help designers to create more complex quests, as they don't have to worry about helping the player to find the way to completion, so they can only focus on the quest content. No wonders that the best games who adopt this system are mainly appreciated for the *quality* of the content they present to the player (The witcher 3, Red Dead Redemption 2).

The markers system has many cons, though, and is by far my least favourite to play. The main problem is that playing is not fun. The player is guided too much and is not stimulated to pay attention on what's happening. Thinking is not required to complete the quest, and even if you do, it will still looks like the game is just showing you the content, rather than you actively playing it. Most of the times i find myself doing this type of quests just because i have to do another chore on the list. I see these problems pointed out very often, so i don't think more words are needed in this regard.

One could argue that you can still play the way you want. In fact, many games allow you to modify the HUD, remove minimap or markers. The problem is removing them is not enough, because the quests are not designed to hint you towards your objective. Playing this way will result in frustration as you won't be able to find your objectives most of the time.

**2. The hints system**: there are no markers and no lists, the game gives you quests hiding them in the ordinary gameplay and gives you hints on how to progress. This system is mainly used by japanese games, from the early Zeldas to the more modern and much appreciated Soulslike.

The pros of this system can be derived from the cons of the previous one: completing these quests is fun and rewarding because you feel like you did it yourself. What i'd like to point out is that, apart from the side quests themselves, this kind of system makes the whole game much more interesting. If you know that you can get quests from any interaction you have with the world, you will be much more prone to explore and analyze it. This results also in an overall better quality of the quest, as i will try to prove with an example.

Let's say the quest is to bring milk from point A to point B. With the markers system, this would be considered a "fetch" quest: you will already know if you can deliver it, where and to whom. You will go straight to the place and complete it. With the hints system, the same exact content can turn into a much more fun and satisfying experience: you get the milk, but you don't know what to do with it. You will keep on with your main quest, while actively exploring every corner of the world looking for the solution. You will fail many times, which results in a very rewarding feeling when you actually find the destination. You will also read every single line of NPCs dialogue, questioning if what they are telling you, which looks like the ordinary game narrative, may have some connection to the quest you are following (i.e.: "over the hill there's a farmer, he may need help for...").

Now, the most important part of my discussion is that this system has some cons too. 

First, the hints are usually received through dialogue, but the dialogues are not registered anywhere and are not always repeatable (usually npcs just repeat their last line). If you are not completely immersed into the game, maybe you play a couple of hours and then stop for a few days, chances are you are going to forget what the hint was, and end up not completing the quest.

Second, it's not always easy to distinguish between game narrative and hints. This is normally a good thing as it makes the player question himself about the world, but it can result in frustration: on one hand, if the player spends time trying to achieve an objective that he just misinterpreted because it's not in the game; on the other hand, if the player fails to recognize a quest and misses that content at the end of the game. (i will provide an example later to better explain this)

**3. Bombers' notebook:** where i'm going it's pretty clear at this point, the quest management system in  Majora's Mask, the Bombers' notebook, it's the best of both worlds because it perfectly balances the two systems.

First, the notebook doesn't tell you exactly what to do and where to go (sometimes it's pretty close, but it still requires a bit of thinking or problem solving), but it keeps track of every hint you get. You don't have to write them down and you are not worried to forget anything.

Second, and most important, the quest progression is very clear: you know when you got a quest, when it moves to the next step, when it has finished. You only have to focus on completing the quest, solving that little problem the game has given you. Personally, i don't feel frustrated if i get stuck for hours or days on a quest, if i'm sure that there is a way to do it. I only feel frustrated when i find out that the time i spent was useless, because the quest was not available or i couldn't complete it at that point of the game.

Let's make one last example: in one of the quests, you have to use the telescope in the Observatory and look for a Deku-guy that is flying around and is landing into a hole. You go there and buy a heart piece, then he says something like "ooh, you found me! now i need to find another place for my business". This is not a hint for a new step in the quest, but only a dialogue for better context. Now, if this was Ocarina of time and i really wanted to complete all the quests, i would have probably spent hours trying to find his new location, only to end up frustrated finding out that the quest was over. With the Bombers' notebook, i was immediately sure that the quest was finished.

I know that the Bombers' notebook is designed in order to help players through the 3-day loop, but i think that it could perfectly work in every game. I really wish more games will adopt this approach: it's the reason why Majora's Mask is the only Zelda i've 100% without guides, the only Zelda i spent 60 hours in (except botw), being stuck multiple times but never feeling frustrated.

What's your opinion on this? I'm sure there will be more games who adopt similar systems, and i would love to know more.Lately, a lot of titles are being advertised as an open world and this seems to do the trick for a large number of cases, and people like open-world games. Now again, most open worlds are empty and do not achieve the quality achieved by games like Skyrim, Morrowind, or Witcher 3. 

But should RPGs always have an open world? I dunno, a lot of older RPGs did not have open worlds and they have gone down in history as one of the greatest games ever made. For example, Dragon Age: Origins. Mass Effect 1. I haven't played, but I've heard Baldur's Gate 1 and 2 were not open worlds either, but still, they were really good RPGs. Same with SW: KOTOR.

I simply feel if a linear main quest had a good story and choices that had impacts, but on the story, people would be immersed as well and would appreciate the game

I know the question might sound a bit foolish, as non-open world RPGs exist, but I'm simply asking for opinions and your thoughts.Racing games are by far my favorite genre of gaming, to the point where I basically ignore 90% of gaming these days since the genre is so small compared to others. I spend most of my gaming time just playing older racing games I already own, and then buying the few that *do* come out, like Forza Horizon 5. One of these is the commercial failure that was Onrush, a game I absolutely adore and keep playing online with its small dedicated playerbase three years on because it does one thing better than any arcade racer I've ever played: it doesn't boil down to just being the fastest. 

I like both racing sims and arcade racers. The thing about racing sims is that due to their inherent complexity, they provide a pretty dynamic experience when competing against other people. Things like fuel consumption and tire wear, dynamic tracks changing in grip as the race goes on, the inherent difficulty of driving in these games, and a host of other factors mean that I can never know what to expect when racing.

Arcade racers, on the other hand, almost never have this inherent complexity. They are, by design, incredibly simple and usually not super difficult to control. This means that in an arcade racer, the overwhelming best strategy at *all* times is "pick the fastest car and drive perfectly". Competing against other people for instance boils down to exactly that--those who have played Mario Kart Wii, for instance, will definitely remember the Funky Kong/Daisy epidemic, because those characters on inline drifting bikes were objectively the best because nothing mattered more than speed and being able to get around corners. On this very sub, [a recent post about Trackmania had many people saying one thing they did not like about the series was that it was so laser-focused on just getting the best time with basically no player interaction](https://old.reddit.com/r/truegaming/comments/q0edw0/trackmania_is_one_of_the_games_that_puts_quality/). I love TM but that's undeniable--it's the absolute zenith of this gameplay design, where the ability to even touch other players is removed (most of the time) and the entire thing truly does boil down to "play more perfect than everyone else and grind out the best time you can". You do the best possible strategy known at the time for a track and perfect it until someone finds a better one, then you just do that one instead. It's great fun, but also inherently one-note. If you aren't as skilled as the best people in the lobby/match/whatever, then they just fly away from you and you're on your own putting around the track without actually interacting with them in the slightest. Even if you are as skilled, if there's some hidden exploit or shortcut, then they'll still just fly away from you (once again, as anyone who had to race tryhards in Mario Kart online on a course with an ultra shortcut can attest)! It can easily lead to feeling you aren't really competing against people so much as just time trialing with other people in the way. 

This is the "issue of overcentralizing optimization" I mention in my title--nearly all arcade racers boil down to "get the fastest car and drive perfectly and ignore everyone else on the track" because their core design incentivizes nothing else. Some games have tried to avoid this: Mario Kart with its chaotic items; Split Second with its power plays that let you trigger environmental hazards to wreck rival racers in front of you; but these all still have this issue in some regard. 

Onrush is the only arcade racer I have ever seen that actually avoids this issue, because it isn't even about racing. 

Onrush's objective-based game modes--which boil down to "get the most points"/"drive through the gates to add time for your team, running out of time loses you the round"/"capture the moving zone"/"take out each member of the enemy team three times before they do that to yours" mean that ultimate strategy in the game does not--literally cannot--boil down to just "drive perfectly". Matches are a lot more fluid and dynamic because there are a variety of ways to get the objective, and, more importantly, *players are forced to interact with each other*. Simply just driving fast in front of everyone else is a terrible way to play Onrush, and when I am accidentally way ahead of everyone else, I willingly slow down and throw myself back into the fray. Unlike pretty much every single arcade racer ever, when you wreck or are taken down in Onrush you take *very* long to respawn--five seconds if you wreck yourself, about ten if you are taken down. I have seen a lot of people complain about how long this is on places like reddit (especially when the game came out) which is honestly silly and shows how people do not understand how Onrush works or what Evolution Studios was going for. 

This is pretty much how any objective-based shooter works too--if you die, you are out of the game for a long while, allowing the enemy team to leverage that to win. Taking someone out in Overdrive deprives their team from their point gain for *ten seconds*; doing the same in Countdown means that they can't gain time from hitting gates, slowing their ability to stave off their ticking clock. Actively fighting and scrapping with the enemy team is paramount in Onrush--simply getting ahead and staying there and avoiding all interaction is worthless in every mode except Countdown, and even then scrapping with enemies is still incredibly useful. When I used to play Burnout online for instance, I felt almost zero reason to actually takedown people when I could just drive fast and get away from them, but Onrush is actively designed around fighting with other people, hunting them down, and in general doing something a lot more interesting than just driving the course perfectly. Slowing down and trying to hunt someone behind you is a completely viable strategy in Onrush and something I often use--Onrush is honestly the only arcade racer I've ever played where actively choosing to slow down is a thing you'd willingly do as opposed to just going max speed the entire time. 

The other system enforcing this is the Stampede--basically, every player in an Onrush is effectively inside this invisible rolling convoy of vehicular chaos and can't get out of it. If you fall too far behind the game respawns you right inside of it. In many arcade racers, the best people in a race will just fly off into the distance and never show up again; this is *literally* impossible in Onrush, as the cars are all designed to go roughly the same speed and falling behind just throws you back into the thick of things. You are pretty much always nearby an enemy and have to fight with opponents, but the game is never claustrophobic about it and you can get breathing room. *This* system solves a different problem I'm not going to talk about much, but is one games like Twisted Metal and Destruction All Stars have, namely that driving cars in enclosed arenas is honestly not that fun because they don't have the same mobility as a, say, a character in a shooter or platformer/action game. Onrush fixes this problem by just making the arena a mobile bubble you are always moving forward through, and I'm actually *staggered* that it took till 2018 for someone to figure out that the TM style of things is pretty substandard. That the rumored TM reboot isn't going to use a stampede style system boggles me and it's going to have the same issue all of its predecessors ever had, but that's for another time...

It is these aspects of Onrush that keep me playing it to this day, three years on. The game is inherently far more dynamic than just about any other arcade racer, which is also why the game isn't dead despite how old it is, how little it sold, and how much its own publisher has abandoned it. There's nothing else like it--Evolution Studios figured out how to fix several key issues that inherently plague the game's own genre. Unfortunately, despite their masterful work, they will not get the recognition they deserve for these smart decisions, outside of the dedicated core of players the game still has.Recently I purchased GTA Trilogy DE and started playing Vice City. I am honestly surprised how great the open world game design is especially considering this game was apparently made in only 18 months. 

Modern open world games including RDR2 has mission structure that’s set in order that the developers put in and to reach the end game, you have to complete in that particular order. In Vice City that’s not the case, money actually matters, as you will have to buy many businesses, but in which order you do them that’s up to you. You won’t have to buy every business. These businesses are also expensive so you will have to earn money to buy them and there are many ways to earn money like doing stunts, rampages, arena events, Taxi/Vigilante/Firefighter missions, Pizza missions, Shooting Ranges, Chopper checkpoints, street races, RC top fun and many other mini games. Another thing is these businesses are not marked on the mini map but you have to discover them yourselves and they have very engaging and fun missions.I can’t think of a AAA title that hasn’t taken at least 3 years to develop (and that wasn’t rushed and full of issues on release e.g battlefield 2042) 

Even the 6+ year wait between halo 5 and 6 is by far the longest there’s been in the series 

Elder scrolls VI probably won’t be out until at least 2026 - 15 years after Skyrim (although I understand they’re working on another title)

Scorn was announced in 2013 and in development shortly after, and now is set to be released next year, almost 9 years later, and will probably be delayed 

Even Stanley parable ultra deluxe has been delayed by 3 years now 

GTA VI hasn’t even been announced despite the fact it’s been 8 years since GTA V dropped - it will be at least 12+ years between releases 

I understand these are huge complex projects and I’m all for waiting to have a quality product, but to release a wildly popular game then have 12+ years before the next before the next one seems questionable from a commerce perspective

What do you think are the main reasons behind it?I'm not going to argue about exploitative pricing or generally exploitative practices, I just want to look at the modern free-to-play system in general and compare it to what came before.

Let's pick Halo 3.
You paid $60 dollars to get entry into multiplayer at all.
All four of the game's map packs cost $10 each.
In other words, Halo 3's multiplayer was a **$100** buy-in for the full package.
Vast swaths of the game's player base didn't bother purchasing those new maps, making them pretty damn rare plays for the people who *did* buy them.

Granted, all of those maps became free downloads later on, but plenty of games didn't work that way.

Halo: Reach's map packs never became free, and also essentially tallied up to an extra $40 on top of the $60 buy-in, if you weren't buying CE: Anniversary. Another **$100** package.

Other franchises worked more or less the same way. Modern Warfare 2 was a $60 dollar game with $30 worth of extra maps for a **$90** package.

Battlefield: Bad Company 2 had an interesting solution to the prevalence of used games, buying the game new gave you "VIP access", meaning all the game's post-launch maps other than the Vietnam expansion. I can't decide whether this was a generous move or a bit of a scummy jab at people who bought games used. The Vietnam expansion which included a whole new setting, vehicles, weapons, the works, cost $15. A **$75** package overall which was actually pretty alright for the time.


Now let's shift to CoD: Warzone.
It's hard to weigh the time and effort put into creating an absolutely massive map like Verdansk, sometimes updating it significantly, and eventually developing an entirely different absurdly massive map with a new theme to developing a bunch of small arenas. Easier in a lot of ways, tougher in others, I suppose.
The game chucks in new weapons from each mainline CoD as they're released, every single one as far as I can tell(?) along with each of those weapons supporting CoD's attachment system on top of that which tends to turn weapons into weird mutant versions of themselves. There's over 100(!) weapons for you to screw around with and I don't doubt there will be more soon.
Point is, there's an absurd amount of content, so much that it seems like people have struggled to document it all, and you can go and download it for the low, low price of **zero dollars** and have access to *all* of it.

And people are upset that Activision will add in some visual flair for your army toys if you throw them some cash, to support this thing you got for free.

Apex Legends is pretty much the same story.

Halo: Infinite is in the process of adapting this system to an arena shooter.

In fact *most* free shooters operate this way now, and I'd argue it has benefited players alongside the companies offering these games. $60 is a lot of money for some people and that's a disingenuous representation of how much these games used to cost. On top of that, publishers have recognized that they'll get way more money from people playing dress-up than they ever would have from locking things with actual gameplay significance behind a paywall, so even *paid* games are using systems like this (which I *would* argue is pretty shitty), and people complain when they let you in for free.

Remember the days when all your friends would buy some new game, and uh oh, you paid $60 for something else and now you can't play alongside them? Or someone doesn't want to drop money on new content, and the people who actually did are kind of screwed? I do. It sucked. Maybe you could easily pay for it now but would you drop another $60 for your kids? That's what our parents needed to ask, and the answer was obviously no.

Call me crazy, but we are *so* much better off than we used to be. We get a huge amount of choice in what we want to play without spending a dime. I'm not sure what it is psychologically that makes people look at this stuff and think "wow, this is a really bad value" but I'm not getting it. Saying you'd rather spend a whole $60 dollars plus more for the satisfaction of unlocking some digital models and textures rather than spend $0 dollars and potentially $10 for the satisfaction of unlocking some of those same digital models and textures just screams middle-class privilege to me.

There *is* another facet to this that I think is far more relevant, and that's systems specifically being designed to goad people with little impulse control into spending money they wouldn't have otherwise, not for the sake of supporting the game, but because they're sucked into a slot machine, or because they're intentionally "frustrated" into buying their way into getting their new digital drip more quickly. But is that really what most people are talking about? Because that side of the conversation seems to have dropped off of the map recently, and it seems to have been drowned out by the very sort of people who are immature enough to fall for these tactics and think in terms of "me want red color" rather than "hey, I've dumped 30 hours into this for free, these developers deserve some cash."Hello everybody! I'm a big fan of this subreddit and the discussions it generates. However I see a number of threads and comments here (and more prominently elsewhere) that are based around some pretty common misconceptions about games and how they're made. I've been in the games industry for over a decade now, and I've worked on indie titles all the way up to AAA franchises. I'll keep things vague, just because I'd like to maintain a level of anonymity for professional reasons. I figured I'd discuss a few things that I commonly believe are misconceptions that get discussed online. Important disclaimer that these still contain a level of subjectivity, and my own experiences may not be representative of the entire industry. I'd love to discuss this further, and it would be great if other devs jumped in as well!  

&nbsp;

**Edit: A number of people have provided some really good comments about the following point. It's very likely that when people talk about "bad QA", they likely mean the entire process of Quality Assurance, such as reporting, triaging, and fixing bugs, and less likely mean the actual QA department. This is a good reframing of my perspective, and I'm glad there's been so much good discussion here.**


**A buggy game is almost never the fault of QA. They're certainly aware of any issues.**

This one probably bristles me the most. QA is a tough job, and usually pays worse than other disciplines. Worse yet, when a buggy launch happens, you often see people blaming the QA department. I cannot stress this enough, but **QA's primary responsibility is to report bugs, not fix them**. QA will get the latest build, regress any bugs listed as resolved, and write up any new ones. New or reopened bugs then get sent to the department responsible for the feature. I'd say on average, any shipped game probably has hundreds to thousands of unresolved issues, that were either too low priority to fix by cutoff, or were deemed as WNF (will not fix). Rarely does this indicate laziness, but more likely points to deadlines and budgetary restrictions.

&nbsp;

**There's a lot of communication between studios and journalists while reviewing a game.**

I'll use "studio" broadly here, because it can apply to both devs or publishers. But for most semi-large releases, there's often quite a back and forth between the studio and a journalist reviewing a game. I've worked on games where we've sent "pre-review packages", which is basically a pdf that contains all sorts of info that may be relevant to the reviewer. This includes stuff like an overview, known issues, and also key facts like the game's target demo, etc. For example, I worked on a 10 man strategy game aimed at a niche audience, and our publisher made sure to stress this point when sending out review copies. It makes sense when you think about it, because if an outlet reviews a game without understanding the audience, it can be disastrous. It's also very common for a reviewer to reach out and mention a bug they encountered. The studio can then mention whether its fixed in a launch-day patch, or provide advice on how to avoid it. Journalists aren't obligated to **not** mention any of these issues in a review, but I think unless they are incredibly frequent and severe, for the most part, the reviewer will side with developers. It's a complex relationship. That said, I do think this system is exploited, and paired with restrictive review periods, is likely what contributes to some of the more notable broken games receiving suspiciously positive reviews.

&nbsp;

**There's pretty much zero standardization in the games industry, and people shouldn't expect absolutes and conformity.**

I see this mostly in regards to difficulty in games™, but a lot of opinions (especially on this sub, for some reason) kind of revolve around the idea that there are inherent, objective design principals that every game needs to conform to. That may sometimes be true in regards to the technical side of things, but that's rarely what people talk about. There are a lot of conversations about how "x game should have y, because some other game did it so well", or that "this genre needs to be more challenging to be fun". I'm not sure why some people treat games like there are rigid standards, and each title needs to be exactly the same, because that's certainly not how it works on the inside. Sure, developers will look at comparable games and take the best practices, but it's not like we're a heavily regulated industry where there are specific standards to adhere to. Sometimes decision are made to specifically serve the vision of the game. 

&nbsp;

**"Forced diversity" is by and large a myth.**

Okay, well, this is a bit of a volatile topic, but here we go. Now this one probably goes most into anecdotal territory, as this is based on my own experiences, but is also based on discussions I've had with peers who have also worked on mainstream releases. I've never seen a case where a publisher or manager has explicitly stepped in and said "we need more representation", and I've certainly never seen it suggested for cynical reasons such as the idea that it would appease some sort of "woke crowd".  I might be preaching to the choir a bit to this sub, but there are still threads and comments about how any form of diverse characters need to be "justified" or "well written", otherwise they're a sure sign of "forced diversity" in games.

The simpler truth is, as shocking as it may be, is that many game developers simply care about representation. It's important to remember the demographics for most videogame studios: usually they are located in large cities, and most employees range from their mid 20's to 40's on average, most of which come from a background with some level of post-secondary education. I don't want to over generalize, but those demographics (urban, younger, with post-secondary education) tend to skew more on the progressive side. While there's still a lot of room to go in regards to equality inside the industry, most studios have a somewhat broad mix of racial diversity (though this may be a biproduct of my city, which is fairly multicultural). As a result, it's a natural conclusion that if the people making games are a more diverse team, they would naturally be interested in bringing more diversity into their games.

The most obvious example of this is the fact that diversity often ends up being more work for the devs themselves. Such as modelling, rigging, and animating a female player character in addition to a male one, or creating more skin tones for a character creator. Now I'm sure there have been major games where the studio has pushed diversity for more patronizing reasons, but the simplest explanation is usually the case: as more diverse people enter the industry, the games become a representative of the views of such a team.(This kinda just evovled into me discussing PvZGW but question still stands. Feel free to not answer though.)

If you've never played it, Plants vs. Zombies Garden Warfare (GW1) was similar to Team Fortress 2 and released back in 2014. It got a sequel in 2016 (GW2) and a reboot in 2019 (Battle for Neighborville) that kinda fell off, they stopped supporting it in 2020. Makes sense when you have an alpha test and release the whole game the next month. It was all dumb fun and it's a shame it went out.

Back to GW1 though, there were 4 classes on the Plants team and 4 on the Zombies team, about 4 of them filled the same niche through different methods, and the other 4 were unique. The soldier class were Peashooters and Foot Soldiers, the former had a ton of splash damage attacks, super speed, and a turret mode it can switch between, favoring the high ground. Tlatter had a mid-long range AR and missiles specifically meant to counter turrets, smoke bombs and a rocket jump. It also favored high ground.

The healer class were Sunflowers and Scientists. The former was mid range and could heal anyone at any time with a beam. The latter was close range and had to drop a fire hydrant that zombies had to stand near to heal, but it could teleport to ambush plants. For some reason Sunflowers also had a turret mode for some reason.

As for the unique classes, Chompers were melee and a bit tankier, can one shot zombies by swallowing them from behind or underground, and Cacti were snipers. All stars were full tanks and Engineers had the same splash damage as peashooters, but could also crowd control. Each class also had variants which is alot to get itno, but basically altered their primary weapons to suit other roles (Like foot soldiers with a sniper weapon.)

The first game had the general shooter gamemodes, but also had capture point maps where only the plants defended and the zombies attacked. The zombie classes were generally geared to offense and plants defense, I'd see plant players  in team deathmatch basically group up and have Cacti set up walls/mines, Chompers set up other traps, and played defense.

GW2 basically made new classes trying to fill the empty niches left in the first game, but through different methods again. Zombies got a melee class that looked like Superman, but instead of eating plants he could fly and shoot ki blasts. They also got a sniper that also had a shotgun. Plants got a Rose engineer class but she had two modes of crown control (Freezing people or turning them into goats), and a tank that and switch into a ball to move faster. As well as a Corn Foot Soldier clone but instead of smoke bombs it can summon air strikes, and it had a rocket jump that basically one-shot every zombie that was under his arc

I'll gladly explain more if you want to know, or clarify anything. There were alot of balancing issues in the game that I don't think the community noticed but they all got good reviews, and were pretty fun. Would you consider them asymmetrical multiplayer?I remember playing it and beating it when it first came out and thinking it was some of the deepest shit at the time. I was also 14 at the time..so lol. I quit after the mall scene. It was way more ridiculous than I remember. I know Jason was supposed to be 4, but they could've made his death by car more believable considering that car was going rather slow and and Ethan was shielding Jason completely..then the car came to a complete hault after bumping Ethan. So wth? Lol. If they wanted to still have Jason with the mindset of a 4yr old, they should've just wrote him in as autistic. Dude ran away from his parents to chase a balloon into the street lol. They could've written him as autistic and to where Ethan didn't make it to him in time.  Also, the music that is quite literally blairing during the whole mall scene and gameplay. It's so loud. There doesn't need to be music there lol. It starts as soon as the mall part comes up. Not being subtle at all. 

The mall part alone makes me wonder how this game got a 9/10 from IGN and an 87 from Metacritic. That mall scene is bad enough to drop it below and 8 lol. And I know the game gets even more ridiculous and filled with even more plot holes as it goes along.. Yet everyone back in that time thought it was next level story writing but people who are re playing it recently dont see it as that good. 

And the animation is nice in some regards, but weird looking any time a character talks. Like they were using models from the Sims or something lol. Mouth movements were always a little exaggerated.How many times do we make fun of Skyrim and Oblivion's voice-acting? The performances of these games are notorious, but this is the logical conclusion to having the same 12 actors portray an entire country's worth of characters. I once saw a comment saying that Morrowind could never be remastered because it would be impossible to fully voice the game, since a lot of Morrowind's dialogue is in text. 

Who says the game needs to be fully voice-acted? Who says that any big game needs full-voice acting? For generations as a species we have been content with reading dialogue in books. We read the dialogue in video games for quite a while: Breath of the Wild recently caused quite a stir for being the first Legend of Zelda game to add voice-acting. In 2017!

There's no reason that huge games need to be fully-voiced, and this isn't a call to get rid of voice-acting, either: I think there's a perfectly fine common ground. Important story events in big RPGs should always have voice acting, and limiting the voice-acting to specific important beats would allow the development team to spend less on the budget, allowing them to get better actors who can focus more on these specific, significant moments.I just finished Nier Automata the third time and I will keep this post (major) spoiler free.

I find that Nier Automata is a prime example of a decent RPG that is hold back by its strong focus on the narrative and it's subsequent design choices.

I agree that for the first or even sencond and third playthrough, the narrative has to take priority but what I can't understand is why the game has to be restricted by these limitations afterwards. Why not giving me an option to go back into the world as the character I choose and just let me play all the side quests I want? Every modern open-world RPG is designed in this way and no one says (that this particular part) is awful. No, I have to find a [guide/list](https://nierautomata.wiki.fextralife.com/Side+Quests) of all side stories and in which chapter I can access them, all while I have to ignore the main story in that particular chapter. It gets even more hilarious if the main quest is a pressing matter (the filter in chapter 14.1) for the android you control.

Then, the story tells you things like that there's a chance that the oil filter get's defective if you are in the desert and fighting enemies. Why does this never happened before or afterwards? Or even a better example is when 9S needs maintenance after he has fought for "too long", all while I can keep 2A fighting for two hours in auto-mode for leveling up in the spawning pit, with no malfunctions (I didn't try it with 9S but I would be surprised if it would differ).

Now as a comparison, let's take a look at Assassin's Creed Odyssey which got its share of critics for all kind of stuff. In my opinion the game knows what it is (a sandbox open-world RPG) and what it's not (a narrative experience) and it doesn't try to force the player into the other way. There's no narratively based limitation that only applies during one story act, while being completely ignored during the rest of the game and I can easily complete all the side quests I want after I'm done with the main quest.

So my "suggestion" for Nier Automata: Either be an open-world RPG and make it accessible for the user and logical or be a narrative experience and don't allow the chapter selection and don't include side quests.

tldr: Nier Automata stinks for not sticking to either being a narrative experience or an open-world RPG. In contrast Assassin's Creed Odyssey knows what it wants to be and excels at it. Nier just left me frustrated.Recently I started playing Stardew Valley, after months of not playing anything. It was a bit of a rough start until I installed some QoL mods like the one that lets you set the passage of time. I started looking things up on the wiki and reddit, because I've always played games that way.

For a time, the game felt *deep*. There's so many things to experience! But that feeling started fading away once, in my research, I started noticing... weird aspects of the game.

The very first festival event in the game. You're supposed to ask someone to dance with you. However the problem is you need 4 hearts with a bachelor for them to say yes. If you're playing normally there's no way to get 4 hearts with anyone by the time of the festival in your first year. If you know about the festival in advance , from reading the wiki, it is theoretically possible to get 4 hearts with the bachelors, with varying degrees of luck and difficulty, if you focus on them day 1. Besides the bachelors there's no one else to dance with. You would think that, being the new person in town, someone would offer to dance with you. That is not the case. So the new player experience is walking around talking to everyone, expecting this event to be an opportunity for relationship development or whatever since it's so early in the game, and getting rejected every time... and then the dance comes, and the player's avatar sits in the corner while all the bachelors dance with each other. Okay... but why? For what purpose?

There's a wolf attack event in the game. To trigger the event your farm animals must be trapped outside at night. However the vast majority of players never see this event because apparently simply leaving the doors of the coops/barns open at all times circumvents it. Most players don't even know the event exists! There's simply no reason not to leave the doors open at all times. You would think leaving the doors open at night would be a trigger for the wolf attack event, but apparently not. Is it a bug? There's no signs of it being fixed if so.

I received mail from an alcoholic NPC called Pam asking me for Pale Ale. Well I'd love to! But um, Pam, I can't build the keg I need for your Pale Ale because you unlock the ability to craft it at Farming level 8 and I'm only at Farming level 5 so... Guess that Pale Ale's gonna have to wait. Awhile. Not to ruin your immersion or anything.

There's so many different types of fish to catch. The *catch*? There's not a whole lot you can do with them... Fish are barely used for anything and recipes that require specific fish are rare. Ditto with minerals you can get from the mines, most just sort of... exist. Well at least minerals I can donate to the museum, can't do that with fish even though ironically catching specific fish is a harder task than finding minerals.

Jojamart is gonna drive our local shop Pierre's out of business! I should check out Jojamart's prices. Well, in an unfortunate turn of events it turns out *they have the same prices*. Okay... Guess Pierre is safe after all. Oh and speaking of Pierre's there's unique dialogue you get from the townspeople if you sell your products directly to Pierre instead of just putting them in the shipping box. They comment on the products. Cool! But why couldn't that have been a thing with just the shipping box? Why must I go out my way to sell to Pierre in order for the townspeople to acknowledge the existence of my products? This, too, is something the majority of players don't know about.

You can, of course, marry bachelors and have or adopt kids with them. The kids never grow past toddler stage and the family of your spouse apparently never realize that you are now family. Kind of disappointing.

The farming, the farming... Once you get the ability to craft preserve jars and kegs there is no reason, profit wise, to do anything except process your crops and fruits. Imagine, a farmer that only sells pickles and wine in a world where there is apparently no demand for anything except pickles and wine. Weird. In regards to processing, you would think, logically, the quality of raw produce would affect the final product. Apparently not. Speaking of processing you can build a Mill. It exists. The things the Mill produces can be bought infinitely in bulk. So the Mill ends up being expensive decoration.

I know Stardew Valley was developed by one person. I know it has sold millions of copies, a testament to its success. Yet I cannot help but feel sad about the "issues" I mention probably never getting addressed seeing as how the developer is moving onto a new project. The game will remain in this state of limbo forever. Mods can only do so much, after all.

Why am I still farming? Just to suffer?It's such an odd thing to complain about. I remember once when the hype for 2042 was still big, there was an article linked on r/games about the developers saying explicitly that the setting of the game has no political influence, and this made me think 2 things: why do you have to clarify that it wont be political, and wait people are actually mad about this in the comments? It seems like such a nonissue given the context. Many people in the comments were arguing that "so a game about climate disaster and resource wars isnt going to be political? Why are they so spineless and being afraid to take any kind of stance?" And it seems just like... why would they? And if they did, why would it matter? Who would actually care about what a game like battlefield has to say about these issues? I dont get it, but I would like to see the discussion you guys can generate about itIt's very common for games to emphasize a feeling of loneliness. Game devs will usually say this is done on purpose to highlight the sense of survival or challenge that the player can feel as a result of isolation. But, honestly, it's just *easier* to make the player feel alone. It's a great excuse for having a game environment that doesn't feel "alive" or lived-in.

Why are there so few interactable NPCs? *the game wants the player to feel alienated!*Why is the game world so empty and static? *the devs want the environment to feel gloomy and scary!*Why does the player character do everything alone? *it's supposed to make you feel like a hero!*

The fact stands, though, that doing the opposite would be way more difficult. Populating a game with NPCs that have high levels of interactivity takes time and resources. Creating a dense, living game environment is demanding and time consuming. It's just easier to make the player character do everything alone.

I can think of a few examples of games that have mostly resisted these tropes. The original Mass Effect trilogy and Dragon Age 1&2 both did a really good job of making the player feel like they were part of a team and like they were playing in a living world. I think a lot of game devs since have tried to recreate that magic or utilize the same formula, but I can't think of any modern examples that are particularly successful. The only recent game that really comes to mind is Disco Elysium. The game is densely populated with NPCs that can engage the player character in long, complex conversations. And the protagonist actually gets to traverse the world with a partner who interacts right alongside him.

This is something that has bugged me about games my whole life. As someone who deals with high levels of depression and overall emotional instability, I really dread starting up a new game sometimes because I go into it expecting the devs are going to use every trick in the book to make me feel even more alone than I already am. And they're cheap tricks that offer the easiest and most obvious sense of immersion and escapism. It's so much easier to make the player feel miserable and alone rather than happy and part of a community or a family.

What do you think  prevents a game from giving you that YOU ARE THE ONLY PERSON IN THE WORLD AND YOU'RE ALL ALONE feeling? Would you like to see more games with good party/companion systems, dense game environments that feel alive, NPCs that feel like real people, etc.Time and time again, you'll hear it: "_______ was a good game for its time but now, it's just aged poorly." Now as someone who regularly plays games from different eras, both new and old, I often find these claims exaggerated rather than understandable. 

I've heard these complaints levied toward just about any critically acclaimed game older than fifteen years. Goldeneye 007, Mario 64, Zelda, Half Life 1, Halo 1, any GTA before V, etc. There's no shortage of games that happen to fall into this "aged like milk" category. This can range from graphics being outdated, to controls, you name it. 

But to me, a lot of these complaints these games receive seem to stem from a lack of patience imo. And not just that, a mindset that games of old need to meet some unfair arbitrary standard of modern gaming. 

I don't watch movies from the 60s or 70s and expect any CGI dynamic shots to show up. I don't expect Christopher Reeve's Superman to be flying through demolishing buildings with snap zooms. Many gamers simply refuse to acknowledge or approach these older games with any consideration or thoughtfulness like like do with other mediums. They just see a framerate below 30, gag and complain and turn their mind off towards adjusting to the controls. Nor do they open their mind to understanding what was achievable when said old game came out. There's no appreciation or regard for why a game like Halo 1 or Goldeneye must have been mindblowing for their time. 

It's even more jarring when this starts to happen with games that I myself always regarded as more contemporary. San Andreas is nearly 20 years old, but in my head, it's a relatively more modern game even though it's older than a lot of redditors now.I was thinking about why I dislike most JRPGs and most Playstation games. Games that are too story-heavy or too cinematic are a huge let-down most of the time.

But I don't actually dislike a good story, or a good cinematic experience. No, I love those things, I spend so much time consuming media, I love great stories.

But a game is different. A game consumes a lot more of your time, but in exchange you get a lot more interactivity. So when a story-heavy game is too easy, it doesn't actually do its job as a game as well as it should.

Challenge is an essential part of what makes a game a game. Don't get me wrong, it doesn't have to be a very difficult game, but when you can beat it by just going through the motions, it's more of a movie than a game.

Challenge gives you a sense of immersion, of actually identifying with the world, with the characters. It gives a sense of purpose to the tools at your disposal. It gives meaning to everything that happens, a sense of accomplishment and investment into the events.

Of course, there's nothing wrong with a game just being a glorified visual novel or a movie-game. Plenty of people love those, like tired adults after work or children for whom everything is still magical.Think about it, AAA game development takes time, a lot of time, a lot of money, need to hire famous actors for marketing, a lot of development budget, just to make a game that not everyone would like.

Meanwhile, Japanese gacha games, easy to make, no 3D elements to fuck your programming schedule up, just need to hire actors for their voice overs, and publish on phones because that's the widest reach. Bam, instant billions. And at no development time at all.

If this was the case, why are people still developing games for consoles, despite the slim margins, or at some cases, a loss? From a profit standpoint this seems really counterintuitive to what your goals are: Bring profits. And we've seen companies who are more than happy to alienate their loyal fanbase over something like this.

Best of all, you can only focus on your domestic audience and say fuck you to anyone who hates your game. Japanese devs did it, and it was a success.

It baffles me.Wondering what people’s thoughts are on this. League recently announced that they will be removing all chat and I just saw a thread on Battlefield 2042 not having all chat. I think this is an effort to curb toxicity. Do you think this is a good approach? What other solutions come to mind? If a game is rated M should devs care about toxicity?After having played a title called "Turnip Boy Commits Tax Evasion", I had a lot of thoughts on my mind. At first, I want to describe the game:  
It is an "A Link To The Past" inspired title and while the gameplay is relatively shallow, it has a strong connection to the current meme culture and uses modern internet humor (which connects this game with Reddit). I want to stress that the gameplay is incredibly irrelevant and would become extremely stale if the game wasn't so short. The actual game is the humor, presentation, and design (audio as well as visual design).   
Some examples:

[A cherry is in the game called Kakyoin. That is a reference to this part of a series.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E2yb0mzbiqA)  
[At the climax of the game,](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kC6wdfk2M98)[ a character references this specific scene of the anime.](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kC6wdfk2M98)  
A streamer within the game wants a tier 3 sub from you. The "sub" is an actual subway sub and the clerk is happy to hand it to you. That is a somewhat smarter reference to Twitch and how streamers really want subscriptions which are typically shortened to "subs", to earn money with them. 

I more or less understand every reference of the game as this type of internet culture is something I am deeply related to (with all the bad and good implications of this).   
Now, here is the thing:  
I do think that Turnip Boy will age badly over time the people who understand the jokes are already a minority and over the course of time, it will only shrink until the most important aspect of the game is not understandable for a younger audience: the humor. 

Interestingly to note:   
Not all of them are going to age so bad. Ironically the used references are going to age better than I might have implied at the beginning. These anime are widely popular, Tengen Toppa Gurren Lagann and JoJo's Bizzare Adventure both have reached the status of classics within the community (albeit I want to add that TTGL is more niche as JoJo attracted a large casual audience).   
And Twitch is here to stay for a while and I do not think that they are going to change the world for a subscription.

The next part of my thesis is highly subjective and you may disagree with what I wrote below as the difference between Kids and Turnip Boy is maybe too monumental. 

Now, Turnip Boy is the extreme end of one spectrum and another game also caught my interest.   
Kids  
Kids is a surrealist and minimalist game that only takes 20 to 30 minutes to complete. There is no real plot, people and kids are running around and are doing things that can be interpreted in any direction. [The game itself is supposed to have no definitive analysis and it is more about your personal interpretations.](https://www.theverge.com/2019/5/28/18642356/kids-game-android-iphone-steam-double-fine-interview) It is difficult to call this a contemporary game but I want to define a contemporary game as something that is the product of its time. This is extremely broad as every game is a product of its time. As such, I propose the distinction that these influences are not exclusive.  
2D/platforming Roguelikes are contemporary in my opinion as the technology/idea already existed for a while but first bloomed in the late 2010s.  
Still subjective but objective enough to take a measure. 

The deconstruction of a medium is natural and happens over time. Take something established and start to play with the formula to create something new.   
Kids is a contemporary game as it leans into the deconstruction aspect of current gaming that especially some indie developers have embraced. While this is not exclusive to this time, I think that we arguably have reached a peak.    
Kids is not playing with the tropes of a game but the medium itself:  
What defines a game, how fluid can I make the transition to film and what defines interactivity and how will interpretation depend on the viewer? These questions are currently being formulated as there is no consensus (and there will never be one if the history of "art" is anything to go by).

These two games contrast each other a lot but they use the medium to tell something that leaves personal impressions. With the production of low-end development games becoming cheaper, it is easier to express certain jokes, thoughts, ideas, and information with video games.   
Similar to a time capsule they are photographs of the thoughts that were underlying to their target audiences. A valuable form of characterization of the present for the future and these titles will influence the design of future titles which may immortalize them.   
So this kind of "current life" impressionism is formed by the experiences of specific niches and their daily lives, as well as their interests.   
So yes, I think these games are fated to become anachronisms as their main selling point is to create current discussion and association, but at least they will become nice pictures of the past.One really positive trait to come out of overhype is the over-hate that comes as a response and puts some distance between you and a game until the hype cycle has ended, and you enter it when the coast is clear. No more hate or headlines, just you and the game, and an objective view of it.

There's definitely problems with both Mass Effect Andromeda in design, story, writing, and animation, and it was definitely worse at launch than it is now. There must've definitely been problems with Cyberpunk's bugs at launch moreso than today, more T-posing characters than now, and a last-gen port that deceived everybody thinking the E3 footage was indicative of the graphical parity of the title.

But all of that is hindsight to me now. Underneath the scandals I'm ultimately playing these games and finding them hella spectacular. There's so much talent put into these on a creative level on several fronts.

All high-profile games are made by masters in their craft, but you just can't deny when you waltz around on the Nexus in Mass Effect that the architecture and interior looks really well considered and beautifully rendered. You can't deny that Cyberpunk has a vibe, and you can't deny that both of these games are about a multitude of game-systems that co-exist to make it more than just "A corridor shooter" or "A GTA Clone."

Mass Effect had a hard legacy to live up to, since we were coming off of an extreme emotional attachment of the culmination of a trilogy, and having to redo what ME1 did, but in this modernized AAA landscape where standards have changed and whatnot, and the story had to fit in somewhere despite being a new beginning, and "as far away from those endings as possible" (that might've been their mistake). And so it was both over-scrutinized by returning fans already crossing their arms about "So, how are you gonna unfuck your ending mess, BioWare?" as well as general gamers coming in like "This isn't near as well animated as Horizon Zero Dawn!", it was a hard bargain. But when you take a step back it's still a game that has an imho pretty satisfying main plot that is completely unaffected by the fetch-quest design the game was panned for, and ultimately I cannot think of any other AAA shooters that has me running across these bizarre-looking alien worlds, or cross it in my vehicle with my RPG companions ribbing each other as I clear my checklist. You win MANY points with me when you are a game that does things that aren't found elsewhere, and Andromeda does combine the best traits of past games and enhances the "boring AAA standard formula" that it is now a part of. Maybe I don't like it on the same level as the other 3, either one of them (yes, including ME1!) but I might actually like it *as a video game* more than I liked ME3 due to how player-driven the content is. And it's still a worthy story in many ways. To go in further depth would be to have its own topic about Mass Effect as a whole. Just viewed as a "popular game that no one likes" you'd be shocked to find some actual enjoyment in this game though, of which there is a lot actually. It has that Mass Effect factor of living on your ship and striking up conversations, and then going back into the "game" where you shoot stuff and solve intriguing plot-lines.

Cyberpunk does... *so much* of what I always say games should do, and I think that has gotten buried under misguided comparisons to Witcher 3, and obvious criticism around the marketing lies and underwhelming level of polish at launch. It is a quite streamlined experience where despite attempting to be this "immersive first-person always" experience, even in interactive dialogue, it does feel railroaded too. However, you're going around this Night City and realizing what a marvel it is and the work the artists put into it, and you're getting into the headspace the game wants you to be in as you head into elevators and push the panels yourself and wait until it goes up. You have to take a step back and appreciate the craft when entire conversation-setpieces with pre-scripted blocking across an entire room is made interactive with multiple choices when none of it is cinematic. If you toggle on noclip in any Mass Effect-styled RPG conversation system you'll discover the slight of hand they pull, where characters constantly move around, float above the floor, or change positions in the entire room, to match each intended camera cut, so to have one long piece of fluid motion where poses and animations blend into each other that the player is grounded within, with branching dialogue, is an actual feat. Along with very human interactions between these characters you get pretty invested. The GTA-IV style phonecalls and Catherine-style text-messages you send is almost a game in and of itself. The shooting isn't Halo or CoD but it's very good for a subsystem of an RPG and way more fun to do than the awkward gunplay of RDR2 imo.

The point is that, when so much hate comes in a game's way due to some understandably high expectations not being met, you get the impression that this must be *truly abysmal*, and once you go in with that expectation, you kinda go "Wait, THIS is what people were so angry at?"

It's just an interesting case of reaction vs reaction, I think, and just a shoutout to the fact that these games were not 5+ years of wasted work. A lot of beautiful craftsmanship was poured into these games to a thankless response.I was lucky enough to get a PS5 on launch, and while its been an amazing ride in some ways, overall the experience leaves me cold. Here are some of my takeaways:

**Design**

I didn’t much like the change from PS4 Pro to PS5 in terms of the design language. However, I thought maybe PS5 would grow on me – both the plastic and the user interface. Unfortunately, after a year, I must report that the PS5 still feels like a big step back in this department. I miss the more understated, elegant look of the PS4 Pro on my shelf. I miss the customisable PS4 UI – in particular, the amazing Firewatch theme, changing throughout the day (sunrise, sunset, etc.). I even miss the DualShock 4 V2, which in my opinion simply looks and feels better (my favourite was the funky Blue Berry variant). The colour variants of DualSense don’t do anything for me either, they’re as boring as it gets. Black and red-black, that’s it after a year, seriously?

Frankly, I still use the DualShock 4 every chance I get, and am a bit bummed that you’re blocked from using it with PS5 titles (so few of them use DualSense features in a meaningful way anyhow).

I don’t necessarily hold it against SONY for taking risks with a bold design overhaul, I just don’t think it works for me (this time). I’m hoping the revision of PS5 – slim, pro, whatever – will be more to my liking in terms of looks.

**Games**

I know it takes a while for any console to find its footing, but it says something when after a year on the market the only game that truly gave me that “next-gen” feeling was the included technical demo: Astro's Playroom. With so many cross-gen and cross-platform releases, it feels like the PS5 generation has not really began at all. There were very few true, next-gent exclusives, and even fewer that I wanted to play (almost none, it turned out).

This state of things will change, of course. It’s just a matter of time. But for now I feel like I’m mostly using the PS5 as a sort of PS4 **Pro²** – even better loading times, frame rates and resolution, but mostly the same exact experience. And that leaves me feeling mixed.

Suffice to say, all of this is just my **subjective take, my biased opinion**, and *not* some authoritative verdict. I’m curious what the rest of you think now that you’ve spent some months with your new systems.Many people seem to enjoy FromSofts way of telling lore through item descriptions but I've often been curious as to how this information is conveyed to the player character rather than just the player.

Is it simply intended to break the fourth wall/does only the player know this and the character not matter? Does the player character already know this? Do they find out with the player? 

I'm not really sure how to frame this myself and I think devs who use this tend to assume we'll just suspend our disbelief.

Does anyone have an explanation that might connect it better to the in game flow of info to the player character? Also, what are your thoughts around this practice and implementation? Could it be improved by a simple hand-wave of: "player character has a vision when they come into contact with item and now they know the item description"? How do you think it can be improved?

Edit: Mobile autocorrect corrections

Edit: did not expect this to be such a spicy topic that some think it shouldn't be criticized or improved at all. InterestingI've never played Halo, and when the Master Chief Collection came out (with all the buzz that generated) I decided to pick it up. I heard the campaigns were pretty good, and seeing the state of modern fps campaigns (e.g. Battlefield) I thought that the good old days might have something interesting.

I have now played through the majority of Combat Evolved (I'm in "And the horse you rode in on") and I am very disappointed. I think the hype and nostalgia might be greater than the product here, and while Halo was surely a giant leap forward in its time and genre-defining, (and the multiplayer might be more fun than the single player), it's worse than many that came after it. Progress made a good thing look bad in comparison. It's just plain boring.

The Good.

1. The music is nice (when it plays, most of the time the game is rather silent)
2. I really like the ability to tab back and forth between the old and the remastered graphics.
3. The visual design - of the covenant especially - is aesthetically pleasing.
4. The world is rather interesting and probably the inspiration for quite a lot of copycats - a soft-sci fi human race with "regular" guns, a precursor race whose technology is up for grabs, and a biological race of space-locusts all ring familiar bells. I'd like to know more about the Covenant and how many species work together so faithfully, and the Precursors who in their infinite wisdom decided that >!"saving" the galaxy from the flood by destroying it!< was a good idea.

The Bad.

1. The level design is atrocious. Every level amounts to running through a corridor in which enemies stand, occasionally back-pedalling to recharge shields, the only difference being how wide the corridor is. I've played a bit of Reach before this, and in that you get to fly around a bit or protect something instead of constantly forging ahead. Yes, modern shooters are also very linear, but they at least make their levels diverse and interesting. And if you look at something like TitanFall 2... no comparison.
2. The environment isn't very varied. You basically have grassland/swamp, and alien-looking interiors of Halo, Covenant ships and the Pillar of Autumn. It's extremely repetitive, hard to navigate because everything looks the same (they don't give you a proper minimap) and in general visually uninteresting. I know they wanted to make both the old and the remastered version work in the same engine and the hot-swapping introduces some engine limitations. But that does not excuse the fact that I can't see violet or grey walls anymore.
3. The weapons feel underpowered. There's this weird idea that all weapons need to be reloaded or cooled down at regular intervals (why construct a fully automatic plasma rifle if you can't fire on full auto for a useful period of time?). One thing I found especially jarring was that for some reason the human rifle and pistol always need to have a bullet loaded into the chamber after switching to it, even though you discharged half the mag five seconds ago and there should still be a bullet in there. The accuracy and damage of the rifle are terrible. I found the alien plasma pistol most useful, but surely it does not make sense that a side arm is more powerful than the primary one? There's no reason to swap weapons except for new ammo, so you're stuck with the best weapon for the playstyle, which in my case was the plasma pistol.
4. I don't know if the enemy is supposed to respawn infinitely at some instances, or if they just respawn to a nauseating degree. In any case, it's too much and instead of a challenge, it's just repetitive. The enemies come from "nowhere" in many cases, with a weird mix of fighting factions in the later parts, leading to questions about how some groups got where they got. There are no "front lines" you have to cross, it's just a mix of two opposing factions that apparently wait for you to arrive to fight each other.
5. Long stretches of the game have no change in enemy unit composition or gameplay. When the flood is introduced, a bit of diversity is introduced, but it still feels like playing against the covenant with a Lazarus capability.
6. The story is predictable and the mix of gameplay to exposition is heavily skewed towards the (boring) gameplay. Basically the formula is "fight through this horde of repetitive enemies in repetitive hallways for 20 minutes, then you get half a minute of plot and then you get to fight your way out again."

So, now that I've ranted for a while, what makes me say that this game does not hold up? What, in the wasteland of modern single player fps, could possibly be better than this?

Well, Call of Duty Modern Warfare (2019) for example features far better gunplay, and while the plot may be not that great either, the corridors you fight through are far more diverse (and with far better graphics). And of course, you have all those great shooters that came before. Bioshock maybe wasn't the greatest shooter from a mechanical perspective, but the world and story were top-notch. The Black Mesa remaster of Half Life showed what a great game that was.

But the best comparison IMHO is Doom 2016. There, too, you fight a seemingly endless onslaught of enemies. But...

* There, the guns feel great in your hands, you have reason to change them and you enjoy the process. You don't have to reload them, and they mostly don't overheat!
* The environments are varied and expansive, and they make far more sense, creating the illusion that people might actually have lived and worked there.
* The enemies are varied, they are introduced one by one and you learn to deal with each, specifically. (And the way you deal with them is more complicated than "shoot at the thing and the thing dies".)

I'm sure the multiplayer is fine, and I know many people will love the game out of sheer nostalgia. But from a purely modern point of view, this campaign is a well-made museum piece. If people say they want to play Halo: CE's campaign, I'll point them at the Wikipedia entry for the plot and at Doom 2016 for a better version of everything the game has to offer.

Edit 1: I see I missed the mark concerning my arguments here. Sorry. 

My point was that there are games that do hold up even when rather old.

*  Point-and-click adventures, while not my cup of tea, are basically unaffected by time. There are monkey island remasters, and the age does not stop the humour or plot from working. You could make a game with better graphics, but only one with better plot, the core gameplay hardly changed.
* Portal (2007) holds up great. It's still one of the best games out there even today, and it's only 6 years older. Yes, that's a lot of time for video games, but still quite far from the modern day. The things that make Portal good are not the graphics, but the story and the gameplay. Portal will survive another five years comfortably and will still hold its ground against modern competitors.
* Finally, Half Life or Black Mesa as the remaster. It's older than Halo, and far better IMHO. I mentioned it in my original post. This is where the difference becomes apparent: If someone today asked me which single player shooters are good to play, I would have no qualms recommending Black Mesa.

I would not recommend Halo. The remastering-face-lift Halo received cannot stop the aged gameplay. Others have aged far better. I will reiterate that there are those who recommend the Halo Campaign today, and I say that those people are wrong. That is all. If you think that is obvious, thank you for agreeing with me.I'm a huge fan of horror games. Unfortunately there are few actually intense games out there and the problem with the whole genre has been pointed out multiple times. I have been pondering the question of a game being scary versus it being tedious a lot. I'm not going to go into a full on ramble about the matter, that would take several pages. Instead I want to ask how you guys feel about a very primordial concept in a horror game that defines the entire gameplay arc.

Should you, as a player of a horror game be able to fight against the enemies or not? Yes or no, does it make the game scarier or less scary?

I'm completely aware of the fact, that every game is more than just the sum of their parts. So there is no definitive answer to this question. I'm just really interested in different interpretations of the mechanics.

Some games, like Dead Space are actually pretty much action games with a horror setting combined with a slightly scarce ammo supplies. I adore the series, it has some really scary moments. I'm currently playing Resident Evil 8. It has some stealth in it, but it's a lot more actiony than RE7 that I really enjoyed. I'm having a really good time with it. Still, after the super scary opening, I've yet to find true terror in it. The creepiest part so far has been thinking about why the director of the game has a border line fetishistic interest in goring hands in particular.  These are games where you get to fight against the monsters with limited supplies. Still, I think I prefer this solution when compared to gameplay where the player is completely helpless against the monster(s).

That said

Alien:Isolation is in my top ten list of games every time. It's intense and the brutal scarcity of save points really forces the player to use every resource they have to advance. That game really doesn't allow save scumming that ruins many other horror games. It also has a hearty mix of fighting back and hiding from an indestructible foe. 

I also liked Outlast. That game has absolutely no way to fight against the enemies. It's scary as balls at times, especially the DLC episodes. 

I could list games from both sides for pages, but I'm sure you get where I'm coming from. 

The gist of my pondering is this. Is it more scary to be chased by something you cannot counter at all and all you can do is hide? Or is it better to have some, yet limited ability to fight back? I know it depends on the game and how it's done. Yet that core mechanic remains in the heart of the design.

&#x200B;

P.S. I love being chased in games. I play very few online games, but Titanfall 2 is probably one of my all time favorites. Weirdly enough, this high mobility, low TTK FPS scratches my itch for horror game style "running away from a unkillable enemy" when I'm trying to get my teams flag to our base and the enemies are hunting me down with giant mechas.Not Pro Controllers, not Xbox Elite whatever. But something made out of expensive, durable parts built to extreme precision. Quite possibly costing exponentially more than the price of the current "elite" controllers each of the big 3 make. But designed to last the majority of one's gaming life. Like a gaming equivalent of spending thousands on high quality work tools. 

I know Arcade Sticks can get close, the fighting game community definitely makes sure of that. And there's probably some custom gamecube controllers that fit the bill cause Melee players are crazy. But I've never found a controller that is designed as a normal gamepad that can reach that level. Most have analog sticks that drift or misread inputs well within a year of regular use. (It's not just nintendo) And all the custom controllers I can find focus on aesthetics or artificial improvements. Tactile stuff that doesn't address the core issue of consistency and accuracy.

The answer is probably no, and I guess I can accept that. Market is what it is, but I would still find it disappointing.Grinding in multiplayer games is in no way any less "pointless" or fulfilling, if we are to look at it from an objective point of view. It's all a waste of time either way.

And yet from personal experience, I can tell that for a lot of people, grinding in multiplayer is night and day from grinding in a singleplayer game.

But why is that?

One of the most obvious reasons is that there's a sense of permanence. Once you're done with a singleplayer game, you uninstall it and that's it. But with a multiplayer game, it keeps getting updated, and so your grind was invested in something that you won't just forget about entirely in a few weeks.

But there's other reasons too. Like competition with others, showing off your work, or just sharing your achievements with others.

One interesting reasons, and one that I will exemplify today, is inability to cheat. There's only 1 way to get results in multiplayer games (well, assuming the game isn't broken), and that is to work for it.

There's no way around the grind. Only doing the work will get you the reward.

But it's different in a singleplayer game. For example, I was playing Grim Dawn. I needed a certain item that was rare, could have taken me many hours to get it. But I kept asking myself, why would I waste all this time? Is this fun, just grinding for an item? Is this challenging? Is there any point whatsoever to me wasting my time?

And the answer is no. The same as it would be in a multiplayer game, of course. With one key difference. In a singleplayer game, I could just cheat and get the item in 2 seconds.

So I asked myself why wouldn't I cheat? Why would I waste hours working, doing chores, just for some pixels that I can get in 2 seconds.

And that's the interesting thing about grinding. It's equally wasteful of your time and pointless in a multiplayer game as it is in a singleplayer game. And yet I can waste hundreds of hours in a multiplayer game, while just a few hours grinding in a singleplayer game will seem Ludacris to me and I'll skip the whole thing. I actually completely ruined my enjoyment of a singleplayer game and dropped it altogether, just because it  was a bit grindy (and yet it was just 1% as grindy as a multiplayer game that I spent x100 more time on).

**So how do you feel about grinding in multiplayer games vs singleplayer games?**I don't think we see a lot of racing games that not only get rated very highly by critics and players but also is a huge success when it comes to sales/hype.

Online I've been seeing people talking about how racing games will never actually be considered for game of the year regardless of quality.Some of them kind of see organizations that give the awards at fault,on the other side some think racing games just can't be part of that conversation by nature.They suggest they are not broad appeal or genre isn't open to growth or progression.

Before anything else I think it just would be completely unfair to developers to remove them from the race just because of games category.I mean where do you draw the line?What types of games should be eligible,is there going to be a secret requirement list no one talks about?Well you could say there always has been one.

I want to see a constructive discussion regarding this so I'm interested in your opinions.Everything I've seen of Age of Empires IV looks really great and I'm sure it'll scratch particular itches I have, but I know deep down there is a particular itch for fantasy that will not be satisfied by that game. Does anyone know of any good fantasy army \*real\* time strategy games? All fantasy army and economic games seem to be turn-based these days.

The best example of what I am talking looking for is the Battle for Middle Earth series. Despite this game being incredibly limited in scope to the fantasy written by J.R.R. Tolkien and given flesh by Peter Jackson, it gave me a decent amount of what I am looking for. Economics was pretty limited to building farm plots that either had to be spread out for efficiency or use finite building slots, and all the farms did was "make currency number go bigger". Army management was robust enough, following a traditional "pike>calvary>sword>archer>pike", with some siege engines to spice up base attack. Battle for Middle Earth 2 even broke out all the stops for 2006 and let you play out an entire war correlating individual skirmish matches with a persistent overworld incorporating nearly all of Middle Earth, and also let you create a unique and customizable hero unit to lead your army. 

But this was a game essentially focused on reaping the benefits of being part of the Lord of the Rings franchise. I haven't seen any game since that has matched the vision, nor made an attempt to build upon the concepts in intuitive ways. I want a real-time fantasy RTS with a persistent strategic overworld map, where my army can be devoted to a particular deity for certain bonuses. If I'm playing as a particular race, such as elves, I want to be able to foster friendships with humans and dwarves, or possibly ruin my reputation with all "good" factions and make alliances with goblins. I want my army to be lead by a custom hero of my own design, using a rules-lite RPG as inspiration, such as D&D or Pathfinder. 

TL;DR Why has no game like Battle for Middle Earth II been made since 2006?

Surely other true gamers out there want a game like this. Why are these sorts of games never developed?Lately I managed to get new GPU and as a result I decided to check out few popular games with RT. Cyberpunk is one of them. I could, and at the beginning thought about, writing something about game, it's story, mechanics, gameplay... but technical state of this game after 11 months since release is only thing I will talk about, because anything else feels secondary after what I witnessed. 

Let's start with a fact that I played previous games from CDP Red. They weren't perfect, they had technical issues on release, but there wasn't anything even remotely close to Cyberpunk. I'm also playing this game on PC on max settings, so any of bugs are not the case of "necessary cuts to make this game run on slow hardware".

So far I played Cyberpunk 2077 for ~20 hours and I'm gonna stop at that, simply because there are too many technical issues that simply make this unpleasant experience for me. I hoped it will get better as game progress, but issues are just piling there's more and more of them. I think that basically every system I witnessed so far in game has visible and annoying (and other times gamebreaking) bugs. Things I witnessed so far (in no particular order):

- game has zones that force your character out of vehicle, in some areas these zones actually partially extend on the road so you will simply stop mid ride on road.

- messaging module sometimes will display messages in wrong order, reply to your message will be displayed earlier than message you sent.

- GPS sometimes randomly shows you should go offroad, switch to opposite lane. When road splits but two new roads go parallel then GPS shows route in the middle, between both roads so you need to guess which one you actually need to take.

- NPCs (both cars and characters) often disappear when they go out of your view. Once car that I was standing one disappeared because I stopped looking at it.

- Few missions spawn guards around some buildings, problem is that they will start attacking you even if you just drive nearby on road - like a normal citizen. They also have no idea of knowing you are up to something at that point.

- NPC, especially during cut scenes, will often end animation before animation itself ends and return to neutral position. They will jerk and change animation before previous one ends. They will disappear mid cutscene after they stopped talking with you.

- Interacting with terminals will often lock you and you need to open main menu (press esc) and return to game to fix it.

- changing weapon will sometimes result in V pulling out invisible gun that materializes in our hands after a short moment.

- many quests still include ridiculous bugs. You can still be blown up, fly in the air or drop under map after another car hits your car in one of quests you get early on.

- game doesn't account for many decisions it allows. At some point you can pick to either go somewhere with NPC or let this NPC go alone. If you go with NPC that afterwards, even though you are still next to him, he will message you saying that reconnaissance is finished and you should get there. Well I know it's finished, I was doing it with him.

- subtitles will often stay on screen after conversation is finished and you need to reload game to fix it.

- there are leftover messaging options that don't do anything, because they were ultimately cut from game.  >!One year after release there's still option to message Takemura and ask him out on a date (dinner). This option doesn't do anything, no response. This option is written for female V as in polish version it uses "am" at the end of verb which indicates female V, but is also triggered for male V. This is leftover from Takeura romance that was removed from game.!<

- collisions for NPCs (both cars and characters) are kinda turned off or not working properly, NPCs can go trough each other because otherwise they would block on themselves and crash cars on themselves. I also saw two car partially overlapping (basically half of car was in half of another car).

- physics are terrible. Small objects, uneven surfaces, small crashes can launch your vehicle into the sky

- NPCs will try to jump away from your car if you drive towards them. Problem is sometimes they will jump on the road, in front of your car because somehow game though you are driving towards them.

- sometimes police will start chasing you without reason. Happened twice to me, no idea why, I was driving and then bum 1 star chase. But it doesn't matter anyway, police still can't chase you and if you get out of the car they can't find you unless you will show them yourself on purpose or be unlucky enough that they will spawn too close to you.

- selling items sometimes won't give you correct amount of cash, not sure why but it usually happens if you sell many items. You will get cash only for some of the sold items.

- game is till unstable and can crash without reason. 

- NPC sometimes don't see you even though you are in front of them, other times will spot you across the garage while you are behind boxes.

- sometimes game won't allow you to answer the call, open message, etc. you will have to mash button few times for it to work.

- you can find NPCs t-posing on chairs next to fast food stands. Sometimes they will just stand spawned on chairs too.

- sync on some of the conversations is off, you will have few characters (sometimes including V) talking simultaneously. Looks like another character starts talking too fast while previous one is still finishing his sentence. >!I'm not talking here about Johnny talking over some NPCs, I get that this might be his thing, he just likes to drop his remarks or objections during other NPC talk, but this happens in other situations!<

- sometimes spawned NPCs won't  have heads.

- sometimes quest item won't be spawned after you reload game so you need to load save from previous mission checkpoint or even from before you started this mission.

- most part involving you riding as passenger are janky, look as if car was riding on railroads and not normally. >!You can see it especially well in sequence when you go with Panam to kill guys that betrayed her or when you go into power station with her!<

- and more... 

That's 11 months after game release, after 3 major patches and 10 minor patches. CDP Red still doesn't have any roadmap for fixing this game. CDP Red is already working on DLCs. CDP Red is working on next gen update while base game is still full of bugs, sometimes game breaking ones. When this game was released a common opinion was that CDP Red should delay Cyberpunk for another year. I know patching already released product is more difficult, but at this point I believe that they would need to delay it till end of 2022 to make it stable and fix most annoying and visible bugs. Another 1-2 years if they would actually want to include all cut content. And it's really visible that they cut a lot of content simply because they were in a rush. They were in a such rush that in prerecorded gameplay snippets you can see in menu (if you leave game for a while I believe) you see some of content that was removed. On top of that... damn, is expecting UNUSED conversation options that shouldn't be available in game really such a issue they they weren't able to do it for 11 months? What kind of spaghetti code do they have there?

I'm not even going to criticize this game for all other flaws it has, because for me technical state of this game already makes this game not worth picking up.The Grand Theft Auto The Definitive Edition, looks really good, all things considered. And I'm looking forward to checking it out since It'll  have updated controls, although we have no idea how it feels to play yet. But it made me wonder: How does everyone feel about remasters? 

It seems the between the last generation and this generation we're getting, a great deal of remasters  Some of these games are re-releases, and some are PC exclusives that are coming to console for the first time. Personally, I don't mind it because many of these games I never had the chance to play. I think it's a good idea, because there are many, many of great games that get lost in the deluge of game releases. I also think it's a great way to revisit some of the classics and play them again, or even experience them for the first time. Sure, if you own a decent PC, you can play games from 2 or 3 console generations past but without mods or fan patches, many of those games wouldn't be playable on modern hardware. Remasters take care of a lot of those frustrations. Newer visuals, updated controls and many QOL improvements, like saving anywhere and reworked UI make a better all around experience.While it's possible to be a fan of both at the same time, linear game fans and open world fans seem to have very opposing tastes depending on where they lean from my experience. Linear game fans seem to want their games to be quick-paced and consistent, wanting the game to deliver its "main content" with little "filler", and at most having just a smidge of downtime to breathe after intense action. Open world fans seem to want their games to be vast and lengthy, with a variety of things to do and little things to find in every nook and cranny at their own discretion; open world fans are also much more tolerant of extensive downtime. You're free to correct me on this.

Both primarily linear games and primarily open world games alike attempt to appeal to the "other" audience despite the opposing tastes, though. However, I tend to see quite a bit of opposition when such games try to do so. Red Dead Redemption II for example is an open world game that had rather linear story missions seemingly to appeal to the linear game crowd, but not only did it garner criticism for gelling poorly with the game world, it led to some scrutiny of much of Rockstar Games's output for similarly having linear stories in open worlds. Likewise, Zelda: Skyward Sword is a linear game that had a sky area in which you can freely fly about in order to cater to previous games' (semi)open overworlds, but even among the crowd who otherwise didn't mind the linearity, the sky was seen as an obstacle to get to the parts they actually enjoyed.

I'm never one to throw the baby out with the bathwater, so I have to ask: How can a linear game appeal to open world fans? How can an open world game appeal to linear game fans? Neither certainly can be impossible, so how can either be done?

---

Now, my second question is whether appealing to both linear game fans and open world fans is a good idea in the first place. Like all media that intends in part to make money, most video games need a target audience, and [indecisively appealing to multiple audiences](https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/UncertainAudience) is a real problem with all media. And to that end, trying to appeal to opposing audiences is a difficult proposition at best. So would it be easiest for a game to primarily commit to one side of the spectrum? Or would it be better for the success of a game to try to appeal to both the linear demographic and the open world demographic?

Of course, appealing to the linear crowd and the open world crowd is a spectrum in itself. Could it be that the ideal scenario is somewhere in between "appeal to one crowd exclusively" and "appeal to both crowds equally"? Is the best course of action for a linear game to only contain *some* elements to cater to the open world crowd while an open world game only contains *some* elements to cater to the linear crowd? How much of those "some elements" are needed to successfully appeal to the "other" audience if this is the case?I'll preface this with a little note, when I bought a Switch some of my first statements were  
"I hope they come out with a new Metroid game" followed by "that doesn't suck". I've obviously  got some opinions of my own, and some where I'm interesting in seeing what others who may be fans of the series (or even new to it) feel. The arrowed footnotes are some of the questions to the group at large, as reactions by other friends familiar with the series have been pretty wide-ranging.

It feels like there has been a lot of swirl around "the next Metroid" for quite awhile, including news that a game was coming soon... then wasn't... then was being redeveloped, staff turnover etc etc, so I think that the title "Dread" aptly describes my feelings prior to buying the game as I had real concerns that it would have quality issues or be inconsistent in such. As "Super Metroid" is one of my favorite "classic" games, it had a lot to live up to and frankly some of the intermediary titles fell short of this. 

Prior to release, there was also a lot of supposition as to what it would even look like. Were we looking at another side-scroller like Super Metroid and Samus Returns, or would it be something more akin to Prime? Would it be more like most games that focus on Samus or something akin to Federation Force which really felt like it was more like a weird spinoff.

  
\> Did you feel like Dread felt complete. Did the EMMI's feel well-integrated or bolted on. Did the switch to the "other baddies" partway through make things more interesting, or did it feel inconsistent/confusing?

\> Did the "counter" or "hint" mechanic with bosses add to the game, or break the flow?

In my personal opinion, Dread did a really good job of following the Metroid mechanics, level design and general gameplay. The storyline wasn't spectacular, but it worked well enough. The "counter" mechanic and corresponding cutout scenes with bosses was also fun in some places added to the game, but in others made the concept of "spot the moment" cues a bit frustrating, especially with bosses lacking HP meters so you sometimes just couldn't tell if you were landing damage or not with standard attacks. Maybe it's just that this old gamer isn't as "twitchy" as I used to be though. It definitely felt a bit harder in some places than the predecessors, making wondering if there was a pattern/cue I was missing or if I just suck :-)

\> One of the touted features of Metroid was level design. Did you feel Dread measures up? How would you feel it ranks among previous games?

Level design was generally good. It's pretty much been a staple of the series to follow a "move forward, find item, trace back" mechanic. My biggest complaint here is that some of the non-required items required very convoluted and precise patterns to acquire, while others you could acquire out-of-order but would then be useless (giving the prompt: "An unknown resource has been acquired. You cannot use this item yet." message). This felt like a bit of a disappointment.   


One interesting change from previous games were averted via a slightly more intelligent map system. If you did reveal a weird block you couldn't pass through, but later found the corresponding item, the maybe would re-label it from "unknown" to "super bomb block" etc. I'm not sure if purists would love this but IMHO it can provide some clues if one is stuck on where to go.

\> Did you feel like the weapons and movement were too "been there done that" or is it good to stick with something familar? How about the switch from selectable missiles to more of an "upgrade" system.

In terms of weapons and movement, Dread falls back to a pretty standard array of weapons from the previous games, with the added slide and a temporary super-gun at times. I personally found the change in missile mechanics a bit confusing, and kinda missed the style of SM where there was a bit more distinction and separate ammo sources between them

\> Was there enough variety in enemies? How about the inclusion of certain familar faces while others were absent? Did you find the difficult range was consistent, too hard, or too easy?

The enemies including some familar faces, some new stuff, and a bit of a swap-up partway. Bosses had mostly new faces with a bit of a cameo. The EMMI were the biggest change, and added a new element with a bit of a pace-change in sections where the existed.

\> In terms of artwork/graphics, did you find it measures up to previous titles?

It may be a bit hard to stick with the theme without departing so much as to annoy fans, but I found this pretty middling. It didn't impress nearly so much as the reskinning and depth added to "Samus Returns" did, nor showcase any capability of the Switch the way Prime did for the Gamecube. It certainly wasn't bad, but it wasn't special either, though the "cutout scenes" for certain boss counters were neat.

\> Would you want to see another 2d game? Should they mix the formula up a bit if they do? How about another 3d game or possible a modernization of something like Super Metroid, Prime, etc similar to how "Samus Returns" was done for 3DS? Which do you think would be the best "next move" for Nintendo?

Again, in my opinion, I like the game. I found it fun while also being challenging and not a little frustrating at times. You may not want to play the game around smaller children, not just because some of the bosses might be a bit frightening, but also because they might learn some new words if you're prone to cursing.

I know that some people are really attached to this 2d style of Metroid and were not enamored when GameCube switched that over to a first/third person, but I did feel that it added a notable change in play and that it looked pretty spectular on that particular console, so would have been pretty happy with either style. Since they've done 2d again now I'm still somewhat hoping the next one will be similar to Prime and mix it up a bit again.

That said, I'd totally be up for Nintendo to do something similar to "Samus Returns" and spruce of either Super Metroid, Fusion (which I missed due to not having a GBA) or Prime.

\> Last question, and completely unrelated to the game itself: How would you feel about a video series based or movie based on the franchise?

Obviously we've had a lot of \*bad\* video-game movies in the past, and more recently stuff like Witcher or the DOTA/Castlevania animated series on Netflix which many seemed to like or pseudo (not based on any specific game) game-movies like "Wreck it Ralph".

Would the world be ready for a Metroid series/movie? Would it be better as a series, movie, or just better off not done?I like games... sometimes.... but I'm not a gamer.

My problem is that I don't really like most games. In fact: I don't like most movies, books, tv shows, music, etc. Yes this means I am critical. Probably too critical and it is something I struggle with. I wish I could enjoy more things and be more easily pleased, but unfortunately this is just not the case.

So I struggle with finding new games to play. I have wasted a lot of money buying games I thought I might enjoy but ended up not. Sometimes I DO succeed and really enjoy something, but that is more by chance then anything else.

So I also struggle with actually finding out IF I will enjoy a certain game. I have found the usual venues of figuring that out don't work for me.

Professional reviews? They are often biased or sponsored and don't give an honest insight. But also, like all reviews, it is ultimately by and large just an opinion.

User reviews? They are a little more trustworthy, but the problem there is that they are rarely balanced. If you go to Metacritic scores are either 9-10 or a 0-3. People usually only feel the need to leave a review of they absolutely loved or hated something.

Game recommendations? There are many subs here to ask recommendations. But asking that to random people is pointless in my case. The most popular games will get recommended but a game being popular doesn't mean I will like it.

YouTube lets plays? These are better since they come closest to actually playing the game yourself. But you need a lot of patience for them and you should hope that the person playing doesn't spoil anything.

Demos? This would be the best way: give me a free demo so that I can try the game out first without charge. However publishers rarely make demos anymore. Steam and GOG have a return policy that you can get your money back within an hour, but an hour is often too short and if you actually do get your money back is kind of a gamble.

It is also really sad that I cannot sell the games in my library that I will never play. Back when games were still physical copies I could at least sell off the games I purchased but didn't like.Pretty much every time I read a review of a video game online, I get frustrated. I'm not talking about Steam reviews or other amateur reviews that people write in their free time on niche blogs and video game databases. Those are often not the best, but that's not a problem, since these people are just amateurs in the good sense of the word - "lovers" of what they do. I'm talking about the "professionals". At first, I thought that the problem was just with the video game journalism in my country, but upon comparing the writing with what Western video game journalists produce, I'd say that the level of awful is about comparable.

So let's get to the point. There are two problems that I have with video game (and often music and movie) journalism. The first one is who gets to be a journalist. My impression of video game journalists is that their only qualification often is that they played a lot of video games. And that's it. They seem to have no background in technology, game design or even other cultural areas. Just now I read a review from a writer who is a student and who, in his own words, hates to read. The other problem is a direct result of the first one - what constitutes a review. Nowadays, it's pretty much accepted that it's enough for a reviewer to sum up what you do in a game and how they feel about it. I often read that "the gunplay in the game feels great" or that "the dialogues are weird at times". I mean, describing a game in those terms has zero information value. I may as well just watch a trailer or read the Steam reviews and end up informed about the same or better. "The game is good, but has some flaws," is about as good a review as a whole article on Rock Paper Shotgun.

So, what would a good review look like? In an ideal world, the journalist would know what kind of experience the developers were going for. They would know other games in the genre and could compare how the game is different and why, what it succeeds at and where it fails. They wouldn't just tell me that something looks or feels great, they would provide an insight into why. They would be able to explain some of the trickier mechanics of the game and identify their potential weaknesses, as well as where they work well and why. They would be able to come up with their own ideas of how to improve the game in clear terms, so that developers would be able to actually use them. They would recognize what other games the game at hand draws inspiration from and they could tell if there were references to other games. They would be able to analyze the story, ideas, philosophy and politics of a game and have an intelligent conversation about it. They would take interest in other arts, such as literature, film or music, and they would be able to compare video games to them in a constructively critical fashion. Ideally, they would be at least amateur modders, developers, designers, artists or writers themselves. They would be able to look at the more niche features of a game and look at the game from multiple angles (for example, how an RPG works from the perspective of a powergamer, a roleplayer, the average casual gamer, how a racing game works from the perspective of a simracer or an arcade player etc.).

But maybe I'm too demanding. Maybe most people are just happy to know that they game they were looking for "is good and looks great". I don't know. What do you guys think?I've been watching a few reviews on Lost Ark recently and I've especially noticed the many opinions which exist regarding monetization. 

In Lost Ark, there are numerous currencies, Silver is the main game currency, Gold is the main Auction House currency, Gems are used in the Cash Store, Peons are used to complete trades in the Auction House, alongside gold, then you have Rift Shards, Pirate/Voyage Coins, Shards, Courage Tokens, Silmael Crystals, Carnelians, and well, I'm pretty sure there are more.

But the main focus of controversy are Gems, which can be bought with real money, and how they can be converted to Gold which can then be spent on in-game progress. 

Many players feel this is unfair, that this allows individuals who make a lot of money in real life to progress and beat them in games as well. But in my opinion, that is far from the full story. Because there is a far more valuable currency in life, which also varies a lot between different players, and that currency is time. 

Because the simple fact is that players who don't have a lot of real life currency often have more time to spend playing games. 

While players who have more disposable income often have far more real life commitments than players with less disposable income, and therefore, less time to actually play the game. 

And in either case, neither of the two have anything with actual skill to do. You're not automatically a good player because you spend a lot of time at a game, just the same way you're not automatically a good player just because you spend a lot of money at a game. 

The truth is that if we truly wanted to create an equal and fair game, we would have to limit both, we would have to limit how much money people are allowed to spend on the game, just the same way as we would have to limit how much time people are allowed to spend in the game. 

For instance limiting the number of hours people are allowed to spend in the game and outside outposts to for instance 20 hours each week. So that each player only has a set number of hours they can play and progress within the game. 

That would be how you would truly create an equal playing field, one where most players can compete on an equal footing and the best man would win.Currently playing Divinity Original Sin 2 and I really came to appreciate the easily accessible and extensive respec possibilities.

 In so many (A)RPG or similar genres that don't have respec, I end up using guides for levelling because with games having a lot of choices, it is hard to know what combinations will work well or even how a skill will function. And if your gaming time is limited (like most of us are I assume), you don't want to find yourself with a badly built character dozens of hours into the game (especially from choices done hours earlier when you didn't even know some of the stuff about the game) so guides are what you end up following to avoid this problem.

But using guides kind of also kill the fun of experimenting and establishing a build yourself (a big potential draw of those games). Having an easily accessible and profound respec system (not just respecing X tree but not all the rest) allow you to really experiment by yourself because you know that if it doesn't work, you haven't lost your time with a gimped character. And it also allow more experimenting. While you may try to do one build in a game with no respec (at your own risk that it doesn't work in the end), if you can respec, you will still be able to experiment and create more builds in less time.

Even outside of experimenting by yourself, it just allows for more variety by changing your playstyle every so often (hell even if you follow guides in this case) which can be a good thing in games that are often dozens of hours long or more.

In a single-player game at least, I also don't understand the point of limiting respec to be honest. It only hinders the player and people that don't want to use it can just avoid doing so anyway.With the delay of Overwatch 2 there have been many people saying that this is an issue with the management of the game rather than the developers themselves, and it made me realise that I hear this pretty much anytime a AAA game is delayed or is unsuccessful.

There is likely more of a greater argument for the failure being attributed to developers when it comes to indie games as there are often no investors/management, but **are there any AAA games which you would argue failed as a result of the developers rather than the management/investors?**

I assume the reason why it doesn't happen as often as it does with indie games is because of the sheer number of developers with AAA games. 1 incompetent developer in a team of 100 is 1%, but 1 incompetent developer in a team of 4 is 25%.

To clarify obviously no unsuccessful game is 100% the fault of the developers or 100% the fault of the management, but rather a mixture of both. I just mean which is the most significant factor in the game's failure.I think I've played all the best games and the others simply don't appeal to me.

So my favorite genre of video games is science fantasy, magic and monsters vs technology while my favorite core mechanic is story branching. I have played a lot of story branching games over the years, irrespective of genre. Everything Bioware except Jade Empire and Knights of the Old Republic 2, Dishonored series, Deus Ex Series, Metal gear solid 5: the phantom pain, Assassin's Creed Odyssey, Hades, Fable, the Operative, Alpha Protocol, Telltale games, The Witcher 2 and The Witcher 3, Vampire the Masquerade Bloodlines, Fable the lost chapters, Chrono Trigger, Arcanum and Kingdom Come Deliverance. Mass effect 2 is probably my favorite of the bunch because it's got great voice acting and amazing combat, followed by Skyrim for it's mix of seriousness and goofiness.

But all these games set up such a high standard that when I started playing other games, I felt really weird. Not bored, I was still entertained, but it felt strange to play a linear game. Like, for instance, I downloaded L.A noire the other day and it felt like it dragged on and on. There were very few side activities, it just went from one main quest to the other and while I definitely enjoyed it most of it, I stopped playing some time ago and I don't know why. It wasn't the facial animations, god knows how many times I use doubt, it was just a difference of pacing from the other games I've played. No resting or whatever.

The next game I want to play is Divinity Original Sin 2 but I didn't like Baldur's Gate and the only reason I want to is cause I saw Soviet Womble's video on it.

On to the subject of multiplayer. I have only ever played Warface, Warframe, Fortnite, Pubg, Payday 2, CSGO and Team Fortress 2. The two that I consistently played consistently were Warframe and Tf2. Warframe cause it has a niche story with choices (see a trent?) and tf2 cause of it's cartoon mechanics.

Do you think that by playing the best games, the mediocre games get ruined?I'm playing Persona 5 right now for the first time. This type of game is usually not my cup of tea, but I've listened to plenty of podcasts and other gaming shows saying how great the game is, so I'm giving it a shot. 

I'm about 6 hours in and my main complaint right now is that there is no autosave or an option to manually save at  any point outside of a cutscene / dialogue.

I'm not saying I'm giving up on it by any means, but I don't like that I'm required to section off about 30-40 minutes of playtime in order to save.

That's my opinion, otherwise I really am enjoying the story! I was curious what else should always be in a game.I stopped playing Destiny 2 back in 2018 for a few reasons: firstly, I started to get bored with the game because I couldn't afford the expansions, and secondly, I had to focus more of my time into studying as I was failing a few classes in high school. Recently, a friend of mine convinced me to reinstall the game, so I did, only to be dropped into a story where I don't have a clue what's going on. I don't know how we got to where we are now, nor do I know who a lot of these characters are. I look around and see if there's a way I could play through the old campaign and the old expansions to get me up to speed, only to find that they were, in essence, deleted from the game and put in what's known as the Destiny Content Vault.

To be completely honest, it's up to the mercy of Bungie if we ever see that content again. They may take Red War, Curse of Osiris, Warmind, Forsaken, and other future expansions they 'vaulted' and make them part of a seasonal content shuffle, or we may never see them again, with old YouTube videos, Wiki entries, and Reddit posts being the only proof they existed. There are a few options Bungie could've done or what they can currently do so that these old stories, expansions, destinations, etc. don't get lost forever.

1. Beyond Light and all subsequent expansions should've become Destiny 3. If your options are to either delete massive amounts of content in the old game to make room for the new stuff, it's time to just make a new game. This would've been the optimal solution to this conundrum we currently find ourselves in.
2. Make Red War and all of the other expansions optional downloads in a similar vein to what Call of Duty does. This would be the easiest option to implement and if game space or engine stability is an issue, put a limit on how many expansions you can have installed at one time.
3. Take Red War, Curse of Osiris, Warmind, Forsaken, and Shadowkeep and release them as their own game separate from the current Destiny 2. It would be a Destiny 2: Classic if you will. If WoW: Classic can be a massive hit with players and act as a money printing press for Blizzard, I don't see how a Destiny 2: Classic wouldn't be the same for Bungie.

This game has become VERY unfriendly to new players or returning players like myself. We don't have a clue what's going on, and when they make references to past events, many of us don't have a clue in the world as to what they're talking about. Bungie for all intents and purposes removed the story from a story and lore oriented game.Recently I finished playing Psychonauts and while I loved my experience with the game I couldn't help but to think that the things I really liked about the experience mostly had to do with aspects that are unique or better executed in other mediums; I enjoyed the story, characters, humor, and writing.

I loved the concept behind the game and how every level had a unique theme behind it depending in which character's mind, they took place in.

When analyzing this though I noticed that the gameplay was fine and clever in its use of hiding secrets, collectibles, and upgrades that were directly associated with the story, but I became aware that the true aspect that "elevated" the experience, took place in its story, cutscenes, humor, characters, and overall, narrative.

This made me think of games that I not only like, but that have resonated with a lot of people as well, and are widely regarded by many critics and players alike as incredible titles that appear in many "GOAT" lists.

Games like Red Dead Redemption, Metal Gear Solid, Zelda, God of War, The Last of Us, Final Fantasy, etc...

More often that not you tend to hear about people reminiscing thoroughly about the contents of these games narratives rather than their actual gameplay, some might say it's a thing mostly present with modern games, but with the Grand Theft Auto trilogy releasing next week fully remastered, I've thought that a very big reason as to why that franchise became such a huge hit was mainly because of their titles stories and not necessarily because of their gameplay, ;so much so that most people who I tend to hear; in forums, life, family, etc... Revisit those games attempting to relive a moment in their stories and not so much in their gameplay.

I guess what this comes down to is that I don't really get what the merit of gameplay truly is, if for the most part what we tend to remember & celebrate the most about gaming, really has to do with its cutscenes and narrative, stuff that many have said, and still would say, other mediums do a heck of a lot better than games, even to this day.Whenever I see discussion about older games, I often see people asking if the game “holds up” to today’s standards.  

Certain games, like say, Chrono Trigger or basically all the Mario games, may not have the most updated mechanics and graphics, but they still are extremely playable and enjoyable today, even for a first time player.

Contrasting that, the original Star Fox on SNES pushed the limits at the time, but holds up very poorly for a new player today.  The original Kingdom Hearts was a blast to play when it came out, but it’s painfully clunky by today’s standards (even the remastered version)

Do you think this issue still exists with today’s games?  Are there going to be such drastic innovations in the future that we look back at today’s games and say they don’t hold up?I've been getting into Mafia: Definitive Edition and to my surprise, the city of Lost Heaven cannot at any point in the story be explored outside of strict mission parameters. In other words, the game has no free roam.

This is strange to me because if I recall correctly, the original game did have it. Now it can be argued that if you have an open city world that serves no function except to connect the missions, you might as well get rid of the open world altogether. I *strongly* disagree, and I can sum up why I disagree in four words: **Shadow of the Colossus**.

Without the open world, Shadow of the Colossus is just a series of boss battles/puzzles. But with the open world, Shadow of the Colossus gains a kind of gravitas and quiet, a sense of adventure and place. The game is a truly magical experience, and the emptiness of it is a large part of that. This empty open world is sometimes criticized (for example in Mafia II), but I think Shadow of the Colossus shows us that a huge world with nothing to do can actually add a lot to a game. It's not a *lack* of content. It is negative space that allows the actual content to breathe and gain more meaning.

The city in Mafia: Definitive Edition is very detailed and amazing to look at. It is insane that it is not allowed to fulfill it's true function as the game is designed now: to allow down time in-between missions. I believe it is a mistake to believe an open world only serves a function if it is filled to the brim with side missions and collectibles. The powerful and central role of the open world in Shadow of the Colossus would be shattered if there was more to do than wander and occasionally stumble across a non-vital upgrade in the form of a fruit or a lizard; if there were constant pop-ups and alerts. An open world can also play a vital role in a game simply as an empty space to **be around in**. 

Mafia: Definitive Edition as it stands feels very constricting, very oddly paced, because there is no negative space. Especially because the city and its '30's atmosphere is such a central part of the games appeal, it is bizarre that players are not allowed to depressurize in it, to get to know it in-between story missions, as Tommy presumably knows it, to reflect on the occurences in the story, et cetera.

In an update the game gained a Free Ride mode where you can explore the city at will, and yet it is not the same. Because the Free Ride mode is an actually different mode, it does not fulfill the role of negative space around missions. Instead of you, Tommy from the story, taking a walk or a drive through the city in-between missions, you must disengage from Tommy to enter a new mode, divorced from Tommy's reality and story, where you can walk around in. 

Whereas a properly used empty open world is like a sculpture placed in an large empty space, where the sculpture gains more impact due to the surrounding emptiness, the Free Ride mode is more like placing the sculpture in a cramped broom closet - but don't worry, we have a large empty room right here! I'm sure you do, but the empty room isn't doing the sculpture any favours if they're entirely separated from each other.I had a bit of a discussion with a friend the other day on playing Team Fortress 2 and it generally evolved around the fact that Tf2's still alive while most other multiplayer games from it's first year are long dead, besides CSGO. I found it hard to disagree.

There are many competitive shooters. Fortnite and PUBG are exceedingly popular. They've all got their own reasons for it.  But I can't stand either game and the reason for it ultimately boils down to their game mechanics. Sure, everyone starts off with the same equipment but not the same level of experience. It only takes a couple of shots for most players to go down so anyone inexperienced will not survive long. This is a double edged sword. One edge is that it will encourage players to get as good as possible. This creates the thrill of having to face off against better opponents. But then there's the other edge.

What do you do when the experience gap is too high? Or the other players simply have better equipment and you had the bad luck of having much poorer versions? There's not much you can do other that spray and hope something happens. If you're experienced with thousands of hours of practice then of course you'd like to annihilate novices who can't tell the sky from the gun barrel they're currently holding. And yet if they become frustrated with the game leaving it, without a steady supply of fans (as they will come and go) it will run out of reason to keep going as there'll no one playing anymore except the few veterans who still enjoy the game. In my opinion, Pubg and Fortnite balance this out by just having a lot more players spawn in at once, so there's a greater chance of having in experienced face off against each other which can work well but for me, there's no way for me to know that so I end up getting wrecked every time. 

Now, onto Team Fortress 2. This game is still somewhat popular even though it's what, over a decade old at this point. Now you might be thinking, Updates! but no, there's only 3 developers working at it at a time. Valve's intentions for the game was to make it seamless, it was designed to be a timeless game such that anyone from anytime could jump in and start having fun. Some could say that wish came too true. Valve's characters have amazing voice lines, animations and weaponry. But I think it's the actual hit registration that causes people to stick around.

Getting base ubered nullifies damage, making anyone, even someone known for Stealth such as a Spy, an invincible killing machine. Dispensers and teleporters allow for players to move quickly with ammo filling. I believe that crits are a large part of why people stay. In this game, it doesn't matter how skilled you are, the sheer bonus skills per weaponry allow you to be killed in any number of ways. Firing a rocket at a pyro? Too bad, he can throw it back. Got a whole team ready for killing? That sniper just threw his piss at you, you're now extra vulnerable to damage.

But it's the crit that invites a player most of all. Any random player could be in a tight spot when out of nowhere their weaponry somehow powers up and takes out the enemy in much less effort than before. The sense of elation given by the weapon causes the player to be tempted to try to play again, as they hope for such a result again. I believe it is tf2's unbalance that invites players to come back and play again since the amount of experience does not stop you from getting surprised. 

Balanced games means everyone has even odds but a lot of people don't like that. They prefer to have an advantage. Who doesn't? What do you think is the reason Tf2's lasted so long?I get that everyone holds the original Resident Evil up as "the game that launched the genre" and while I absolutely love the original RE and have played it to completion well over ten times over the years...it's definitely NOT the game that created the survival horror genre. I think Alone in the Dark would get the credit for that truth be told.

But what NOBODY seems to know about is Team Innocent on the PC-FX. Hudson Soft made a full survival horror, tank control style survival horror game for the launch of the PC-FX and beat Capcom to market with that style of game by two years and honestly if you play Team Innocent THEN RE you can see where PERHAPS the team at Capcom got some of their inspiration from.

It just goes to show that a lot of games that are popularly thought to have "created the genre" are really just the first games to POPULARIZE the genre.A bit of a long ramble about some discussions on this sub.

Quite a few posts on this subreddit are framed like the question above or asking what games should always do. I think this is a somewhat bizarre way to discuss games or any other media really. 

The questions are asked in good intent if there are universal "good" design principles that should govern every game as if all games have the same intent and principles when that is obviously not the case. 

The majority of games are trying to keep you engaged on some level throughout, this is the same in most media, be that books, film, or plays. Beyond that they can have wildly different goals and means of keeping you engaged. 

Mad Max Fury Road has little in common with Arrival, but they're excellent films. You wouldn't say Arrival should have a relentless pace driven by spectacle and you wouldn't say Mad Max should focus on being quiet and contemplative so the viewer can think about the questions the film puts foward. 

So why would you say that about games? 

When people say all games should be gameplay focused with sound design, visuals, and narrative being afterthoughts (despite the fact that sound and visuals are gonna have a huge effect on the "feel" of the game), would they say the same about film, should all films should be action first?

 I don't think so. 

So why is this such a common discussion point? 

Shouldn't the game's intent fuel the principles it's going to use to create it's systems and narrative? 

It'd be a little strange to watch The Matrix and say all movies should have that visual style because it worked in The Matrix.

Obviously I should mention the genre caveat, most people are aware that games in different genres are gonna have different design principles and most of the questions I'm talking about are in relation to action or open world games. Even with that games are still gonna have different principles in their respective genres. For example The Matrix and Mad Max are both dystopian action films, but their styles and direction are very different. 

In a similar way Read Dead  Redemption 2 and Breath of the Wild are both open world action games with a large focus on "immersion", but they go about it completely different ways. Read Dead 2 tries to make gameplay feel "realistic" by putting more effort into the animations making them longer to look closer to the actions they are simulating. Breath of the Wild conversely tries to "gamify" almost every system in the game to create a sandbox where the player can expirememt. I'm not gonna discuss the merits of either game but they're both well received even though they have wildly different design principles. 

All that I'd to say, I think games are a fantastic medium to discuss but I wish this subreddit would have less questions about what you could call the "universal principles" and instead focused on how games achieve their desperate goals with an understanding that the principles are necessarily going to be different from game to game.Hey everyone. I was having a discussion with some buddies about MMO's last night: their past, the current state of many of them (not all, just the ones we've had exposure to), and their future. I personally come from a background of having dabbled in many MMOs but only spending considerable amounts of time in WoW. I tried Wildstar, Rift, Aion, ESO, FFXIV, and most recently New World, and am looking forward to playing Lost Ark upon NA release. I'm writing this out to say I'm no stranger to the genre but I do want to be clear I have not been part of the mainstream demographic for MMO for years - the last time I truly dug in big time into one of these was the Cataclysm expansion for WoW.

Some of the points that were brought up that I thought would be interesting to discuss, along with any personal caveats I may have;

1. Lack of originality. For reasons I'll mention below, I couldn't get into FFXIV. I know it is the love-child of MMO players today and to be honest, I am not talking about it with this point. But we agreed that the genre outside of FFXIV has become stale and stiff. New World has some interesting concepts in my opinion but all-in-all is about 1-2 years away development-time wise from being a good game. There's too much missing - one simply cannot take a game that was a solely PvP centric game and turn it into a PvE/PvP hybrid experience in only a year. In our experience, the downfall of many MMO's is to have a few novel, unique gameplay concepts in certain areas that are mixed in with a myriad of issues or other stale, tedious, boring gameplay mechanics that when summed together create a less than ideal experience.

2. Payment model. Maybe a topic for games at large, but we agreed that there is an issue here moving into the future. Subscription based payment methods seem to be the most balanced, when done appropriately. Fuel the continued development of the game in exchange for good and regular content updates - this creates the dilemma that WoW presented recently (as far as I understand) but in the past, it wasn't as much of an issue. Many studios these days develop F2P, MTX driven games-as-a-service (GAAS). We agreed that this model is unsustainable, predatory in some cases - leaning heavily on "whales" who on average consist of as much as (if not more) than 50% of a games revenue. This is not a sound business model but does get more players in the door initially. GAAS seems to lend itself to certain predatory practices if left unchecked.

 An MMO is generally, 99 times out of 100, not a profitable venture in the first year. It takes a lot for one to become truly successful and the vast majority lose a ton of money in the first year. But that lack of profitability in the first year is compounded by MMO's, due to the nature of their complexity to design and play-test, being generally very buggy or exploitable in their early days, which creates a negative feedback loop in terms of their profitability. To this end, should MMO's exist? What does a good MMO of the future look like?

3. Gameplay. This is more of a personal issue than one we had as a group. Tab target combat, to me, is incredibly outdated and boring. It's one of the main reasons why I have a difficult time sticking with an MMO if I've tried one in the last 4-5 years. For all of its flaws, New World at the very least has action combat and has elements of doing it well. Due to technical and networking limitations, tab target combat made more sense in the early days of MMO's. I don't think an MMO necessarily needs this in order to succeed but I do think at least deviating from the standard formula would lead to a more engaging experience. I dropped FFXIV after level 40 or so, to the chagrin of many of those I told. But I just can't get over tab target combat. Lost Ark has some ARPG style combat which I think will be more my speed. Again, this is anecdotal but curious what you all think about MMO and their combat systems.

4. Socialization. Early MMO's had incredible formation of online communities. Early WoW had a large RP community. Early Ultima Online had PK and drop on kill loot which gave every social encounter risk. I know I don't speak for everyone, but I bet I speak for many MMO players when I say the amount of community and socialization (generally positive, sometimes even negative) that I have in a MMO will dictate my desire to continue playing that game. FFXIV has done a decent job of it with social hubs brimming with life, and engagement and overall positive interactions between players, and New World had small (relative) server sizes that allowed for familiarity among players (sometimes).

**TL;DR:** There isn't much of a point to this post other than for anyone with thoughts about what I've written or about the MMO genre in general to share. I'm curious what you all think about the future of MMO's - is it an outdated relic of the past? Will it reform into something else entirely in the future? What is an MMO to you now? Do you want to play an MMO or would you be fine never playing one again?I feel like the new map is great for gaming, except no one ports there games to Mac. When are devs going yo start supporting it? Is the future of gaming laptops going to include mbp? What do you guys think? Apples new integrated gpu architecture has the means to compete head on with the best from nvidia on laptops right now, and better then mobile cpus from intel, all while barely generating heat or power…In the last couple of years, we have seen two very unpopular directions in the industry, from Sony's censorship of Japanese games and the rise of EGS buyout leading to Ubisoft abandoning Steam for good. The former led to the infamous Sony Check as quote by Censored Gaming where Japanese Devs are abandoning the Playstation to release their games on the Switch, namely PQube's recent offerings of Galgun and Omega Labyrinth. While I don't care much about Sony's handling of Japanese Games, we need to talk about Steam's situation that is leading to what I called the "Steam Check"

In today's market, a push for moral marketing as become the standard let it be pro LGBTQ+ or racial equality campaigns. Gone are the days of politically incorrect and sexually charged marketing campaigns designed to pander to the id impulse of the buyer. This did not stop Steam from fully embracing the adult game market as it created a storefront where certain porn games can be bought uncensored and no longer have to put up with either Mangagamer or dlsite.

Unfortunate in today's market, allowing porn on your storefront can be a detractor and Epic took advantage of that by buying the loyalty of devs that build their fandom on Steam of games namely Rocket League, Chivalry, Axium Verge and Darkest Dungeon. They claimed that it is because of money but the reality is more of the fact moral marketing has persuaded them to leave. Porn games do not and never will have a place on EGS' storefront and one factor is Steam allowing porn games on their store front that finalizes their shift of loyalties.

An example of Steam's support of porn games that is leading to it's downfall is the publisher Kagura games where the games would appear in a totally worksafe package. However the reality is all of Kagura Games' titles involve more obscene fetishes such as necrophilia, sexual violence of all types, brainwashing and yet continues to lie about it's content matter by making it "worksafe" to avoid being refused classification. Enokippu is a circle known for such content and has multiple titles published under Kagura Games on Steam

[https://i.redd.it/g9bm415vrfi71.jpg](https://i.redd.it/g9bm415vrfi71.jpg)

If this is proof of Kagura Games dishonesty and a partial reason why we are seeing EGS doing the "Steam Check", then I will not be surprised. Sweeney has said that he will never allow porn games on EGS no matter how profitable it could be and how badly they need the money. That means Steam is the only storefront available for them

**If you don't want to see porn games, just filter it out Gyrobot.**

This is often a commonly accepted response whenever someone complains about the sexual content of Steam. But I will disagree on hiding it as every society's status is from it's downtrodden, it's most grungy and dirty shit that it has to offer. To hide the unwanted items from storefront is to ignore the issue at hand. Adult games on Steam's presence is causing what I call the "Steam Check" to happen, it is telling devs that Steam doesn't give a care about quality so long as the horny audience needs are met.

 EGS continues to buy the AAA titles and indie devs who got their start on Steam off while Steam languishes in declining relevance except to a dedicated group of fanatic who believe Valve can do no wrong. They no longer trust Steam and Epic looks to win by being the moral paragon while Steam is becoming a slum of games that will never see a single cent of EGS' buyout money.   


Either Steam can stop allow porn games on their storefront or they can face the same fate as Sears and other former retail giants who once believed they were too big to failI never ever replay narrative games. I do speedrun a few titles every now and then, but I haven't played a narrative game twice pretty much ever. Horizon Zero Dawn is a major exception. 

I usually dislike openworld games. While the concept of an open world is interesting, the realization is always boring and lacking. 

I'm also exhausted with post apocalypse settings. It seems like all my favorite games are somehow tied to that genre. While it's a nice scenario to to examine, I'm done with it. If an actual apocalypse ever happens, I hope that the first nuke hits me right in the face, I'm tired of seeing broken husks of rusting tanks growing flowers as a powerful metafora. 

I hate crafting mechanics. Some games, like the Last Of Us games get a pass from me, since they integrate the mechanic so well into the narrative. But I still dislike it as a concept.

I hate the whole green-blue-purple you name the color tier list of stuff to loot.

I want my games to be reasonably long, 20 hours at max. 

I prefer games that have a solid  and linear story, I find the open ended way of doing the narrative extremely annoying.  


All that said, for some reason I absolutely love HZD. I never EVER replay a game after I'm done with it. And like I said, 20 hours is usually my cut off point for a game. I Platinumed HZD on my PS4 and then completed it again on my PC once the port got to Steam. That's hundreds of hours of gametime and I never ever do that on narrative games.  

There's just something about this game that draws me in time and time again.

I read a lot of books. I think that the way the game presents its self feels familiar to me. In the genre of Space Opera, like the books by say Alastair Reynolds, Isaac Asimov, Arthur C. Clarke the world is the actual protagonist. I think HZD nails that so goddamn well. The character acting got a lot of hate, and yeah, it's kinda meh. It's not bad but it's not good either. But the point of this whole thing is the world, the history and what happened. I think my love for the story is boosted by my love for books like Silmarillion or the Foundation. 

&#x200B;

But that's not all. Then there's the gameplay. The combat against the robot dinosaurs is super interesting. Hiting the weakpoints with specific ammunition, changing the way the encounter plays out by disabling the weapons of the enemy. Then you have the boring bandit camps a la Ubisoft. They feel nice because there are not that many of them and they all feel like a power trip after fighting massive robot dinosaurs. 

There's just something in HZD that makes me think that it's even more than the sum of its parts. It's one of my favorite games, even when it has so many elements that I hate on paper.For those of you don't know, cp\_steel is a 5 control-point map for TF2, closer to the style of the attack/defend style that is common in the game; you defend a point until it's taken, then you move back to the next one. It's game over once all of them are called, as always the usual. 

The big catch with this map, however, is the fact that you can cap the final 'E' point right from the getgo, albeit with very long cap time. The second catch, however, is that the point looms over a giant death-pit, which most classes can't get over. As you cap the A-D ponts, the attackers gain bigger and bigger advantages: 

* A point opens routes to B and E
* capturing B gives you an additional route to C and strong control over a T-section
* capturing C gives routes towards D, and extends walkways to E enabling anybody to cap point
* capturing D closes a spawn route for defenders, and adds railing to prevent falling

It's played in the Highlander gamemode (9v9 all classes), and some people love it due to the depth and different ways to play. Do you want to go for an AE push? An ABE push? Cap all points? The different strategies of the map make it really dynamic, and teams must prepare for all kinds of different situations depending on the enemies' actions. 

That being said, it is deeply, deeply flawed. Released in 2009, it is part of really outdated game design.

1. it is extremely confusing for new players, as the map basically connects everywhere, with flanks composing and looping around almost the entirety of the map. Even if you were a player with a dozen to a few hundred hours, you can definitely be lost. 
2. It's very claustrophobic, and many classes like Scout and Engineer have little fighting opportunity, with Scout being reserved to take specific ground and cap E, while Engineer mostly puts a sentry down on B. This also means pyro is exponentially stronger too. 
3. Doors open agonizingly slow to let defenders fall back.
4. A, in competitive mode, is a "throwaway point", meaning it's hard to control. 

A few people might ask: "If it's such a flawed and bad gamemode, why don't people play a different map with the same gametype?"

...The problem is that it is the ONLY official map of its' kind. Of the over 100 maps added to the game, that is the only resource that mappers can go off of. Because of this, many user-created maps all have the same pit over point. It's especially hard for people to balance it around  all the classes, while making it easy for new players to learn. (of course, the fact that Valve no longer actively works on the game is a big thing). 

Maybe other games use this "steel-type" formula that I'm not aware of, but I think it's a really cool concept that could go places.Many regular posters here at [r/truegaming](https://www.reddit.com/r/truegaming/) may often wonder how to improve their posts to better improve possible discussions, but have been unable to get the feedback they desire in any form besides a downvote. This monthly post is designed for frequent posters of [r/truegaming](https://www.reddit.com/r/truegaming/) to receive the feedback they'd like in an organized fashion.

If you are seeking feedback for your posts, we recommend linking to your threads and explaining your thought process in posting them. Explaining the reasoning behind how you posted may be key to finding out what you did wrong and what can be improved. We also recommend including what type of discussion you wanted to start within your threads, and what you believe your own strengths/weaknesses are as a discussion author. This way, people can gauge how you see yourself and can give feedback appropriately.

If you would like to give feedback, we emphasize to please be constructive and polite when doing so. This post is designed for posters to learn from their mistakes, and in order to do so, a decently-sized explanation of their mistakes may be needed. Please also consider replying to those who may not have any replies yet, for even the smallest amount of feedback can help discussion authors.Spoiler warning: This post contains major spoilers for some of Mother 3's most important moments, including the final boss fight.

Compared to film, and certainly literature, video games are an incredibly young medium. Because of their relative newness, games have a seemingly greater degree of untapped potential than the aforementioned storytelling avenues in the ways they can present stories and ideas wholly unique from television, movies, and books. However, perhaps the single-most distinctive offering games bring to the storytelling table is the medium’s interactivity, for the way in which the player controls a character and directly interfaces with a game’s world is a level of personal control of which only an interactive medium can offer. Indeed, one can easily imagine and understand that a great deal of, for example, Super Metroid’s success lies largely in the agency and interactivity the game offers to the player. Immersing oneself in the hostile world of Zebes by slowly piecing the layout of the world together with minimal direction and seamlessly embarking on one of the game’s multiple paths to the final boss help firmly align the player’s motives, thoughts, and feelings directly with Samus, the character they are controlling. By the time the credits roll, the player can feel tied to Zebes, Samus, and her mission in a way that’s difficult to imagine accomplishing through film or literature. This is not to say games have a monopoly on connecting people to stories and worlds, for games obviously do not. Rather, games can clearly leverage the advantage of direct control, and the immersion that naturally follows, to show instead of tell, in a much more pure sense of the term, and this “showing” can be used to great effect when the developer has a strong vision, and understanding, of how, and what, they want the player to feel.

Interestingly, a genre that might have historically encountered more hurdles to showing rather than telling is the classic JRPG genre, for that category of games relied much more heavily on traditional writing and dialogue between characters to convey stories in contrast to most any other genre of the 1980s and 90s. Indeed, the gameplay of JRPGs from this era is sometimes criticized for boiling down to “playing the menu” because, if not effectively combatted by the developer, combat systems, the primary gameplay mechanic of JRPGs from the 80s and 90s, could reduce to simply selecting options from a menu and watching predetermined animations of the characters on screen performing whatever action the player selected. An especially notorious offender of this simplistic, and more detached approach, are the mainline Pokémon games going all the way back from today to the first entries on the Game Boy in 1996. Of course, many clever developers have worked around this potential pitfall. Whether one looks at the active-time battle systems of the SNES Final Fantasy entries, or the more simplistic, yet still engaging, solutions of the first two Paper Mario games, there are countless solutions to building more engaging core battles to be found in the genre. Even so, when approaching more traditional JRPGs, one would be forgiven for not expecting major surprises to emerge from the gameplay mechanics. Instead, surprises in that genre more readily manifest themselves in the form of writing and world surprises, or, in other words, surprises that happened to the characters within the story rather than both the character and the player. Ultimately, when a player starts up a traditional JRPG, there are, as with any genre, a set of expectations regarding basic mechanics and ideas that present themselves before reaching the main menu.

However, these preconceived notions of genre tropes and staples can be incredibly valuable when a player encounters a game that effectively plays off one’s assumptions about the genre they are playing. YouTuber Matthewmatosis touches on that point in his video “Meta Microvideos” in which he explores the idea that some games “take a penny” while others “leave a penny.” Fully elaborating on this notion, Matthewmatosis said, “Games are like pennies in the take-a-penny, leave-a-penny tray. Some developers leave a cent behind; whereas others are just grabbing whatever they can. Growing up on restrictive JRPGs like Final Fantasy VII, I had initially assumed that the ‘Roleplay’ in RPG meant that players had to take on the role of a fixed character like Cloud who, despite having dialogue options from time to time, clearly had his own backstory and personality to some degree. In other words, my goal was to think like Cloud… Often, these kinds of choices are surface-level only having the bare minimum acknowledgement before resuming the prescribed route every player will take. Western RPGs were much better in this regard; they might be the first games to leave a penny instead of taking one… It's RPGs like Fallout, or maybe even adventure games like Zork, which deserve credit for pioneering this approach to choice and consequence. That lineage continues through spiritual successors, but, nowadays, these ideas might be best represented by games like Undertale or OneShot. Wherever it happens, we all know that narrative divergences based on a player's actions can be engaging, but my penny analogy isn't really about any single game. I'm saying that these developers left a penny because their games have a positive effect on the entire medium. Without prior knowledge, it's impossible to know whether or not a game will honor decisions before playing it. Once you know that a thoughtless response to dialogue really can lead to drastic consequences, you’re more likely to be cautious next time, even if you’re playing an entirely different game. In other words, anyone who plays a game with choice and consequence ironically has no choice but to assume their decisions will matter in the next game they play, even if those two games are unrelated… Likewise, games which present the illusion of choice and consequence are simply taking pennies. They're riding on the coattails of others because if those other developers didn't go to those extra lengths, then everyone would see through the illusion. We mainly play along because we've been conditioned by those games which punish or reward certain choices, and in so doing, they leave a penny for another game to take.”

Perhaps, this is, similarly, one of the key reasons why Mother 3 is so striking. Mother 3 has been highly, and rightfully, lauded for the themes presented by the razor-sharp writing, story, and world. Additionally, the quirky, memorable, and undeniably endearing cast of characters and enemies, leave a powerfully lasting impression long after the final credits roll. However, Mother 3 rises even higher, in no small part, due to “leaving a penny” in a similar fashion to the choice-based RPGs in which Matthewmatosis referred, but rather than leaving a penny through presenting choices to the player throughout the story, Mother 3, instead, masterfully uses traditional JRPG tropes and mechanics to effectively show, rather than tell, the player key points about the game’s story, world, and characters. In doing so, Mother 3 leaves much more than just a penny.

In Mother 3’s opening three chapters, the player is introduced to Tazmily Village and the quirky inhabitants of this small, seemingly rural, village. The village residents are generally happy living simple lives taking what they need and providing what they can. In fact, everyone in the village seems to get along so well that, near the end of Chapter 1, the player is informed the town has never needed to use the local jail. Furthermore, in the opening three chapters, which sees the player swapping between various characters who remain central to the game’s plot, the local store in Tazmily is less of a store and more of a supplier. If the player needs to pick up items at the store, they simply do just that. There is no currency, and there is no expectation that the player will need to pay back the shopkeeper in any tangible way. The player takes what items they need, and they continue on their way. In that same vein, one of the villagers, Caroline, bakes bread, a valuable early-game healing item, for the player free of charge, provided they bring the few materials necessary to bake the bread. Throughout chapters one through three, the player is also made intimately familiar with the area immediately surrounding Tazmily Village, especially Osohe Castle, an old castle that sits as a relic of a bygone era, directly to the north of the village. After a brief introduction that sees the player take control of Lucas, the main character of the story, as a young boy, the player controls Flint, Lucas’ father, for the entirety of the first chapter. Flint looks to be pulled right out of the Old West. Dressed as a rancher with a cowboy hat prominently placed on his head, and his style fits with most of Tazmily’s generally more rural look and feel. Indeed, the buildings of Tazmily, especially Flint’s home, which comes complete with an old loom and coal stove, look to be pulled directly from the frontier towns of the American West. Furthermore, in keeping with the feel of the shop discussed earlier, there is generally no technology, with the exception of Porky’s mysterious troops, to speak of anywhere on the game’s map in the first three chapters.

After growing extremely familiar with the general layout of the game’s map, and the overall simpler feel the game’s world gives off, the fourth chapter skips ahead three years from where the game began. The player takes control of Lucas and steps out of his home on the southern end of Tazmily Village to find the village transformed with roads that were once dirt now paved and modern buildings of both steel and artificial light in the place of the old wooden buildings that once lined those streets. While time-skips are not unique to Mother 3, having been famously used to profound affect in The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time, the time-skip succeeds, in part, for a similar reason the mechanic worked in Ocarina of Time. Showing the player a radically different version of the map they have grown to understand so deeply remains a remarkably impactful way to show, rather than tell, the player that radical change has occurred in the game’s world, and this fundamental visual shift holds an impact that is uniquely possible through player-interaction. Furthermore, Mother 3’s time-skip recontextualizes Flint’s character model. Flint, a character who initially looked mostly at home in the rural Tazmily Village, now is known as the only man left resisting modernization in Tazmily. In this way, Flint’s lack of graphical change among all the other alterations is striking.

However, Mother 3’s time-skip also accomplishes something much more than a visual overhaul of the game’s world. When the player walks into the store in Tazmily after the town’s modernization, the player is informed the store now requires currency to purchase items, but the added benefit of this new currency means a much larger selection of items will now be available to the player at the local store. Furthermore, Caroline, who was once the neighborly baker helping the player when they needed, now has a burgeoning small business. Instead of offering bread in exchange for the requisite materials, Caroline now only accepts the new currency in exchange for a wider variety of baked goods that offer much greater healing than previously seen by the simple bread in the preceding chapters. In this way, Mother 3 uses standard mechanics of nearly every traditional JRPG, currency and item shops, to not only widen the player’s gameplay options through an array of new items, but, crucially, to drive home to the player the tangible impact of Tazmily’s change. Through the addition of a genre-trope, the player is shown, instead of simply told, that this new modern world is a harsher, more self-interested place than the halcyon village they knew so well.

While Mother 3 has more examples of this brilliant implementation of mechanics to show rather than tell, the final boss fight of the game is the other area worth examining to fully drive this notion home. After searching far and wide for Lucas’ twin brother, Claus, the search concludes with the revelation that Claus is the elusive Masked Man helping Porky, the game’s main antagonist, achieve his goal of destroying the world. After Porky takes the drastic step of entering his Absolutely Safe Capsule, ending the fight by default, the player is left with the final task of stopping the Masked Man, Lucas’ brother, from destroying the world, and the final showdown begins. Stepping back from recounting the fight for a moment, understanding that aligning and synchronizing the player’s motivations with the character they are controlling can be a common hurdle for game designers is important. This was alluded to earlier, but this alignment of motivations can be accomplished in a number of ways, an example of which was briefly discussed with Super Metroid prior. This synchronization is perhaps most vital in games that rely on writing and storytelling, which is, again, common in the JRPG genre, and Mother 3 is no exception here. Prior to beginning the final showdown with Claus, the player may not be as entirely unwilling to fight Claus as Lucas would be, for the player’s motivation is generally, first and foremost, going to be to uncover the optimal strategy to win the battle, ideally in the shortest amount of time. However, rather than dealing a certain amount of damage to defeat the final boss of Mother 3, the optimal, and only, strategy is, instead, to deal no damage at all. The player will quickly discover there is no other way forward, and the player, instead, is to focus on guarding against Claus’ attacks, slowing the “rolling health” system, which is a combat mechanic unique to the Mother series involving health points literally rolling down instead of instantaneously dropping, and healing when necessary. The player’s optimal path, ultimately, lies in tanking damage and healing when necessary to outlast Claus until the fight naturally concludes. In this way, Mother 3’s final fight mechanically discourages the player from actually fighting Claus, and through this, the player’s motivations completely synchronize with the character they are controlling, Lucas. This kind of mechanical discouragement is another striking example of demonstrating a point to the player, by showing that Lucas does not want to fight Claus, rather than merely telling the player the same information.

Ultimately, Mother 3 is a shining example of the “leaving a penny” notion that Matthewmatosis proposed, but rather than leaving a penny in the choice-based way Matthewmatosis discussed, Mother 3, instead, masterfully marries traditional JRPG mechanics and story together to successfully show, rather than tell, the player crucial pieces of the game’s story, world, and characters. Furthermore, through this melding of classic mechanics and story, Mother 3 demonstrates just how uniquely impactful an interactive medium can be to tell a story when a developer has a strong vision, and understanding, of how, and exactly what, they want the player to feel. In this way, and numerous others, Shigesato Itoi and his team deserve immense credit for what they have achieved with Mother 3. I know Mother 3 will stay with me for a long time, and these reasons are just one part of what makes this game so special.

Matthewmatosis' video on games "taking and leaving pennies" (quoted portion is from 21:04 - 24:04): [https://youtu.be/PGv4ixLllWo](https://youtu.be/PGv4ixLllWo)

Edit: Grammar "Retention" - it's like the consequences of a "promise" to the player that "tomorrow will be better", and it will make sense to return to the game. There are two sides to this "promise".

1. The first one is creative. For different games, this "promise" needs to be done in different ways.
2. The second is mechanical. You can just sort out the mechanics from other projects to figure out what will suit your game.

**Raf Koster, the game designer of Ultima Online and Star Wars Galaxies, described the main ways to retain players.**

* A constant increase in the amount of content can give the player both a task within the current session and a long-term goal. In addition, it can be sold, as do large MMORPGs like World of Warcraft and Destiny 2, in which you have to pay for add-ons. The main drawback of this "method" is its obvious complexity — it takes time and money for new content.
* "Investment" in the game world is the purchase of a house, the construction of buildings, and their decoration, which, as it were, "bind" the player. It can be very expensive to create them, and therefore the player will not want to lose the fruit of his labors. Such "investments" work, for example, in survival simulators like Minecraft and Rust. But this technique also requires time and money, and in the same survival genre games, are often arranged — resets, after which everything acquired disappears.
* Social interactions are typical for single-player games, which are usually discussed at the release or in another period of popularity, and for MMO with their guilds and co-op. Community members immediately immerse themselves in joint activity and "get attached" to the game, but at the same time society generates problems like quarrels and toxicity. Besides, according to Koster, guilds often "migrate" from one game to another.
* The gaming economy can attract gamblers who like to increase their wealth. By the way, we have already talked about the economy in games — sometimes it is very similar to the real world, from which it inherits most of the problems. It is very difficult to create a logical, dynamic economic system, as, for example, in EVE Online.

**There are also several methods that do not necessarily need to be used just to attract players who have left the game. Among them, for example, PvP, which is a direct competition of players, which Koster calls "a free source of game depth", and the gameplay depth itself, which requires a competent game design to create. It is thanks to the depth that some games are very popular even many years after their release.**I picked up Hades recently and despite not being a fan of the rogue lite/like genre, I’m actually really enjoying it. Just an amazingly designed game in almost all ways.

One of the main reasons is the combat. It’s fast-paced, exciting, smooth, satisfying, and most of all - it’s actually simple!

I don’t mean simple as in easy. It’s simple as in other than the movement keys, you pretty much are only using one normal attack and one special attack most of the time. You can pick it up really easily and smoothly.

And yet there is still depth to it! Not to mention builds, weapons, playstyles, etc.

This made the combat so fun and fresh as compared to some games where I feel like you have to click and press 20 different things for combat and it ends up being tedious, or the other end of the spectrum where you just click stuff once every 5-10 seconds or something. 

I think this is combat design really worth picking up for isometric games - even RPGs.

Also note that I don’t have an extreme amount of experience with isometric action - just speaking based off games that I have played!

What do you guys think?I played TLOU2 a few months ago and find myself still thinking about the gameplay time to time. 

I think what makes the gameplay so good is the A.I. For the most part, the A.I in this game is quite impressive. They are pretty good at working together to hunt the player down. And it seems like their intelligence also scales with the difficulty as well. I also really like their audio/visual detection ranges. It doesn't feel like its as easy to figure out as most other stealth games. You can still be caught off-guard, and it feels totally justified. I remember once the A.I heard me open the door to hide in the bathroom.

Also I think TLOU2 does scarcity well. If you play on the hardest difficulty, resources are actually scarce. I hate when games with survival mechanics invalidate their own scarcity mechanics. In TLOU2 it doesn't feel like this was the cause. I couldn't just invalidate the challenge of the game by creating suppressors and headshotting every one (MGS3....), because  I never had the resources to do such a thing. Instead everything I crafted had to be used deliberately.Since the stamina bar is very essential to the whole gacha gig, what exactly would happen if they are suddenly removed? Will the games completely break or will they still be functional?

Would it make it so that players will be less inclined to spend money and thus making the games' overall profit plummet? Or will it not necessarily affect them at all?

What could possibly go wrong? And what could possibly go right?We've have genres of games, like arcade racers and skateboarding games that reached a peak in popularity, and then slowly fell off over the years. Yet, one genre that seems to stand the test of time have been shooters. Whether third or first person, it seems shooters have popular since the beginning of gaming, which is crazy to think about as I can't think of a genre that have been this strong in relevance over the years. Even when I think of the whole racing genre and the sports genre, they all feel like they have their ups and down, and while they are still relevant, they just don't seem to hold that same power and significance as shooters. We have had subgenres of shooters, like arena shooters and battle royals that have fallen off, but the genre as a whole is still going very strong. This makes me wonder, will we ever see the genre start to lose this popularity? I know for myself personally, I'm frankly getting sick of shooting games, but considering how well series like Call of Duty and Battlefield are still doing, maybe its just me who is feeling this way. Could it be that shooters just one of those gaming genres that will never decline or die out in popularity, or do you believe that one day we will see the genre as a whole lose this popularity? I've love to hear what you all say about this!This question is for gamers that don't VR, or have never even tried VR. I get the impression that us VR enthusiasts are in a bubble and others don't really know how good VR is today. I need an outside perspective on VR gaming.Hello,

My name is Nima, and as part of my master’s research at McGill University, I am conducting an experiment on sound modeling in video games. We are looking for volunteers to play through different sound-based scenarios, which would allow us to better identify important aspects of sound simulation in games. No previous knowledge or experience in video games is required for participation.

If you are interested in participating or want to know more, you can find the participation form below. All data collections are anonymous, and depending on how many scenarios you prefer to play, it can take any time between 5 to 20 minutes. Should you have any questions or concerns, you can e-mail me at [nima.davari@mail.mcgill.ca](mailto:nima.davari@mail.mcgill.ca)

&#x200B;

Participation Form: [https://surveys.mcgill.ca/ls3/742587?lang=en](https://surveys.mcgill.ca/ls3/742587?lang=en)

&#x200B;

Thank you for your time!

&#x200B;

*The following information is available on the participation form as well.*

&#x200B;

**Purpose of the Study**

We are attempting to create a sound model to use in video games. More specifically, our model tries to produce sound that is perceived as reasonably accurate and natural by the players, while not hurting the performance of other subsystems of the software. We aim to evaluate our model by observing players’ interactions with sound and confirming whether our model provides spatial information of the geometry to the player.

&#x200B;

**Procedures**

The participant is required to download the portable software and play through any number of the three different scenarios (preferably using headphones). The estimated time for each scenario is as follows.

Scenario A: 5 minutes

Scenario B: 3 minutes

Scenario C: 8 minutes

&#x200B;

Each scenario will create an output file that the participant is asked to upload in the corresponding section of this form.

&#x200B;

**Collected Data**

For each scenario, we will track the movement and the orientation of the player character, as well as all relevant inputs and events of the game. The participant can freely open the output files to confirm this.

&#x200B;

**Confidentiality**

* **Identifiable Data:** Participation is completely anonymous, and no identifiable data will be collected.
* **Data Storage:** All research data will be stored electronically on a secure server (McGill’s OneDrive), and will only be accessible by the principal investigator of the study.
* **Data Retention:** The data is intended to be electronically stored for at least 7 years.
* **Dissemination of the Results:** We expect to disseminate the results of this project through master’s thesis, conference presentations, and publications in conference proceedings and journals, including online appendices.

&#x200B;

**Risks and Discomforts**

There are risks involved in all research studies. This study is anticipated to include only minimal risk, with no known harms or discomforts associated with this study beyond those encountered in normal daily life. More specifically, there are no foreseeable harms other than possible fatigue caused by normal everyday computer and headphones usage. No disturbing audio is used in the experiments.

&#x200B;

**Benefits**

This study will provide insight into the effectiveness of such sound modeling techniques, the properties of sound that need greater focus for simulation, and the level of accuracy that players generally require for each property.

&#x200B;

**Voluntary Participation Statement**

Participation in this study is voluntary. You may wish to not play through or provide data for any of the scenarios. If you choose to fully withdraw during the study, all information obtained up until that point will be destroyed. Withdrawal will not be possible after submission since the data are not identifiable. Data collection is expected to end by January 2022.

There is no time limit to complete the experiments, so you can take as many breaks as you wish and return at any time. The data is only collected once you finish this form.

&#x200B;

**Contact**

If you have any questions or desire further information concerning this study, you may contact the principal investigator Nima Davari (a graduate student at McGill University) at [nima.davari@mail.mcgill.ca](mailto:nima.davari@mail.mcgill.ca) or Professor Clark Verbrugge at [clark.verbrugge@mcgill.ca](mailto:clark.verbrugge@mcgill.ca).

If you have any ethical concerns or complaints about your participation in this study, and want to speak with someone not on the research team, please contact the Associate Director, Research Ethics at 514-398-6831 or [lynda.mcneil@mcgill.ca](mailto:lynda.mcneil@mcgill.ca) citing REB file number 21-06-010.Even though I don't like this concept that much, since I like the protagonists of the games I play to be actual characters in the story, I noticed that I've been playing a lot of games with silent protagonists that I neither noticed nor felt bothered by them. So I'm pretty confused about the subject.

For me, these characters can work pretty well when it's a character you build yourself, like how western RPGs let you create your own character, but I think other games that have a defined protagonist, but chose to make them silent, could benefit a lot from turning them into actual characters.

* What do you think about these kind of characters?
* Do they take you out of the experience or make it more immersive?
* What kind of games you think they work or not?
* Is there any memorable silent protagonist you know?

These are some topics that I find interesting to talk about, but there are a lot of other stuff that can be said about this subject, so feel free to tell me your takes.

And this is the definition I'm using to refer to silent protagonists:

>A silent protagonist is a player character who lacks any dialogue for the entire duration of a game, with the possible exception of occasional interjections or short phrases. In some games, especially visual novels, this may extend to protagonists who have dialogue, but no voice acting like all other non-player characters.Video games can't all be translated to board games but can board games always be translated to video games? Are board games inherently better at certain things that video games? What divides board games from video games (aside from the physical/digital) aspect?

**Complexity** is the first thing that comes to mind for me when I think about comparing video games and board games. Video games are complex with underlying systems that alter the game in subtle and complex ways over prolonged periods of time while board games are usually designed for shorter and more 'compact' experiences.

Or at least, that's my surface thought on complexity. But if there is (was) any truth to that it is fading. Board games are becoming increasingly more complex - legacy games are designed to be played over a prolonged period of time. Where a game like Talisman that I played 25 years ago had dice and a few decks to simulate 'complex' game mechanics more modern games like Arkham Horror have dozens of decks and randomized elements to change every bit of the experience.

Let's look at Gloomhaven for an example. It's closer to a P&P (Pencil and Paper) RPG than a board game in many respects but it still falls into the board game category. Best board game of all time according to most 'ranked' lists and the like. Obscenely complex - randomized elements, legacy gameplay, persistent characters. It's insane and it's beloved and they just made a board game out of it. And everyone says the video game is so much better than the board game because it automates so much of the tedium of setting up and managing the game. *So why was Gloomhaven ever a board game in the first place? Or why isn't the board game simpler while the video game version has all the depth? Would Gloomhaven have found success if it had been a video game first or would it have been dismissed as 'just another indie game?'*

**The Social Experience** is the next thing I think about when I think about board games. Sure, some can be played alone (Gloomhaven again comes to mind) but for the most part board games are things you do with your friends around a table. Especially games that are less 'crunchy' where you're putting your creative/funny skills to the test. Apples to Apples isn't a complex game but it's beloved by many and is essentially just an opportunity to try to be clever while showing off how well you know your friends. Of course the game almost always devolves into people trying to be as offensive as possible which spawned other similar games like Words Against Humanity.

But these games have limitations. Sure, these games are fun and social, but you're still restricted by the medium. So what about Jackbox. You load the game onto your TV then everyone uses their phones to interact with it. You play games where you are clever and funny and you do it, most often, in a room full of your friends but nobody has to track cards, there are no restrictions from being a card/board based medium. *Are Jackbox games video games or board games? Something else?*

**Physicality** is also relevant in certain situations. Physically rolling dice, moving pieces around a board. That's nice but, if I'm being honest, the only place it really makes a difference to me is when it crosses over to being a miniature game rather than a board game. Maybe a pedantic distinction but not an incorrect one.

**Summary**

While I'm sure there are other differences these are the ones that come to mind. This all started brewing in my mind when my D&D group couldn't all get together about a month ago and we wound up playing board games instead. Of all the games we played only one of them had a simple and easy to pick up ruleset. The rest had rulebooks that were intimidating and confusing. Not bad - hell, board games today are designed amazingly well - but they aren't simple. The complexity improves the games but in a way that makes me think that a video game (or a hybrid video game like Jackbox) would be better. Why do I want to spend an hour setting up Arkham Horror just to have the game fail spectacularly an hour in. Why should I set up my Game of Thrones board game (with all expansions!) when I'm going to have to do a refresher of the rules every time and teach everyone these in depth mechanics before we even start. Yes, it's fun, but is it worth it?

I looked over my board games and realized that I don't enjoy playing most of them. Not because they're bad but because the hassle of them outweighs the fun. I almost always prioritize board games like Cards Against Humanity and Trial by Trolley because they're faster and easier to set up, but ever since I discovered Jackbox I can honestly say I'd rather play that in a group setting than either of those. It's more enjoyable, there's less need to be crowded tightly around a table (mainly an issue with 6-8+ players), and there's fewer restrictions/clean up.

*What's the distinction between a board game and a video game? Are there specific types of board games that can't work as video games? If complex games can remove tedium by going digital and social games can reduce restrictions by going digital what about games that fall between these two categories?*

tl;dr - Board games feel like they've been splitting into two categories over the years - increasingly complex and/or simple social games. Complex games drown you in tedium that is better mitigated in a digital sense and simple social games can be handled digitally without losing much, if anything. What makes board games different/better than digital alternatives/equivalents?I’ve been gaming since I was 7 years old and recently, it feels like it’s been harder and harder to get into games. Not because I like it any less, but because it seems that negativity in the gaming community is the highest it’s ever been in my experience. 

To better explain what I mean, about a year ago, I began playing Borderlands 3 once the epic exclusivity deal ended. I loved Borderlands 2 and knew I would like 3. I knew people were unhappy with the story of Borderlands 3 so went into it expecting the worst story imaginable. It was definitely bad, but everything else about the game was great in my opinion and it’s my favorite Borderlands game to play. However, every discussion online about the game I’ve ever had or seen is constant criticism of the game (much of it fair) ragging on about how it’s “the cringiest game ever made”, “the worst Borderlands”, “an irredeemable garbage heap that destroyed my love for the franchise” etc. The negative reactions were so plentiful that it even made me start to speculate whether I should enjoy the game or not.

The same thing is starting to happen with Battlefield, another franchise I love. The 2042 beta came out and ever since then, the subreddit is filled with meme after meme picking the game apart. Doomsayers explaining that “the identity of Battlefield is gone”, “Battlefield V was so much better”, “EA has destroyed the franchise, there will never be a game like Battlefield 4 again, let it die”. I’m sitting here still excited for a modern Battlefield despite the overwhelming negative reaction. I understand the criticism just like how I understand the criticism of Borderlands 3. I’ve watched enough YouTube videos to know.

I don’t want to be a blind follower and dismiss everything bad about a game I enjoy, but at the same time, it feels like level headed critiques are the minority and the majority is pushed to the most extreme edge possible to cultivate a reaction. 

It’s fun from time to time to engage in the hatred (like World of Warcraft for example) but when it starts happening constantly to something you like, it hits different. 

I’m not quite sure where I’m going with this, but does anyone else feel the same? I like staying up to date on gaming news and reviews but it makes the discomforting negative reactions surrounding some games to only be more prevalent to me and harm the enjoyment and excitement I have about new releases.I was thinking of this as I was checking reviews for the game on Steam.

To keep this as focused as possible, I'm strictly speaking about the "investigate, collect, conclude" cycle of Phasmophobia: as much as games like Devour feature exploration, collecting and a climax, most of those can be easily traced back to Slender and its more obvious clones, except this time the formula is more refined.

What I want to discuss here is this specific formula, the game's pacing and focus: whether it's a single-player/multi-player match, there's some detection work at hand: you bring your tools in, you wait/provoke the entity into giving signs and from those signs you draw conclusions: sometimes you get a confirmation, other times you get a blank that ends up confirming something else (as of the most recent versions, ghosts interacting with a door for example may or may not leave fingerprints behind, and you can use that to further deduce the ghost type).

So you have this detective rationality as you run what are, basically speaking, inquiries to the ghost AI. And from those inquiries you either draw a conclusion or understand that you need to investigate further with more inquiries, or performing the same ones under different circumstances (another room, alone instead of being accompanied).

And to be fair, this process isn't that unfamiliar to the genre of adventure games. In certain adventure games you also get to engage in this process. One such example would be 2017's Unavowed: you speak to various individuals and gather items and clues in order to piece together a puzzle solution, or the truth behind the area's mysterious events. But when comparing both games... Phasmophobia's matches are much faster than a full adventure game, and multiplayer on top of that. They're supposedly built for replayability based on a generated mystery.

Naturally, even as an early access game, it already generated a lot of buzz, at least enough to warrant what is already being described by some as "Phasmophobia-likes", like Forewarned. This label is, naturally, enough to sound my alarm bells as I'm reminded of the word "soulslike", which is about as descriptive as "metroidvania" and "roguelike". And to be fair, by describing such games as "insertgamehere-likes", it ends up hurting new projects even on a development level, as they become quite limited by the limited perspective of an IP, rather than the actual loop itself which could be utilized in various ways.

I've seen it being best described by a Steam user as a "speed detective" game. This seemed to click, because ultimately that's what both Phasmophobia and Forewarned (for example) are when you tear out their "paranormal investigation" coat of paint: you go in, you gather clues, hope that you do not die during the process, draw conclusions and go out on your merry way with a sense of a job well done. It's like a fast paced adventure game focused primarily on deduction, which reminds me of social deduction board/tabletop games such as Cluedo, Awkward Guests and even The Resistance or Secret Hitler. So it has this board game quality to it too, especially given that it has an auto-generated mystery element to it. In Cluedo and Awkward Guests, it's the killer and the circumstances. In The Resistance and Secret Hitler, the traitors are randomly selected and as one of the "good guys", the mystery lies in trying to deduce who's really on your side, and who's not.

Now back to videogames... is there an already existing genre that fits this "speed detective" gameplay loop? I can certainly see it in adventure games, but usually as part of the bigger narrative, or of a mystery that lasts way longer than a session that can range between 10 to 30 minutes. And if not so, would this hypothetical "speed detective" subgenre warrant its own existence and possibly be explored with more depth (and hopefully budget as well)? I mean... these are indie titles, developed by indie dev teams, and carried mainly by Twitch/Youtube content creators that are always looking for the next big scary thing to entertain their viewers with. There is potential for this formula, already integrated within other genres' context from what I can see, but we may only be able to see it fully developed and with its potential maximized. And you can't really do that with limited manpower, limited budget and limited dev experience.

The concept works in boardgaming and I believe it can work on videogames too, even if requiring a different approach and a bigger concern towards replayability when faced with multiple replays in succession. Most people that play board games usually do so once or twice a week, with each session ranging from half an hour to 2 hours depending on the game. Phasmo players may play multiple sessions in one single day, because matches are fast and videogames solve the problem of having to physically prepare a game space.

What are your thoughts on this?Mafia 3 is a game plagued with issues; glitches, poor AI, repetitive game design, but despite all of this, I think it is something special. The documentary style of storytelling is very effective and the way characters reflect back on old memories like how Father James talks about his time during WWII or how Donovan talks about the sacrifices he made in Vietnam give depth to the characters and help you connect with them, whether they are moral or immoral. 

Another example of this is the ending, I've noticed that despite Sal Marcano being an absolute disgusting piece of shit, Lincoln connects with him at the end. They both suffer from nightmares, they both did what they did for their families (except for the betrayal), Lincoln acknowledges that after the destruction he has caused trying to get to Sal, that he is no better than him, he's destroyed his home of New Bordeaux in the name of revenge, even if he decides to replace Marcano, while he is better, he still falls into the temptation of running prostitution and drug rackets.

The game tries at all times to keep you immersed in this revenge fantasy; the guns are impactful and loud, enemies will groan in pain on the floor after you shoot them, sometimes for minutes if you don't decide to finish them off yourself. Lincoln stabs mobsters like a slasher out of a horror movie, an unstoppable force of nature. But the game also encourages exploring the other side's point of view, the side you've been killing so mercilessly. We see Sal's relationship with his son, Burke's insecurities and fears and Cassandra's inner trauma. All people Lincoln and perhaps the player don't like initially.

I don't really know where I'm going with this, I'm not a great writer but I just think Mafia 3 is something special that shouldn't be overlooked and wanted to share my thoughts.If there's one thing you can say about DayZ that isn't divisive it's that DayZ is divisive.

By simply uttering its name I’ve probably drudged up a pasionate opinion and fond memories. Though to this day it still retains a core and dedicated (fairly niche) following like its daddy Arma before it, its heyday is long, long gone and *The Consensus Most Generally* seems to be that while the early days of DayZ were promising, the development of the standalone and its potential success was ultimately squandered by greedy, slow, and incompetent developers that took everybody’s money (lots of money) and ran.

**My Claim**: DayZ was a spontaneous creation of novel artistic expression - it had a guiding vision grounded in verisimilitude and depth that was only achievable in the context it was created, as a free, user-made modification with a single guiding creative force with a unique and particular vision (see: [auteur](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Auteur)). As a spontaneous creation any attempt to wrestle or control it is *ultimately futile* as its creation was something of a perfect confluence of factors and events rather than a sheer brute force wrangling of will. 

DayZ’s DNA is embedded in every other ‘Battle-Royale-Survival’-type game there is, to varying degrees. Rust, Fortnite, PUBG, Apex Legends, Escape From Tarkov, and Hunt: Showdown are all influenced either directly or indirectly by DayZ and its gameplay loop. DayZ was such an aberration of note that even the two biggest FPS franchises in the industry adapted their own version of a game-mode that really began as an Arma 2 scenario with the goal of streamlining the DayZ experience and making the **loot-shoot-die-repeat** loop much simpler and stripped-down from any mechanical systems that might inconvenience or confuse players.

It’s important to note that DayZ’s history is a part of ArmA’s history and the Arma series is actually the [Operation Flashpoint](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operation_Flashpoint:_Cold_War_Crisis) series, which has for the majority of its existence been very niche, the community relatively small but extremely dedicated with many dedicating thousands of hours throughout the series history, either playing with a clan/unit and taking part in organized recreations of real-world conflict scenarios, or learning to use the built-in [2D Editor](https://community.bistudio.com/wiki/2D_Editor) to build said scenarios. The editor could be manipulated to create *almost* any scenario you could dream up, especially when coupled with some basic scripting knowledge and the series *Skyrim*-level of community content, mods and addons. Arma has always been most significant as a platform first and game second and while each iteration shipped with a full campaign and various missions to play they really were at their best and most enjoyable when playing community-made missions, preferably with an organized group.

Arma is the definition of a *sandbox*, and DayZ as a creation of that sandbox was naturally limited by, well, the box it was created in.

Fans of the series have long put up with its engine’s quirks and definiciences because despite them, the game (or platform) provides a *unique experience* totally unlike any other - there simply is (and especially were) no competitors. For a large-scale, combined-arms milsim there really were very few other engines more capable or suited for that kind of game's needs, especially at the time - vast and seamless terrains with hundreds of AI and/or playable units, relatively complex bullet/penetration physics, and a built-in mission editor which is in fact the origin of DayZ, one of many thousands of user-made scenarios that resulted from repeated tinkering with the editor; and back in those days there was no fancy 3D editor, you used the 2D one *and you liked it* goddamnit.

While series' veterans might forgive or (at least for a time) look past the engine's faults for the unique platform it provided, the sudden and explosive surge of success and popularity DayZ found meant that a brainless horde of sweaty nerds were champing at the bit for DayZ and more DayZ and most importantly *better* DayZ and ill-intentioned competitors wasted no time at all churning out cheap [copycats](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RtKAm3nzg6I) to be riddled with microtransactions and lootboxes, looking to ride the hype-train all the way into the ground and grave. Bohemia Interactive as a company - a profit-seeking entity - can’t really be faulted for purchasing the IP from its creator and monetizing it because **that’s really the only decision a profit-seeking entity could have made in that situation**.

DayZ’s success was so sudden and so global that to ignore its potential as a money printer (*haha dayz go bRrRrRrRrRrRrRrRrRrRrRr*) would just be *dumb*, and certainly even those with the most negative opinion of DayZ's development will concede that - where issues arise is BI’s subsequent handling of development and resources, but my main point is that you can't fault a lion for eating a gazelle because it's just what the lion *does*; so you can't get mad at BI for pouncing on and trying to cash-in on the kind of *craze* that was DayZ - the kind of craze that happens only so rarely, and one that conveniently fell right in their lap like a crippled baby gazelle.

Despite rocket's intended vision of DayZ, like any piece of truly great *art* the magic comes from the engagement of **The Other** with it, even if they take away something the artist might not have intended. DayZ has thus always and inherently had a fundamental identity crisis despite having a very clear development vision, and rocket's desire to create a brutally punishing ‘anti-game’ was not *exactly* what 1 000 000+ just-boot-new-Arma-recruits were necessarily looking for but since DayZ burst onto and for a moment eclipsed the entire gaming scene like a worldwide viral infection and had people who didn’t even play PC games talking about it, it truly was an aberration of *spontaneous beauty* that only occurs so infrequently and everybody played it because everybody else played it and if you weren’t playing it you just had to play it.

But beyond the shallow hype there was *depth* and a genuine sense of risk and reward - because DayZ was intentional in its avoidance of common game design tropes and certain standards of accessibility (and could explore those things as a mod) these qualities made it a novelty in a broader industry that found itself moving towards the 'Games as a Service' model of ensuring engagement and all the cheap tricks that came with that - DayZ was compelling without all the gamification and manipulation and that's partly why it blew up - it was a spark of organic and flawed beauty in a sea of artificiality and copies of copies.

Fortunately BI had a new and rabid fanbase. Unfortunately BI had a new and rabid fanbase, one asking for an aging engine tailored specifically to fit the needs of a combined-arms military simulation to now take into consideration the needs of a persistent open-world zombie-survival sandbox; things like fluid melee combat, more enterable buildings, and robust inventory and crafting systems - systems the game all lacked totally and fundamentally, some of which would require a total rewrite of the base code - but that didn’t matter really because millions of people were already ready to part with their money on a promise to play the ‘official’ ‘standalone’ ‘experience’, and to wait too long when hype is so obviously parabolic and volatile is to risk your golden-goose and millions and millions of its golden eggs. BI was in a classic double-bind - release their version of the standalone too soon and the state you release it in might push people away - too late and you risk losing hype or excitement totally and give your competitors a chance to capitalize on a trend that, like all trends, has a finite life-cycle.

DayZ was, as a mod, a piece of genuine digital art - but what happens when you commodify, manufacture and monetize ‘genuine’ art? Its soul, its essence, its heart, *whatever* you want to call it evaporates and dissolves and  some “thing” that made “it” what “it” was is replaced by contrivance.

People will wax poetic about their thousands of hours spent playing the mod and just how unspeakably "fun" it was but if you really take off the high-powered rose-tinted nostalgia-goggles you would remember 95% of the buildings were unenterable, melee was basically non-existent except for an axe *you had to reload*, zombies were unbearably glitchy and phased through walls and doors, animations, movement and inventory management were awful, server desync, hacking, duping, admin abuse and using Alt-F4 to 'combat-log' were rampant and the most dangerous threat in all of Chernarus was not the zombies or the chance of starvation or dehydration or even other players - it was the goddamn doors and ladders.

The *real* **magic** of DayZ was that point in time in the spring and summer of 2012 when it was fresh and new and novel and unlike anything else that existed then and there and before it - when you and millions of other players were discovering the game while simultaneously shaping the way it was played, *especially* considering DayZ was a sandbox in the truest sense - it became partly what the community made it.

Playstyles were scrutinized and questions of (a)morality were raised about survival, banditry and the necessity of ‘killing on sight’ (or KOS-ing) became a central and driving question in the community. Like I said, while rocket’s vision of DayZ was one thing, what it manifested as a piece of digital art to each person playing it was something entirely different, and certain people enjoyed certain aspects of the experience more than others, whether that be finding loot, PvP gameplay, base-building and raiding, roleplaying or general survival. 

While the threat of betrayal or potential of instadeath from an indistinguishable pixel in the bushes sniping you from over a kilometre away was a central and defining feature of DayZ, about half the community were inclined towards a faster-paced game of quickly looting mil-spec gear and beelining for specific PvP hotspots to engage in a bloodbath asap while the other half enjoyed a more 'relaxed' hermit-like existence of scavenging and actively *avoiding* conflict. Of course it was the synergy of these two distinct and disparate playstyles that really made DayZ what it was - when the two collided they could produce unique moments of human interaction that went beyond your typical first-person shooter and those are the moments everybody who has played DayZ will remember.

Unlike most MMO(-lite)’s where your progress is *specifically engineered* to be constant, persistent and drip-fed in a way that is crafted to manipulate your monkey-brain into wanting to play more and more, DayZ made it a point that loot and thus progress was (relatively) hard to come by and supremely easy to lose, and this was precisely why the game was so engrossing - because the risk was high so too was the reward. As much as it sucked to lose all of your stuff in an instant, the paranoia, tension, and anxiety of that ever-present possibility was what made DayZ what it was. For all the frustration of every 'You Are Dead' screen that came without warning there were equal and greater moments of pure joy and excitement to be found in every subsequent loop of acquiring loot, struggling to survive, and getting progressively better at it.

The juxtaposition between the relative 'lows' of travelling, looting, and taking care of your basic survival needs vs. the adrenaline-pumping highs of merely encountering another player, even from a distance, made each potential interaction and encounter unique and even if the result was generally combat it didn't **have** to be and that was the beauty of DayZ - everybody was on the same team but there also were no teams and then even if there were you wouldn't really be able to trust them anyway - Welcome to DayZ. Even today most DayZ-likes avoid this element of its design and instead seem more interested in creating a tight and competitive PvP shooter, but that's only a small part of what DayZ was.

For a lot of people DayZ was really mostly about that moment of all-encompassing popularity than it was the actual fundamentals of the game itself, and there were other games (or even Arma 2 scenarios) that people would gradually migrate to - Epoch, Overwatch, Overpoch, Origins, Wasteland, Life, or most famously (*PLAYERUNKNOWN’s*) Battle Royale. DayZ’s moment was over but that’s the very nature of moments - they are transient. 

The ‘standalone’ DayZ, as it were, was always destined to be something the mod was not, including adored. Just as explosive and sudden as its success so too was its eventual relegation to little more than the butt of the joke and the target of mockery and derision for its glacially slow development, lack of features compared to the mod, and no short number of missteps and mismanagement by Bohemia Interactive. Livonia probably should have been free as it would have been an easy way to build some goodwill but I guess goodwill doesn't pay bills, huh BI? Kind of a bummer for a company that otherwise has a quite decent DLC and monetization strategies in an industry (and genre) plagued by lootboxes, microtransactions, and neon-pink-leopard-spotted weapon skins; I think the fact that BI didn't turn DayZ into that shambling husk of its former self is commendable at the very least - it seems they really have stuck to rocket's initial guiding vision of DayZ as a slow(er)-paced survival game punctuated by moments of panic and tension.

Revisiting and playing the standalone in 2021 I see most of the mod's most glaring issues addressed and as somebody who has played DayZ for only a handful of hours compared to the 1000+ or so I've spent with the Arma franchise over its lifetime (and those are rookie numbers in both communities) it makes me extremely excited for Arma's future, especially given the improvements they've made in the areas of animations and object/character/environment interaction, including the feeling of character control and movement which has always been robotic and stiff, inventory/gear management, environmental and ambient audio design and general engine performance - things fans of the series have been dying to see implemented and improved for years.

Setting up and tending to a fire to fend off hypothermia for 10-15 minute intervals on a first-person-locked Namalsk server is a surprisingly enjoyable experience, certainly on a whole separate level in comparison to the mod and the kind of polish *you'd expect* from a mod turned game - it only took about a decade to get there. 

Better late than never I guess.

Is it perfect or even close to it? No, not at all, but perfection is overrated and novelty is far more interesting - zombies still sometimes clip through the environment and ladders still might have some residual homicidal tendencies, though to nowhere near the same degree of frequency as the mod. Still, underneath all its faults is that glowing ember of novelty that made DayZ something special, even if it's not burning quite so bright as it once did.

DayZ was doomed from the beginning, destined to fail spectacularly because it was more than just a mod for a game, it was a brief moment in time and space that can't be revisited or grasped despite both the game and mod still existing - it was an enraptured exploration of an unknown world viewed through the portal of a screen in a dimly lit room and nothing to do with the next 12-48 hours but play until deep vein thrombosis became a real possibility - *that* was DayZ and that's why there was nothing the developers (or any developers) could do to ever satisfy the expectations of what really only existed as an ideal - *The Ultimate ~~Zombie~~ Game*. DayZ was, or became something else entirely in the minds of those who adored it than what it actually existed as in reality, and the fond and gushing nostalgia with which the mod is generally viewed is proof. 

One thing I’ve learned in both life and in DayZ is that other people are completely insufferable but so too is being completely alone. Other people often at least make life interesting and surprising even when they also make it worse, and as long as you can respawn - as long as it’s all a dream, whatever happens, everything will be okay again when you wake up.

Back to the coast to begin anew.

With all that said, g*mers that spent money (and sometimes not even) on a video game are some of the whiniest and entitled man- (and often literal) children that celebrate drowning in a glass of water and I feel sorry that kind of misplaced and impotent rage was directed at some guy who ultimately just made a custom scenario for one of his favourite games and as as a consequence was thrust into the role of lead dev on a multi-million dollar (and doomed to fail) project. It's easy to sit there and say you'd gladly endure relentless vitriol directed anywhere you have a presence online for a few million dollars but I bet it's something else entirely to actually live it.

Don’t get me wrong I do love a good mob - they’re excellent tools for "negotiating" with the ruling class - but damn are some of the smaller ones not *particularly* awful. 

Remember nerds, *it's only game, [why you heff to be mad](https://youtu.be/xzpndHtdl9A)?*

DayZ is dead, buried, and never to reanimate not because it's a poorly designed mutant of a game taken out back and shot in the head by lazy or incompetent developers, but because it's simply not the summer of 2012 anymore, time only knows its straight and unrelenting march forward, and if that doesn't make you mad, sad, scared and confused all at once then are you really even alive at all? 

**TL;DR**: Put some damn respect on DayZ's name because it deserves it.

I’ll send us off with a video that some of you might find nostalgic.

# 🎬[The Days Ahead - Welcome to New Charnarus by CHKilroy - ](https://youtu.be/KRpPIyJDSEQ) - April 10, 2012🎬I'm going through the game again and I distinctly remember that people were incredibly bothered by this scene when the game first came out. The scene of Abby having sex with Owen is pretty constantly used in anti-TLOU Part II video essays on YouTube and there are cringe compilations of streamers getting incredibly upset by the scene and talking about how awful and "cringe" it was. 

So what exactly is the issue with it? At worst, I thought it was predictable but it came across like a pretty standard sex scene between two characters that have history and the tension in how differently they wanted to live turned into a sexual tension. It never really struck me as that big of a deal or even endemic to some broader writing issue that I know people had with the game.I've been fortunate to have not been involved in a overly toxic game community. Oh sure I've heard about them: Dead by Daylight, COD, LOL, Overwatch... etc. I thought I'd throw the question out there to others. Can a game genre type naturally cater to a toxic community? Does anyone see a pattern?

Seeing: Competitve, youth, insecurity and a general lack of empathy pop up frequently.The Dreamcast's failure has been attributed to a lot of things. A lack of a DVD player like the PS2, negative momentum from the Sega Saturn, etc. 

One thing I don't see mentioned however is that the quick death of the Dreamcast seems to match the decline in arcade revenue seen in the graph below:
https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/vgsales/images/d/d5/US_Inflation-Adjusted_Revenues.png"

I was never a Sega kid (more a PC gamer), but what I hear from people who were around in those days (like YouTube channel SegaLordX), Sega was known for two things: sports games and arcade ports.

Unlike Nintendo, Sega was a big arcade game developer and ported many of those games to their home consoles, such as the Genesis, Saturn and Dreamcast.

Before Sonic, the Genesis was the console where you could play accurate ports of arcade games for in the home. NBA Jam, Altered Beast, Mortal Kombat, Golden Axe, etc.

The Saturn had Virtua Fighter 2, Daytona USA, Sega Rally Championship and Virtua Cop among it's 10 best selling games. All arcade ports.

The Dreamcast like-wise featured many arcade ports: Sega Rally Championship 2, Virtua Fighter 3, Power Stone, Soulcalibur, Crazy Taxi, Sega Bass Fishing, etc.

Here's why I think Sega's arcade roots helped lead to the early demise of the Dreamcast:

1. Arcade and home console hardware was becoming too similar. In the early 90s arcade games were the graphical powerhouses. If an arcade port was made that looked close enough to the real deal, then that was an achievement and something worth getting. By 2000, most games started to look like arcade-quality.

2. Arcade games are designed for short bursts, but aren't really compatible with slower, more story-focused games. Like the RPGs and action-adventure games that had taken the N64 and PS1 by storm. Sega was always a very RPG-starved company. You were better off on the SNES or later the PS1. When those games became massive in the 16-bit, 32-bit era arcade-focused Sega was left behind and could only try and catch up to now established franchises like Final Fantasy or Zelda.

Had it had a DVD player or a more popular previous console, then the Dreamcast might have had more time to move away from its arcade roots. But without these, there's wasn't enough time to pivot.

What do you think of this theory?I just replayed Super Metroid being fresh off of Dread, and despite what many people say, I don't think the mechanics of exploration and discovery is designed as well as it could be. I'm aware of David Jaffe's recent criticisms. And while I don't think the specific example he used is a great one, I don't entirely disagree with his sentiments. 

Just to note, I'm going to be talking about Super Metroid specifically, as it's still being touted as the best in the series. 

When it comes to designing video games in general, you have to think about how the playable character is going to interact with the world. It doesn't have to be realistic, but it does have to be consistent, and there should be rules about how those interactions work. 

The main issue with SM, is that when it comes to discovering new passageways, the only rule is that there are no rules. Visually, there's no indications of what can be broken (with very rare exceptions). Now, if you are someone who grew up mainly on Nintendo games, (or even non-Nintendo games), you have been conditioned to identify things that can be destroyed. If there's a crack in a wall, you know to try blowing it up. If something has a off-color hue compared to its surroundings, you try blowing it up. You see a flimsy structure that's about to topple over, you try blowing it up...you get the idea. 

Metroid decides to do away with this philosophy and decides that any wall or surface can be destructible, even if there's no visual indication. Normally, this is bad enough, but to compound the issue, you have multiple weapon types. So it's not enough to just shoot at everything. You sometimes need to use bombs to reveal a passage. This results in an incredible amount of trial and error, which really doesn't add anything of value to the game. 

Very early on in SM, I was confined to just a handful of rooms. Couldn't find a way to progress. I shot and bombed what I thought was everything, but still no solution presented itself. So I resorted to a video guide to see what I could possibly be missing. And lo and behold, the answer was the one tile I didn't hit. It was a tile in an elevator room that needed to be shot with a super missile. 

Pardon this rant, but not once in any metroidvania game I've ever played, has a transport room contain a hidden passageway. To me they're like a save room. A room that provides one purpose and nothing more. For instance, you wouldn't expect to enter a save room and be locked into a boss fight. When it comes to video games, there are certain conventions you just come to expect. And if those conventions are broken, there needs to be a hint of some kind to let you know that you should be thinking outside the box. This elevator room was surrounded with a metal wall. From what I can recall, the only blocks you destroyed were made of rock-like materials. Why would I suddenly think that I should be able to shoot through a solid metal wall? In any other video game, a solid metal wall means you're not getting through. 

Obviously this isn't an isolated incident. The main system of progression in this game involves finding the destructible walls. And I suppose in an effort to make the task less daunting, they supply you with the x-ray scope so that you can locate these passages more easily. But I ask, why? Why not just throw a crack on a block, or discolor it? Why make trial and error a part of the core gameplay? Just imagine if this mechanic was used in something like Zelda. Say a dungeon had no doors. Instead you had to swing your sword at every surface until a wall crumbled? You could maybe make an argument for uncovering secrets this way. But mainline progression should never be locked behind trial and error. And that is what Metroid's design philosophy seems to be at its core. And dare I say, it's an old relic of the time when developers needed to pad their games so that they couldn't be completed in a single rental. Remove this mechanic and you would be left with even a shorter game. 

Of course, if your argument is that trial and error is fun, then I have no argument. The only thing I could say is that I believe the series would be more enjoyable without relying on it so heavily.If you've played Red Dead Redemption 2, and you're even the slightest film fan, you are probably like many in thinking Agent Milton, or rather the likeness of Agent Milton, is very familiar. It's Pete Postlethwait.

 Roland Tembo from Jurassic Park: The Lost World, Kobayashi from The Usual Suspects.

Make no mistake, it's definitely his face. Look all over the interwebz and there's dozens of threads across many forums making note of this fact.

Thing is, Rockstar have never come out and said they used the late actors face as the model for the character. Which makes me wonder whether they had or had not done it with the consent of the mans family, or whoever inhereted the mans estate. But then, did they even need to? Is anyones likeness up for grabs upon death, free to be recreated and represented in digital form? To watch, be played as or gunned down?

How do you feel about this?**Warning:** ***As I’m especially looking for experiences arachnophobes have had with spiders in games, please only keep reading if your phobia doesn’t get triggered by reading/writing about spiders.***

**Before I start:** 

While I think it’s an interesting and important question that needs to be answered in the future, I don’t want to start the discussion on whether game devs should consider people suffering from arachnophobia when adding spiders to their games as it would miss the point of what I’m trying to achieve with this post.

**The question is:** 

What are your experiences with spiders in games and I would be especially interested in ***positive*** experiences you may have had, meaning spiders that didn’t trigger your phobia as much or even at all. You can of course also tell me about especially negative experiences you’ve had. What’s important to me is that you try to explain what exactly made the experience especially positive or negative if you can (Was it the aesthetics? Did the narrative play any role? Did it have something to do with the mechanics?). 

Just share your thoughts, as it would be really interesting!Hi,

Gameplay often need conflict in order to set up challenges between player and the AI and/or competition between 2 players .

War, strategy , board games, are prime exemple of such systems. 

As such, if there is a single player mode, the player often needs/expects to be in the shoes of the "good side", and face the enemy, thus the bad guys.

If a video game portrays a modern or even current conflict you end up in historical dead ends or conundrum because without historical hindsight (ie time for historians to review history and make sound analysis less influenced by bias) it is hard to be truthful to a historical moment/era/conflict....

(I also read about the controversy with the game on the fallujah massacre by us army)

Should video games (which often need to simplify things in order to shoehorn them into gameplay) avoid dealing with very modern or current conflict then ? (I haven't even talked about the issue of being respectful to victims of such conflict who are...still alive )

For concrete exemple, I am developing a video game set during the war in Syria and Iraq.

- it's a 2 player game (board game like, strategy game). Either player vs. Computer, or player vs. Player 
- I had to create broad "teams" with the geopolitical actors in order to have team A and team B 
- as such,  iran,syria,hezbollah,russia, Iraq, .are on team A
- and usa, Syrian rebels, kurds, Israel, nato, al qaeda , Islamic state....are on team B
- I pondered a lot about how to incorporate Islamic State and AL qaeda into the mix. It's a very broad simplification to put them in team B with the usa...

(I am not putting any link to my game so it does not break subs rules)


Overall,  what are your guys opinion on video games and tackling current conflicts?

Thank you so much for the discussion,I've made a thread about this before ([https://www.reddit.com/r/truegaming/comments/l74on5/mechanics\_to\_modernize\_the\_retro\_jrpg/](https://www.reddit.com/r/truegaming/comments/l74on5/mechanics_to_modernize_the_retro_jrpg/)) and got some interesting responses about having interesting decisions inside of JRPGs.

The general consensus of the discussion is that the traditional JRPGs lack depth because most fights are filler, and most of the difficulty comes from a war of attrition where you simply trade damage with an opponent and consume finite resources until one side drops. When I stopped to think about this, I realized that the issues with the standard JRPG go deeper than needing to have more novel, difficult fights, and it ultimately boils down to the decision making itself.

If the standard game loop for a JRPG battle is to take turns attacking each other, and the interesting decisions a player makes happens on their turn (presumably with an enemy just having had a turn, and the enemy getting another turn after the player selects their options,) then the player can either do something in response to what the enemy has done, or they can take initiative and watch how the enemy responds (or both.)

In traditional JRPGs, this is pretty simple. Cast protective spells or defend if an enemy is about to use a strong attack, heal after a strong attack, and/or use an ability which the enemy is weak to. Unfortunately, these decisions just aren't that difficult. Each game state (enemy charging attack, low health, etc.) can be mapped to a unique dominant strategy. Or, the enemy doesn't telegraph their attacks at all and the player's strategy is to react to the enemy after the fact. Either way you end up with simple if-then decisions that aren't really decisions at all. In order to increase the number of attractive strategies, more variables must be introduced. Add too many variables (such as player position or status effects) and you've crossed the line into strategy RPG or card battle type mechanics.

It feels like I'm coming dangerously close to being able to offer some kind of formal explanation for why a JRPG can't have strategy without transforming it into something that's no longer a JRPG, but I don't want to settle for that. It sounds too reductionist and closed-minded, and damn it, I **want** to see a strategy-heavy RPG.

The closest answer I can come up with in regards to what could make a JRPG good is some system that allows for multiple actions each to act as partial solutions to whatever problem they've encountered. The conflict must be multi-dimensional, and different choices must have different trade-offs which make it unclear what the best option is. Perhaps the decisions each have drawbacks, or accomplish different things. But if all you're trying to do is make a health bar go down, you don't have enough dimensions for this to happen.(Disclaimer: huge wall of text, and by video games as time capsules I don't mean how most games with savefiles keep your savegame right before you stopped playing the game, just to come back 10-25 years later and see it intact. Although that's a perfectly fine time capsule, it's not the type that I want to discuss here)

&#x200B;

So a few months ago I got a ROM of the arcade racing game **Metropolis Street Racer**, released in 2000 for the Sega Dreamcast. Since I don't have access to a CRT TV, I'm using an emulator with a widescreen hack for the game and an increased native resolution scaler to try to get rid the anachronism that would feel playing the game without plugging my system into the screen it was supposed to go into.

&#x200B;

This game is considered as either the predecessor to or the first game in the Project Gotham Racing franchise, since the following games kept the same formula: production cars racing in street courses that originate from a section of a real life city modelled for the game, with a driving style-based system called "Kudos" as the game's currency. The games, although they don't show it explicitly, are open world at their core, so in order to unlock the free roam layouts of the city areas in MSR and the first PGR you have to beat the game (hence why I'm alternating between a savegame just to drive around the cities and a regular save for the proper career mode).

&#x200B;

What's been striking me about this game is how accurately represents the late 90s and early 2000s, the time when the game came out. The car rooster mainly consists of then new coupes and roadsters from a wide variety of manufacturers: Fiat, Opel, MG, Mitsubishi, Ford, Peugeot... These types of cars were very popular when this game was released, manufacturers eventually switched their focus for aspirational vehicles to SUVs and of all the cars that are in the game only a few (Ford Mustang, Mazda MX-5, Renault Spider...) are still being made or have a successor in production.

&#x200B;

Then we get into the cities, easily the most impressive part of the game. Each of the three cities (San Francisco, London and Tokyo) are divided in 3 areas that, even though they aren't particularly large, have been recreated with an outstanding level of accuracy. They appear to be 1/1 scale recreations that fully represent the architecture and layouts of their real life counter parts: you get European roundabouts, the iconic San Francisco hills, tram rails, busy Japanese mergers, moving Japanese trains, buildings that aren't generic assets at all and pretty much everything you'd expect from a big city except pedestrians. But the devil is in the details, and oh boy does it have many...

&#x200B;

Before I start commenting on the details, I want to mention a feature that's included in this game and isn't featured in the games that followed. The game is synced to the internal console clock, so every time you boot the game it asks you the timezone you live in. This is linked to a day night cycle that make the locations even more impressive. For example, if you live in Manchester and play the game at 9 AM, the London courses will be in the morning, while in Tokyo it will be the evening and in San Francisco it will be late at night. This feature highlights how the businesses and advertisements light up at night and turn off their lights when the sun rises. And these businesses and ads aren't all parodies of real life counterparts in the vein of GTA games. Here I would like to differentiate between 3 types of  businesses and ads:

&#x200B;

100% perfect recreations: these include some commercial brands they actually licensed for the game such as McDonalds, Virgin, Pizza Hut or Fujifilm along brands and symbols that belong to public administrations such as the London Underground or the BART (Bay Area Rapid Transit)

&#x200B;

Slightly different takes on real life brands: here they try to get away from licensing both commercial and government related brands such as Levi's (Elvis), Converse (Convert), Burger King (Burgers R Us), and the British lottery logo

&#x200B;

Generic shop textures used for the small lesser known shops and ads that aren't real but are actually easter eggs that relate to real life stuff such as the videogame Fur Fighters (also developed by the team behind this game). This type is the least common, which is rather impressive.

&#x200B;

I especially like how they went through recreating every ad in Picadilly Circus (London) that was up in the year 99-2000 (TDK, Sanyo, McDonald's Coca Cola, Nescafe, Samsung, Calsberg...), at night all of those signs light up, and the ones that had animations in real life actually have those animations recreated in the game!

&#x200B;

It's been 21 years since the release of the game, and many of those businesses and logos have been replaced,updated or simply disappeared, hence adding to the game being a time capsule of different places in a specific time.

&#x200B;

The atmosphere of the cities doesn't end here, since there are many sound effects that add up to the experience. This is especially notable in San Francisco, where you can hear the sound of seagulls, police cars and trams going down the streets. But a common sound effect shared with every city is getting interferences every time you drive down a bridge or one of the few buildings you can get it in. Why am I getting interferences? Because of the radio!

&#x200B;

The game features a GTA-like radio. Each of the cities has 3 radios that play all kinds of music with announcers (all of them speaking in their local languages and accents) and ads between the songs. Interestingly enough, none of these songs are real (the ads seem to actually advertise real products and services, strangely enough), they were actually made for the game, and these songs weren't generic video game music, they're parodies and takes on the bands and styles that people were listening at that time: Oasis, Will Smith, R'n'b, Hard Rock, Blues Rock, Country, Drum n Bass, Dance Pop... The soundtrack of this game makes it have a surreal simulated feeling, as if it was an alternate universe early 2000s that felt vaguely familiar but different to the one you were used to. And on top of that, just like with a real car, you can rip the songs you like into the car's stereo (an actual Kenwood stereo is shown in the menu and not a generic interface).

&#x200B;

The sum of these parts, along with the game simply being extraordinarily well made, makes it an extraordinary time capsule of the late 90s and early 2000s considering the technical limitations of the time (as well as the limited time and money devoted to develop such a well made game in the early 6th generation of consoles)

&#x200B;

After having this series of thoughts I wondered if anyone else felt that video games could work within this context: time capsules of a time, era and place. The only thing I could find was this rather good article written for Vice: [On the Terrific Power of Video Games as Time Capsules](https://www.vice.com/en/article/kzqav9/on-the-terrific-power-of-video-games-as-time-capsules)

&#x200B;

In this article the author explains how **Project Gotham Racing 2**, a game released in 2003 that features Edinburgh among other cities, is a surprisingly accurate depiction of the Edinburgh he lived in between 2001 and 2005, while later showcasing Metropolis Street Racer (huh, what a coincidence) and **Yakuza 3** as other examples of video games as time capsules.

&#x200B;

But while realistic games can be great time capsules, I also want to make an argument for games that are less grounded in reality. This time I'm going to choose the **Wipeout** games that came out on the original PlayStation as examples of time capsules in relation to then-evolving aspects of mid 90s to early 2000s culture.

&#x200B;

The games are heavily inspired by an optimistic cultural obsession on technological developments, as shown  in the futuristic sounding electronic music that was very popular in the UK (with Psygnosis/Studio Liverpool being a British studio) and visual styles and themes heavily inspired by depictions of "cyber-everything" (cybernetics, cyberspace, cyberpunk...) on literature and movies.

&#x200B;

By the time 9/11 happened, this optimism on the developments of technology eventually died out, and nowadays this techno utopian style shown on many forms of media between the early-mid 90s and early 2000s is seen retrospectively as part of the "Y2K aesthetic" and blobism.

&#x200B;

Another good example of this type of time capsule is **Jet Set Radio.** Although the aesthetics and themes of this game are a little more eclectic than the first Wipeout games, it's still very reminiscent of its era nonetheless.

&#x200B;

So in your opinion, given the examples I showed, what other video games would work as time capsules of a time, place and era?

(Edit: wording, formatting)

**February 2022 update**: I just found [this article](https://www.gametripper.co.uk/games/playstation-2/the-getaway-2002/) on **The Getaway** and it's very impressive though slightly inaccurate in parts depiction of 2002 London as described by someone who lived there at the time and I thought it was worth sharing since it relates to the topic of this post.So, assuming they do not get the licensing agreement renewed, how much will it impact sales? On one hand they don't need to change much about the games to make them perfectly legal, but if the game's not called FIFA, will a substantial amount of customers just not realise its the same games? Even if they do, would they rather buy into something else, whether because they care about the license, think it represents prestige/quality, or new competition appears bearing the FIFA name?

It would be interesting. If a second Google result is to be believed, EA's best selling franchises are: Mass Effect, Simcity, Tiger Woods PGA, Command & Conquer, NBA Live, Medal of Honor, SW: Battlefront, Bejeweled, Battlefield, Apex Legends, Madden, Need For Speed, Sims and FIFA.

So, ignoring the fifa situation, 7 of these are dead and most of her rest have reached something you could consider close to maximum saturation. In other words there doesn't seem to be anything to shift resources to that could start printing money like fifa has.

It's interesting and exciting to think that EA might get bit in the ass by their decision to ignore anything that isn't giant and multiplayer or at least microtransaction heavy and forget building a diverse portfolio.

Question is, will they manage to retain sales or get them back by actually making their soccer games better, or will they put more effort elsewhere - and is it going to be a new/returning IP or just the next most lucrative franchise on the list?Half the fun of games like this is making your own builds, experimentation. As well as discovery. It's so fun to discover what different mechanics do and to experiment!

But PoE is the antithesis of that. You can't experiment too much cause it's too punishing for mistakes in your build, it costs too much to change your build.

And you can't make your own build anyway, because the game doesn't explain a lot of things, so you need many hundreds of hours under your belt till you figure out the obscure ways in which the game works.

The sad part is that for new players, the most beautiful experience that could be is to just jump in and discover things with fresh eyes. But you can't really do that or you'll definitely end up not being able to progress through the endgame, having to level up a new  character, this time following a guide.

Maybe I'm just too old for this shit.Firstly let us get EA out of the way, In the majority of cases they give Bioware free rein to do what they want, so we have to look at the developer as a whole, not its publishing company.

The decline was first noted on the release of Dragon Age 2, a widely panned game at the height of their popularity. If we look at their previous release, Mass Effect 2, we start seeing a few problems.

Firstly they made Mass Effect 2 a more linear experience. The levels outside of the hubs generally followed a straight line and puzzles/exploration were minimized to three minigames with little depth. Comparatively the first Mass Effect was an evolution on the first Kotor video game.

I was never impressed with Bioware's writing, Baulder's Gate included. But their level design and storytelling *systems* were tight. In the first Kotor, you could engage with each dungeon from a multitude of directions based on player states and character traits.

Mass Effect 1 diminished these choices, but it kept the open level design. Noveria and Feros led to one final arena but there were multiple pit stops on the way which could be tackled in any given order. The writing in my opinion was a step up from Kotor 1 even if it was derivate of that same game. Characters like Kaiden and Wrex were logical evolutions of their counterparts in Kotor (Carth and Canderous). There was a focus on info-dumping rather than emotional development but that works better in video games because you are not forced to sit through the information and can consume it at different intervals.

Mass Effect 2 began with less set up and more direct emotional attachments. So we could presume a game with better storytelling, but rather than telling a compelling story, Bioware decided to focus on style over substance. The Illusive Man is interesting but never fully explored. The Collectors are threatening but tied down to a twist ending that robs them of any agency. And the reapers are continually hyped with little direct contact.

At the time this was passable because it was assumed more information was on the way. The gameplay followed the same trend as Mass Effect 1. It streamlined the levels and gameplay customization while retaining only four hubs to explore freely (Omega, Ilium, the Citadel, and Tuchanka).

If we pause here we see a clear progression: the dialogue is sharper and more realized, while the substance behind the story is truncated. The level design is streamlined further throughout each game and exploration is limited.

Parallel to the mass effect/kotor games there was Dragon Age. It was supposedly a throwback to their old school DnD systems until the second game where they merged the style of mass effect with Dragon Age. I have one comment on the first DA game, and that would be how open the world design is compared to everything else. This is important to note for later.

Now the second dragon age game (my favorite personally) was derided for copy and paste levels, grindy combat, and less content. But their storytelling skills had evolved. Rather than tell the world saving stories of their previous titles they had a more domestic tale that follow the emotional growth of its characters over a twenty some year period. The execution wasn't perfect but Bioware obviously was attempting at more heightened narrative beats.

If we return to Kotor (a very generic story) we will remember the sequel produced by Obsidian (Kotor 2) attempted to delve deeper into the substance of the characters through a personal journey rather than a epic battle between good and evil. Here Bioware attempted their own Kotor 2 with Dragon Age 2. But with some major differences:

1. The emotional complexity in DA2 was subjugated to a plotless story with no central conflict
2. The characters themselves, despite being put through interesting scenarios, lacked substance

Each of the supposed party members had a lot of style and personality but they didn't have much beyond their own philosophies and backstory, in other words they were static. Kotor 2 faced this problem as well, but it had a central conflict to contextualized the characters behind. DA2 left such a spotlight on character development that any flaw shined brighter than it should.

Fenris was the brooding bad boy with a tragic backstory, Varric was the funny dwarf with a deposit of blue-collar wisdom, Aveline was the ambitious female soldier not to be put down by her male counterparts, Isabel was the sultry pirate captain, etc.

Mass Effect 3 was somewhat ignored because of the ending, but it further streamlined the level design. Now the game only had one hub instead of four, the majority of side quests were handled through auto dialogue, the quest log was ruined (for no conceivable reason besides marking how unimportant side quests had become), and despite more mods to your weapons the actual versatility of Shepard (the player character) was unchanged.

Dialogue as well was limited to only two choices instead of three. So whereas Origins (the first DA game) had on average six replies Mass Effect 3 has two. Moreover gameplay elements like Persuade or Intimidate had completely vanished. In their stead where the Paragon/Renegade choices from the first Mass Effect.

But there is a noticeable difference between that and charisma stats. The Paragon/Renegade choices all led to the same outcome. Whereas the normal options would force you to pick between option A. and option B.  the special highlighted dialogue would let you pick both (whether it was red or blue).

So now it was no longer about different outcomes, but increasing the ease of gameplay. And these rewards were dolled out by being consistently one sided in your morality. That meant if you played a saved file with inconsistent moral choices the game would punish you later on. And being as there are only two dialogue options in Mass Effect 3 you have to pick between Renegade and Paragon, and the game wants you to only pick one per playthrough. That means there is no dialogue choice at all, the correct way to play is to pick the same option which are conveniently located in the top right or bottom right sections of the dialogue wheel meaning you don't have to even read the options to decide.

So here we have stories with less substance and less ways to prod and pick through them. I imagine that is because the more a player is allowed to fiddle with a story the more durable it will have to be. As Bioware's storylines moved away from the template of Kotor 1, they became more flimsy (or in the case of DA2, nonexistent).

There is a two year break after Mass Effect 3 came out which allowed Bioware to enter stage 3 of their studio's existence (stage 1 ending with the release of Mass Effect 1). Years of hype and speculation led to DA: Inquisition.

Now this game is remarkably different from the aforementioned trend. It is bigger and more explorable, has more dialogue options, more customization, and more choices for the story. You would imagine it was a return to form for Bioware, but if we look closer we will see it was nothing of the sort.

The world, while big, was padded with repeat content like the early Assassin's Creed games. It turned Bioware's signature RPGs into a generic open world design. Bioware before never made open worlds. Even in DA origins or Kotor 1 the maps were none linear but divided into separate zones. The Mako segments from ME1 were big but also irrelevant to the main levels and objectives.

The customization in DA:I didn't allow players to progress through the world differently being as the levels were so open there was little in the way of obstacles blocking progression. The one exception was power levels which were less about how a player explores the world and more about when. The copy paste quest design (a reverse on DA2's copy paste level design) was made so you grind for a higher level with no choices allowed *within* the quest structure. You could choose which quests to play  but not how.

Ironically DA:I fulfilled all the fan requirements. Bioware really listened. The problem however with listening to fans is that they don't always know why they enjoyed something. Bioware needed a clear vision and instead they outsource the conceptualization of their games to the fanbase. The result is DA:I

Mass Effect Andromeda and Anthem were a further devolution of this thought process. In retrospect the further they have moved from the Baulder's Gate template, the less ideas they have had. How can a developer like Bioware be so bankrupted of ideas that they are brought to mimicking the latest trends rather than creating their own?

So my question is, can Bioware change? Because they are not suffering due to time constraints or financial quotas, but a lack of vision. And I think if we take a broader view, they have always had this problem. They mean well, but sadly I do not expect much from Dragon Age 4 or Mass Effect 4, and I am glad they have not to do with the Kotor remake by Aspyr.Ok ubisoft you clearly are terrified of being the slightest bit controversial and never want ANY of your games to get political. That's fine, most AAA games aren't political and they can still create very well crafted experiences.

God of War is a personal story about family, RDR2 is an ethical study on Good and evil, even earlier assassins creed games managed to sneak in some philosophical arguments about free will. None of these games are particularly political and NO ONE CARES. Because they have substance and can create a real experience with at least some depth to them. 

Modern Ubisoft games have no substance, they're mostly void of any characters and are just completely void of any actual themes. The only thing most of them offer these days are some *absurdly* basic political window dressing. The entire theme of watch dogs legion can be summed up as "hahaha stupidly fascist, authoritarian surveillance states are kinda bad guys right (but what do know)" 

No one would mind them using the surveillance state as window dressing if the game had ANYTHING ELSE to go off of. I have a theory as to why they do this, I believe ubisoft gave up with writing actually well written stories a while ago, they know they need sell their games as something. Marketing a poorly written story as well written is tough, but you don't have to do a lot of work to make your game appear like it's some political drama. Add  some political iconography to the trailers, throw in a line reminiscent of the French revolution and now you're game will appear like it's some deep discussion about the real hard hitting issues of our time.Don't get me wrong, its super pay to win, but it is fun without the pay to win factors. I don't really love MMOs (due to how they usually associated with pay to win), but eve has something different which is unique:

*No guidance*

Unlike most games, this game simply dosen't tell you anything. While it can be hard to come up ideas on how to play at the very first place, the rewards are extremely valuable.

*Items have value, like really high value*

Especially the ships, everything is really valuable in there. Its not the typical of like "oh I picked up this miscellaneous, probably never using it again" the game prevents this by minimising the type of items in game (basically just 8 minerals), which really gives everything a purpose in game, even if its just small amounts

However, the game just kills all these funs with one obvious factor: pay to win

"Pay to win of course is going to make the game worse"

But this actually hits different 

Take Star wars BF2 as the example, people might pay lots of money to get what they want, basically making others annoying, but not to the point where you quit the game (unless you're fed up)

Eve hits different, because every ship is crafted in a hard way. Even with a strip miner (which is p2w) , mining is still hard. Let alone for f2p players. Basically saying, its not annoying, its just the kind of silent rage that basically makes you to quit. I've spend a 30-50 hour on mining, only to be destroyed by a guy who is an omega clone (which requires plex, or lots of money)

I do feel like this is (kinda) a shitpost tbh, but I think this is useful for balance between grind and reward for future games. Probably this is what led to this game downfall, rather than just a backslash like Star wars BF2.So, we leap once again into the world of Ubisoft’s Farcry series, to see what has been hacked out for stable quarterly earnings this time.

Farcry 6 is the latest installment and apparently follows on from Farcry 5, how the fuck does that work Ubisoft, wasn’t the entire world nuked at the end of 5?

Anyway, Farcry 6 is set in the fictional land of Yara ruled by the tyrannical dictator, Gus from Breaking Bad. In typical Farcry tradition our hero rebuilds a resistance from the backfoot to eventually overthrow the leader and save the country.

Our character is Dani Rojas, an orphan trying to escape from Yara to go to America and live a glamorous life of stocking shelves in a supermarket. In short, the boat they are on gets destroyed by the dictator when he finds his son trying to escape. Everyone except Dani gets killed and we find ourselves thrust into the role of a guerrilla working to restore the resistance, Libertad, to its former glory so they can launch an attack on Gus Fring.

Our job as guerrilla means we have to travel to 3 functionally identical regions and recruit the groups of those regions who are having their own issues with the big bad’s underlings.

What struck me as strange in Farcry 6 was the critical path, It’s all over the fucking place.

Unlike previous Farcry games where the next main mission is unlocked after doing the previous one, the missions that build the main villain as an actual threat with a personal investment in our character are free to be done at any time, so you can recruit all the factions and after that learn the villains motivations and backstory, which completely throws off the narrative structuring resulting in an unsatisfying story with no payoff or catharsis at the end.

And while I’m moaning about the story, Dani works for the resistance initially to get a boat to go to america but about 3 missions later, at the end of the first chapter, they just give up the idea to run about guerrilla-ing. Unlike Farcry 3 in which Jason Brody became an efficient killing machine at one with their surroundings out of a desperate desire to survive. Dani basically becomes a legendary guerrilla by doing what they are told by random people they haven’t met. Making it even harder to be interested in the story and world of the game is that Dani has no personal investment in the ongoing conflict aside from just being there. Yes, it is her homeland, but only a few missions prior they were ready to leave forever for a perceived better life in America.

On the gameplay level, not many things have changed, except for the rather glaring absence of a skill tree which makes it hard to gain any sense that our character is growing or that we are getting stronger, and a leveling system which means that the sense of a completely open world is lost as enemies have more health in the higher ranked areas until you reach that rank and then they suddenly don’t. To make up for the lack of a skill tree, you can now find accessories in the world that give you different abilities, such as being able to sabotage alarms, move faster after taking damage, etc. However, this doesn’t fix the main issue that we aren’t getting stronger with more options and abilities to effectively kill permanently, it's all temporary. The base building mechanic from Farcry New Dawn remains although thankfully it's no longer a required feature to continue the game. There are resources which are needed to add mods to guns and upgrade the bases. On that note, I guess it sunk in that all farcry games become a cakewalk once you unlock a sniper with a suppressor because now there are enemies with weaknesses to certain types of rounds like soft rounds that deal more damage to enemies with no armour, armour piercing rounds, poison rounds and the like. Suppressors now overheat if you shoot too quickly meaning the sound won’t be suppressed at all, and there are disadvantages to equipping them such as a loss of range. So that’s something, but in reality it just means that each weapon you carry will have a specific purpose for a specific enemy, you can also switch weapons on the fly and therefore there is no danger of ever being caught off guard with an enemy you are ill equipped to fight.

Most characters personalities are reused from previous Farcry  games, there is the no nonsense leader person who inexplicably dies near the end of the game for no reason but to leave Yara in a state of chaos and anarchy once the dictator is dead and everyone else seems to be some variation of crazy violence liking person. 

Speaking of character, the game sorely lacks one as Dani is basically just a big cardboard box on legs, there is a certain mission where Farcry 6 references Farcry 3’s infamous insanity speech vaas gives with the doctor character, but for series newcomers it completely falls flat as Dani doesn’t react to it in any way and for series fans it comes across as a cheap rehash.

Farcry as a series really needs to get over vaas and 3 as a whole, I don’t want new Farcry games that just redo what 3 did but to a worse extent. I want new Farcry games that take influence from 3 to create unique, interesting characters in a unique, interesting land fighting against a unique, interesting villain.

Overall, Farcry 6 is a big disappointment between the story that just very dramatically goes fucking nowhere, with gameplay that hasn’t evolved in any significant capacity and in some aspects has even regressed.OK, hey, let's go back to the beginning and talk about Doom. After Wolfenstein, Doom almost became a proto-immersive sim thing, with established co-op characters, way more story, ect., and most of it got scrapped, because most of the development team thought "Eh, this isn't actually very fun."

It might be surprising now, but people actually loved Doom Deathmatch. Just look at all the early Doom .WADs people made, most were very careful to make sure that their levels were Deathmatch-compatible, to the point of neglecting single-player content. A lot of map packs were more or less Deathmatch only. It was kind of a big thing at the time. Now, there's actually still a pretty sizable group of people making and playing Doom maps and mods, but *competitive multiplayer*? Dead as a doorstop.

Quake? Also massive, especially from a multiplayer perspective.

Quake III Arena and Unreal Tournament more or less pioneered the multiplayer-only shooter the same year, and both were pretty huge. The developers of these games liked their shooters extremely fast, with very high TTKs, lots of power-ups to grab, lots of funky projectile weapons.

It was about the same time that shooters focused more on *comparatively* believable worlds, characters and stories were showing up. Which was fine. There was plenty of room.

The thing that I can't comprehend is this. What happened to the *hundreds of thousands* of people who huffed those games like crack? Many still lingered around for well over a decade, wondering when they'd finally get *something* they could move on to. But something pretty bizarre happened.

No one replaced them. Somehow, despite gaming being bigger than it ever has been, there is apparently no room for traditional arena shooters any more. Again, **no one replaced them**. That's the thing I can't wrap my head around. *I* sort of did, I'm the sort of person who can tolerate the early helplessness because I just enjoy bouncing around too much. Where did all the people who enjoyed these games go?

I understand perfectly why other design decisions have essentially won the big player counts. Shooters being slower, and slowing down even more in gunfights due to ADS systems, and not focusing so much on dominating an opponent by denying them the stuff they need, makes them far more accessible in the sense that people can drop in and play semi-decently right from the start. We aren't in the days where people usually started at local LAN parties where everyone was more or less equally garbage any more, either. On top of that, of course many, many people much prefer a more "grounded" experience in their competitive shooters, anyways.

But seriously, despite all their early popularity, there literally just isn't a market any more? How did that happen? The closest we can get now (as far as a game with actual popularity is concerned) is Team Fortress 2, which carries over the speed, very distinct weapons, focus on projectiles and big health pools, but makes a good compromise by giving players exactly what they need right off the bat and being silly enough that people can enjoy themselves by just being in-game at all.

Tribes: Ascend was a very, very good game that never got the audience it could have had.

Titanfall was replaced with Apex because Titanfall could never retain players beyond a hyper-loyal few, and Respawn recognized that they could have a much bigger game by moving in a different direction.

Doom's reboot never had a very significant Multiplayer following, period.

Hyperscape got some interest but more or less killed itself with poor balancing and a playerbase that couldn't decide what they actually wanted the game to be (read: Less like an old arena shooter).

Unreal Tournament 4 was a botched excursion from the start, with the developer's bizarre idea that their fans would more or less build a game for them.

Quake Champions was killed by early technical problems, old faithfuls disagreeing with it's direction, and the few streamers that tried it deciding that it would take too long to "get good at" to continue streaming it.

Diabotical more or less suffered the same fate as far as a few people streaming it and then dropping it because it was "too difficult".

The Cycle was a pretty unique hybrid between a typical BR and something like Tarkov gameemode-wise, and it was blazing fast, and had quite a few projectile-based weapons, including rocket launchers and a man-portable artillery cannon. It ended up with, again, a very small but loyal player base, small enough that the game is now being rebranded as Cycle: The Frontier, and is effectively becoming a true sci-fi Tarkov clone, and it's possibly even slower than Tarkov. It hasn't released just yet and it's closed betas are already bigger than the old game ever was.

Actually, a really specific aspect of these games that has shifted in a way I find fascinating is people's attitudes towards projectiles like rockets. In the early days, a lot of players saw direct rocket hits the way modern players see 360 no-scopes. Aiming and dodging big projectiles is fun, most people thought it was fun, and some splash damage to compensate for the difficulty of landing direct hits was seen as a necessary compromise. People often saw those who avoided slow projectile weapons as "unskilled" players who relied too much on hitscan stuff and "couldn't deal" with the dance that came with leading and dodging big slow projectiles.

Now, if a weapon like Quake's rocket launcher is in a game, the exact opposite occurs. Anyone who uses it is trashy garbage, it "breaks the game" and everyone cries for it's removal immediately. And it isn't just a matter of most games having lower movement speed, either, because even quicker games like The Cycle got the same complaints (Hyperscape gets a free pass, because it's projectiles were mini-nukes.)


**TL;DR**
How is it that the particular sort of multiplayer shooter that UT and Q3A used to represent, used to garner huge attention and sales, can no longer hold anyone's attention for more than a week? Seriously, no one replaced the hundreds of thousands of people who played them? What *actually* changed?

**Edit:** I'm beginning to get the impression that this is a mix of sociological factors that go well beyond gaming as a medium, and the possibility that this particular sort of shooter being the first to develop was actually a freak accident of developers who didn't represent what the average person actually wanted. Unfortunately.AT&T recently revealed 2015s Batman: Arkham Knight will be playable on the cloud free, for all their customers, using Stadia tech.

https://arstechnica.com/gadgets/2021/10/google-stadias-salvaged-future-as-a-back-end-cloud-service-is-here/?amp=1

Obviously this is a test run to see if this kind of business strategy is viable. The gamer in me sees this as an obvious failure as no one really wants to play a 6 year old game, but I get the feeling that isn't the point of this experiment.

I think the point is to see if people are willing to play games from a non gaming entity. If so, it could open the flood gates to non gaming companies buying up/making deals with developers/publishers to put their games on their platform for X amount of time. Now to play the "next big game" you need an AT&T subscription..or a Verizon subscription...or an Apple subscription..or any other major tech subscription. Cloud gaming and gaming as a whole outside first party developed titles could turn into streaming ala Netflix, Hulu, HBO, Amazon,Paramount, Peacock, etc etc etc.

Imo this is literally worst case scenario for gamers  and truly scares me. Next thing we know we're paying $60 A MONTH to play games that aren't directly developed by Microsoft Nintendo or Sony.

Thoughts?Back in the day, like 10 years ago or 20, the chat in games was constantly being used. Examples that come to mind are: Halo CE, warcraft 3, runescape. Nowadays there's none of that. I currently play a game, Legion TD2 (wc3 custom game), nobody says ANYTHING other than a few 'gg' at the end. Runescape, I played osrs just recently and again: nobody says a thing and it feels super lonely. Also the death of lobbies and birth of automatic matchmaking is an extra factor of loneliness, people would talk in the lobby. I've always used gaming as a way to socialize, since it was/is difficult for me IRL, but nowadays I just can't anymore because everybody stays quiet.After crashing a plane once again in Ghost Recon Wildlands and failing the mission, it reminded me strongly of the frustration of that one plane mission in Grand Theft Auto 5 where you need to fly a plane for something like 10 minutes and if you botch the mission at any time you have to go all the way back to the start of the mission.

I find it kind of weird when games force something on you that isn't ordinarily required throughout 99% of the game, but is just necessary to continue a plotline. And they expect you to be masterful at doing it.

For example, and maybe this is ironic, but in Mad Max you drive a car all over the wastelands and you'd think that for a game devoted to driving you have to be really good at driving. But you actually don't. You can be the worst driver in the world and it's fine. It's fine right up until a point where you have to win a race to progress in the story. Suddenly, you have to be the world's best driver, and the game doesn't care if you're clumsy and inept at it. So there you are on YouTube at 4 in the morning looking up cheats to beat this one section of the game.

Or what about the Mako in Mass Effect 1, the greatest Space RPG ever made? Here you are, an awesome space marine, and you're fighting bad guys and you're going through an intense story, and suddenly the game is like, OK, your mission now is to drive this nightmare of a tank with controls so bad that the slightest wrong movement will give you motion sickness.

I am honestly and truly the worst pilot ever. That previously mentioned GTA5 mission to fly the plane was like watching a toddler try and create a house of cards. I was brutal. I always get the up-down thing backwards, I panic on the landing, I panic on the turning, I crash into buildings. I even went and downloaded a mod that was supposed to fly for you but couldn't get it working.

My question is: Do you think developers should have an "autopilot" mode in their games? Let's take Cyberpunk 2077 for example. There's a decision you can make where your companion can drive you if you're shit at driving and you can sit back and watch the scenery. I'd love that in all games!

Imagine you get to the scene where you have been playing 65 hours of first person shooter and the game suddenly says ok now fly this plane to this destination and you're like, cool, turn on the autopilot. I mean is there really any loss because somebody doesn't want to play this mini-game? No. There's no loss.

Like, imagine if to beat Far Cry 5 you had to master those ATVs? I would have quit the game. Controlling the ATVs in Far Cry 5 is impossible (for me). But if there was an autopilot? Sure. Go ahead.

And I feel like some games get it and they implement that. Like Witcher 3 and RDR2 are like, ok, maybe some people don't want to literally micromanage every step the horse takes so one button will get you to follow the trail. The same concept could be implemented for cars, planes, helicopters, whatever.

It could even be a mode in the settings: Do you want to play on manual or automatic driving/flying? Ok, thanks, bye.

I think this would reduce frustration among gamers, but also avoid the horrendous break in game pacing as inept gamers, like me, suddenly stop progressing through a storyline and suddenly have to learn how to not land a plane in the ocean every single time (by the way, if you're ever on a plane with me in real life and everyone on board is dead except for you and you ask me to fly the plane you're basically asking me to kill us both.)

Thoughts?NOTE: This wound up longer than I'd intended. Feel free to skip to the conclusion at the bottom or look at just a couple sections to see what I'm trying to talk about.

Video games seem to constantly be trying to change the way they do things. Sometimes a series will experience small mechanical tweaks while other times it's almost an entire genre shift. I'm not sure if this is just about game companies feeling the need to mix things up to keep these series 'fresh' or if there's some actual desire/intent to continue improving upon things.

**My first example is Final Fantasy.**

The rules across almost all of the games are different. Sitting down to play any Final Fantasy game is going to have a distinct learning curve regardless of how many others you played because they are all so different from one another.

FFI has a custom party with mechanics like spells per day. FFII had a leveling system based around getting better at whatever you were doing. FFIV had wildly varying classes that you had access to amongst your party members. V was fairly similar to IV but had a job system allowing you to change your classes very dynamically. VI had wildly different party members and 'Espers' to modify your party. VII had materia - mechanics dedicated to learning spells/abilities through the equipping of magic rocks. VIII had you learn abilities on your monsters and equip the monsters - also allowing you to pull magic from enemies and equip spells to your stats to improve them. IX had you learn abilities from equipped gear - meaning you had to use crappy gear for a long time to learn abilities from it. X did away with all of that and put the leveling system into a 'grid' where you simply move your characters around to modify them on a very minute level. X-2 had a job system that was a call back to some of the oldest games in the series.

Once you get to XI and beyond the differences become even more wild. Two MMOs (11 ,14), a game that you can essentially program to play itself (XII), a mini series that constantly evolves within itself (13) and an action RPG completely incongruous with everything that had come before (15).

If you sit down and talk Final Fantasy with someone you're going to hear so many opinions that are all over the place. "I loved nine but hated having to use inferior gear to learn abilities." "Eight's story was a romance and really captivated me but the junction system was really confusing and annoying." "Six was the best game in the series but I can't even remember its combat system."

This constant evolution of gameplay has had some strange impacts to the series in my opinion. What is the identity of Final Fantasy games? JRPGs? JRPGs that have crystals as a central focus to them? Is the identity variety? It's not 'Medieval' with half the games having some sort of sci-fi slant to them.

It almost seems like a central core idea to the series is the idea of a 'job' system but instead of defining that and refining it over time they simply throw everything away every single game and start over. Would we be somewhere different with the series if it had picked a lane and refined it over the last 30 years or would FF have grown stale and gotten thrown out long ago?

**My next example is Assassins Creed**

This is a series that churned out games on a yearly basis for something like 10 years without changing the formula in anything other than small ways. "This game has bombs." "This game has recruitable NPCs." "This game has even MORE collectibles." Then, suddenly, the game experienced a bit of a genre shift. RPG mechanics. Leveling system, tiered equipment. Abilities. It's evolved but it hasn't. It's still everything it was before - it just now has some additional numbers that sort of matter.

It's almost jarring how similar these games are to each other. The series has evolved - it's refined over time - but those changes have been so small, so incremental, that you almost don't notice them unless you were to do something like go from AC2 to AC: Valhalla. You have to jump the entire series to really feel the weight of the changes. And even with that I would argue that if you've played any one of these games you probably learned enough to pick up any other one and start 'mastering' it with just a small amount of time/effort.

AC2 had 3(?) sequels to it and each one further refined the core mechanics of AC2. It almost felt like it was a sub-series dedicated to ironing out the gameplay. Then 3 came out and tried to simply try to be the best version of everything that worked. Black Flag comes out and they just drop the greatest sailing gameplay mechanics ever in the middle of gameplay that works. And then they just change everything with RPG mechanics one game later.

But what is the purpose of this continued evolution? Are they trying to make the games better or is it just about keeping them from growing stale? Have they gotten better or does it scale up and then back down again? When they try something that doesn't work should they refine it to work better in the next game or would they be better suited to abandoning the idea? Why spend so many games refining something just to drastically alter it the very next second? If AC4 came out right now and was simply a return to form of the older games - focusing on all their refinements and ignoring the last 10(?) years of alterations would that be an improvement or would it be a shame?

Note: My favorite AC game was Odyssey, I'm not trying to shit on the newer games here.

**It wouldn't be a video game discussion in 2021 without Soulsborne!**

Is Soulsborne the antithesis of change? Let's take a look at the 6 games people talk about when they talk about Soulsborne.

Demon's Souls - the template.

Dark Souls - the refinement, almost a carbon copy of Demons Souls. More focus on map design and cleaned up a bit but essentially the same exact gameplay. Oh, Dark Souls also has a 'hop' button while getting rid of the ability to climb up ledges that Demon's Souls had (and most people didn't even know that Demon's Souls had that). The crafting system is a lot different - that's a gameplay change and it's (in my opinion) the most prominent gameplay change. The game also handles healing items differently.

Dark Souls 2 - the same thing. Enemy placement is different. Bosses are a bit repetitive. The world isn't as put together as 1. Dark Souls 2 is considered by many to be the weakest in the series (even though it's my favorite Dark Souls game). It tries to strike a balance between the healing mechanics of Demons Souls and Dark Souls. But aside from that... it has the same equipment, the same animations, the same everything. It doesn't evolve. It tweaks, but it doesn't evolve.

Bloodborne - The series stops being the 'Souls' series and becomes the 'Soulsborne' series. A game that can't be ignored but is also distinct enough to stand alone. It takes everything that the previous games had then gets rid of shields and replaces them with a gun, introduces a bloodlust mechanic that rewards violence, replaces the magic of Souls games with anarchy in the form of items, and cranks up the speed to about 1.5. And yet... It's the same gameplay. There is evolution here - it's not Dark Souls but it's following the template. It's refined on top of being different but it's refined in a way that runs parallel to what will come next.

Dark Souls 3 - It's Dark Souls 2 but better and faster. Not as fast as Bloodborne but still noticeably faster than 2. It's trying to tweak things that need tweaking - bows are faster, some weapons have special moves, but it's primarily the same core gameplay.

Sekiro - Honorable mention. It takes the souls template and moves somewhere else completely with it. I think the community generally treats Sekiro as its own thing rather than considering it to be part of soulsborne (SekSoulsBorne?) but it's still worth mentioning in this topic. It's faster. It's vertical. It drops all the customization and multiplayer of Souls games though. It replaces build variety with a predefined character that you have to play in a specific way.

I feel like Souls games have evolved in a way somewhat similar to the early AC games. They're not trying to reinvent the wheel - they're just tweaking what needs tweaking and overhauling things that need overhauled. They've never settled on a healing system that's been entirely what they want so that continues to change across games. They've never settled on a crafting system that has worked so it changes each game. But the core gameplay, the core mechanics are stable and consistent.

When a game comes out as its own thing it takes the existing template but then runs with it to an extreme - Bloodborne is  'Fast Dark Souls with regeneration'. Sekiro is 'Fast parry Dark Souls with vertical gameplay.' These games almost feel like they are taking a specific build from Souls games and then building an entire game around that build. They're taking a system that's been refined and then refining an entire game around that specific little bit.

But... is that good? Are the games stale? Many people tend to remember their first 'Soulsborne' game as the best but that's largely because that's the game where you learn the mechanics and everything is new. Once you beat one game you know the rest (Sekiro sort of exists as an outlier to this statement). This familiarity doesn’t seem to push away most fans of the series but is there a limit to that? What if a new game came out every year? Does it need to change and try to find new ways to stay ‘fresh’ or should the gameplay remain consistent while the world and supporting mechanics change to keep things fresh?

**Resident Evil**

Resident Evil is almost the poster child for gameplay evolution improving a series. RE 1-3 were a strange variety of horror games that I (personally) feel like were products of their time that don’t hold up great. Mechanics and gameplay supported the setting but they were what worked, not what was ‘good.’

Then RE4 comes out and just sort of says ‘no’ and changes video games forever. This is not intended as hyperbole - RE4 seemed to create a shift in games cameras from that point onwards. That over the shoulder thing was popularized in RE4 and has spread from there. Not saying it was the first (I have no idea) but I feel confident in saying that this game is a core stepping stone in video games getting to where they are today. RE4 takes a horror series and makes it into an action/horror series.

RE5 and RE6 come out and they just sort of try to build off of 4. They change things but they’re trying to capitalize on 4. The series is stagnating. Is it stagnating because it’s not evolving past 4 or because it changed too much of what worked in 4?

Then RE7 comes out and just sort of says ‘no’ and flips the table over yet again. Now we’re in first person, maybe sprinkle some VR in there because why the fuck shouldn’t RE be defining many peoples first major experiences with VR horror? It’s no longer action - but it’s not just horror. It’s not really a traditional FPS - you’re not running around with a machine gun and hundreds of bullets - but it’s certainly there. RE8 continues this trend.

But… What else is RE doing? Remaking RE2/3 and modernizing them. Does modernizing them consist of making them like their modern games? Nope - they’re following the trends of RE4 - and they’re great. People love them.

So why did the core series evolve from the gameplay standard that 4 set when that standard is still loved and popular? Was the series stagnant because the gameplay wasn’t evolving or was it flailing because 5 and 6 just weren’t doing it right? Was evolving the series gameplay necessary? Should they have tried to fix whatever was broken or was it a good idea to bin it all and completely change the core gameplay?

**Far Cry**

Ubisoft again, but I’m going to keep this one short.

Far Cry 3 got me into Far Cry. I never played 1 or 2 and I don’t care to, from what I’ve seen/heard of them. I played a bit of primal, I played most of 4, and about ⅓ of 5. Now I’m playing through 6. What a weird fucking evolution this series has.

The core, and I mean *core* gameplay stays the same. Sneak your happy little ass around and then gun people down. Or just gun people down. Y’know - whatever makes you happy. Drive a car if you want to. But everything else - all of the supporting mechanics change constantly.

Crafting systems, healing systems, recruits/allies. Abilities. They just can’t stop dicking this game around and all I can think when I play any of these games, after 3, is that I wish I was playing with the mechanics of 3 in this new world they built.

I don’t want to change my equipment to be able to tag items through walls. I don’t want to wear different shoes to run faster. If I’m running across the map I shouldn’t have to put on the pants that make me run faster after sliding and then slide constantly.

When I level up my character I want to be able to define them further - not gain the ability to purchase more shitty guns that I don’t care about.

I feel like Far Cry 3 mastered a lot of stuff but it’s like Ubisoft never even stopped to consider what made the game good - they just started changing things randomly from one game to the next. What are the holes they’re trying to fill? More than any other series I’ve mentioned it seems like the changes in Far Cry are based on a simple desire to change for the sake of change than for anything else. Or maybe I’m wrong and people would have hated the series if it hadn’t been changing things between the games. Maybe it would have gotten stagnant for people.

**Honorable Mentions**

God of War going from what it was to what it is now. An evolution of story, gameplay, tone and everything else. Many people refer to this evolution as the series ‘maturing.’ I find that interesting. People see the gameplay changes as an evolution that fits with the tonal shift. It’s the game they played when they were kids that has followed them into adulthood. Could GoW have retained the old mechanics with the new tone and been popular or was the evolution of gameplay necessary? Regardless of the necessity of change for this series - what happens to the old gameplay? Is it forgotten forever? Should it be revisited in future games or side series? In 3 years is an ‘indie gem’ going to come out that mimics classic GoW mechanics and everyone is going to collectively dump on the newer GoW games for abandoning the classic style when clearly the original had value?

Gears of War - the other GoW. I can’t talk to this one too much. I played the first three games and my brain melted 30 minutes into the third. I just want to mention it because I felt like this series was let down by a lack of supporting mechanics and world design. The problem was never the core mechanics - it just got old doing the same thing over and over and over again. Have a shootout in an alley. Now again in a church. City street. Alley again. Now you’re on a boat. Oooh, this shootout is in an office building and the enemy you’re fighting is really big!

Fallout 3 and Onwards/Elder Scrolls. Just what the fuck? So many games that have the exact same core gameplay of swinging sticks and exploring vast worlds while taking on esoteric quests and engaging in story events. There is no consistency to these games and yet they all feel exactly the same. Every game has different mechanics for bartering, discussions, karma, leveling, crafting, abilities, skills - fucking everything. What are they even trying to accomplish with these changes? I’m not saying any of the games are bad, I’m just saying that all of them feel pointlessly different from each other - never any improvement or deterioration to the core gameplay - just randomly fucking different across games, across series.

Wild Arms. Nobody has played these games so I didn’t want to go into any depth about them but the first 3 had nearly identical JRPG mechanics with flavorful and interesting tweaks and then somewhere after that the developers smoked a bunch of crack and made the game into a magic hexographical grid system for combat before fading from history completely.

Pokemon. Seven people understand the core mechanics of these games beyond the surface level and one of them works at Game Freak and continues to mess with them between games. For everyone else these ‘hidden’ mechanics might as well not exist and nothing about the core gameplay has changed and yet everyone still loves them. Every now and then a game does something that people like and then it never fucking happens again.

Mario. Mario evolves with the ages. He’s just there doing his thing. Whatever he does is refined. Doesn’t mean everyone likes it, but his games are rarely bad due to a lack of effort. Mario covers so many genres (sports, RPG, platformer, fucking Turn-based strategy) across so many series that it’s hard to talk about meaningfully.

Zelda. Zelda died for me when it went 3d. Heresy, I know. It paved the way for 3d games alongside Mario but I hated both Mario 64 and OoT and yet I hated them. Still respected them for what they did, just didn’t enjoy playing them. Then Zelda decides to come out with a new ‘modern’ game and pretty much takes all the trite repetitive garbage of the last ten years of open world games then combines it with one of the greatest physics engines I’ve ever seen in a game and just sort of tosses it out and says, “Have fun Link.” I don’t get it, but it’s worth mentioning.

Metroid. Fuck yeah, let’s start a genre. Then let’s make our series into a FPS that has mixed reactions from people. Then let’s make some games that nobody cares about. Now let’s make the first AAA side scrolling game in the genre we created in years. I don’t even know.

Halo. Master Chief is here to shoot bubblegum and chew ass and he’s all out of inspiration. I don’t know what to say here. The games are all over the place. The shooting of Halo 1 made it foundational but it seems like they always dick with it. Reach introduced abilities and the games since then have sort of poked at those abilities with a stick without ever committing to anything. ODST tried to shift the gameplay into a subgenre and some people really liked it but the lack of a ‘Halo’ response seemed to scare them away from considering that further. Now they’re trying to make the game into an open world FPS with a grappling hook? Is that because someone thinks it’s a good idea or is it just because the series is stagnating and they’re trying to pump interest into it? Should they be trying to mix things up with stuff like that or should they be trying to return to their core and focusing on that more?

Ico/Shadow of the Colossus/Last Guardian. Not a series, exactly, or is it? Maybe? Whatever, I’m not here to talk about the story of these games/series and it’s close enough that I’m going to talk about them. Team ICO made the shittiest game engine ever and then made three games with it. They never improve the engine unless it’s to add the shittiest version imaginable of a new mechanic that a game requires. The end result is three games that are amazing in very specific ways and frustrating in all the other ways. Does it matter? Is that part of the charm? Would a refinement of the core mechanics of future games undermine it and set it apart from the others in a bad way?

**Final Thoughts / tl;dr**

Games are still a relatively new medium and are constantly evolving and changing as different companies strive to maximize profits while also trying to figure out what the best strategies are for that. I don’t think there is a clearly defined answer to this question that applies to all genres but I do wonder if there aren’t answers to this question for specific people - or maybe even broad stroke answers that are relevant?

Are we striving for games to be the best version of themselves or do we prioritize new and novel experiences over quality? If you could take the mechanics from your favorite game and apply it to a new game would you do so or would you rather have a new experience even if that experience is inferior? Should series grow and evolve between games like Final Fantasy or stick to the same formula and only deviate mildly like Soulsborne games? If a series decides to perform a genre shift should it abandon everything that came before (mechanically speaking) like Resident Evil or should it try to stitch the old mechanics to the new like Assassins Creed? Should games change for the worse just so that it can have change like (in my opinion) Far Cry? If a series makes a mis-step in how it changes should it try to change back or should it try to improve its misstep?

**EDIT**

I'm not looking for definitive answers - I'm curious about peoples opinions on this stuff. Do you like that every Final Fantasy game you play is different than the last or would you prefer if they focused and improved core mechanics? Or do you wish that they all had the exact same gameplay as your favorite one and they never changed beyond that? If your opinion on FF is that they should change but your opinion on Souls games is that they should stay the same what makes them different?

**EDIT 2: The Editing**

This has been in the tl;dr the entire time but I'm feeling that people aren't even reading that so I'm putting it here to draw more attention to it:

*I don’t think there is a clearly defined answer to this question that applies to all genres but I do wonder if there aren’t answers to this question for specific people - or maybe even broad stroke answers that are relevant?*

I want to know your personal opinions regarding the question. I know that when people ask questions the answers they receive are opinions. Asking for opinions and then getting told that my question should have a goal because all I'm going to get is opinions is wild.I've genuinely had this question for like 18 years now. I grew up playing final fantasy, started with 5, played literally all of them. I realized in 6, sabin had fighting game inputs for his limit break, and squall had timed inputs for renzokuken. Then kingdom hearts happened, and my friends and I believed "this is it, square figured out action gameplay", but chose not to implement this into mainline final fantasy games. 

Initially you could see this as them retaining their turn based roots but then so many other genuine attempts at action combat came from them.. ff15 being a noticeable example. Like am I insane? Does disney somehow own that combat system? Why is it exclusive to kingdom hearts? I love and play the KH series, Kh2 final mix and KH3 on critical mode are in my top 5 action games of all time. So why not.. use it... on your other attempts at action games?

So we can say ff15 was botched, ff13 wasn't supposed to be action etc, but then what about Final fantasy type 0? Even final fantasy 16, yet to be released, yet seems to be leaning into the devil may cry style of action rather than KH. It's almost admirable, they struck gold with an action gameplay system yet they choose to neglect it and instead reinvent the wheel for games not named kingdom hearts.. anyone have any idea as to why?I've seen countless arguments for both, I know that we all did, but hear me out.

Lots of people love, and lots of people hate Half-Life. There are even some people in the middle, who think they're good games, but nothing to write home about. What is the objective truth, then, if there's one? Is Half-Life the best gaming franchise of all time, or is it just another generic FPS with aliens?

Funnily enough, one of the arguments for both sides is the storytelling; those who love Half-Life, praise the storytelling that doesn't use any sort of cutscene movies and that you get your knowledge from the world around you, not by random NPCs telling you everything, but the other side says that storytelling this way is confusing and they barely understood what's going on. I read this argument a lot more about Half-Life 2, not the first one. Since HL2's main events already required the Combine to pre-exist on Earth; we didn't see their rule unfold and take over Earth. Some people love the fact everything is so ambiguous about the story, and how the game makes you ask more and more questions. Some people say the world of Half-Life 2 is dead, cold and lifeless, however, I think that's what makes the cruelty of the Combine's rule so believable, even if we don't actually know a whole lot about it, other than the fact every citizen gets just enough food to survive, people are separated from their families, any sort of rule breach can end up with you dead, and that Civil Protection members get certain benefits ("non-mechanical reproduction simulation", and "family cohesion: preserved").

But that's enough of my thoughts. What do you think?The game's PC port is a complete mess, but I ended up playing with a gyro-less controller and I'm really happy with how it feels.

The bad part is Aim Assist. I play with it off because it feels terrible, though I wish I could have a bit of good AA rather than none. The game's AA compensates for your movement and tracks enemies a bit, and both of these feel alright. The issues are bad aim snapping on ADS and decreasing sensitivity when you're aiming at an enemy.

The first isn't bad in principle, but the execution is frustrating - it's so annyoing to line up (or almost line up) a headshot just for the game to throw your reticle downwards because it always snaps to the center of the enemy, rather than adjusting for where you were aiming beforehand. 

The latter is terrible, at least in a form as basic as in this case. The problem is that when an enemy is moving, your aim will often be unable to keep up even if you fully tilt the stick. It's intense enough that I couldn't even control my gun's muzzle climb because the game would limit my vertical aim speed too much.

Sadly, all of these are under the same option in the menu, so you have no way to only use the good parts of the system.

There's also no button remapping, which sucks, especially since sprinting is bound to clicking the left stick, which is both the most unergonomic and most fragile input on any controller.

&#x200B;

With all that out of the way, the game surprised me with how great the options in it were. The game lets you adjust not only the sensitivity, deadzone and sensitivity curve, but also the time it takes for the acceleration to kick in - this is the most important option that's often missing even in games that attempt to give users in-depth control over the stick response. 

I honestly don't need the aim assist thanks to a wide sensitivity curve and short acceleration time, and the game has earned a much higher spot on my list simply thanks to how great these controls feel.

I really hope options like these will become the norm soon. Then we can move onto making gyro aiming the standard.**Pretext:**

In the past i was trying to become better at competitive shooters, as dying bothered me very much. I looked for advice for the games that i played on the internet and found lots of great videos and articles from better players about how to improve your tactics and aim and etc.

However, none of the advice actually helped me. Yes, i didn't put 100 hours into aim training simulations, but i knew that aim was not the main thing that was causing my death in 95% of the times. I knew that what i truly was lacking was game sense and quick optimal decision making skills. The videos and advice from experienced players however can't teach you these things, they only show you the existence of such concepts, they hint at the possibilities that you have to explore on your own to truly learn them, through effort and concentration.

Still, however, even as i tried to consciously force myself to think faster and deeper in games, even as i seemingly improved in some aspects, the 1.0 k/d and 50% win ratio (about 10% for battle royals though) has always remained.

After many years, i am still at the same statistical place as i always was, having the lot of the "mediocre" player, not good nor bad, exactly average. However, even though i did not improve at the videogames, i have obtained a lot of experience in life, and found that much of the wisdom i have learned can and should be applied to games, as the things i am going to talk about are more important than just the concept of winning. What i will primarily be talking about, is in fact, what most of advice on the internet omits entirely - losing, and how to do it properly.

**Main:**

1. One of the first and most important basic lessons that i've learned was the seemingly obvious yet hidden and difficult to come to terms with fact that in battling against a human opponent, you will always have only the 50% chance to win. As will he. When both people know what they are doing and don't have a particular advantage or disadvantage against each other, they will always have only 50% chance to win. From this basic fact, a few important lessons stem:

1.1. Winning is a matter of advantage and chance. Trying to force a win by making rash decisions will result in success only half of the times. In competition, winning is almost determined by accumulation of advantages - such as gear, position, mental preparedness, intrinsic skills and talents, element of surprise, etc. Sometimes an advantage can be so great, that the win is almost determined, for example when the experience and talent gap is actually severe (when a noob faces a professional twitch streamer), or equipment gap (on equal grounds 200 points of armor will brute force a win against a 100 armor opponent, idealistically speaking). This is why you should not ever focus on things that only improve your chances arbitrarily (for example, don't waste time on improving your aim when it's already mostly sufficient when you suffer more heavily in other areas), as well as don't place your bets on just one advantage, secure as many of them as possible (avoid the false taste of a close victory when you find a great weapon, or when you decide to rat in a corner. narrowing your advantage to just one primary thing such as cheesy weapon or cheesy tactic is less prone to survival than a flexible playstyle and attitude)

1.2. IMPROTANT - do not \*ever\* allow yourself to truly be defeated mentally. Lose with pride. Understand that you did what you could, that you were either honestly outplayed or the chances just didn't favor you this time, as i've already said, on equal grounds, it's always 50/50. Don't beat yourself for the fact that your efforts did not pay off. Inhale, exhale, accept your loss for what it was and move on. It is not as important to analyze your mistakes (even though that's a good practice) as it is to maintain control over your emotions. You absolutely CAN become a WORSE PERSON if you allow yourself to rage and whine over defeat. It is not the game that changes us, it is our attitude towards it. If you lose control all the time and start blaming yourself or your opponent or the chance, you will make this a habit and it will spread into your life outside the game. The good news are, that this is reversible, and when you train yourself to control your emotions in games, you will also be able to better control them outside the games.

&#x200B;

2. Do not fear defeat. Do not fear anything. When you encounter a lot of better players or just hit a streak of unlucky matches, it is tempting to succumb to the overwhelming feelings that tell you in advance that you will lose. Fearing defeat is the first step towards defeat, it distracts your thoughts and clouds your mind. Making decisions out of fear is a matter of desperation, and even though a desperate person can be dangerous for a moment, a person who's mind remains unaffected will always have the mental advantage.

2.1. If you feel fear building up inside you, you should take a moment to reflect upon it, see what it is exactly that you fear, the image of defeat, it's details, all the bad memories, and see that this road that your fear shows only leads to defeat. Let is pass and let go. You must actively make this choice, not wait for it to waver on it's own. Once you have let go, only clear awareness may remain, and as it remains, you will know that you will do all you can the best way you know, and whatever happens you will accept without a hint of bitterness or sadness, and if things play in your favor, you will forever know why letting go of fear was so important.

&#x200B;

3. If you encounter unfair play. By this i do not mean dirty tactics, such as ratting and camping. I am talking about illegal ways that players sometimes gain advantage, such as cheats and exploits. Whenever we encounter something truly unfair, our primal desire for retaliation hits the hardest, many mammals understand the concept of "fairness" and retaliate violently against "unfairness", humans are not an exception. You must remember that you must not be petty, do not allow a cheater to ruin yourself, remember my point 1.2, let a lost match remain a lost match, if you think you are dying to cheaters too often, stop playing the game, this is very important, do not force yourself into an environment where you constantly find disappointment that you scientifically can not deal with (it is difficult to deal with a fair loss for a person who puts a lot of effort in the attempt to win, it is 10 times more difficult to deal with emotions that come in retaliation towards true unfairness). Trying to play a game infested with cheaters is like running into a brick wall hoping that this time it will in fact be made of pillows. Cheater infestations do happen sometimes, as a player you can't fix it, so just let the time pass until the developers deal with the problem or find a different game. In cases however when you are not sure whether you were killed by a cheater or not, stop your bitter thoughts before you go too far into the territory of losing control over yourself, just hit report button without any hard feelings, "just in case bro, with kind suspicion".

&#x200B;

4. IMPORTANT. Do not seek improvement if the process impacts you negatively. If you start like i started many years ago and focus too much on the fact that you "suck" and beat yourself up over that fact, meanwhile months of training don't pay off AT ALL, this means that you are going down the wrong path, there can be many reasons for it - such as: A) you are improving an aspect you are already good at, this is why the payoff is small; B) you are training yourself with the wrong attitude, you either want progress too fast or you beat yourself up so much that you actually hinder your performance and ability to learn (no successful pregnancy ends faster than 9 months and no mother beats her stomach with fists to help the baby. treat your training like giving birth to a baby, don't even think about rushing it, and don't be (or stop before you are) negative towards it and yourself); C) you do not actually need training - you might not even be a "sucker" at all, and instead you lose too much and don't find joy in game because you have not mastered the things i have wrote above. cultivating proper mentality goes a lot farther than skill training. If you TRULY SUCK, you will notice a very quick growth from training, reaching the average level is something any human without disability can do relatively fast (and even disabled people can but need to put more time and effort). If you have 1.0 k/d and 50% win ratio, you DO NOT SUCK, you are mediocre, "like everyone". It is from this point that training actually becomes hard and long, very long, and it is alright to pursue improvement from this point, it is absolutely cool to strive for like 10 k/d and 95% win, but only as long as you have mastered proper mentality and feel that training fulfills you and brings you joy even through loss and disappointment. No training will help you if you have no control over your mind and body, train only when you are truly ready.

**P.S.** Don't try to rush an immediate understanding of the concepts i have wrote for you. It took me YEARS to learn the existence of these concepts and a lot of effort to truly internalize them. I am in many ways lucky to have learned these things from experience and experienced people while i'm still in my youth, no one teaches these things in our days, not in schools, not in universities, not on television, many people live their lives bitterly, always finding ways to hurt themselves and blame others for it. I have outlined the ideas for you, it is up to you to make these concepts a part of your mentality through effort, concentration and introspection. And if you have already known this intrinsically, it's truly great for you, i'm saying this without irony, but these ACTUALLY BASIC concepts are so hidden in our societies that i am sure there are a lot of people like me who didn't realize they were right under their noses as well as the importance of mastering them. I thank you if you read thus far, truly bless your day for having such patience and hopefully taking a first step towards becoming a better person you can be.Due to many factors, I became extremely reductionist in thinking. My mind would boil down everything to its core.

Eventually it felt like every game was more or less the same. 

There was nothing interesting, just a bunch of pixels and numbers. My mind just looked at the systems and the gameplay, ignoring everything else, seeing it as fluff, useless details. I'd just look at the boiled down core gameplay and systems, and I'd just consider the sights and sounds and all the other many things that make up a game as pointless things that the developers added to make the experience prettier, while at its core it was the same old thing.

But that way of thinking is just wrong on so many levels. 

Instead, try to appreciate the experience as a whole. The art, the characters, the animations, the sounds, the music, the story, the worldbuilding/lore etc... These aren't just fluff, they're just as important as anything else!   


And it truly did help me. Now I've been able to actually finish a game that I dropped 4 times even though that game seemed perfect for me on paper. And it was great.

P.S: This applies to other things like books and movies as well. Although I find that it applies even more to gaming, because it's such a complex medium with so many things working together to create the experience. Unlike a novel for example where it's just some dude making stuff up and seeing what sticks, this is a multidimensional medium where many people have pushed their talents to the maximum to create this experience for you.I'm making no value judgements about adult content in video games, but I do have the (potentially mistaken) impression that what sort of content was deemed "acceptable" or at least mainstream in a video game shifted dramatically around 2005. Extreme gore was extremely common by about 1995, but I can think of very few adult video games from that era to feature strong profanity or nudity. In the early 2000s, even hearing the word shit was extremely rare, while fuck was virtually unheard of. 1998's relatively obscure Kingpin is probably the only game I can think of from that era to feature anything of the sort. Even 2001's Conker's Bad Fur Day, which marketed itself on the gimmick of being one of the most obscene games on the market at the time, censored fuck and shit in spoken dialogue. Grand Theft Auto III (2001) and Vice City (2002) were renown for their adult content at release, but neither contained a single fuck. I can't think of any games from this era to show female nipples, no less genitals.

Things seemed to change around 2003, with the release of the post-apocalyptic GTA clone Road Kill, and the cel-shaded shooter XIII, both of which featured abundant use of the word fuck. The word also featured throughout releases like 2005's Killer 7 and Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas. We also began to see some female nudity in releases like BMX XXX (2002) and God of War (2005). Still, this sort of content seemed exceptional at the time, and I'm tempted to call many of these games "gimmicky" to varying extents, relying upon the rarity of this sort of content to distinguish themselves from their competitors. Since then, it has become commonplace to hear the strongest of language and see full male and female frontal nudity in completely mainstream games, none of which appears motivated by shock value. I'm convinced that the sexual content in a game like The Witcher 3 would have been absolutely shocking in 2003, and that conversely the "Hot Coffee" mod in Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas would barely be worth a mention today.

Did this shift really come as quickly as I'm led to believe, and if so, why? Were there any regulatory or market pressures preventing some forms of adult content making it into mainstream video games before 2003, or were societal norms simply different then?Similar to what I mentioned about the Far Cry series where it seems that the developers are aiming for making them into commentaries about certain issues or key topics but with flawed executions, I often feel the same about the recent Assassin's Creed games.

This is especially the case because this is coming from the perspective of a (sort of) ex-Assassin's Creed fan.

Something that the Assassin's Creed games in the earlier years were themes that I would define as spiritual in nature. The atmosphere, the music and everything else is combined to give a sort of spiritual feeling that is eerie in nature but awesome at the same time.

There is a reflection in this on the religiously-themed nature of the aims of the Brotherhood which reinforces the feeling that you are fighting for a cause, especially since the Assassin's are meant to be secret, while at the same time, it also builds up the awesome but also scary feeling of delving into the unknown and quite possibly the metaphysical and supernatural as the characters fight for artefacts that are quite god-like in nature and encounter things that are related to an ancient race that one can define them as gods. 

At the same time, the encounters with the unknown supernatural world also encounters the metaphysical as characters often debate about what is to come or what really happened or what is.

These build up questions that have no clear answers but you are inclined to figure out them even though you do not always want to know the answer.

These factors mixed together build up a reoccurring theme about the obscure, the unknown and quite possibly, deeply powerful and horrifying. 

It is something that gave a certain appeal to the series where you go back through time where you are to see something happened but just because it happened in an era that we deem as lesser than ours, does not mean that they did not delve into something that is greater or advanced.

This also reflected on the modern-day aspect as the main protagonist was unsure about certain topics like his destiny or whether or not the apocalypse was actually going to happen while the Templars, who managed to infiltrate almost every aspect of society, are constantly watching your every move and hunting you down.

There is a state of urgency, fear and adrenaline as well.

And most of the themes and the stories that are used in the games are reflections of the real world and human societies and philosophies where certain symbols or pop culture reference certain aspects of human philosophy, religion, culture, art, myths, and so on.

&#x200B;

This is, from my perspective, something that made the Assassin's Creed games so captivating.

And it seems that Ubisoft is aware of this and is aiming to implement these things into the Assassin's Creed franchise. 

But many have expressed their own opinions about this as well.

&#x200B;

It is uncertain where this mixed reception started but many point out that it has become more apparent after the supposed ending of the franchise in Assassin's Creed 3.

This is not by any means saying that the series did not have its flaws before.

Such as the combat was more action-focused which contrasts the secretive nature of the Assassins, the story of Ezio is more akin to a Chosen One trope, and the first game had flaws in captivating the attention of the player.

&#x200B;

And this does not mean that there were not decent games in the Assassin's Creed series after AC3 either.

AC 4 focused on someone who was quite between the Assassins and the Templars but also reflected on the pirate-themed desire for freedom and other treasures as the protagonist ended up losing a lot in his quest for personal gain.

AC Rogue focused on a different perspective where the Assassins are the villains of the story and the protagonist believed in a quest for order in the eyes of the Templars that was deemed as just.

AC Unity is a reflection of AC3 where the protagonist troubles between how can freedom and order be both occupied in a time of utter chaos and revolution, and whose freedoms should be prioritised and whose order should be executed. This is where the characters were on the edge of actually pushing aside their ideals and work together but others thought that this was heresy and wanted to use the current historical events as an oppurtunity

 

So there are hints where the developers were aiming to make use of the historical points of the eras that we explore and wanted to combine them with the key topics and debates of that era and where the ideals of the Assassins and the Templars clashed.

But many have expressed their own opinions about this as well and many have expressed the worry that the AC series has become too outstretched or changed so much that it lost its original identity.

&#x200B;

For example, in the AC Syndicate, the Templars were not exactly hidden as they wore their symbol proudly in public and were portrayed as classic villains who exploited the injustices and the divisions during the Industrial Revolution.

In AC Odyssey, the story delved into the theme of destiny or questions about what should be defined as order or what is right in the eyes of the Greeks at the time, whether it was a Spartan monarchy or Athenian imperialism, or whether it was a following of the philosophies of certain key philosophers like Socrates or Plato. But simultaneously, it is a story that had no Assassins or Templars, and many said that the RPG gameplay elements did not reflect well with the themes and the core tenets of what made an Assassin's Creed game.

And in the recent AC game, Valhalla, many expressed their own opinions that it is more of a Viking game than an AC game even though the theme and the story is a reflection and inspiration of Norse mythology which delves into the theme of fate.

&#x200B;

These different opinions also reflect on the modern-day aspect as people expressed their own opinion about this as well as there is no clear motive to use the Animus.

In the beginning, it was because we eventually learned that there was a predicted apocalypse that needed to be stopped. Then it was changed into an Isu character who was a fanatic and a supremacist but was later quickly killed of in the comics and was never brought up again. And then later, the new modern-day protagonist eventually learns that there are other secrets and there is the possibility of another apocalypse but this is still not solved (and an ending that I would rather not spoil in case you have not played the game)

&#x200B;

Many have expressed their concerns that the developers attempts to blend philosophy, history and myth in the recent AC games where done poorly or where the AC brand is mostly added for marketing purposes to gain more sales when the main themes and tenets of what made an AC game (which is also heavily debated because fans have their own opinions of what is defined as an AC game) do not exist or are added with flawed execution.

&#x200B;

The premise is often the same where the protagonist is drifted into the secret war between the two factions and often takes the side of the Assassins and have to delve into the messy debates between the conflict between right and wrong and freedom and order, especially in the context of that historical era. Different games delved into this in different ways and there is a trend where the games are self-aware of their reflections with the real world.

These are very cleverly designed ideas of making the player aware of the complicated nature of the conflicts between the Assassins and the Templars or what they can define as right or wrong or what is real or not or to question everything else in between.

But many have expressed the concern that the mains of doing this in the AC games are done are flawed or not in par to what the original creators intended it to be or that there is no coherent pattern or aim in mind of what Ubisoft wants to achieve as there isn't a clear main goal to keep reminding us why we need to keep on using the Animus.

(Side note - the original creator of the series was actually fired by Ubisoft somewhere between the release of AC2 and AC Brotherhood. It was never revealed as to why and it is recorded as it happened so suddenly but some speculated that this was Ubisoft's attempt to take control of the IP and continue to develop future releases however they saw fit)I was watching a review of God of War 2018 and it shared the same sentiment that most reviews seem to: the story and characters and world and performances are great, but the combat leaves a lot to be desired. The main point of criticism seems to stem from the camera being too close to Kratos and not allowing the player to get a complete view of the combat arena and all of the surrounding enemies. It seems they went in this direction to keep a consistent viewpoint during gameplay and to make the player feel closer to Kratos since you're always close up to him.

 In the review I watched, which was [this](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5jMJ39_j6NQ) one by the way, the reviewer remarks how the game could still have its compelling, serious narrative while allowing the camera to be pulled back during combat and even allowing for some hectic, over-the-top combat like in the older God of War games. He reconciles this  by comparing it to the Yakuza games, which have crazy, wild combat while still telling compelling, serious stories.

I'm currently obsessed into Yakuza: Like a Dragon and absolutely loving it. Even though it's different from all the other games with turn based combat, it still carries over all of the wackiness of the combat. They even contextualize this by showing how Kasuga wants to be the hero of his own story and grow and get stronger, like the Hero from the Dragon Quest games he grew up with. So he sorta kinda hallucinates(?) during combat. All of the normal looking people you encounter turn into exaggerated, caricature versions of themselves once you enter combat. And during that combat you're able to perform some larger than life moves that I don't think we're supposed to believe is actually happening. The other characters question Kasuga when he mentions seeing the enemies transform, but he just kind of accepts it and everybody else goes along with it and it's not really acknowledged again, at least as of yet. I see it as just a quick way to contextualize the combat being so silly compared to the game's narrative.

And it totally works. While I wouldn't necessarily call the game's story realistic, it's grounded in reality and meant to be taken seriously, and through the use of some fantastic writing and characters, it is. It's not like I'm unable to take the story seriously because the combat is so wacky. Honestly, everything outside of the main story is pretty wacky, but I'm still able to get invested in the very compelling narrative.

So I wonder how far this could be pushed. How much does a game's story and setting *really* need to harmonize with its combat or movement? I wonder how many games are held back by their attempt to be consistent in tone at all times. 

Take, for example, Uncharted. While Uncharted is still an action movie blockbuster, it's still grounded in reality. Well, there is some supernatural stuff going on, but none of the characters have superpowers (except for maybe Talbot in the third game, but that's besides the point.) Uncharted has some great stories and settings and characters, but since it's grounded in reality there's really only so much you can do for combat. It's mostly just running and jumping and shooting with some light stealth if you want. The fourth game adds the whip, and all of the games are able to sometimes offer really fun arenas that allow you to make the most of that admittedly shallow set of combat options. 

So my question is, what if Nathan Drake inexplicably gained superpowers just during combat, and nobody acknowledged it? What if the combat was allowed to go all out and Nathan was just able to perform some super absurd abilities for combat, but during the rest of the game he was just a normal guy again? Would you still be able to get invested in the story and characters? You could even just assume this is how Nathan imagines how cool he looks in this power fantasy, 

Going back to Yakuza, the combat is wacky and zany, but the movement in the open world is pretty boring. You just run from place to place. It gets the job done, but what if Kasuga was able to inexplicitly swing around like Spiderman when you're just roaming the open world? Would you still be able to take the story seriously? I reckon I could, and I'd have a more enjoyable time traversing the open world in the process.

Anyway, this was just something I was thinking about and I'd love to hear any input on it. Thanks!I should emphasize up front that this question is more about the reaction to the games _before_ release. Now that both games have released, PS Royale holds a 75% on Metacritic compared to Nickelodeon Brawl's 68%.

When Sony announced a fighting game in the style of *Super Smash Bros*, featuring PlayStation mascot characters and third-party characters like the Big Daddy from _Bioshock_, [the reaction from the gaming community and, particularly, Hideki Kamiya (of *Bayonetta* and the Capcom *Devil May Cry* fame) was to call it a rip-off of Smash](https://gamerant.com/playstation-all-stars-battle-royale-smash-bros-rip-off/) and deride it, even as it made public moves to differentiate itself from Smash. Instead of Smash's combat system, PS Royale had a power meter that increased by dealing damage to other players and could be spent to use a Final Smash-style Super Attack that would kill if it landed. Each character had [3 different Supers](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qIdTDx7cG_c) (usually a short-range effect that hit a small area, a medium-range effect that was harder to avoid, and either a stage-wide effect or a powered-up form that lasted long enough to accumulate multiple kills), as their bar powered up from level 1 to level 3 by accumulating more power. The game also featured levels that mashed up two games in amusing ways, like combining [an *Uncharted* cargo climb with *Bioshock Infinite*'s Columbia](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VV7UptXDR18), or [combining _God of War_ with _Patapon_](https://youtu.be/UhcxImSp178). 

Post-release, many of the complaints about the game were _about_ the Super system, saying that the game _should have_ just been a copy of Smash's gameplay instead in a "damned if you do, damned if you don't" reversal. Even people who enjoyed the game weren't hyping it up as a real pretender to the Smash Bros throne. I'm aware there were also some issues with roster choices (Ninja Theory's DMC Dante being chosen over Capcom's classic DMC Dante, MGS4 Raiden being chosen instead of Snake) and issues with getting the rights to beloved characters like Crash and Spyro. Overall though, the response to the game was highly divided and controversial, and the game sales suffered to the point that a sequel doesn't seem likely to ever materialize. 

Yet almost a decade later, the response to *Nickelodeon All-Star Brawl* leading up to the release was much warmer and optimistic, despite (or because of?) the game emphasizing that it was directly modeling the gameplay off of Smash. No one was deriding the game as an "immoral rip off" of Smash, but excited at the idea of another game in the Smash style. [PC Gamer](https://www.pcgamer.com/nickelodeon-all-star-brawl-may-be-the-smash-bros-killer/) and [Adam Sessler of X-Play](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ARYgROF9yHM) were floating the possibility of the game being the first one to dethrone Smash as the premier platform fighter. 

Post-release, most of the complaints about the game have been about its lack of polish: cheap-looking character models with all characters lacking voice acting, poorly balanced level design, and lack of content (which were supposed to be the things that differentiated it from Smash), while still praising the gameplay (which was directly borrowed from Smash).

So, in retrospect, was SuperBot's decision to try and do something different with the Super system a mistake and instead they _should have_ modeled the gameplay after *Super Smash Bros* as critics were accusing it of anyway? Would that have helped or hurt the reaction to it? Why was *Nickelodeon All-Stars Brawl* given so much more benefit of the doubt? Is it really as simple as the character roster choices in both games? What happened in the following decade that made direct clones of Smash Bros acceptable as a genre template?*This entire thread will contain many spoilers for the game Lost Judgement and possibly triggers for those with mental health issues.*

*If you are fine with this, please continue. Otherwise, don't force yourself to read this thread. Thank you.*

----

Before starting, I'm not a mental health professional or anything.

>!I finished watching a few playthroughs of Lost Judgement. The story involves suicides and suicide attempts by high school students due to intense bullying.!<

>!I don't know what the first Judgement game was like, but I was surprised to see a AAA game tackle such a heavy topic so head on. Even some of the people I watched thought the game would just be about Japanese yakuza and murder, but were surprised when students' deaths got involved.!<

>!I got curious about "bullying" afterwards and looked around.!<

>!I found that a lot of sources said to not directly link bullying and suicide, and that it's dangerous or misleading to say so.!<

>!On the [U.S. Department of Health's website about bullying](https://www.stopbullying.gov/resources/facts), they say:!<

> >!The media should avoid oversimplifying these issues and insinuating or directly stating that bullying can cause suicide. The facts tell a different story. It is not accurate and potentially **dangerous to present bullying as the “cause” or “reason” for a suicide**, or to suggest that suicide is a natural response to bullying... **The vast majority of young people who are bullied do not become suicidal.**!<

>!Since this game is based in Japan, I even looked up some Japanese sources. In the [English abstract of this report](https://kiui.jp/pc/kiyou/kiyou-no29/honbun/04.pdf), they mentioned:!<

> >!...In such bullying-related programs, **bullying was often
addressed together with suicide**... The
media coverage on bullying may have caused serious tertiary damage to the victims of bullying and their
families.!<

>!I know Lost Judgement is a fictional story. And I'm sure there may be dozens of books and movies that involve students' bullying and suicide.!<

>!If the story is fictional, does it have a less effect on people than a news report of a real life case?!<

Again, I'm not a professional, but I do want to know what actual mental health professionals think of how the topic was presented in the game. 

Thank you. 
Edit - minor differences 
The whole idea of Far Cry is mostly pretty simple.

The character is placed a pretty bizarre premise and their goal is to survive or outwin a common enemy, usually a person who is so wacky and intimidating that it is terrifying that a human being is capable of possessing such vileness.

In the second Far Cry 2, this premise was quite bleak and dark and the Jackal, the main villain, was a slightly charismatic but brutal arms dealer in Africa, a continent that has nations that are notorious with tyranny and lack of democratic systems because of the centuries of imperialism that it endured that felt it quite literally crumbled, and the many resources that many still find ways to exploit.

Suffice to say that this premise gives some different shades of grey for the consequences of having so many resources and being constantly governed by kings and tyrants whose purpose was to exploit you. It is a re-occurring pattern that does not seem to stop.

Far Cry 3 is when this is taken even further.

The main character is not a hardened veteran but a careless nobody who has to quite literally learn to survive in a pretty bizarre collection of islands that are filled with truly psychotic people which makes it terrifying because these people are not technically legal rulers or have superpowers, they are there because they have so little humanity that it makes them terrifying.

This reinforces the wacky power fantasy of the game and that you can do pretty much what you wish without any real consequence.

But this is also a bit of a commentary of the evolution of the protagonist as he slowly transforms himself into a more sophisticated killer and possibly a psychopath. From taking drugs to enhance your senses, destroying outposts and properties, to slowly become more and more aggressive and a part of the culture that the islands are known for - a place for killers, criminals and thugs.

It is possibly a good commentary about the player and a bit of self-reflection about our power fantasies.

Far Cry 4 onwards is when things become weirder.

They still follow this premise where things are super wacky and bizarre and the people that you have to fight against are also just as weird and creepy, if not more.

Far Cry 4 has a charismatic dictator whose morals are bizarre but somewhat needed in a premise where lawlessness is the new rule of law and he claimed that he wanted order, even though he achieved this through murder and genocide.

Far Cry 5 is somewhat of a mix between 3 and 4 where the leader is clearly a narcissistic psychopath and he is also a cult leader who predicts a nuclear apocalypse and he is willing to control his followers with an iron fist.

The premise is still the same and the game is just as wacky but in the end, the leader was right and the apocalypse does eventually happen.

Far Cry 6 is sort of following the same formula.

The leader is ruthless and exploitative. The freedom fighters want to overthrow the tyrant but there are mentions of how a revolution is easy but building the nation again is hard, and how changing the nation into a one like removing its old ways of living will also be hard.

This formula of trying to make this wacky power fantasy into a political commentary has been a reoccurring criticism of late because it lacks the necessary punch to make the game stand out more or make the player truly aware of their actions or what is going on.

Honestly, the idea of making a self-aware commentary within a game is a very clever idea but it feels that it is either done for the sake of appearing deep or because it is not that properly developed to be that impactful.

I like how you can have a blend of two worlds - the wackiness of power fantasy, and the serious realistic side of the situation that you are in.

Honestly, this emphasis on the latter does not feel like theg have the necessary punch to truly feel that impactfulHi All, this is my first post here. Sorry if I break any rule or post in inappropriate subreddit. I have googled and still am not sure where to ask.

So to elaborate: 
Some games are playable alone such as shooter (Valorant, Apex, OW, and etc) and battle arena (MOBA, GetAmped, Battlefield, Brawl Stars, and etc). These are fun to play and I find the matchmaking is effective in getting player into a game. Engagement are small that one player can really make a lot of difference, either being super chad or just lucky. However, these are pvp games and sometimes I have thirst for pve. pvp would be more fun too with regular friend.

I am referring to mmorpg or coop game like Monster Hunter. At some point, it's just impossible or take a long effort/grind to progress. Some mmorpg plays with number i.e. with too few members even 100% crit and perfect play will not pass the dps check to clear. Others have hard requirement e.g. you can't start an instances without enough members or mechanics/gimmicks require x number of players. Eventually, it becomes more like a job (hunt) to look for statics/groups and apply. This may need to be done a few times to find one where you can fit in. Or, just be lucky with random PUG (impromptu recruiting random players). Another way is to get a library of "friends" or your clan and just go with whoever is online and willing. It works to make the party but there is no chemistry, camaraderie, and etc from the time spent together. Most of the time it is not enough to tackle harder contents.

On my side, my irl friends are into single player games or pursue other agenda in-game or real-life.

I have tried making friends in the game itself but so far it has been either they got their own cliques and would prioritize that (very understandable) or never intend to play in group since the beginning and would play leisurely whatever content that can be tackled alone. Friends made with this method can also disappear forever or for a long time without even a goodbye.

I have considered just in case maybe I am the problem. Whether not fun, bad personality, or unskilled which is fair. However, I find that they really never form a group unless suddenly their irl friend start playing.

Any advice or input is welcomed. Even if it is a flaw in my mindset. Some games really interest me but I just find it not feasible to get into. I do not know how to TLDR this, thanks a lot even just for your time in reading this!

Edit: thank you All for sharing advices and your experience, also for encouraging me. I tried to read all comments and figured it might be better if I thank everyone here 🙂Which do you prefer? In my opinion, melee is a lot more interesting. It feels more satisfying, you have to get in close and interact more. Lots of variation, combos, etc. Shooting does have some interesting elements as well though. Tactical strategies, taking cover, surveying your environment, the cool gun sounds lol. To me, shooting tends to get old quicker, cuz it's mostly point at something and it dies, like in say Fallout 4. I honestly did like how Cyberpunk did it, cuz the fights had more length, so they felt a bit more involved. Melee seems to have more staying power, especially when you get special moves and interaction with the environment, as well as a nice traversal system. Also, new swords and weapons like that are satisfying. Playing Middle Earth Shadow of War lately, and really enjoying the combat. What are your thoughts on this? How would you make either one more interesting if you could?Honestly I can't think of a real example. But hypothetically, you played a mystery murder game, the game played phenomenal, it has interesting mechanics but the story just wasn't your cup of tea, nor was the execution of the idea.

And you're also in the minority of the people who think it's kinda a meh execution or universe. Would you review this low based on how you personally felt playing the game?

Or would you review it higher then what you intended, because you might be thinking "oh yeah I can see a lot of people enjoying the story and execution" ?

Because often times (except for the super thorough reviews) I see the former, where people would voice their review give it a low score just because that's how they felt. Not saying it's a bad thing.

I'm just wondering what you would prefer and what you would do in that situationI've played a bunch of games, and some games are obviously "Get through the Levels," but for games like City: Skylines or Prison Architect, the goals are much looser as it's a sandbox game. In Skylines, I get stuck building grids all the time, or otherwise trying to optimize. In Prison Architect, I hope for the best prison from day 1, and I forget to have fun enjoying being creative with the design. Do you all have any advice on how to escape playing mechanically and analytically and start playing games creatively? I feel like right now I min-max the fun out of playing...This year, we saw a number of games release that are sequels to games from over a decade ago: *Psychonauts 2* (2005), *Neo: The World Ends With You* (2007), and *Metroid Dread* (2004). If they were people, the previous games in those series would all be old enough to be in high school now. Two console generations have come and gone and a third has taken over as the new top dog in that time. So playing Neo TWEWY and Psychonauts 2 back-to-back this summer got me thinking about the ways both games brought their series back, and what changes they had to make to accommodate the modern gaming scene.

*Psychonauts 2* feels like a time capsule from a different era, like a big budget remake of a beloved classic brought to modern hardware. 3D platformer collect-a-thons were already in decline by the time *Psychonauts* was released, but the genre is almost entirely dead now. The only other ones that made any splash over the last few years that I can think of are *Yooka-Laylee* and *A Hat In Time*, both released in 2017. Psychonauts' art style is so strange yet stylistic, and so much effort is put into the great writing when games are often satisfied with the writing being perfunctory. It's a game too weird and alienating to the average taste but beloved by enthusiasts, which is fine when games could be developed by small teams, but in an era of huge game budgets needing to be recouped, being weird and alienating is a huge risk. But on the other hand, while *Psychonauts 2* makes improvements on the original game in some mechanical ways (enemy variety being a great improvement), there's still a lot of jank in the user experience. When it comes to the controls, having to constantly bind and rebind the 8 different powers on the 4 buttons the game offers means that flow of the game often gets interrupted in annoying ways, especially since many enemies have specific power weaknesses that mean rebinding the controls over and over again. This isn't usually a problem for other games, games manage to fit a lot of possible actions onto the controls without needing the player to rebind commands, or employed context-sensitive actions for overworld traversal that could have helped make playing the game feel smoother. By the end, I was both enchanted and frustrated by the game defying modern gaming design conventions.

*Metroid Dread*, on the other hand, is coming into a world where the 2D "Metroidvania" genre has been totally colonized and claimed by indie developers, to the point where they've devalued the perceived cost of games in that genre. The $60 price point for _Dread_ has come into question, and "Nintendo $60" went viral on Twitter a few days ago with people comparing the $60 price tag and 7-10 hour length to other AAA competitor games. I'll admit, it's hard for me to look at that price when there are modern genre classics like _Hollow Knight_  or _Ori and the Blind Forest/Will of the Wisps_ that cost a fraction of the price with more content, that still manages to not sacrifice quality for quantity. I've never been a Metroid fan, so maybe my opinion on the series doesn't mean much though, does *Dread* justify the cost beyond the value of the IP, does it stand out in the now-saturated genre it inspired that didn't exist when the 2D series was at its peak? It's got to be a strange position for the series to be in.

*Neo: The World Ends With You* had an interesting but difficult dilemma, how to follow up a game that was *very specifically* designed to be played on the DS- a problem that the original game's iOS and Switch ports couldn't quite overcome- while also releasing into a world where dedicated mobile gaming hardware like the DS that made the first game special has almost entirely gone away. There are no more DS/3DS/PSP/PS Vitas, there's only the Switch's handheld mode and smartphones, where games are expected to be cheap P2W cash grabs. Still, I thought the game did a pretty good job at tackling the former problem- the Beatdrop system captures the ludonarrative theme of "the difficulties of learning to work together with other people" that was so integral to the original DS game experience but lost in the iOS and Switch ports- but it definitely struggles with the latter. 

TWEWY very much felt like it was designed to be played on the Japanese commute, so each story mission was intended to be finished in about an hour and that meant the game kept up a good, consistent narrative pace. *Neo TWEWY* feels like it was trying to take advantage of the Switch and PS4 platforms to be bigger and more ambitious and play like a typical console JRPG, so each story mission instead takes 3-5 hours to complete, contributing to a bloated and grindy pacing problem. According to HowLongtoBeat, [TWEWY's storyline](https://howlongtobeat.com/game?id=10277) could be completed in 25 hours on average, [while Neo's story](https://howlongtobeat.com/game?id=85428) takes about 39. It's an interesting transition to see this game try and soft reboot itself after all this time with that 2D->3D leap as well as the handheld->console leap, and hopefully the next game will be able to iterate on it further and resolve the growing pains.

What should modern sequels to classic games try and do? Maintain what made them special, even as the world has moved on? Try and keep up with their contemporaries? How do they reassert themselves as the top dog in their genre after so long in hibernation? What are some other series that came back from the dead and either struggled with this problem or overcame it?I bought Deathloop because of it's immense high praise from the reviewers, also I always liked Arkane Studios games. Having just finished Deathloop (got all three endings) I had fun with it and definitely was a pleasant experience for me, but nowhere near a masterpiece score (a solid 8/10 to me).

But after coming back to all of these 10/10 reviews (IGN, Gamespot, etc.) it feels like none of them warned about some of the glaring issues that this game has. Even the world's biggest Deathloop lover can see that the A.I. in this game is dumb as a brick and it feels like shooting mannequins. The biggest offender to me is how none of these 10/10 reviews didn't even touch on the game's endings, much less talked how incredibly poor and anticlimactic they were. And yet, every single comment section about this game (on Reddit, YouTube, etc.) there are dozens of users commenting about these same problems I said above.

Am I missing something? Did I just got baited into buying a game for overinflated reviews that didn't stated the very basic of this game? Are reviewers nowadays not even finishing the game before even posting the review?Hi everyone, I think this topic is not that new. I did my thesis at college about this idea 8 years ago. However, from what I researched, the act of playing affects our behaviors. In my country, the press and families blame video games for corrupting their children with violence.

I grow up playing many video games with many genres, some of them are violent. But I can't see how it affects my behaviors until now. I'm 30 years old now and I've been playing video games for 20 years. If you still know what NES is, I started playing from that time.

The reason why I'm wondering this is because I love to make video games but I don't want to affect badly on people. My major in college is Multimedia Design and now I want to start my new journey as a game dev. I want to make a great video game that may have a great impact on people's life.

What is your opinion about this effect of playing video games? Does it affect on your behavior?To this day i am yet to find a game so well constructed, so well balanced, so filled with choices and interesting planning that you can do as SWAT 4. Many games after it have tried, and many have failed to replicate what SWAT 4 achieved (Hell, even Splinter Cell, it's main competitor at the time, fell off into the abyss). To me, SWAT 4 is the perfect tactical FPS, a culumination of multiple years of development and learnt experience over 3 games that led to this magnum opus so to speak. There's a reason that there's no SWAT 5, because you couldn't do better than 4 even if you tried. Everything in this game just clicks and i am yet to see a tactical FPS be even remotely as well designed as SWAT 4 (Arma comes close but that's a different genre of tactical FPS). And there are 2 main reasons that i think make SWAT 4, even to this day, a cut above the rest

&#x200B;

1: The level design is top notch

SWAT 4 in my opinion has the perfect level design for what the game is trying to achieve. It's a SWAT simulator so that means that the levels are gonna be houses, stores, drug dens, warehouses etc. Pure urban warfare. And SWAT 4 excells in this. From the simple but tightly packed first mission of the Food Wall Restaurant to the sprawling but consistent A - Bomb nightclub to the creepy, drenched in enviromental storytelling of the Fairfax residence, every level takes you on a journey, and each one is tailored to fit with that think on your feet, check around every corner gameplay that people play these kinds of games for. Level design is something you absolutely have to NAIL when it comes to games like these and SWAT 4 does that and then some

&#x200B;

2: Revise, improvise, compromise

SWAT 4 thrives itself on quick thinking from the player. In this game, you can't just shoot people willy nilly, you're the SWAT after all. In the game there's a command where if you press the f key (or whichever designated button you have put for yourself) you can yell for people to get down. This is absolutely essential for you to do as you walk into every single rooms, for both civilians and the enemies in the level since if an enemy surrenders and you kill them, you will fail the mission. The game helps you with this with it's generous arsenal of non lethal weapons to subdue non surrendering foes and civilians like peper spray, peper ball shotgun, tasers, gas grenade, tear gas etc.

However, sometimes, the enemy might just not surrender. Sometimes the enemy might surrener and then change it's mind and attack you again when you least expect it. This is where the quick thinking comes into play. 2 seconds of decision making can be the difference between life and death for you and your whole squad in this game, and it's that that makes SWAT 4 beyond intense. You need to do everything in your power to not kill anyone, even if that means getting yourself badly hurt in the process and walking through the rest of the level with a limp in both legs. (Ps. you can kill people in this game, you just need to make sure they don't surrender and start shooting first which also adds that extra tense risk) 

&#x200B;

These two things, coupled with the fact that the game still holds up graphically even till this day and you have a true masterpiece of the tactical FPS genre that i don't hear mentioned that often even though it absolutely deserves itI've been working on a project for quite a while. I'm a musician and I've been working on a  "game" to accompany my album. I want to make music videos for the songs of course, to give a visual representation to the music that follows the same esthetic language (they are very abstract songs, and the videos will be very abstract too).

But I also want to make this "game", that will basically serve the same purpose. Give the listener something to look at while they... well... listen.

The "game" will be basically just looking around a series of rooms and lanscapes that, as I said before, accompany the music. But not like a walking simulator, because other than what I have already mentioned there are no other mechanics and interaction is very limited. There will be a few elements that react to what you do and where you are, but that's it. It sounds kind of boring but I think I could make it work, especially taking in consideration that the music is the main focus rather than the gameplay itself. (if you can call it gameplay)

Now, here's the problem.

I don't think it can really be called a videogame given that you can't loose or win and that there is no objective other than just being there. That to me is not a game. There is other "games" that cound fit in the same description (in my opinion) too, like *Flower* from the same guys that made *Journey.*

I don't want to refer to it as a "videogame" because I think it is not, but I can't find other way to call it besides stuff like *Interactive experience* and such, wich to me, sounds vage and pretencious. I want to find a word that really communicates that this thing is something *like* a videogame, but it's not a game. 

Not only I'm asking this because I need a way to refer to this thing but also because there is quite a bit of games out there that don't really feel like ***GAMES***. I've even read people that think that the already mentioned walking simulators are not videogames (wich is an opinion I strongly disagree with by the way) and I really wanted to see other people's take on that.The hype that builds up around certain titles in gaming is insane. Hype certainly builds up around albums, books, movies, but it can reach extreme proportions in gaming. 

However, it feels like many - maybe most - hyped games fail to deliver on their hype. Examples of such failures abound - Fable, No Man's Sky, Cyberpunk 2077, to name a few.

Perhaps more interesting are the few games that manage to deliver on their hype (the most recent and biggest example that comes to me is Breath of the Wild).

Hype is about inflating expectations, and delivering is about meeting those expectations, so it might sound like an impossible proposition from the outset, but clearly it can be done. So for developers that manage to deliver on the hype they've built - how did they do it?If you've tried to submit content in the past 7 days, your post was taken down automatically and silently by the automatic spam filter. We don't have control over this spam filter besides setting it between three settings, Low, High, and All. High is the default that it has always been on. Apparently, it decided that content was overrated and removed literally everything.

We have set the setting to Low for now while we contact the reddit admins and try to figure out why it happened.

If you posted in the last 7 days, apologies! Your content may not have been the problem (although you better not be posting those darn list posts!) but rather it was the sub's fault.

We'll keep an eye on what the spam filter is doing for the next few days while we sort this out.

Thanks for your understanding!I'm just tired how gaming companies sometimes are acting so disrespectful to players. They are like not listening. Or make something bad, especially in microtransactions stuff. The invisible hand of market is sometimes not working and that's why we need a regulation from government. Of course, in democratian way, not authoritarian like China. I just recently realised how Rovio killed Angry Birds franchise and I got an idea.

We can't get rid off completely microtransactions and lootboxes, but can regulate it. I think government should make some reforms like restricting what to sell in game and how lootboxes should work. For example, before you are opening lootboxes, you can check out chances to get some item. For example, in Genshin Impact banners you can see how you have chances to get 4 star or 5 star characters and items, and check how you can give a pity that will increase a chance. Then, government should regulate how chances you can get. I know that in Genshin you basically without a pity have about 1% chance to get 5 star character. So why not to increase it?

Then again, government should make new laws about listening to players and respecting them. If the company does something bad, players can submit it to the government at its discretion. After which the company will be fined. I believe that every company should have a kind of rating. If the company does more good for the players, then it will receive more karma and, therefore, receive a bonus. Or otherwase, they need to pay more taxes to government.

I heard how people stopped buying from companies. Some have switched to indies. But it doesn't solve the problem. We need a government regulation.This doesn't apply to a few genres like walking sims.  


I'm not the greatest gamer out there, but I, like many of you, have been playing videogames for a very long time, so it's rare for me to struggle with stuff that a beginner may find difficult: things like button layouts, aiming, orientation, camera movement.   


With that said, I definitely approve when developers do the best they can to help beginners, because as gaming becomes more and more mainstream, there are going to be more and more and more beginners. What they often forget though is that many games without difficulty fall apart, because the challenge is very often core to the experience  


here are the consequences that, off the top of my head, lack of difficulty can create:  


\-Disconnect from the story

So many games feature empowering stories which put you at the center of a conflict that will decide the future of the universe. So many baddies in so many videogames get no or a nonsensical motivation at most, but what writers usually spend the time on is making that villain at least look menacing. But I'm pretty sure that if you're reading this, then you've already played some boss fights that didn't meet that expectation and went down very easily. So, while you're supposed to triumph with the main characters, you're left with emptyness and disappointment.

\-Disconnect from the quiet moments.

If the game is always easy, then the parts where the game is purposefully easy for the sake of pacing will result boring. If The End in Metal Gear Solid 3 was an easy and quick boss, then The Ladder wouldn't have been such an iconic moment, while like this is a perfect intermission between one of the hardest bossfights and the next biome which will feature more complex stealth challenges. Even the graphics will be enjoyed more, because, if the game is difficult, you won't have the concentration to appreciate them when you're fighting, but the impact they will have when you will have that concentration will be heightened.

\-Lack of true progression

We all know games like to trick us into thinking we've actually become better at the game by showing us a bigger number on the screen. And while it works in a lot of cases, seasoned gamers will be able to see behind the façade. If it took three hits to defeat an old enemy, and now I've become stronger and it takes two, then I've not become stronger: the game has become easier. Of course a game can do both things, say, it takes two hits instead of three but now you have a third more enemies to take care of, so the difficulty stays the same; but I wouldn't be making this post if every game nailed this. A very big symptom of this phenomenon is when boss fights don't get more and more difficult the more you play but vary wildly and even get easier (unless it's on purpose). 

\-Content is ignored

 **"Given the opportunity, players will optimize the fun out of a game."** this quote is famous and I don't know where it comes from, but it's true. If you make a cool moveset to your enemy that is well telegraphed to the player, but the player isn't punished enough for not learning it, then the player will not learn it and won't have the satisfaction of having bested the enemy. This applies to many of the facets of game design, and it will result in a lot of your work wasted.

&#x200B;

Another thing to keep in mind is that difficulty is the biggest "litmus test" you can do when trying to identify if the game's mechanics are well calibrated and fair. If you notice the game's difficulty doesn't scale "linearly" with the parameters you're changing when calibrating such difficulty, then it means that there often is something that might break the game's balance. Very often innocuous challenges in other difficulties can become terrible choke points in others. We also know of artificial difficulty and nobody likes it (e.g. in new Assassin's Creed games when you do 1 point of damage but the enemy moveset remains the same lame moveset)  


Here comes Kena: Bridge of Spirits, a game that has been overall well received but criticized for being a tiny bit too shallow in the story and the combat and the world.  


It has 3 intended difficulties for the first playthrough: easy, medium and hard, but it has a 4th difficulty  that you unlock after the completion of the game, called master. Now, personally speaking, I hate doing second playthroughs of videogames, and nowhere in the marketing was the combat highlighted as the focus of the videogame, so I used a small trick on the game's [pcgamingwiki](https://www.pcgamingwiki.com/wiki/Kena:_Bridge_of_Spirits) to unlock it for your first playthrough.  


Man, was it a blast.

This game is well thought out and what was probably too simplistic on normal difficulty became a very tough but also very fair challenge, that made me despise every villain I encountered but also master every encounter, and care for their story. It is surprising that a game made by a handful of people is probably a bigger challenge and a better one than, say, Dark Souls 3. Of course I had to insert Dark Souls into this conversation lmao. By having simple mechanics but well thought out ones, Kena and it's world will always be etched in my mind because it managed to succeed in the pitfalls that it otherwise would've certainly suffered had it been too easy.

The only thing I wish they did is have the courage to make master difficulty available for everyone from the start (although they kinda did with a very simple trick you can do on pc, so I kinda think that it was on purpose), but as my first playthrough, it was one of the best experiences in the last years of gaming. Every time I beat every boss I had struggled with, I felt like it wasn't down to luck but down to me mastering the mechanics of that boss in particular, and that I could've defeated him again if I confronted immediately. 

Very few games do this well while also being rewarding, and the only example that I can think of recently is Kingdom Hearts 3 Remind's bosses, but even then, only if you use the difficulty modifiers to disable a lot of broken click to win mechanics, so it doesn't really count despite being one of my favourite games ever.

TL:DR

With that said: every player has its own skill level and everyone should play at the difficulty they want, but that difficulty SHOULD BE DIFFICULT FOR THEM, or they won't enjoy the game to the fullest. And unfortunately developers seem to forget about the higher skilled players and just make a game that is good for the average player or lower.It seems Kotaku and Metroid Dread got people talking about piracy again, so might as well talk about it here. Is piracy morally acceptable?

My position is if the game is no longer available to purchase, then yes, piracy is acceptable as there is no other way to get the game. However, if a game is readily available, like Metroid Dread is, then piracy is not acceptable. 

Some will claim it’s ok because because the game can be reproduced infinitely. However this only looks at the variable costs of games, and ignores the fixed cost of game production. Also, at the end of the day, if someone creates a product for sale, and you take said product without paying for it, that is the definition of theft.I suppose I primarily want to hear the communities' thoughts on Deathloop. But to get everyone started, here are some of my thoughts:

It's a singleplayer campaign game with sort of asymetric online duels. Besides Dark Souls, I can't think of many or any other games that allow an online player to invade someone's singleplayer campaign - especially no "sandbox shooters". Whenever I get "invaded" I always have a lot of fun - it ties in so well with the game's setting and story. It's immersive and I feel like I am prey trying to become the hunter. It's very exciting!

What genre is Deathloop even? Roguelike? Sandbox shooter? Shooter puzzle game? Shooter RPG? Whatever genre dishonored was? It's tough to say and damn if that isn't a fantastic thing. How often do we get games that do not conform clearly to a genre or can easily be described as "that game, but slightly different or made with a different story and painted blue"? To me Deathloop is something new, and after gaming for most of my life I don't have the luxury of playing "new" very often. I'm thankful for that.

I also want to point out the obvious similarity to the recent Hitman games. Deathloop too relies on you learning the gameworld, the various characters and their routines over the 4 parts of the day. It too allows you to kill targets in multiple ways and encourages you to learn how they operate to pull of the perfect kill. But compared to Hitman, you can have things on one time period and location affect others which I think is very cool. It adds another element of strategising and "Gameworld learning" which hitman doesn't have (but arguably doesn't need either). I don't want to say Deathloop is a better Hitman, but to me it takes many strengths from hitman without the weaknesses and I really like it for that. One of the biggest things I like is how it keeps track of leads for you. If you learn new info, it is saved and will be shown whenever you go to a location at the correct time to benefit from the information. It makes it easier to keep an overview of what is happening compared to Hitman, but I don't feel like my band is being held too much either. They managed to strike a good balance.


Plus, I love the 70s artstyle and music. 

What do you guys think? How do you feel about Deathloop? Did it get too little praise and attention?I started playing Days Gone recently. I picked it as my next game in the backlog after platinuming Ghost of Tsushima. So far I've had a really mixed experience with Days Gone, but it's not that I haven't enjoyed the game -- at least, not in the sense most people probably think of when they consider whether or not a game is fun. I do think the game is fun, however, my fun is dampened by the near constant anxiety I feel when I play it, which I think is a testament to the game's quality.

For those who haven't played it, Days Gone has the following off the top of my head:

\- a bleak narrative in a "zombie" infested open world filled with raiders, survivor camps, with both a main storyline and option missions

\- a "mount" in the form of a motorcycle that you can customize and upgrade, which uses fuel for regular and fast travel, requiring the player to conserve and find gas while traveling, as well as repair their bike at times

\- scarce ammo and resources for crafting weapons and other useful items

\- a reputation system with different camps

\- unlockable/purchasable weapons

\- a stealth and cover system

\- 3rd person shooting

So far I've completed probably five or six main story missions and some side missions, including finding "freaker nests" and destroying them, although I have not yet killed a "horde" which is a large group (dozens to hundreds) of freakers, that act like boss fights.

While playing, I often feel forced to take things at an almost agonizingly slow pace. This is because death can come quick when you get ganged up on by freakers, the need to frequently look for resources while traveling or in an engagement area, and what I feel the need to call the "realism" of the game. Whenever I rush through somewhere, I inevitably create problems for myself by not seeing an enemy that was hidden. This has lead to some fun and immersive moments of emergent gameplay.

So far in about 10 hours of playing, I have been ambushed twice by bandits/raiders/marauders. The first time occurred when I was on my way to a mission area, and I was knocked off my bike by a clothesline strung between two cars on either side of the road. I was immediately set upon by NPCs, who although they died easily, severely damaged my bike and created an exciting moment.

Similarly, I was riding and was shot at with a sniper rifle from a ridge overlooking a stretch of road. I narrowly avoided being shot off my bike, went and parked near the enemy camp, and proceeded up the path to their area. It took several tries to kill the enemies in this camp because I kept creating issues for myself. One time I was being very careful not to set off any tripwires, only to blast right through one as I was creeping up on an enemy whom I assassinated. Although my assassination was successful, the whole camp came down on me and killed me because I hit the tripwire. Another time, I accidentally stepped on a bear trap and my characters screams drew in a group of about a dozen freakers, who then went on to attack the enemy camp while I hid. Yet another time I hid when a wolf wandered into the camp and began attacking the enemies.

This isn't the only time something like this happened. And I have to say, whether these are truly emergent moments from the game's different systems and AI, or if they're very cleverly hidden behind triggers and routines, I really enjoyed them, frustrating though they were at times. It felt like it added to the realism. Anyway, another time I was at a small town trying to destroy nests. I saw an enemy patrolling around a small lake on their bike who was being chased by about 50 freakers. I laid in wait to shoot the enemy off their bike, only to run out of focus, not get a shot off, be seen by the freakers, and immediately overwhelmed by the small horde.

I think that all these systems are good on their own, and perhaps I just suck at the game, but it feels like it would be much more enjoyable if it could be played cooperatively with a friend. When on your own, you have to stake out an area the freakers can't get to and shoot them from there, or perform a combination of sprinting, turning around to fire your weapon, sprinting, turning around to fire your weapon, repeat. With a friend(s) I think the cooperation aspects that could be built in, building and maintaining a base, potential survival aspects, and the ability to set up fields of fire when taking out groups of freakers would be superior to the single player experience that exists now. All of the systems seem like a friendlier, more approachable version of something like DayZ, and I just think that all of the systems currently in the game, and its general design would lend itself well to an online survival game.So currently I am playing Lost Judgment and I am loving the game so much, considering it’s the sequel to my favorite game of all time. But there is something that’s been bugging me about this game and most new games in general.

When you wait a long time for a game to come out and it finally does, I feel like there are 2 conflicting things going on in my head, I want to play the game as much as I can and find out all the twists and turns in the story, but I also don’t want to rush through the game too fast considering I waited so long. One game I ran through too fast was Death Stranding, This was a game I was waiting a long time for since I’m a huge fan of Kojima’s work, and I found myself rushing through the story ignoring a ton of side content just to find out what happens, and when I finished the game I definitely loved it except I wish I didn’t beat it so fast, I waited years for it and finished it in days.

this conflict feels like a lose lose situation, especially when you find yourself with a lot of extra free time for games, I really wanted to know the ending of Death Stranding, and see each characters story concluded, but I also wish I took more time with a game I was anticipating for a long time. Do any of you have similar stories of regret and how do you deal with it?I want to discuss why TrackMania doesn't get talked about more in mainstream gaming media, and why it isn't really popular.

The game does a lot of things right.

## Easy to learn, hard to master

The game is very easy to pick up. It's an arcade racer. In essence, you have 4 buttons. Accelerate, brake, steer left, and right. Note: left and right can be analog input, and as such most players play with a controller for precision, however there are still pro players that play with keyboard. So the game is very simple, and you can quickly jump in and play. If you crash, you can just restart with a single button, and a couple seconds later you're already playing again.

The game also has incredible depth. Drifting, speed sliding, gear management, and all kinds of small tricks will give you just a bit more speed, and doing everything as precise as possible will give you even more. Then there's of course consistency as well, as you can't be ultra precise every single round, so you have to evaluate how risky you want to be.

##Community and the features around it

This is the main thing that makes TrackMania great. The developers have a lot of features that help the community. Map building is of course a big one, but also things such as having a quite open software. While heavy modding is not supported (as in changing physics or adding new gameplay elements), there are other things available. They release their server software, so anyone with a bit of knowledge about hosting can do so if they want. Furthermore, the server has an API where you can listen to all kinds of events, such as people finishing a lap, someone joining etc, and then display that in UI that players see when on that server. Before they released their matchmaking, I was actually in the process of creating my own matchmaking system (like FaceIT for CSGO), and had a working proof of concept fairly quickly.

There's of course also the streamers. They have been growing quite a lot, and even some of the big Twitch streamers such as Ludwig and Lirik have been dipping their feet in TrackMania. Streamers will often hold small tournaments and play viewer maps. It's a growing part of the game, and will probably continue to grow.

## Competition

You're always responsible for what happens to your driving. Other players don't affect your driving. Sure, you can be a part of a team, but you can still do well yourself, and you'll be happy with it. In my time of playing, I don't think I have seen a single player be genuinely toxic to someone else.

A lot of people and organisations organize tournaments, and everyone are free to compete. There are tournaments that are months long or just normal tournaments as well. There are all kinds of different styles, and everyone can compete in some way. Kacky is a good example of that, as the maps mostly requires tons of tries before you even finish it. They're very difficult, and can sometimes just come down to pure luck (even though the game is deterministic).

There's TMGL that started a couple years ago, which is the official league for the top 16 players. It runs over a couple months, but it has its issues. The maps are very hard and long, so casual players will have a hard time to compete on them. There's also been a lot of issues with the format of the league, as players used to be punished heavily for not finishing top 8 on a map. This has been changed now, but the new system might be just as bad.

## Payment model

The base game is *free*. You have all the gameplay features unlocked, and can play anything that other players can also play. There's nothing in terms of gameplay locked. You can pay for standard edition to play on custom servers, and club edition to have your own club with server hosting from the developers. It's not even that expensive for standard edition.

## Why isn't the game more popular?

The game is definitely growing, but there are reasons as to why it hasn't been too popular. The developers were quite slow to start the league and ride the esports wave. I think this may be the biggest thing that stunted the growth of the game. Another thing is also that it's just a car game, and some people may shrug it off as most other car games have been closer to sim-racers and be more realistic. Marketing is also a pretty big thing. The devs are French, and have been mostly markted in the European market. France and Germany are the two most represented countries.

So what do you think? Does it deserve more? Are there other reasons as to why the game hasn't grown more?I recently saw a post on Twitter of this mockup of a "full screen PSVITA". [https://twitter.com/its\_menieb/status/1443965694937374738?s=20](https://twitter.com/its_menieb/status/1443965694937374738?s=20)

Here's a link to the video on reddit if you want that:
https://www.reddit.com/r/vita/comments/q0bhma/thoughts_on_this_design_if_it_was_used_for_a/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web2x&context=3


&#x200B;
Anyway, Its main new feature is the fact its entire front surface, minus the buttons and analogue sticks, are a screen. And I was thinking how well would this design work if it was considered for a new Playstation Portable/Vita 2?

Personally, I'm not sold on its practicality. It looks amazing but I doubt it would work well as a serious device.

For one, the buttons and your fingers would obscure part of the "screen". The screen is also significantly curved at that point. This means either the UI and camera would have to be significantly readjusted for games on the Vita 2 so those don't obscure any important info if all of the screen is used thereby increasing the cost of development especially for ports, or the game would default to a standard rectangular display and thus leave all that extra "screen" unused and a drain on the battery.

I know mobile gamers deal with having their fingers obscure part of the screen but at least there, it's a tradeoff since while it may be less optimal when gaming, the screen performs well when doing other stuff. With the Vita 2, even if you use it for other stuff like watching videos, you'd still have the buttons obscuring part of the screen. Plus, mobile gamers can buy controllers and attachments to avoid the issue. There isn't an equivalent here.

Another issue is the size. This is about the size of the Vita. This is a problem if it has to play PS3 and 4 games since it would be very difficult if not impossible to both make it powerful enough at that size and have a suitable battery that can last for a decent amount of time. To say nothing of overheating. The Switch is at least a fair bit bigger and has a fan.

It also lacks triggers

Bit of an aside but I don't think Sony will make a PSVITA 2. And that's me speaking as a fan of the PSP and Vita. It seems unlikely from a market perspective.

The Switch was successful because Nintendo already had a healthy handheld line and developers that made games for it while not really doing well if they competed with Sony and Microsoft as a console. In addition, Nintendo doesn't focus on graphical fidelity so it was easy for Nintendo to shift everything towards a main handheld and consolidate all devs to work on one main platform without being limited by being a handheld.

The Steam Deck has the advantage that it has access to Steam, one of the largest libraries ever. In addition, if the user is already a PC player, they have their entire library already available on the Steam Deck with no additional purchases. Valve doesn't need to make games for it as it already has them.

Sony doesn't have these advantages. If they were to make a new handheld it wouldn't be as powerful as the PS4 since they have to keep production costs low so people will buy it. Meaning it won't have access to the PS4's entire library and devs will have to tweak their PS4 or earlier games to work on it taking up valuable development resources. In addition, Sony would have to support a PS3.5 like device while also supporting the PS4, PS5 and PSVR at the same time. And seeing as they'd have to make graphically impressive games since that's their MO, it would limit the speed and production of games for the new handheld. And at that point, Sony's better off making games for their already established platforms.

Basically, Nintendo only has to worry about supporting one device by doing what they were already doing. Valve doesn't have to worry about making any games for the Steam Deck. But Sony would have its attention and resources divided far more by a device that would need a lot more resources to even stay afloat. A somewhat casual-hardcore gamer has access to the Switch for portable play. A PC player has access to the Steam Deck. The only real advantage the Vita 2 would have is being able to play some Playstation exclusives portable. Which would mean mostly porting worse versions of existing PS4 games and spending valuable resources to make PS3.5 level games that may generate more money being used to make PS5 games instead.This particular phobia seems to elicit the most visceral reaction in people, even those without the phobia, so why isn't it commonly used. 

Like I remember the unintentional mlb the show 17 glitches and that messed me up more than any horror media I've consumed.

[Link for anyone who wishes to see it](https://www.kotaku.com.au/2017/03/horrifying-mlb-the-show-glitch-is-not-okay/), of course content warning disturbing imagery.Many regular posters here at [r/truegaming](https://www.reddit.com/r/truegaming/) may often wonder how to improve their posts to better improve possible discussions, but have been unable to get the feedback they desire in any form besides a downvote. This monthly post is designed for frequent posters of [r/truegaming](https://www.reddit.com/r/truegaming/) to receive the feedback they'd like in an organized fashion.

If you are seeking feedback for your posts, we recommend linking to your threads and explaining your thought process in posting them. Explaining the reasoning behind how you posted may be key to finding out what you did wrong and what can be improved. We also recommend including what type of discussion you wanted to start within your threads, and what you believe your own strengths/weaknesses are as a discussion author. This way, people can gauge how you see yourself and can give feedback appropriately.

If you would like to give feedback, we emphasize to please be constructive and polite when doing so. This post is designed for posters to learn from their mistakes, and in order to do so, a decently-sized explanation of their mistakes may be needed. Please also consider replying to those who may not have any replies yet, for even the smallest amount of feedback can help discussion authors.cRPGs - the Baldur's Gate trilogy, The Neverwinter nights duology, Icewind Dale, Kotor, Dragon age and the list goes on... Are all games that seek to import the experience of tabletop roleplaying games to the computer world, and enable players immersive campaigns. Some are used to play Persistent Roleplaying worlds too, but in this case I shall focus on single player.

Now, why does one play such a roleplaying game? For a long time, the community was divided into three axes - Simulationism, Narrativism, Gamism. The three axes can mix and match as they please, and everyone has different preferences.

However, I doubt I would be stating anything controversial by saying Narrativism and Simulationism tend to be the dominant reasons, with varying degrees of gamism tacked on. If one sought Gamism proper, they'd play a Wargame  rather than a roleplaying one, after all! This is even how Chainmail was developed. 

For computer games, for primary-Gamism one would play Diablo or some other hack and slash isometric RPG lootrunner. 

So, what does that leave either Narrativists and Simulationists? While Simulationism rejects tailoring encounter design for sake of drama, it does still frown upon encounters that encourage munchkinism or minmaxing. Both behaviours that negatively affect immersion. And Narrativism? Sure, a difficult/hard story might require difficulty, but again munchkinism/minmaxing is antithethical to Narrativists.

One does have to qualify what they mean by difficulty. In this case, by difficulty I refer to the character statblocks rather than rules. Friendly fire, additional immunities/concealment, bigger spawns and whatnot are not an issue. What I find issue with, having been watching my friend play Wrath of Righteous is the statblocks.

In other words, on Core, enemies get higher AC/AB/DR/HP/APR/DC/saves. Pillars has the same issue with its difficulty settings, but is worse. In Wrath, one can customize difficulty to get all the core rules going, while disabling enemy scaling. In Pillars, far I understood, such is not possible.


So, what's the issue with AC/AB/DR/HP/APR/DC/saves increasing with difficulty? Well - simple: they make characters with realistic flaws and strengths non-viable. You need to min-max to be able to land hits or not die too quickly. Min-maxing is antithethical to roleplaying, and I say this as someone who enjoys building 3.5E statblocks and marvelling at the insane numbers possible... But I do that with constraint of a character's background and tie behaviour to it. 


I'm not really sure what I meant to say here beyond that I feel that in Wrath of Righteous, amusingly, playing on Core does not reflect the core P&P experience. A proper DM would punish the required munchining (dumpstatting cha/wis/int on non-casters, relying on int-monkeys for skill checks, dumpstatting str/dex on mages and whatnot) when the player does not properly roleplay those dumpstats. On Core, those dumpstats are almost required, which is anti-Roleplay.In case you've not heard of it, Six Days in Fallujah is an upcoming tactical fps game developed by Highwire Games where you play as US Marines during the Iraq War. This is actually a project that was cancelled once nearly a decade ago due to controversy surrounding its setting, and was revived recently.

Regardless of the political controversy, I find the game very intriguing for its genre alone -- a single-player squad-based tactical FPS. The same genre as games like SWAT 4, which is pretty much a dead genre currently. Most if not all tactical FPS games today are multiplayer only, which is why when Ready or Not was announced, a lot of people were excited. Here we have Six Days in Fallujah, another game aiming to revive that genre, yet I don't see it getting nearly as much attention as Ready or Not in that regard. 

I guess it comes with the controversial setting, but I do wish discussions about it weren't so hyper focused on the setting. It's still a game first and foremost, and from the gameplay trailer, it's shaping up to be an enjoyable one. It's reviving a dead game genre, with its own improvements (random-generated maps on each attempt); I mean, surely that's gotta count for something.China is currently trying to define what kind of content is acceptable to include in games. A lot of them are just political stuff like how you should portray Nazis, Samurai, Myths, History, etc. but I don't want to get into that stuff because this is a gaming subreddit. 

It gets thrown around a lot that some aspects of game development should be regulated, so I wanted to hear your thoughts on these content related mandates regarding game development in China, these are just the ones that I think are mostly apolitical so the topic can stay on games:

* Cannot force players to spend money

* Cannot re-skin or re-release old games

* Lootboxes are strictly prohibited

* No lottery or wheel of fortune mechanics

* No treasure hunting or smashing golden eggs mechanics (not sure, seems like more loot box stuff from a google search?)

* No refer-a-friend mechanics

* No gear crafting that relies on RNG (I'm guessing they mean like scrolling in Maplestory or Rivens in Warframe?)

* No characters with RNG attributes/stats

* Game cannot be missing too many features (underdeveloped) in a clearly unfinished state

* Version of the game released must match the version submitted for review

* Game cannot use the same art assets too much (repetitive) or use stolen assets from other games

* Provide us with the resources to review the entire game (do not waste our time training or grinding)

* Do not exaggerate in your advertising, do not hire fake reviewers, do not advertise for something that won't be in the release, do not say "to be continued", "coming soon", etc. Go back and finish your game, we do not want to see unfinished games

* Incomplete story, lacks explanations about the world, characters, or gear.

* Need to fully disclose all details about your payment model, do not advertise to your players too much

* Game bugs subject to scrutiny (we are not your QA and require all QA audit reports from developers)

* Review of stamina systems (think Farmville and how you can only play it when you have enough stamina in-game)

So what do you guys think of these regulations? Do you think the government should have any say about game development? Are there any you would like to see implemented in your country as well?

Update: I think it was wrong of me to exclude the political aspects just because I didn't think a gaming subreddit was the right place to talk about it, especially since it was pretty much the standard censorship stuff that we've seen a ton of already. But people are right that this is inherently political and excluding those portions can give people the wrong idea about these regulations. There's a translation for these up on another subreddit (not sure if I can mention the name bc it's censored on some subreddits) with the full list that I think people should check out: https://i.redd.it/ayk7zsxk6iq71.jpg   
There's a lot to go through but I think the points that summarizes it the most would be:

* Games should not allow the players to go against the morals of society. 

* Games should not blur the moral boundaries. 

* Games should not allow the player to make evil decisions or decisions that lead to anarchy.

Source: https://chinadigitaltimes.net/chinese/671510.html**Context:**

By fighting game standards, Guilty Gear Strive did [incredibly well](https://www.pcgamesn.com/guilty-gear-strive/sales) sales-wise, especially in comparison to Arc System Work's other in-house titles, here [one example](https://www.eventhubs.com/news/2020/jun/10/blazblue-cross-tag-battle-eclipses-450000-copies-sold-2-years-after-launch/).

The studio has made a name for itself by conquering almost the entire anime fighting game market, especially after the release of [Dragon Ball FighterZ](https://www.playstationlifestyle.net/2018/10/31/dragon-ball-fighterz-sales-figures-3-5-million/#/slide/1) in 2018, for which the publisher Bandai Namco hired Arc System Works to develop the game. Then Cygames did the same for [Granblue Fantasy Versus](https://www.siliconera.com/granblue-fantasy-versus-sales-pass-450000-copies-worldwide/) and Nexon too with [DNF Duel](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sEUMKQnMWZ8).  

**Announcement to release:**

When the initial 2019 [Evo announcement trailer](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RVd6vhFhYiM) for Guilty Gear Strive dropped, it immediately picked up steam. The [arcrevo 2019 trailer](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TrDaEqZC22A) also created a lot of hype. 
The fighting game community however had a mixed reception. The previous installment, "Guilty Gear Xrd Revelator 2", had great visuals and a great soundtrack too, but didn't manage to compete with the numbers of bigger names like Tekken, Street Fighter, or Mortal Kombat, so the expectations for Strive weren't high. 
Upon playing the Arcrevo test version of Guilty Gear Strive, players also noticed that it broke many traditions of the franchise in the attempt to become more newcomer friendly, to which the competitive scene [reacted negatively](https://www.reddit.com/r/Guiltygear/comments/dyp3oj/teresas_verdict_on_gg_strive_post_arc_revo/) and it [got worse](https://www.reddit.com/r/Guiltygear/comments/dtqg02/leffen_on_gg_simplifying_mechanic_doesnt_mean/) when the director stated in a [2019 interview](https://www.eventhubs.com/news/2019/nov/29/arcsys-little-torn-between-using-rollback-or-delay-based-netcode-guilty-gear-strive-according-daisuke-ishiwatari/) that they're considering to use their outdated delay netcode for Strive's online pvp.  
Meanwhile, a much older Guilty Gear title [was being updated](https://www.eventhubs.com/news/2020/oct/29/guilty-gear-rollback-beta/) with the superior rollback netcode, which caused a large number of players to go back to it and give it a shot.  
Over the course of 2020, Arc System Works backpedalled and announced that Strive will [run on rollback netcode](https://dotesports.com/fgc/news/guilty-gear-strive-will-finally-implement-rollback-netcode) as well, which was [received so overwhelmingly positive](https://www.reddit.com/r/Guiltygear/comments/fl1z8e/oh_btwrollback_netcode/) by the community that it overshadowed other discussions for the time being.  
The game was then [delayed](https://www.reddit.com/r/Guiltygear/comments/gk1611/guilty_gear_strive_delayed_to_early_2021/) from 2020 to 2021, primarily due to Covid. During that time, Arc System Works stayed in touch with potential players via a series of ["Developer Backyard"](https://www.arcsystemworks.jp/guiltygear/db/en/volume1.php) articles.

Parts of the core fighting game community were [still not fully convinced](https://www.reddit.com/r/Fighters/comments/ko9p0g/why_are_people_down_on_guilty_gear_strive/) of the game at this point, especially after [the online open beta test](https://www.reddit.com/r/Fighters/comments/lo1w3y/my_thoughts_on_guilty_gear_strive_thus_far/), which was riddled with server issues. However, there were an incredible amount of eyes on the game already, so much so that even [larger online personalities](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AgHsHtAeM7A) participated in the messy open beta and then still played it on release. Any negative feedback was quickly drowned out. The game was being [delayed further](https://old.reddit.com/r/Guiltygear/comments/lx8yvw/guilty_gear_strive_delayed/) by two months after the terrific server failures of the second open beta test, but the game was already a guaranteed success at this point.

**Present:**

Now it has been 3 months since the game's release in June 2021. Player numbers completely exceeded expectations and went into the 30000s [on Steam alone](https://steamcharts.com/app/1384160). Previous Guilty Gear titles never went above 3000 players, even on release. As usual, the player count began to decline over the months, but the game still isn't done trending. Most recently, the [Jack-O challenge](https://knowyourmeme.com/memes/jack-o-crouch-jack-o-challenge) was all over the internet and caused another popularity spike when she was released in August.

The question remains, what exactly lead to the game's success compared to its predecessors? I think it is a combination of the following:

1. The rollback netcode announcement. Everyone even mildly interested in playing fighting games has probably caught wind of this being a must-have nowadays. The hype for rollback netcode during the pandemic had both critics and the community go easy on the game and be forgiving with its flaws. Here I must say that Arc System Works got incredibly lucky.
2. Social Media and transparency. The frequent developer interviews, articles and also the Arc System Works twitter doing promotion non-stop every day.
3. Reputation. They were able to consistently create high quality games, so people felt like it is worth listening to them and stay engaged, even if the game isn't out yet.
4. The promise of accessibility. This was probably further emphasized by older Guilty Gear veterans complaining about it initially. Having played both Strive and GG Xrd myself, I feel confident in saying that this is exaggarated. Strive isn't that much "easier" than GG Xrd, it is just "different" - one of the top Strive players (Fame96) said the same thing. I believe accessibility became a self-fulfilling prophecy. Lots of new people came in, heard that it is easy to pick up without a lot of other fighting games to compare it to and then told further new people the same thing. So while it isn't easy to play on paper, there are/were more newcomers to play against than in most other fighting games.
5. Graphics and sound. Guilty Gear has always been a series with stellar soundtrack and visuals, but this time it got the spotlight.

With all that said, what is in Guilty Gear Strive's future?  
The game's player retention is unfortunately similar to that of [DBFZ](https://steamcharts.com/app/678950), meaning pretty low. However, looking at for how long DBFZ has been receiving developer support, Strive will likely keep getting updated for years to come as well, so players who did pick it up and enjoy it definitely made a good purchase.

**In Closing:**  
With all that said, I'm happy about Strive's success and it was a step into the right direction for the genre overall, despite blunders along the way. Better netcode, more communication between developers and players, and a lot of positivity in the genre again after it was all gloom and doom during the pandemic.https://youtu.be/k1JhFiiRqW8

Great video on the topic of you haven't seen it already.
There are a lot of reasons why adult games are as jank as they are, many of them covered in this hilarious yet informative video by NeverKnowsBest. They are often made by people that have nothing to do with the traditional gaming industry, the target audience mostly isn't looking for very deep experiences and at the end of the day,  a "porn game' depicting deep and realisitic romantic experiences per definition stops being a porn game and is just adult romance with sex scenes... between which there is a pretty blurry line and not only on top of genetalia wink wink nudge

This all makes sense in the broad and generic sense, but it still leaves the question of why there isn't even ONE quality game in this genre? One with characters that have actual human proportions, one where people talk like people and dirty talk is actually wrote by people that actually talked to the other gender in a sexual manner before.

Don't get me wrong, I GET while the vast majority of this medium is covered by the lowest common denominator, but there has to be ONE outlier, doesn't it? Is the human lustfulness such an individual experience that its Impossible to create a high quality experience that doesn't feel like stumbling into the adult area of a cheap, barely in-business VHS rental place?
And even If it is, why isn't there an example where someone tried to create this and failed?


And one thing I want to adress here: Graphics is one reason, but it can't be the only one. It is pretty freaking hard to create a human looking 3d character that isn't uncanny even with the near unlimited funds of Blockbuster Hollywood. Add to that the fact that it all has to take place in an interactive game engine AND usually they don't have close to that type of budget, I get why the 3d realm is mostly stuck with aliens in hope of ending up at the other side of the uncanny valley. There are other forms of Graphics though. You can make appealing 2d art, anime or not. It just never happens. I've literally never ever seen any adult medium having appealing looking characters that aren't either Anime or cartoony and in both cases, proportions are very "stylized". On the other hand, Non-adult fiction has those in spades.

I have given up on this style of game a long time ago because there is always something that makes this stuff extremely hard to enjoy for me, even if it's just for the fact that I feel that the game treats me as a lustful moron.

In all the porn games that are out there, there is not one that respects me, my intelligence and best case scenario, even the people depicted?I mean mobile phones have enough computing power to be able to run games like civ vi and call of duty now. 

Classics like KOTOR, FF7 and dragon quest were  successfully recreated without the controls being clunky. 

Furthermore games like sasquatch show that mobile games have potential to have an amazing single player experience and still acheive success and popularity. It’s been at the number 1 spot in Apple Arcade for a while. Averaging 4.9 ratings. 


It seems like mobile games have tremendous potential with pretty much everyone owning a phone. Gaming is the most popular app genre on App Store and the google play store. But we rarely see studios care about this platform at all or make a serious attempt at creating a AAA experience.After finishing up a Chaotic Evil playthrough of Pathfinder: Wrath of The Righteous and experiencing all the rewards and penalties given to an evil player I find myself wondering, should there be any drawbacks in RPG's for being good or evil?

In most RPG's there aren't many drawbacks of being a good guy, the player usually still gets respect and glory. Evil playthroughs usually end up being boiled down to just being selfish, mean, or psychotic. Some games can lock content behind an alignment system causing the player to feel pressured to pursue 'good' or 'evil' options in every interaction. Games like Mass Effect, Dishonored, Fallout, and more reward you for taking the high road. It may be easier or more rewarding in terms of loot to act immorally but many find the final outcomes to be well worth the sacrifice. 

Some games like the Witcher 3 trend towards greyer situations where the player can be punished for naivete or carelessness while games like Dragon Age: Origins focus on how your interactions with fellow party members aligns with their personal philosophy or not.

For most games however you are intended to play as the hero, the essence of good in virtual form. Most D&D or Pathfinder adventures are made for parties of good or at least neutral alignment and the epilogues for most video game RPG's usually pat the player on the back for their selfless actions. 

In general, it is easy to be a good guy. But should it always be? If a game presented two paths to take, one 'good' and one 'evil' where the good path resulted in the player getting no rewards or praise for their actions while the evil path led to fame and fortune would players still choose the good path more often like in most other games. Are binary alignments just too simple to reveal anything interesting about humans? Are neutral options usually just good-lite options? Can a developer make a player authentically import their personal moral philosophy into their world? Or is encouraging the player to role play instead of self-inserting themselves the better choice?So I'm conducting research to find out why people quit certain types of games to support my thesis (Masters level degree at SCAD). I need as much data as I can get, so everyone is welcome to take the survey and/or reply here. It would mean so much if you participate! :) And if you have any suggestions to make this a more effective survey, feel free to comment about that too!

This is a quick survey that should take about a minute or less.

Link to survey, https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdSQhnhkQBdRU8E_AVoy-4yHibt24N2y7F5tQQqx019F_jU-Q/viewform?usp=sf_link

As per the rules of this subreddit, here's my contact info: Feel free to get in touch with me at: tchan20 (at) student (dot) scad (dot) eduI don't mean just general areas where a character does not excel, such as "the squishy healer is folds in combat due to low strength and defense". In any rpg you will have those natural pros and cons to characters due to different stats

I don't mean simply classical rock-paper-scissor elemental systems or equivalents. Think Pokemon, Legend of Dragoon, Chrono Cross, Fire Emblem (types of physical damage, not elements).

I also don't necessarily mean abilities that are othereise good, but come at a cost.

I wish i could elaborate with some examples from other games but honestly i don't know any. Its usually elements, stats, or which things they are *not* good at.

I can give examples from a game i am designing (turn based rpg, party of 4 style), though.

- One of the characters is a vampire, and healing magic and items do not work on him at all. He also loses vitality if he doesn't feed.
- One of the characters is a Giant who cannot use/wear weapons and accessories with Magic in them, he loses power when attacked by magic.
- One character is a werewolf and can't wear armor.
- One of the characters is a faerie child, and her fear of the darkness that took her forest causes he to take extra damage from dark magic and become panicked when blind.
- The main character loses spirit meter when their love interest is downed. (He is the only with spirit meter)

Some of these also make way for other different effects of the characters, or ways to be balanced, beneficial, etc. They are generally a result of lore and i use that lore to come up with mechanically interesting ways to make them different. I though i'd separate this and write it after bevause i'd be interested in hearing about any weaknesses of charas, not just ones styled like this. But, i thought a little blurb to explain why i'm interested could be useful. I'd love to hear any ideas or input!

- The vampire can heal himself as well as allies (if developed, he could pass as a designated healer. No charas is designed as a healer first and foremost but several charas have healing abilities).
- The giant has high phys defense and can take attacks for nearby allies.
- The werewolf is a shaman who uses spirit magick to equip spirits of monsters as armors.
- The faerie overcomes this in their character arc and mechanically her abilities turn her into an 'Onion Knight' with some of the most powerful abilities.
- The main chara gains spirit when his love interest is attacked but not downed. In his character arc as he matures, he gets over this and he doesn't frighten and overreact and it becomes another motivator. (These abilities come about on the skill tree after/as this relationship develops)

Let me what you think. I think some effects that relate to the individual character can be humanizing and compelling, as these flaws are personal to *them*. I think using the lore to find interesting mechanics can be done. I think using the lore to watch the mechanics they translate to develop from weaknesses into strengths is a great way to tie the ludology and narratology together.Think of a few games that you really played the shit out of. Games that you loved to death. They were perfect experiences. When you go back to play it again, it'll never be like the first time. But after waiting a sufficient amount of time, does that game regain some of its "freshness"? How long does this usually take for you? Does it depend on the game?

I think it does. I've noticed that for some games, it's almost like they're disposable. For example, "Breath of the Wild" I think has almost no replayability after you've already sunk 200+ hours into it. The core of the game is discovery and exploration. Even more so than other similar games like Skyrim. The entire game is about the magic of everything being new and surprising. Once you've played through it all, you're kinda just running around picking up korok poop. I got to 400ish seeds before I set it down and never picked it up again. And I don't think I will. Unless I get some kind of dementia or I wait decades until I've forgotten everything about it, I don't think it'll ever be worth picking up again over something else.

So what kinds of games are really worth picking up again and again? And how long of a break do you usually need before taking on that second or third playthrough?For those  unaware, TF2 is well-known for being the "game with hats", and where "everybody is casual and goofy". It's also well-known for being the game that Valve has ignored for years, almost completely void of updates for the past 2 years, and had a bot invasion.

There is also a tiny minority of competitive TF2 players. They make up <5% of the TF2 population, and create their own cliques and groups. I make up 1 of them. I currently play in the IM division for just over a year. I love playing the game competitively, but I play purely for fun, and never for monetary gain. Due to many mounting reasons, there will never be a esport future for the game. Here are the basics.

# The Basics: 

* Comp TF2 has 2 main gamemodes: Sixes and Highlander
* Sixes is played as a 6v6, teams made up of 2 Scouts, 2 Soldiers, 1 Demo, and 1 Medic.
* Highlander is played as a 9v9, with one of every class being played.
* Both gamemodes have heavy restrictions; they both have whitelists banning several weapons from play. 6s play 5cp and King of the Hill. Highlander plays Payload and King of the Hill. 

# Competitive's Inner Divide

Already, this presents several problems: there is no, one definitive main gamemode. An argument can be made for 6s being more ideal, but that has its own problems. 6s only uses the 4 generalist classes. The other 5 are reserved for situational purposes, and doesn't represent what TF2 is as a whole. 5CP is  NOTORIOUS for being stalemate-y and can be sluggish. Highlander uses and represents all 9 classes, but that also means nobody can switch classes to adapt to different situations. Payload, HL's main gamemode, is incompatible in 6s due to it's sprawling, open sightlines and lack of players. Spectating the match is chaotic, and are confusing to watch. 

9 is also way too big a number for things like LAN's; getting 12 on a plane is expensive, 18 is even worse. This creates a sectionalist divide between the 2 gamemodes, especially since many from both side think that their gamemode is superior than the other. There is already clashing within the small community. 

# Competitive vs. the General Community

Comp players are usually the ones spearheading the balance changes for several weapons. However, despite the good-will of the players, Valve often still make shitty and horrible rebalances, making both sides unhappy. Not only this, the "casual", general community despises the comp community because we are seen as elitist, as well as "tryharding".   
The game has a very big problem that prevents it from being taken seriously. I AM NOT saying that goofing around and playing casual is bad. That's what most of the players play the game to do, and that's how I started playing the game about 3/4 years ago. 

However, when the casual community actively shun players who want to tryhard, it presents a problem: 

1. They believe that their favorite weapon was unfairly nerfed by competitors.
2. People are recommended not to take the game seriously. It's a sin to play the game well. 
3. The majority young audience of the game refuse to change, unable to change their opinion.

This reflects the most with the TF2 Youtubers. Many of the OG's played competitive before, or while becoming a hit on Youtube. As the years pass, many new Youtubers will actively hate on people who don't play "for fun" (which is the reason why they play competitively). It prevents the average player to try the competitive side. Casuals are not interested in competitive. Even if there was a mega-giant tournament with a billion dollar prize pool, lack of interest and viewership makes unsustainable. 

# Competitive vs. Valve

Overwatch was, from the getgo, considered for Competitive, and Blizzard added tons of prize pool money into its competitions. That's why so many of the high-level Invite players migrated to Overwatch. There is a clip from OWL player Seagull W. saying that the reason why he started OW was because there was money. 

Even if competitive TF2 was actively endorsed by both the casual majority, and there was 1 main gamemode, what truly stops it as a legit esport is its relation with Valve. As I stated, Valve does not care for the game; they have other money-making ventures, and many people can't seem to accept that fact. All competitive LAN's are purely funded by the community, and there is absolutely no way for the players to be able to live purely off of the prize money. What fuels both the players and interest of other esports is the care and endorsement by its' company. We can see this in CS:GO, where the game has become much more competitive and less casual as the years pass. 

# Conclusion

TF2 has many surface-level problems. There are many, many othre problems, but this has already become way too long. I, like many others, would want to have our favorite hobby help us earn money as well. But we know it could never happen, Valve endorsement or not. Despite how financially unsustainable it is, the game has been played competitively since its' release, and staying strong. The comp community will always stay niche, and unsustainable as a real esport with brand names, prize pool, and signature players. It is how it is. That's why Competitive TF2 can never be a viable esport.To me they are just a pain that doesn't really add anything to the game

You already carry an inhuman amount of weight in games with them and they just force you to constantly store or sell items or you in most cases become overburdened and end up walking at a slow pace.. really annoying if it happens mid mission if you forget to check and suddenly have to take yourself out of the action whilst you toss stuff away

Does anyone actually think they add anything to a game instead of a additional pain of inventory management

The games usually have mechanics that let you increase the carry limit or mods to remove them entirely (not all games though)I take it we're all familiar with the layout exemplified by the current [Xbox controller](https://compass-ssl.xbox.com/assets/d4/43/d443d9ff-bba9-4909-ac8e-56bdfe7c3ed3.jpg?n=111101_Gallery-0_2_1350x759.jpg). It's a straightforward design that gets the job done. Yet I can't help but feel that this layout is also significantly holding back game design.

Its most glaring flaw: the thumbs are way overtaxed. Each thumb is responsible for four face buttons *and* a stick which doubles as another button. Meanwhile the other four fingers of each hand only have to handle two buttons total. This has led to some impressive gymnastics on the side of game designers regarding button mappings. Wolfenstein II: The New Colossus has a weapon wheel entry which opens a second weapon wheel. Bloodborne has character gestures bound to motion controls. It also manages to map both sprinting and jumping to circle. And Metal Gear 5 has three ways of pressing each d-pad button: press once, press twice, press and hold.

More insidiously, developers will often just avoid putting more abilities in the game than the controller can handle. The reason that so many games only have a light and a heavy attack is simply that that's the number of right shoulder buttons (the left ones typically being block and aim).

So then, is this something you think the industry consensus will ever manage to go beyond? I myself dearly hope the Steam Deck can push the ball forward with back buttons. Having two fingers on each hand doing absolutely nothing besides hold the controller is such an obvious waste. But there are also other avenues. Gyro aiming is another big topic. And Returnal uses adaptive triggers to get L2 to act as two buttons instead of one. What else?I am a PC gamer. I had HUGE expectations for Cyberpunk 2077. The game kind of disappointed me, yes, but it is not bad. I have an RTX 2060, a low-end card, and the game performed quite well on my system. It's not anywhere near the best game ever made, but I quite enjoyed it. Yes, it could be better, but it's still good.

&#x200B;

However, the console gaming community said the game was shit, because it didn't run well on 8th generation consoles. Supposedly, it runs (or used to run before patches, I don't know) at below 30 FPS.

&#x200B;

This is something that kind of confuses me. [This here is](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=poEqykRrxDk&t=15s) a comparison of framerates of Metal Gear Solid 3 on PS2, PS3 and Xbox 360. As you can see, the Xbox and the PS3 try to hit 60 FPS at 1280x720p resolution, however, they aren't always successful at that. Now, the PS2 version tends to drop below 25 FPS all the time. It's incredibly blocky and feels like a slideshow.

&#x200B;

Nonetheless, Metal Gear Solid 3 is widely considered one of the best games of all time, and a far superior game to the previous 4 installments.

&#x200B;

Question. Why is it that sub-30 FPS bothers console gamers with Cyberpunk, but it didn't bother them with Metal Gear Solid 3, just as an example? Or Metal Gear Solid 4, released on PS3 as an exclusive, which would also constantly dip below 30 FPS? Or GTA V

&#x200B;

Has the perception of console gamers changed? Why is Cyberpunk criticised for a low framerate, when many classic video games in the past have done it and enjoyed success nonetheless?

&#x200B;

Why is it that the perception of low framerates has changed? Why's something that (due to the low power of consoles, which is normal) used to be a standard is now seen as unusual?I recently played a game called Descenders, its a downhill biking game. I love downhill racing type games. This game is a huge success mechanically, its controls well and the physics feel good. But the game is ruined for me due to the procedural generation. I think racing games like this really depend on good level design. When all the tracks are procedurally generated, they end up looking like a permutation of limited pre-fabricated small sections, and they lack any real 'personality' or identity. Its not so much as its bad level design.... its like theres NO level design.

Anyway, I think unless it gets a lot more sophisticated procedural generation won't apply very well to games that depend on having good level design. I'd say it applies nicely to games that need large scale. Like most space games.  WHAT does the future hold for procedural generation in games???So I have a fairly midrange PC (RTX 2060, Ryzen 5 2600X) which has been playing games fairly well at 1440p and 60 FPS+.

But with these increase prices of GPUs not looking to let up until at least 2023, I'm starting to look into other options and am considering making the swap to Consoles as my main platform (I own a PS5 already).

Anyone else in a similar situation? What are your thoughts?

Thanks!**Who?**

Joost van Dreunen lecture at NYU Stern school of business, he has written a book on the business of video games, and he has spoken on several Podcasts over the years.

[Here](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/joost-van-dreunen-unlocking-value-in-gaming/id1154105909?i=1000506616227) is a previous podcast where he spoke if you want to learn more about him.

**When?!**

>One week from the date of this post. (9/28) at 5pm PT

**Where?!**

>Right here on r/trueGaming, via Reddit's official mobile app

>We will be utilizing a new feature to the app, Reddit-Talk

>When the talk goes live, it will appear right here on the subreddit via the mobile app

**What?! (is Reddit-Talk?)**

>Reddit-talk is a new feature being tested on the mobile app (web version coming later)

>Like Clubhouse or other live-talk apps, the community will be able to participate in the conversation

>When the talk is live, listeners can "raise their hand"

>If selected, you'll be able to ask a question or add to the conversation

>If you are unable to, or uncomfortable with speaking:  * Post your question in this thread. We may select it to read during the conversation

**What?! (will we be talking about?)**

>Joost has a wealth of knowledge and area of expertise in regards to the business of games.  We'll be asking him questions and picking his mind in regards to some of the most commonly discussed business aspects of gaming including things like microtransactions, free to play development, and more.

**Why?**

>Because it could be fun. Joost is a specialist in his field and asking for his responses on questions regarding video game business could provide a more informed, or at least alternative, perspective on many of the things we regularly discuss here at Truegaming.

**How? (can I help?)**

This interview is being handled by the mods but we are trying to represent the sub as much as possible. What questions would you like to hear? What subjects are worth exploring and which ones should be avoided? Post these questions here for us to ask him or try to show up during the talk and ask them yourself.Video games makes us live through so many different fantasies. Through video games you can play a goat, or god, or a tree or your waifu. But if it comes to the decisions you get, there are pretty much two choices: Either you are the good guy, or there is a karma system that gives you the ..ehm.. "choice" of being the good or the bad guy. Usually with accompanying feedback of "ooooh, you are such a baddy" sound effect, dialogue response or in case of Fable, literal devil horns.

Games that are actually solely designed to give you a satisfying experience of being a villain are few and far between and usually go into one of the following categories to make it easy on the player to legitimize their actions:

* Comedic: These are the Evil Genius and Overlord type, saturday morning cartoon villains, usually with a light hearted tone.
* Force of Nature: You are bad for humans, but you are not really evil, you are just a natural disaster, a virus, a mutant etc. (oftentimes the humans are actually at fault for your creation.). That's stuff like Plague Inc., Prototype, Carrion, Maneater.
* Antihero: You are bad or at best neutral, but you HAPPEN to do good at the end of the day, often through a redemption arc. Often seen in spectacle fighters like Devil May Cry, God of War, that type of deal.
* Crime: Well, you are a criminal and doing criminal things, so that by definition is evil, right? That's your GTA's and Thief and Dishonored type games. In those games, usually the player action is legitimized through a corrupt establishment and the player action are seen as more rebellious than evil but depending on the flavor of crime, this probably comes closest to what I am looking for. Often though, at heart, the protagonist is still good, just the environment is bad.
* T\*rturep\*rn: The nineties had those in spades. Usually shovelware of incel-esque powerfantasies where you play a psychopathic murderer or some other type of lunatic running around killing innocents. Hatred, Manhunt, Postal, that type of deal. There is little legitimization going on here except for "humans are evil and not worth living", but those are just to shallow and stupid to enjoy for me

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

In the vast majority of cases, your actions are legitimized by SOMETHING or in case of Postal-esque games, it is just mindnumbingly stupid. Where are the games where I can play machiavelian schemers, the Petyr Baelish types, the evil emperor types, the manipulating assholes and that is your only goal and not something you try on your second playthrough. A distilled experience for the wretched, if you will. I would love some examples where this is pulled of well.

&#x200B;

Games that I would say did the villain thing well:

Mafia series:>! I would consider this more the type of "fundamentally good protagonist in evil environment, doing what they need to do", but there are scenes that definitely fit the bill.!<

Hitman

Tyranny: >!Even though you do have a karma system, so it kind of doesn't count, but at least you don't have the choice of "white knight in shining armor" vs. "murder hobo".!<

>!Spec Ops: The Line!<:>! Google it if you want to spoil yourself.!< \- >!This one is a super weird case where I don't really now if it fits the bill. You are definitely playing a bad guy, but not in the way you would suspect.!<

Undertale: >!Again, has a "karma system" with white knight vs. evil lunatic, but at least it plays with that idea masterfully that still makes you feel pretty evil.!< >!It actually mocks this idea of "in the second playthrough, anything goes.". It kind of suffers from a terrible fanbase and having spawned a bunch of metagaming narrative clones that make me groan thinking about a game talking to me as a player, but when it came out, those ideas were fresh and great. Reloading after a kill, watching someone on stream play the evil run and many other meta references really caught me off guard and made this a one of a kind experience for me.!<

and that's kind of it for me. I'd love to hear from some indie games that pulled this off or maybe your experiences with a well made karma system, since those usually just piss me off instead of intrigueing me.# Thesis

Based on personal experience and observation of other players (reviews, comments, etc), I have developed a theory when it comes to gamers' general perception of procedural generation that I want to get feedback on and discuss anything related:

* **The more engaging core gameplay is, then the less procedural generation matters.**

I also find the opposite to be true quite often: **The less engaging core gameplay is, then the more that procedural generation matters** when it exists in a game.

# Who cares?

* It helps me understand that if I have some broad complaint about proc gen related stuff in a game (e.g. level or item variety or quality, etc.), **then I found that my issue is often not about proc gen itself but rather something else about the core gameplay**.

* The same can apply to at least some other gamers as well. So recognizing this theory and asking ourselves "is proc gen really the issue here?" can help refine our discussion & reviews about games.

* **It also can help us understand why games with proc gen can vary in how they are reviewed or perceived**, especially in genres that heavily use it such as roguelites.

I've directly or indirectly mentioned the theory in some of my comments in this & other subs, but I thought this would merit discussing here since I wasnt able to find a post about this type of thing. 

# Definition & Exceptions

* The Theory: See thesis statement above.

* Procedural Generation: A method of creating data algorithmically as opposed to manually, typically through a combination of human-generated assets and algorithms coupled with computer-generated randomness. See Wikipedia.

* Engaging: Having favorable attention or interest, or involved & committed.

* Exceptions to the theory include gamers who have an inherent bias against the mere mention of proc gen. This includes gamers who dont like the elements of chance/randomness, or ones that just really prefer story rich or handcrafted game elements (as these two tend to go hand in hand). I can understand the latter.

* Another possible exception are very terrible balance of the game itself or procedural generation. However, defining balance in a subjective way can be tough because not all games are designed to be balanced tactically or some will balance things to be more difficult for players. We could say that balance ensures that nothing is overpowered or underpowered in the eyes of gamers, but then whats the point of differing power levels at all for many games?

# Examples of the theory in action

* Consider some well reviewed games with proc gen that appear in [Steam's top player counts](https://store.steampowered.com/stats/) such as Warframe, Risk of Rain 2, Slay the Spire, Deep Rock Galactic(?). **These have high player counts and super positive reviews because of their core gameplay loops, but not that their proc gen levels are particularly groundbreaking.**

* **No Man's Sky** is an infamous example of the theory in action: **There wasn't (and some argue still isn't) much to the core gameplay loop, and therefore people focused on NMS' procedural generation which was not enough to "carry" the game for people who didnt like the core loop.** For those who havent played it, the core gameplay loop is: Gather resources, fly to another planet & system, get more resources to upgrade & buy more stuff, fly to another planet & system. They have added a bunch of different things to *do* including discovering lore, build bases, play with other people, etc - But those things dont necessarily make the core gameplay loop better, they are just more things to do that might appeal to some people.

* **Warframe** is a great example, having played it hundreds of hours years ago. It has proc gen levels through groups of pre-made room sets, and drops are proc gen too as a looter shooter. This is an example where **the "engagement" that carries Warframe is often measured more by getting the player committed but even that often still overcomes the simplicity of the proc gen**, rather than the game being pure fun (if you arent a sucker for space ninjas like I was) or having incredible mechanics: It has FOMO events & drops, rare loot that requires many runs before getting the final piece to craft, etc.

* **Roguelites**: A core element of them are "randomly generated" (read: proc gen) levels or dungeons. Many rely on a player's own motivations to try different builds or tactics until they get further, do better, or "beat" a playthrough. For people who need just as much or more external motivation than internal motivation (me with some games), I see the theory play out. 

# Discussion questions

* Do you agree with the theory and its exceptions? Why or why not?

* How often do you think proc gen gets a bad wrap when its not really a gamer's primary issue with a game?

* Is game or proc gen balance truly in the eye of the beholder, is there a more subjective definition that is as genre agnostic as possible, or does concept of balance have to be more genre specific?

# Why the formatting

The last time I had a long post, I used all the formatting I could to mititgate a "wall of text" feel but I still got some complaints that I didnt format it well. So this is my attempt to improve my formatting with headers. Thanks for reading if you made it this far.Very often with regard to games like Fallout 4 or Cyberpunk 2077, the limited amount of interesting dialogue options tends to be laid at the feet of the fact that the protagonists are voiced. People usually point to older style RPGs with silent protagonists that have much more fun and varied responses. I won't deny that having a silent protagonist will obviously give you more dialogue options because one voice actor doesn't have to record them. But I always say that Dragon Age II probably did the voice RPG protagonist the best. 

Pretty much, there are 3 different personalities your Hawke can take on : Diplomatic/Helpful, Humorous/Charming, Aggressive/Direct. So there's three options on the wheel at any given time but there's really potential for 6 different types of responses overall. The tone you choose to take in dialogue tree conversations goes as far as to inform the dialogue Hawke makes even when you aren't choosing what to say. So, if you spent all the time making Humorous dialogue options, Hawke will generally be humorous or charming during auto-dialogue where you don't even have any input on what Hawke is saying. That means that there's even MORE dialogue that's been recorded that won't experience unless you do a playthrough and take that specific tone. I will even add that some of Hawke's funniest lines are actually auto-dialogue. 

For a game that everyone agrees was pretty rushed and not up to the standard set by Dragon Age: Origins, I still find myself incredibly nostalgic for an RPG where I can truly feel like I'm shaping my characters personality and having it manifest in *actual* audible dialogue. Mass Effect is very binary which works for Shepard. Shep always felt a bit more fully formed than Hawke. Inquisition did its dialogue wheel pretty decently but the Inquisitor has a pretty one note personality. Andromeda's tones come to the closest quality but I don't believe it also informed the auto-dialogue. So not even BioWare itself has topped this. 

Which brings me back around to more modern RPGs that are going for voiced protagonists. I honestly feel that blaming the lack of dialogue options on the fact that the game had a voiced protagonist is almost letting a lot of devs off pretty easy. It's absolutely possible to have interesting, robust dialogue options with a voiced protagonist. The issue is that games like Fallout 4 and Cyberpunk simply didn't prioritize them and we're left with the meme of, "**Yes ---- Sarcastic Yes ---- No (but eventually Yes)**". 

For people that care about this, are you still mostly on the silent protagonist for RPGs train? Or do you think we can hold voiced protagonists to a higher standard than we currently hold them? What cues should modern RPG devs be taking when it comes to voiced dialogue besides DAII?Yasumi Matsuno began his career at Quest, directing Ogre Battle: The March of the Black Queen, and Tactics Ogre: Let Us Cling Together, before moving over to Square and directing Final Fantasy Tactics. Anyone who's played both Tactics Ogre and Final Fantasy Tactics will be able to identify many similarities between the games, from the mechanics, writing, graphics, and overall presentation. He followed that up with Vagrant Story in 2000, and built upon the world of Ivalice that was first seen in Final Fantasy Tactics.

At this point, it's clear to see that Matsuno was making games that were distinctly his own style, as he would often serve as the writer, director, and lead designer, creating his own world full of lore and history. His games often feature dark and serious political themes that sometimes reflect real-life horrors (e.g., genocide, religious corruption, civil war), draw heavily from European history, culture, and aesthetic, and he collaborated with artist Akihiko Yoshida and composed Hitoshi Sakimoto enough that the games had a very distinct, trademark, Yasumi Matsuno "feel" to them. Not only that, but he was able to do so in a way that garnered critical praise and commercial success. Even today, games like Final Fantasy Tactics and Vagrant Story are considered classics of their genres.

However, following Vagrant Story, Matsuno was tasked with his most ambitious project yet--helming a mainline Final Fantasy title, Final Fantasy XII. Mastuno came up with the original concept and plot, but ultimately had to bow out of his directorial duties before the game was released due to health reasosn and a difficult development process. While the game's directorial duties were taken over by Hiroyuki Ito and Hiroshi Minagawa, parts of the finished product undoubtedly feel like a Matsuno game, with the grand political plot feeling reminiscent of earlier Matsuno titles.

Matsuno left Square-Enix and his career was never quite the same after that. He was briefly at Level-5 and developed Crimson Shroud, and was involved in some mobile games like Platinum's yet-to-be-released Lost Order, but none of these ventures garnered the popularity or the critical praise that his earlier string of games did. His biggest recent successes have been when he was re-hired by Square-Enix to design scenarios for Final Fantasy XIV, in which Matsuno was back in the director's helm delivering scenarios focused on his world of Ivalice. 

While those scenarios have proven to be popular with fans, I am curious about the perception (or perhaps lack of perception) of Matsuno as a video game auteur. He clearly has established a distinct style for the types of games he makes, and yet, I rarely see his name listed alongside other directors like Kojima, Ueda, Miyazaki, or Taro--in all of those cases, even the mere mention that those directors are working on a new game sends a surge of excitement among video game fans, yet this isn't the case with Matsuno. The lack of a sizeable budget and production values almost certainly muted some of the enthusiasm for what a game like Crimson Shroud, a downloadable 3DS RPG, had the potential to be, but are there any other factors that have impacted the tendency to overlook Matsuno as a video game auteur?This post is about the recent directions of Fallout and the Far Cry franchise. For a while, I've had an idea forming that I wanted to put into words and discuss, but never knew how to word it. After seeing the recent comments on r/farcry, I think I do. This is a long post, and the tl;dr is that the newer Fallout titles are moving from RPG to FPS, and Far Cry is moving to more RPG elements but one is leaning away from what made it great, the other is leaning into what's making it better.

Fallout began life as a top down RPG set in post-apocalyptic America. The gameplay was, quite frankly, as far as you can get from the most recent entries being Fallout 4 and Fallout 76. The game was so much more technical back in 1997. You had your S.P.E.C.I.A.L points, your skills displayed in percentages, optional traits, and more. Text was displayed in a box that you could ask questions about, and those reactions to your questions and comments were modified by several other perks and points.

Fallout: New Vegas was sort of in the middle of both games. It was simplified, as there was only your S.P.E.C.I.A.L points, and skills that you could put points into, and that's it. It was an FPS with a tactical pause you could target specific body parts. It wasn't exactly a run and gun, but it also wasn't a strategy game. The dialog was affected by speech, and one or two perks. The dialog was also amazing, and it felt like a real RPG with a lot of choices you can make in that world.

2015, almost two decades after the first Fallout was made, and the franchise looks completely different. For one, everything is oversimplified. You still have S.P.E.C.I.A.L, but the perks are different this time. They aren't checks like the other games New Vegas and before. They're perks like a COD game. There's +20% damage with automatic weapons, or +20HP, or -25% AP drain. The only thing the game checks is your S.P.E.C.I.A.L, and apart from Charisma, it's nonexistant. The dialog? Boils down to Yes, sarcasm, No, maybe/angry. There was no 6+ option menu for most NPCs like New Vegas, it was always the yes/no, and if you're lucky you get a "more info" option too.

Now let's talk about Far Cry. I'm going to skip 3 and 4, because they were still similar to the newer games but different enough that you can see the games have more RPG elements. Also because this post is getting long.

Far Cry 5 is where the series got more technical. Now, you must loot for materials for crafting and money for more guns. You can also loot for different drugs to use that provide buffs. There's also different ammo types that you use depending on what you're fighting, with some being armor piercing or flaming or whatever. You also did challenges and received points to put into a wide range of perks that changed your gameplay up by letting you carry more grenades/ammo, or by opening new takedowns, or giving you a grappling hook. There were three regions you had to clear, and that involved going after small settlements and clearing out all the enemies, not unlike Fallout 4 had you doing half the time. Once you had enough points, you went after the mini boss of the region and reclaimed it.

Far Cry New Dawn is where the franchises really started to overlap. Both are worlds ravaged by nuclear war, and both play very similar. Now you don't just loot for grenade materials, you loot for everything. Guns are no longer bought, they're crafted with various materials. Ammo is no longer bought, it's crafted at stations with copper you find. There's 8 types of grenades, and you can craft all of them on the fly. Enemies have levels too, and you must use the correct level of weapon or else you do less damage. The challenge system is gone and replaced by a scavenging system, where you reclaim outposts and receive perk points and Ethanol, a material that lets you upgrade your base. Yes, just like Fallout 4, you do quests to help settlements and you upgraded your base. Upgrades let you do more crafting, healing, and mapping of resource caches across Hope County. There was also an upgrade system that let you do repeated runs against a standalone outpost (like a radiant quest on FO4) and you put x materials in for +5% damage.

The new Far Cry 6 is looking even more like an RPG, while Fallout is slowly becoming an FPS with RPG elements. You can now craft, modify, and upgrade guns at your bases that you take back and create. Resources are more important than ever, and the radiant quest system from FCND comes back in a similar way. You will be able to talk to NPCs, and there's leaks of more than two endings to the game. Why does this matter? Because Far Cry can lean into RPG elements as much as it wants, it will still be an open world action shooter. Fallout can't really lean into an FPS because it's moving away from what made it Fallout, and more like a shitty Far Cry clone. It can be an FPS, but it needs care and thought put into the RPG aspects too. I don't mind the direction of Fallout now, but without the RPG elements and choices what makes it Fallout?I came across this article [The way my kid plays video games pisses me off](https://www.escapistmagazine.com/the-way-my-kid-plays-video-games-pisses-me-off-spider-man-miles-morales-roblox/amp/?utm_source=rss&utm_medium=rss&utm_campaign=the-way-my-kid-plays-video-games-pisses-me-off-spider-man-miles-morales-roblox&__twitter_impression=true) Which got me thinking. What really is the best game to introduce a child to video games? Actually let me rephrase that, "if, hypothetically, your goal was to turn a kid who's isn't skillful at games into someone skillful at darksouls (whether it's a year from now or 10 years from now) what game would you start then off with?"

Most of the time when someone asks a similar question "the best game to start off..." People often answer with Minecraft, Animal Crossing, Stardew Valley, Pokémon...

There's a video by Razbuten called, [What Games Are Like For Someone Who Doesn't Play Games](https://youtu.be/ax7f3JZJHSw) where the lady he lives with (his wife) Plays various games and learns how to play. Especially movement controls that deal with mouse and keyboard.

But I think for kids (but this is just from my childhood experience though) there's more to learning a game than just movement controls. Because while there's, understanding what buttons do what, I think understanding what the game wants you to do is just as important.

While I don't have sources to back any of this up. Here's an example of me being a dumbass as a kid. I remember my first time playing Ratchet Clank, beating the first world level. Understanding how to attack. Jump. Move around... but getting confused and lost as to how to actually leave the area. Took me a long time to figure out how to leave. I remember even going on the ship but constantly jumping out. I was clearly pressing the wrong button because wasn't reading what was on the screen.

But for others, it could be opposite. Someone who can understand the basics of pokémon might struggle at a platformer. It's possible some people learn different skills at different speeds than others.

I grew up playing games like Crash Bandicoot 3, Sonic 2, Gran Turismo. So would I introduce an 8 year old kid to video games with these games? For understanding basic controls? Probably, but that's with my nostalgia glasses on. In reality some original retro games are clunky, challenging and can be unappealing. And who's to say they'd prefer not to play platformers?

Anyway, that's my speal on how some of us learn games differently at various speeds and how maybe some games aren't the absolute best for newcomers just because of nostalgia.Replaying this gem after years, and didn’t not realize how fucking funny this whole game was. I was young on my first play through and was more focused on the “running over prostitutes aspect”. Now im older and see the amount of detail poured into this world, and the amount of ridiculousness in everything is so good. I drive around, and I’m laughing out at the talk shows and ads. I’m laughing, because it is our world, the USA I’ve grown up in,  I mean just turn to the beat and Kanye West is on the radio, but Its a parody, a satire, so perfectly executed that i get to laugh at the culture that so many people still idolize and glamorize to such a dumb extent today. No one is safe and they go for almost every aspect of American Life, . Reality tv, fast food, materialism, all guided by hilarious caricatures. This game is stupidly funny , but dark and insightful. A classic forsure.When I initially started playing Deathloop, I really didn't like that there was no way to save during gameplay, and that you could only save after you'd completed a portion of the day.

As someone who relentlessly save scummed trying to get a Ghost playthrough in Dishonored, this was taken away from me.

But as I play it more, I've realized that this decision, while very inconvenient for real life situations as players can never turn off the game at a whim without losing their progress, actually forces the player to play as Cole would as he gains new information and techniques.

For instance, I'll just talk about the first target as it's something the game brings you through extremely linearly and it's not really much of a spoiler as it's basically the tutorial target.

When you first approach them, you have no knowledge, skills or powers. AFAIK there is only one real way to get to them, and unless you have a silent weapon it involves going loud and having a massive firefight.

However, by the third, fourth, or fifth time you're doing it, you're approaching it completely differently. You can come in through various directions due to perks and powers. Your knowledge of where she's hiding lets you pull tricks.

It's one of the only instances where the game's structure forces you to play as they imagined. If anyone has seen the movie "Boss level" which is basically a guy stuck in a Deathloop, I'm imagining my final playthrough of Deathloop will look like his final loop. You know where everything is, react to things ahead of time and everything is unrealistically smoothe.

How are people feeling about the game? Do you like or dislike the structure? Did it have the same effect on you?

If possible let's try to avoid spoilers for later targets!I must admit that I don't have much in the way of experience with Hideo Kojima's body of work. While I find it fascinating to hear about the themes and topics that the Metal Gear series has broached upon, the gameplay from an observer's level never seemed to grab me. Somehow, Death Stranding's gameplay did.

Whenever Kojima's name is brought up in popular gaming discourse, it's typical for folks to say that "He just wants to make movies". The amount of thought and effort that goes into how he puts together his cutscenes, along with the sheer length and number of them certainly reinforces that notion.

However, I would argue that Death Stranding (once you get past the cutscene heavy introduction) is a huge counter to that argument. The way the game's mechanics and systems interact put you in the headspace of a post-apocalyptic postman in a way that cutscenes never could. It makes the player start thinking as if they actually held this job, and it makes them strongly empathize with the protagonist when facing those day-to-day hurdles during the game's routine tasks.

If Kojima just wanted to make games that were just movies, the obvious direction he could have gone in would be something akin to the Uncharted games - huge, cinema influenced spectacles with little in the way of mechanical depth (from what I recall, admittedly haven't touched the games in a few years). Death Stranding showcases that he does put a lot of thought into games as an interactive medium.China has gone through plenty of controversies with regards to gaming in recent years, and this is especially the case because of recently instructed laws and reactions involving the gaming culture in China.

&#x200B;

Firstly, interestingly, a lot of Chinese games are [designed to be highly addictive to the point that it is really unhealthy.](https://fortune.com/2021/09/03/china-video-gaming-mobile-smartphone-addiction-free-to-play/) I think this is where people like to joke or complain that games that are made by Chinese companies are poor in quality and are meant to be addicting, especially for mobile games.

Secondly, there has been a new law implemented lately that limits the number of hours to play video games per week - [only 3 hours](https://www.reuters.com/world/china/china-rolls-out-new-rules-minors-online-gaming-xinhua-2021-08-30/).

This will possibly tackle the gaming addiction issue in China as it has been deemed as a [huge issue](https://edition.cnn.com/2021/08/31/tech/china-ban-video-games-minor-intl-hnk/index.html) in China such as the example of [gaming cafes](https://www.wired.com/2017/05/inside-chinese-internet-cafe-gamers-away-days/). Though some gave their own commitments as they believed that this was is also very limiting, How China will be able to limit this is by using facial-recognition software (which is mentioned [in another link](https://www.pcgamer.com/china-slows-new-game-approvals-calls-for-less-effeminate-men-in-videogames/?utm_medium=social&utm_campaign=socialflow&utm_source=facebook.com) that is on this post)

&#x200B;

On top of that, there is a lot of [censorship](https://www.businessinsider.com/weird-rules-game-developers-must-follow-sell-in-china-report-2021-7) in China with regard to video games.

For example, [anything involving death is censored](https://www.theguardian.com/news/2021/jul/15/china-video-game-censorship-tencent-netease-blizzard). This is why when [Ubisoft initially](https://www.polygon.com/2018/11/3/18058884/rainbow-six-siege-censored-china-pc-ps4-xbox-one-ubisoft) declared that they were going to remove anything involving death (such as the image of skeletons and one of the video game characters has an image of a skeleton as part of their costume/skin) in their game, Rainbow Six Siege on their launch of the game in China, including in the non-Chinese versions, gamers were outraged. However, Ubisoft later reconsidered the choice.

&#x200B;

This is where it becomes more complicated because the reasoning behind the censorship on images related to death is both a politically motivated incentive and a cultural one. For example, the reasoning behind the censorship of images of death is mostly because of religious and supernatural reasons).

There are comments online that even images related to uprising or revolution are censored in China but I cannot find any links to this.

&#x200B;

But there were recent reactions from China with regards to gaming that also provoked controversy such as when [a leading professional gamer from Hong Kong](https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2019/oct/08/blitzchung-hearthstone-blizzard-banned-hong-kong-protests) of the game Heartstone was expelled from an international esports tournament after showing support for Hong Kong's protests. [In turn, Blizzard also suspended the player for a year](https://www.vox.com/2019/10/8/20904433/blizzard-hong-kong-hearthstone-blitzchung), forcing him to forfeit thousands of dollars in prize money from 2019 and immediately fired the casters who conducted the interview.

&#x200B;

And in recent news, China is demanding for [less 'effeminate' men in videogames](https://www.pcgamer.com/china-slows-new-game-approvals-calls-for-less-effeminate-men-in-videogames/?utm_medium=social&utm_campaign=socialflow&utm_source=facebook.com)

According to the articles, experts say that a "part by the perception that "effeminate men are physically weak and emotionally fragile," and are thus unable to effectively defend the nation from threats. Gaming itself may also be seen by some leaders as "contributing to a softening of character in young men,"".

&#x200B;

This raises many questions on how this will impact the gaming industry but also to the Chinese consumers China has plenty of control over its technology (the most infamous is its [social credit system](https://www.businessinsider.com/china-social-credit-system-punishments-and-rewards-explained-2018-4)) and its users such as [the internet](https://www.hrw.org/news/2020/09/01/china-great-firewall-changing-generation) and [social media](https://www.bbc.com/news/av/stories-49527899) or [journalism](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2021/jul/27/press-groups-raise-alarm-threats-foreign-media-china) such as about [the Chinese government](https://www.bbc.com/news/blogs-china-blog-40627855)

The questions that arise are on how will this impact the gaming industry financially.

Such as there are questions of whether making these niche alternatives for the Chinese market to fit with their laws is worth it for the extra time and the extra resources needed, or whether the demand fits with the laws and limitations that are implemented, and whether this will lead to good revenue.

But a more critical question is a philosophical one on the gaming industry's perspective of this phenomenon?

Does this affect them personally on their expression of the games that they help develop? Or whether or not this will have an effect on the developers' and other executives' personal expressions and views, whether towards freedom of expression, certain rights, and so on?

What is the possibility that the Chinese government is using the gaming platform as a means to limit players from being exposed to certain ideas or ideologies while also utilizing gaming as a means to condition players towards certain trains of thoughts or agendas that are in mind?

Similarly, this is actually similar to how the U.S., China's political rival, uses its media platforms to condition its audiences towards a certain direction, or even for potential recruitment ([link 1](https://www.independent.co.uk/voices/army-military-video-game-fortnite-battlegrounds-call-duty-esports-defence-a8648656.html) and [link 2](https://www.thenation.com/article/culture/military-recruitment-twitch/) and [link 3](https://www.warc.com/newsandopinion/news/us-army-enlists-video-games-to-win-new-recruits/43622) and [link 4](https://www.defense.gov/Explore/Inside-DOD/Blog/article/2062735/how-why-the-dod-works-with-hollywood/) and [link 5](https://www.cbc.ca/radio/from-patriotism-to-recruitment-how-hollywood-helped-the-u-s-military-sell-the-war-on-terror-1.5580543))

&#x200B;

**TLDR:** 

**China has been on the gaming news frequently as of late which raised questions and controversies. How will this impact the gaming industry both financially and philosophically from a political perspective and what are the political implications of China with regards to gaming?**Just picked up a PS5 as primarily a PC gamer (also own a Switch for exclusives) and I'm actually really liking it to the point where I might start using my PS5 for other games and not just exclusives, simply because it's just so easy to pick up and play. For example I'm about to buy Tales or Arise but might grab it for PS5 instead.

Anyway, those of you who aren't strictly Consoles or PC gamers. How do you decide which game you buy on which platform? Is it maybe pricing? Certain genres are better based on the consoles controller type? Maybe something else?

Or do you strictly buy all multi-platform on PC and exclusives on consoles?

Just curious, thanks!This happens with pretty much every videogame genre. At some point, at a certain time, in certain gaming circles a certain game genre becomes oversaturated and is present in overabundance to the point that a lot of people will dismiss a game by default for just being in that genre.

We saw this with the Military shooter in the mid to late 2000's, the 3D platformer in the late 90's and more recently the Battle Royale genre. But, i think making a genre overdone/oversaturated produces a positive effect just by said genre being overstaurated: The games from that genre that are good, are really fucking good

Because you see once a genre becomes overexposed and overdone in the market, developers that want to make a game in that genre are gonna have to try really hard to make their game stick out so that people will even bother trying it out. This results in wonderful experimentation, shifting of mechanics, changing up gameplay structures or, in rarer cases, completely reinventing the genre. Like we can all say that military shooters are generally boring, but everybody likes Call of Duty 4. We can all say that there were too many 3D platformers in the late 90's, but people still remember Banjo Kazooie

The best example of this that i can think of is the Roguelike/Roguelite genre which has completely taken over the Indie gaming market and that's really not surprising in the slightest since Roguelikes/Roguelites are far more cheaper to make than actually creating levels so the Indie scene has been and still is overly saturated with them. And this has lead to, what in my opinion are some of the best games ever made. Games like Enter The Gungeon, Dead Cells, The Binding Of Isaac, FTL, Darkest Dungeon, Hand Of Fate, Monnlighter,  God damn Hades (one of the best games of all time and i firmly stand by that opinion) and so many others. The oversaturation of the genre ironically worked in it's favor and produced some absolute quality and unique titles that people still play todayI was thinking about the UI design in combat focused games from a functional point of view.  Aesthetics are important as well but I want to focus on the amount of information is presented and how much could be actually needed.

 Incoming big post:

An obvious one is minimap and it has been talked to death in the sub when talking about an open world. What I gathered from commentators are that it's better not have it and if the game does have it then not have it littered with icons and I do agree. For most AAA games they are intent on making a massive map that ends up with a lot of similar areas and therefore minimap becomes necessary. I would rather have a smaller world that can be explored more organically with pronounced landmarks.

Health and power bar. This is quite Important in a very structured combat where hit points and other parameters are central to mechanics. Some games, particularly RPG games pops out damage points to give the player feedback on effectiveness of attack in either direction. Those damage points along with damage and particle effect can make the screen quite busy. Borderlands series is a prime example where damage and effect points and particle just spreads all over the screen. Personally I prefer small and clear as possible like fortnite or none in the main screen or maybe a log afterwards for understanding weapon damage. I imagine a lot of people will point to Dark souls' little damage hover for player and enemy.

Additional spells and power UI. Usually visible bottom right to match the controller right sided action buttons. I get why they usually hangs around or has the 3-5 seconds of fadeout animation. However I think it can be entirely removed after tutorials. 

Other augmented reality elements like interest points be visible. I don't mind if only one or two stays in especially with user control but sometimes it feels like hot spot  galore in games like watchdogs. I think Ghost Of Tshusima did it nicely with the breeze and fox but it does feel a bit unnatural. 

Overall my personal opinion is to keep the UI info to a minimum and possibly direct and infor. players within the game world elements. For me Dead space is one of the games who did the UI fantastic with all the UI info are within the suit. Even the slightly less useful 3d map looks really cool and it all fits in with the game design.

What do you think? Which games do it well? which are awful?I don't think my opinion is highly popular or anything, but I truly believe that just the way the Souls games have created a cult phenomenon in gaming, Monolith have created something as grand with the Shadow of Mordor/War games.

To be clear, I am not saying that their formula became as recognized and spawned hundreds of similar games (like it happened with the Souls-like games). What I mean is that their games have created something that is as important as what the Souls games have created, that should have revolutionized the gaming landscape a lot more

Never before or after have I seen a game make me feel so interested in encountering enemies and seeing the non-scripted and almost natural way of Orc captains succeeding each other in various ways thanks to the Nemesis system, neither have I ever played such a well done way of controlling a character that is the literal embodiment of power fantasy without being boring. Especially in Shadow of War, Tallion is literally the truest most powerful dominating fantasy super anti-hero I have ever had the blessing to play as in a game.

This series deserved A LOT more praise for the Nemesis system and its way of handling TRUE power, an it honestly is the only game to have created an astounding AI system from zero that gives so many possibilities to the player, and tbh it has done a lot more original things than the Souls game have done, but it never reached the same level of recognition from the masses.I am collaborating on a game design project as a writer. In designing the main protagonist, the player character, I find myself at a crossroads. I've seen both of these options done in various games, and I can see pros and cons for both.

Protean Protagonist: The player has wide options for designing their character. They can choose a race, gender, appearance and origin in character creation, and get to write their own personal history through the game's dialogue and other choices. More common in open-world games. Examples: Fallout, Elder Scrolls, Dragon Age

Canonical Character: The character is mostly set in stone, and the player has only minor choices in their development. There may be some major choice branches, but they are minor compared to the already-established content of the character. Examples: Final Fantasy, Mass Effect

Anyway, I'd just like to get the community's thoughts on these two options.

Which do you prefer, and why? Which do you think people in general prefer? Are there patterns in preferences?

How do the options contribute to and detract from roleplaying, plot, inter-character connection, etc.?

Obviously, my request isn't limited to these particular questions. I'm interested in any thoughts you might have on the topic.Hi all, I hope this sort of post fits this subreddit's discussion rules. Hopefully it is seen as more of a conversation starter vs just being a rant.

&nbsp;

That said, what got me thinking of this topic was playing Psychonauts 2 the other day. I was excited to play it as a fan of the original, and due to the fact that many people have been calling it a possible GOTY contender. 

&nbsp;

I initially enjoyed the gameplay, and really loved the cozy feeling of settling into the universe again, but now I'm deeper into the game, I'm surprised that people haven't been really talking about the constant cutscene interruptions (in my opinion). 

&nbsp;

I'm not against story-heavy games at all, but there are many instances when an event that could be in-game dialogue is replaced by a cutscene that takes full control from the player. One of the most egregious examples was during the Forgetful Forest sidequest. You venture through this forested area, only for a dangerous looking swarm of bees to appear and chase away Raz. In the cutscene that follows, you see Raz run, jump, and slide away from the bees until he's safe back at the entrance of the woods. It was a fairly quick cutscene, but it felt like a perfect opportunity to have a nice little chase section in a game. It is a platformer, after all.

You [can see the segment here.](https://youtu.be/emp_6PeZz7A?t=789). There's a 1 minute 58 second cutscene, followed by a short walk that can take only 30 seconds if you go straight to the objective, and then capped off by another cutscene that's 1 minute and 41 seconds. That's a bit much, in my opinion.

&nbsp;

There's just a series of these small gripes that really added up to be a frustrating experience. The cutscenes are well made and while the comedy didn't really land like it did when I played the original, they were enjoyable enough. 

&nbsp;

I've seen a few people mention this, but most comments are usually along the lines of "well this is a story-based game, it probably just isn't to your taste", and that may be fair. I think I may be in the minority regarding this specific game, but it does bring up a good discussion about story-heavy games. There's definitely an inherent acceptance that they'll have more non-interactive sequences, but I feel like if your game has a heavy emphasis on linear storytelling, then you should be even more mindful of the pacing of a game. Just like film and television, can and should be criticized for storytelling economy, I personally feel like games should adhere to those properties as well. It's kind of wild how many people will defend something like Metal Gear Solid 4 by saying "it's heavily influenced by film", when in reality if a movie adopted many of Kojima's storytelling techniques, it would likely be critically panned.

&nbsp;

What do you guys think?So I've been doing some research and I discovered that Bandai Namco is the 3rd largest video game publisher in Japan after Sony and Nintendo.

Now, of course I expected Sony and Nintendo to be #1 and #2 but I did NOT expect Bandai Namco to be #3. According to Wikipedia, they are doing 250 billion yen in revenue per year.

But their video game franchises include Pac-Man, Tekken, Soul Calibur and Dark Souls. Now, I have nothing against any of these franchises but these aren't exactly Call of Duty level of sales franchises. I think Tekken is their best-selling franchise as of today with 55 million units sold.

But how is Bandai Namco bigger than SEGA, Square Enix, Konami, and Capcom?

SEGA: Total War, Yakuza, Sonic, and their successful arcade business

Square Enix: Final Fantasy, Dragon Quest, Tomb Raider, Kingdom Hearts

Capcom: Resident Evil, Monster Hunter, Street Fighter, Mega Man, Devil May Cry

Konami: Metal Gear Solid, PES, Castlevania, Silent Hill, and the multi-billion franchise in Yu-Gi-Oh

So then I got to thinking because I discovered today that Bandai sells a ton of "Gunpla" aka Gundam toys and action figures.

...Is Gundam really that big that it propels Bandai Namco as the third largest publisher over giants like Capcom, Square Enix, Sega, and Konami? I've been living under a rock.So, for those of you who aren't in the know, S.T.A.L.K.E.R - Anomaly is a standalone mod that combines all the maps from all three S.T.A.L.K.E.R games into one huge massive sandbox open world game but saying that is only scratching the surface. There's new gameplay mechanics, new animations, the AI is leagues and bounds better, it is the best S.T.A.L.K.E.R game you can play currently in my opinion and it is completely free. But i'm not here to talk about how brilliant Anomaly is. No, more specifically i am here to talk about one particular brilliant part of Anomaly: The combat

Anomaly has probably the most realistic, intense, nail biting combat i've played in any game (let alone post apocalyptic game) but, at the same time, it's not too realistic to the point where it becomes annoying to deal with. And there are two distinct reasons why i love the combat/gunplay in Anomaly so much:

&#x200B;

1: Realism

Realism in games is something that you need to be really careful about because if there's too much of it, it can turn from enjoyment to a chore ( Kingdom Come: Deliverance being a great example). Luckily, at least in my opinion, Anomaly is realistic where it counts: The combat. One or two well placed shots from the AI and you're history. In Anomaly, the guns sound, look, and, most importantly, feel like actual weapons. Even if you have the strongest armor in the game it won't take more then 10-15 bullets to take you down with a basic assault rifle because that's how it would be in real life. This makes every single fight BEYOND intense. Even a fight between you and a single enemy can least for good 5 minutes if your enemy  is well hidden. Never has the simple action of running cover to cover in a game made me physically clench until i played Anomaly. Because i knew, once i was out of cover, and i started to run towards the next pillar/barricade, that those few second could be the ones where i got shot

&#x200B;

2: The AI

Here is where Anomaly massively distinguishes itself from the S.T.A..L.K.E.R series. The AI in the original trilogy, i think we can all admit, isn't the best. However, it has a good foundation so what the devs behind Anomaly did is they reworked the AI to be actually competent. During a firefight they can flank you, they can encircle you, they can back away so you get closer to them, they can run you out of cover by chucking grenades at your position, they can actually TRICK you into thinking they're retreating and then pop you when you appear out of cover, it's nuts. Combine that with the realistic gunplay and you have yourself one big, pants shittingly terrifying combat with the enemy NPC's where  every time you see people walking you'll be pulling out your binoculars to make sure they're with a friendly faction

I think the best way to sum up Anomaly would be this part of a review that i read on moddb a few years back: "In Fallout, you enter a building full of raiders, you come out with goodies, in Anomaly, you enter a building full of bandits...good luck getting out"So let me say it flat out, no, I dont think fighting games are a bad genre. The thing is, I couldnt possibly tell you how borked a fighting game individually is, since with SF5, I thought it was considered bad because of the non-gameplay issues, until I listened to the proper and learned fighting game players discuss it. This is because fighting game players know what they're talking about with this stuff, which sadly ends up being one's first clue into just how tough it can be to fully comprehend fighting games.

See, the idea of most Street Fighter or Mortal Kombat-like fighting games is that you get two people duking it out, throwing a few special moves and even a finishing move in there, and simply having a fight. Thats a very simple premise, and so naturally many people can grasp the idea behind them

What makes them hard to comprehend is the controls I feel. See, the way I have always felt, is that many fighting games are BRUTALLY hyper-precise and picky with the controls. Now, the one fighting game I play most is Ultra Street Fighter 4, right? I can hardly do a basic Hadoken without crouching a bunch in my failed attempts to do the moves. So far, it's clearly on me as an unskilled player, yes?

Well, unfortunately, I dont really appreciate how picky the controls are. Now I'm no master of frame data analysis, but from what I can see in the training mode, one of two things always happens to me.

1: I legitimately do the motion correctly, plus the input, but because I was a HAIR too late or too early, the input failed to go off.

2: I ALMOST do it correctly, but in the heat of the moment, I actually input half-circle + diagonal up right.

This is how I basically sum up my issues with fighting games. Its not so much that I declare these things actual flaws, its that I personally dont like how picky it can feel. Like, even when I suffer through Number 1 for example, I just really wish the game had a little mercy and gave me the smallest extension of time to actually do it. If the timing was JUST merciful enough, I'd be doing twice the fireballs I already do successfully.

This is the core of my issue, and while it almost entirely falls on me as a player, when I cant even do TRAINING MODE properly without these issues, it makes me feel like im missing out on doing cool shit like the rest of you. I accept the idea of needing to take time to get better, but boy does this situation not help in the slightest. I just want Ryu and Ken to throw their Hadokens, alright?Now, before anyone mentions it, I am aware that Medal of Honor did make somewhat of a comeback last year with Above and Beyond, but I think the general consensus is that it was less than stellar. (I didn't play it because I don't have VR). And I'm also aware on what made the series great is purely subjective to each person. That being said, my fondest memories of those games are playing Allied Assault and sneaking around enemy bases as an OSS agent, sometimes donning an enemy disguise, and performing sabotage against the Nazis. Perhaps it was the fact that I never played a game like that before, but those moments were the most thrilling for me. I think the Medal of Honor series was founded upon these moments, and I believe that is the key to a successful revitalization.

In my opinion, Medal of Honor failed because it was trying to compete in a crowded shooter market by doing the exact same thing as everyone else. I also don't believe VR is the right path for it either. What I think is that Medal of Honor should be a predominantly stealth-based FPS that is filled with mostly tense-filled quiet moments. This will allow the franchise to compete, as there are not many WWII stealth games out there, and could forge a bright future for this once-great franchise.

But that's just my opinion. I'd like to hear what you think as well. Can MoH compete in today's market? How would you see it return?Haven't played much yet (only 1.5h played by the time I made this post) but still it makes me wonder how I didn't decide to play it earlier before. I love the atmosphere of the game, how tense and scary it can be at times when you're in the tunnels or near the presence of creatures (specially that part in Chapter 1 when >!you are going down the tunnel in the tram and you see standing shadows of people, who atleast I believe that are the ones that at some point ended up dying there!<, got me a bit freaked out but I felt it was a neat touch there. 

Not to mention the the moments where you stand around people, outside of combat. They really nailed the atmosphere at these parts, being able to see people interacting with each other such as kids running around and playing, parents interacting with their kids, people talking, arguing or just having a good time with each other, seeing the soldiers struggling and the wounded obviously, having a hard time. Though those last two aren't very pleasing to see obviously, I thought to include it aswell.

And it just works so nicely, it makes the world feel alive (while it's kinda dead at the same time, because, it's an apocalypse!) and the people in the game really feel like people, it kinda reminds me of Half-Life 2. The enviroments are very nice aswell, and I love how you can interact with stuff (abeilt to a limited extent), specially at some part where I could keep knocking on some random guy's door and he got pissed off, "QUIT KNOCKING!" that was pretty funny.I have noticed this trend of online fps games being completely silent during gameplay. Apex legends, splitgate, overwatch, doom eternal battlemode, quake champions, team fortress AND Titanfall 2, Halo, and cod. All these games don't have any music and it's confusing me as to why.

Is it because players won't be able to hear other players and it would be distracting? No, if the game's audio is made correctly that wouldn't be a problem, and even if it was, players could just turn the music off. 

Is it because it's to expensive and time consuming? No, all these games have lobby music and title music when you're NOT playing, but once you start, there is nothing!

The only online multiplayer shooter I've played with music is Splatoon. It works incredibly well there, I love that game and it's music, but no other game is like that.

These games feel so soulless. It's hard to feel anything when it's a close game that could go either way when it's completely silent in the background! How does everybody else feel about this? I haven't seen anybody else talk about this, am I in the minority here?I really wonder, after some games being labelled as "too inclusive" or "woke" ('such as the Saints Row reboot), what do they mean exactly? How game devs should portray a virtual universe with "inclusivity" while not be rejected or qualified as "woke"?

Is there a notion of balance? Are game developers (and people in general) too afraid of not being "inclusive" enough? Are they trying to avoid some subjects or include unrelated things?

I really wonder where to draw the line, where a game is not enough inclusive, and where it looks "too inclusive" for some people.EDIT PULLED over by THE cops. Sorry for the oversight in the title.

&#x200B;

Throughout my years of gaming, I've always found driving in video games somewhat unsatisfying and lackluster. I am constantly trying to just reach the destination and get it over with, resulting in me driving unsafely for the PC's and NPC's, leading to me either damaging my car, killing innocent NPC's, getting my car stuck in a position it's virtually impossible to get it unstuck, getting chased by the Police, or any combination of these and others. GTA V, a game widely praised for its driving, had quite boring driving, too, in my opinion.

&#x200B;

Here's an idea, what if driving in action adventure games like GTA or Watch Dogs, or action adventure RPG's like Cyberpunk 2077, started employing more advanced driving mechanics, to perhaps make the journey as enjoyable or more enjoyable as the destination?

&#x200B;

1. Having to change gears manually. if you choose the wrong gear, or you fail to press down on the clutch, you may have problems with the car jumping or the engine turning off, or the gearbox outright refusing to shift.
2. You need to properly use the clutch. If you let go of the key too abruptly, the vehicle will start jumping for a second (may be problematic to implement on keyboard+mouse without pressure-sensitive buttons, I know. but could be worked around). Similarly, at gear 1, you may control the vehicle by using the clutch only, no throttle.
3. The character should need to earn their driver's license. To allow the player more mobility from the beginning, they should start with a driver's license for cars. However, less popular/more dangerous vehicles, like motorcycles or trucks should be locked until you get a driver's license. Or, you can drive them, but you need to take into account the cops may pull you over and take all of your weapons and money for that...
4. Different cars have a different feel. For instance, a car with a stronger engine won't turn off the moment you choose the wrong gear, but an inferior one may.

... And so on.

&#x200B;

Wouldn't that make driving in games feel more engaging and far more immersive, thus enhancing the experience? What is your take on that?

&#x200B;

What if, say, GTA VI (not a particular fan of that franchise, I much prefer Red Dead Redemption, but it's the best example of a game with a lot of emphasis on driving) implemented that?The global downturn in tourism due to COVID is causing [serious economic harm](https://www.forbes.com/sites/duncanmadden/2021/01/14/the-covid-19-pandemic-has-cost-the-global-tourism-industry-935-billion/) to communities. One response has been to [take tourism virtual](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2021-04-07/virtual-tourism-down-under/100040776). While it’s not exactly a new concept, interest in it has increased. 

When I looked around at a bunch of different tours, they seemed to be dominated by photos and video media where you click around with a mouse. Many also offer VR experiences, which I haven’t been able to try out, but I imagine it’s more immersive. Some are pre-recorded, some are conducted live with a tour guide, some are a hybrid of both. The definition of ‘virtual tour’ varies greatly too, from what are basically just video recordings or streams of someone walking around a space, to interactive photo/3D environments. 

This got me wondering about game technology and design principles being applied to these kinds of experiences to enrichen them. Many of them are pseudo-games in a way – if we count walking simulators as games, then these are essentially very similar. Even something more indirectly related like American Truck Simulator has you sightseeing as you traverse real-world environments. It seems there’s an overlap here that isn’t yet fully explored or capitalized on. 

Virtual tourism is largely photo and video-based, but 3D modelled environments are also a possibility and while some do exist – few do so at the scale and technical ability achieved in many games.

3D modelled environments might offer more interactivity or allow for greater immersion. Instead of [a static photo of cave art](https://www.aboriginalheritage.org/resources/resources-360virtualtours/), for example, it could flicker in the amber light of a nearby fire. Throw in some kind of avatar/multi-user environment system, and your tour group can all stand in that cave together – add chat/VOIP and they can talk. It can become a social experience situated in a place and space, albeit virtual. This would be different to say, sitting on Zoom together as someone flicked through photos (one version of virtual tourism I saw – it made me sad ._.). 

There are some pretty important parts of the tourist experience missing from many virtual tours that are quite common to most games. While implementing that technology in this space might add costs, there’s perhaps a case to be made that a good return is likely – both gaming and tourism are popular and profitable. A well-executed hybrid of both has good reason to be, right?

I’m not suggesting turning tourism into a game activity. Nor am I imagining Ready Player One. I’m just wondering what bits and pieces from games could be adapted to benefit the virtual tourism sector. 

Beyond 3D environments, some other ideas are things like control interfaces. If the goal is to maximize accessibility, ease-of-use, and ability for people of all ages and experience with technology to participate then do you want VR, or mouse and keyboard, or some other scheme? I assume folks in the game industry have already looked at stuff like this and might have knowledge to share. 

Other ideas could involve building persistent worlds, virtual economies with virtual goods from souvenirs to exclusive tours, etc. 

What do you see in gaming that you think could benefit this area?Something I've found really frustrating lately is the mindset that if a game's initial launch is buggy and unpolished, is how quickly this is excused with, *"It'll be patched later so it's okay."*

This is contributes to sloppy game design and increasingly creating more lazy anti-consumer practices from gaming companies. And you know what I'm talking about. [A game being broken and buggy on launch day is so common this defense mechanism was born from it.](https://www.pcgamer.com/the-worst-pc-game-launches/). And this is still continuing, recently [Sonic Colors Remastered was launched on sale for $40 and is mostly unplayable due to bugs.](https://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=sonic+colors+ultimate+bugs)

Only a few decades ago, the convenience of being able to patch out issues wasn't available. The company had to make sure the product was polished as possible before sale because it was a physical copy. If something was wrong with the product that made it unplayable, the entire shipment had to be brought back. Game devs took polishing a product more seriously back then. With the ability to patch out a problem with the ease of updates this has caused game devs to become a lot more laxed. And with the knowledge and experience that consumers will just buy a product regardless of polish, the practice of a buggy release has become common place.

No other form of media gets away with this. If you bought a movie and it was still missing sfx, graphical effects etc you would not be okay with being told "just wait for the patch to fix it."

**You've already made the purchase for a product with expectations that it is going to provide content as intended by the developer.** To buy something and **still have to wait for an undetermined amount of time to actually get the completed product**, is at its most cynical, a scam.

Worst part is, gamers have created this. A company pulling scummy practices like this is inevitable, their goal is to make money. Your job as a consumer is to punish the behavior by withholding purchase. By purchasing an incomplete product, you reward the behavior. Why should they take the time to use more money and resources to make a better product, if they're going to get your money anyway for an incomplete one?

As a result, gaming companies don't respect you, and that's why you get sold incomplete products, **because you'll buy it anyway.**

You'd think after this many consistent releases of games being unpolished at launch, more people would learn to withhold purchase til later. No one's learned anything. I'm glad more gamers are withholding purchase at launch more often such as /r/patientgamers but it's not enough. This needs to be universal amongst consumers because otherwise companies have no incentive to change.

A patch is supposed to be something that takes care of a few hiccups or blemishes, or provides quality of life updates to an already completed product. Not create an artificially increased, indefinite, and undefined development period after the product has been put on sale.

Have some standards. Wait.Not everyone has time to play games, and I don't think anyone can deny that. With worldly responsibilities and errands in our daily lives, some of us simply don't have time into playing +70 hrs games.

This is where mobile gaming comes in. Games such as candy crush saga or angry birds are designed to be simple, quick games. They are designed to entertain the user for a short time, to be played during breaks or down time.

But what about games that take longer to complete? I see RPGs such as FF6, FF Tactics, KOTOR, and Zenonia series on the mobile market. These take a very long time to complete, and the gameplay makes it hard to quickly get in and out. For example, FF6 has save points that are spaced out, throughout the game. Some save points probably can't be reached within the time they have.

There's also the matter of battery life. As mentioned above, a typical mobile games are designed to be casual and for a quick entertainment, therefore no one will spend too much time during each session. This means not much battery use. However, because the longer games can take some time before players can safely exit the game without losing progress, it means it will drain batteries faster.

I love how older games are coming to mobile, as it makes them more accessible to present time. However, I don't know if they are truly meant to be on a mobile platformI have thought about this alot reccently and about the games i play and many modern games that are coming out and the trend of ultra violence.

&#x200B;

This might be sensetive and i might piss some people off but. the majority of people living in countires like USA and many European countires, Dont really have  a healthy perspective on real life violence.

&#x200B;

I dont know if its a bad observation but i feel like people just crave more and more violent and bloody games with ultra realistic graphics. I did not play the last of us 2. But the game made me on edge and uneasy the detail of the characters and the absoulty grotesque way too "end enemies" are disturbing it feels wrong the graphics are too good a line have been crossed and its way too far into uncanny valley. Thing is most reviews did not mention the violence or at least that it was too much and used as a gameplay mechanic.

&#x200B;

Same thing with mortal kombat and many maaaaaaany more games coming out. Its all blood gore more violnce MORE. I have found myself recently trying too move away from such games playing more games with no blood or just peacful games. I know how horrific real world acts of violence are and i dont find escapism in playing games where your only goal is too kill too see things die over and over and over again.

&#x200B;

I know studies have been made that games dont necessarily breed violence. But i personally think it dam sure too some degree desensitize us too it. I feel like people nowdays (again my observation and opinion) Lack empathy and are desensitize too real life "gore" and violence. I have always kinda wonderd when it comes too escaping into a game why is your first choice something that is all about killing? Its odd that humans want too seek out violence or be the lowest of the low do a violent act upon another human.

&#x200B;

Many just having petty arguemnts over reddit (wishing death treats upon reviewrs, actors, game designers, Its all so unreal. If those people in any capacity would experience real world violence or even have the missfortune too see some haunting stuff on live leak they would feel sick. There are many humans in the world and not all of humanity are good.

&#x200B;

I think that more non violent games should be made or at least that developers would step away just a  bit from the ultra graphics.

&#x200B;

Last point WW2 games and WW1 games they are "censored" Its such a important part of history too show how low humanity can go how low a person can sink into the mental darkness that they dont value human lives anymore. But no what have many modern WW2 games focused on? Ultra graphics and "set pieces" fking set pieces. Its kinda sick when you think about it that we have turned a part of human history into entertainment an medium too consum. WW2 should not be consumed you shouldb be afraid and almost sick when reading about it and seeing pictures from it, Not enjoy it in video game form its a sick part of humanity that SHOULD NEVER be used for sales or be turned into games. The only part of entertainment that almost gave the horrfic parts of ww2 some justice are schindlers list.

&#x200B;

Im really sorry for the rant and i might come of as really really reaaaaally fking stupid. My point was too not at alllll! sound preachy or annoying i just wanted too share some points, And im not trying too force any too change their gaming taste. At the end of the day so is it just a game a medium, But a medium can still be up for critiquing and i simply wanted too talk about violenece video games.

I myself am moving away from it, If i have too play a kinda violent game then it will be a non gory fantasy game. I am though moving away permantly from realistic violent games, at least its one sale less if i stop.

Point is im just getting older and i see no reason too indulge in violent games when the world are alreay so full of violence. I dont wanna jump into more. And yes i have played many violent games made reddit posts about how fun those games are and so on. But i have still been thinking about this and just now i have come too this conclusion.

&#x200B;

TL:DR i am moving away from violent games. I dont find escapism in violence and i wish there would just be a little less focus on it and more on different parts that games can focus on, Or at least move away from ultra violence and be more like games such as disco elysium. Im sorry about the long post i just wanted too share some thoughts. 

While there has been a rise in variations of video game players over the years, such as casual gamers, action gamers and pro gamers, one which has existed for a long time but hasn't really been recognized is hobbyist gamers.

The question therefore is what is a hobbyist gamer? Hobbyist gamers, while of course vary, typically have these traits:

\-Play simulator, milsims and historical games, sometimes MMORPGS.

\-Usually have a small but heavily played repertoire of games.

\-Typically plays a small number, sometimes even just one game which is played over a long-very long time.

\-If the game is multiplayer, usually part of a small but active clan.

\-If multiplayer typically plays when a clan event is on but less so when there isn't any.

\-Typically at least in their mid-20s or older.

\-Mature and unknown/doesn't patriciate in gaming trends and speak.

Hobbyist gamers are therefore in a class of their own as while they don't typically play the usual "casual games" they don't spend as much time and are less interested in being a "pro" at their regular game, instead treating games, like as the name suggests, as a hobby, like going golfing during the weekend, historical re-enactment or meeting up at a local club, gaming is just another form of that to them.

Hobbyist gamers are also not a new variant as they have existed really since MMOs became a thing but have flown under the Rader throughout, therefore not receiving much notice.

Do you agree that hobbyist gamers do exist? Or do you think I am overgeneralising several separate genres and people? Have I got anything wrong? Comment below.I've been thinking a lot lately about how Sony is coming out with all these Director's Cuts for their games. The two that spring to mind are Ghost of Tsushima and Death Stranding. 

Great games imo. Recently booted up the ps4 to go through Death Stranding again and it felt better than I remember. However I've lost the will to keep going, halfway through the story. Its nothing wrong with the game, its just that I keep getting ads for the new Director's Cut showing me all the stuff I'll be missing out on.

I could get access to all of that, but first I'd need to be able to find a ps5, and then pay another $70 to get the same game I already own and start all over again. I'd happily pay an extra few bucks for it as an expansion/dlc, but that's not even an option. 

Same goes for Ghost of Tsushima. Really was feeling like playing it again and I'd love to get the new expansion, but as far as I know, I'd have to buy the game all over again if I could even find a new console. 

Is the new content too taxing for a Playstation 4 to run? It doesn't seem like it. It just seems like Sony wants to get sales again for the same games by adding just enough to get us to want to buy it again. 

What do you think? Am I overreacting? Are these new cuts of the games really worth paying for the game again? Are they more intended for people that haven't played the game yet? Or are they just gouging fans for more sales?

Edit: Apparently you can upgrade your game to directors cut for a smaller upcharge. Great news, but I'd still like to be able to access the content on the console I'm stuck with.I'm interested in what you guys think counts as a fighting game. I think everyone can agree that 2D fighting games like Street Fighter, Guilty Gear, Mortal Combat and others are fighting games.

But then where is the line drawn at 2D? 
Are beat-em'-ups fighting games? In my opinion yes, just not PvP fighting games. 

Where is the line in 3D? 
Are Mordhau or For Honor fighting games? Definitely imo. 

What about Wrestling or UFC games? 
Are they about fighting or sport? I don't even know

What about Knockout City? 
Is it a Shooter or a Fighting game? Honestly I am not sure.

Are games like Blades and Sorcery in VR Fighting games? 

Are Dogfighting games Fighting games? I mean its in the name, but I wouldn't call them that.

Where does "Fighting" as a Genre end and where does the games original genre start? 

No need to answer these, just some food for thought.

In my opinion its very complicated when a game has a right to call itself a fighting game. Where do you think does the fighting game genre end?Its safe to say EA hasn't done enough in many peoples eyes with the Star Wars IP, from 2 Battlefront games, a singleplayer story game and a Dogfighting game. Thats the most we've gotten in recent years. I quite enjoyed my time with Star Wars Battlefront 2, although it was the right choice to start playing a bit after launch, I'm still playing it now, but more specifically I am playing a certian mode that has me and my friends hooked. 

Heroes VS Villans, every major hero and villan from Star Wars fighting against another in a 4v4 30 Lives 3rd Person Sword fighting and 3rd person shooting match, every Character has 3 abilities,  ranging from force moves and heals to running attacks. 

You might think theres not mich depth to this mode, but you'd be suprised, the Lightsaber weilding character especially have an extreme amount of depth to their fights, you can block, dodge, parry and attack and do even crazier moves like a "hookslash" or a "double parry". Its insane how deep this is for a single mode in a reskinned battlefield clone. 

Now Heros vs Villans isn't perfect, it has immense balancing issues, firstly between blaster heros and Lightsaber heros and secondly with certian heros just being completely overpowered in the right hands. Seems like what you'd expect from a little gamemode which wasn't even the main focus.

Imagine a new standalone game by EA which is made up only of this gamemode, with Heros, Villans and skins being added in seasons like so many games of today. New modes like CTF and Deathmatch. 

Would you buy it? Because I have been dreaming of this game ever since I fell in love with HVV. They'll definetly also use the Jedi Knight name and target people who played the old jedi knight games, thats just EA. Would you also want to see blaster heros in a game like this?When the Xbox came out with Halo 2, it came with teamchat and also proximity chat for all enemies.

This was a whole lot of new dynamics all at once, and it was fun as hell. The Xbox 360 came out with party chat and thus began the fall of proximity chat-- then came along Teamspeak, Discord, and everything else.

I miss proximity chat, and wish it would make a strong comeback. I remember in one of the Splinter Cell games, when you would take another player hostage, you could whisper threats or say anything you wanted to them before snapping their neck.

Imagine if proximity chat evolved? Imagine if we got past the 96kbps telephone-quality voice chat in games and got environmental processed, with voice muffling, reverberations, etc? This would had another layer of immersion to games IMO and make it even more fun.

You know what sucks? Little kids screaming in your ear at full volume. You know what would make that better? Little kids screaming and it reverberates through the halls with your gunfire.

Is there any saving proximity chat? Has a game revolutionized proximity chat? How can a game incentivize people to use in-game voice features instead of resorting to Discord to bypass communication limitations?


So I finally got the chance to put on my hands the much praised **RE2:Remake**, and I loved it with every fiber of my being. I just loved how the developers made this synergy of resource management, enemy behavior&abilities and interconnected creepy levels. Nobody can convince me that this game was not designed to scare players, to not have a horror ambiance in mind. These games are supposed to make you scarred and be on your toes.

Several times during the game I got scared by my own shadow, was sweating when opening a door or entering a tight corner... was going crazy when a zombie was approaching me, I thought I had it for sure, but with every shot that did not kill it, my confidence was dropping and panic was growing. Fucking loved that. 

But you know what almost ruined all of that? The fucking characters(notably protagonists) just [no selling it](https://prowrestling.fandom.com/wiki/Sell). For example, zombies or/and Mr X are approaching, I am scarred out of my mind, when **Leon/Claire** decide to be every modern protagonist, and just throw action jokes, at most showing annoyance or anger. At times it felt quite bizarre, as if our reactions should be be opposite, the person who is in middle of a zombie invasion being  slightly annoyed, but the player in the comfort of their home is scarred. 

If this was only one character and other characters acknowledged this as atypical behavior I would be more fine with it, but no, almost every playable character is cracking jokes and quips, and often doesn't seem that concerned with A ZOMBIE APOCALYPSE. And keep in mind, that monsters escalate, **Claire/Leon** are faced with ungodly horrors of human creation, but **Claire** especially only has some intense trash talk or mild concern about it. I was never able to get into the "horror" of facing such monstrosities due to this. And don't get me wrong I don't hate them(the protagonists), I just think they need to be a bit more human and "sell" the player the threat there is in front them, but they do the opposite and actively try to kill the ambiance which in my humble opinion is more important in horror than any other type of genre. The villains must be considered a serious threat. 

But indeed there is a playable character that actually acts appropriately and amplified my enjoyment of the game, **Sherry Birkin**. The section you play as her is tedious from a gameplay perspective, but at a few moments you get that perfect "sync" feeling when you and her feel the exact same thing, as she is hiding from a creepy police chief, at one point I think she is even desperately praying. I was so much more concerned for **Sherry** cause she acted appropriately and did not act like a modern action protagonist.  And I was most afraid of the villain she faced. 

Even **Ada Wong** could have shown SOME fucking concern or fear, the way I understand RE lore, she is some kind of industrial spy? I mean nothing short of some veteran that was in thickest warfare should be scarred and on their toes. You could of course do something interesting with how each character shows and deals with* fear*, cause they should all have it.

But if RE2 was bad in this regard, Resident Evil 3 was... just... Egh.. What the fuck was that?

**Jill Valentine** seems to have been designed to sabotage her own game, at almost no point does she show any goddamn concern about a monster designed to kill her that never quits and cannot be killed. She has nothing about gym trash talk for it, which gets progressively worse and worse and worse, when it reaches a point where **Jill** proclaims that this is just too tedious and annoying anymore, and she is gonna whoop **Nemesis**. This unspeakable, unkillable horror is in front of her, and she acts like she is sparring in a boxing gym.

Now you see, **Claire Redfield's** voice actress and design has charisma, **Claire Redfield** could easily be a Shane Black or James Gunn character, but what did not help was **Jill's** voice actress. In the brief cold ambiance moments, she was perfect and added to everything or when she shows empathy or when she talks smack with **Carlos**, but when she is supposed to be a charismatic badass... Look I hate using this word, but it was cringe AF. When **Jill** was calling **Nemesis** "*Bitch*" or did the other trash talk, I felt that embarrassment that someone is gonna enter the room. Also fuck whoever decided that to outdo the badass [of the **Doom Slayer**](https://youtu.be/5Vx0dncDJzQ?t=282) dispatching the last boss. That part was embarrassing, and after looking up the original RE3 ending, I liked it way more. It gave both **Jill** and **Nemesis** more dignity. 
It really sucks that the scariest villain in these games was a corrupt creepy police chief...

**Carlos** is just as fucking bad, the only real difference his VA just has the charisma to pull it off and is not given as crying lines, but the situation is pretty much the same, he mows down endless creatures and is cracking jokes almost all the time.

Also there are side characters in both games that act almost perfectly to their role, like Annette Birkin and Marvin Branagh, and you totally get why both of them act the way they act, its not immersion breaking. 


So just some thoughts on how it could have been better. To my understanding, Jill by the events of RE3/RE2 is the only person that is a "vet" with Umbrella creatures and is in a not-SWAT squad, that said out of all protagonists she should be least scarred and horrified, but still show some fucking humanity, especially, and I mean especially when and after Nemesis encounters. While **Claire** and **Leon**(after Sherry ofc) should be the most scarred, cause they don't have even a concept of this, **Claire** is a biker chick and **Leon** a police rookie. Maybe have each character as I said, deal with the fear differently but all of them have them. **Ada** trying to be stoic, **Claire** cracking jokes to herself etc... 


Look I get Resident Evil story and lore is not quite "deep" or profound or makes sense(An Umbrella merc squad is killed by G1 Birkin, but a college student biker girl kills the G4 Birkin, what?) but Heroes/Protagonists can be afraid and still do the things they need to do, they can let a bit steam off when the battles end, heroes can be human after all. Let's go back to **Sherry**, Sherry is scared as a human can be scarred, but still is still composed, and gives her best to improve the situation, and I love that. 

-***TLDR:***
The RE games were designed to scare the player with horror, but the playable characters constantly go against this, which I argue damages the overall experience. It would make the characters more identifiable if they were more afraid and thus the horror of the games would be enhanced.I just replayed TLOU1 and EVERYTIME I play that game I seem to agree more and more with Joel's decision to save Ellie from the Fireflies. I'm wondering what you think about Joel's choice.I'm a PhD student who's researching the role of videogames during difficult times and I need your help completing my survey!  [https://qutc.syd1.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV\_7algkiNrZ1u8DBQ](https://qutc.syd1.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_7algkiNrZ1u8DBQ?fbclid=IwAR0jzXLGo-iILD2mJYDFqVjyfLzCq1bYHbSPLz6Df3PunEAHS9JIuiD2MaY)

Participants must play videogames, be at least 17 years old, and must work and/or study to be eligible. For those who complete the survey, there is an opt-in prize draw to win 1 of 4 $50USD Amazon gift cards.

**Please feel free to ask any questions you have here :)**

This study is part of my PhD research and has received ethics approval from the Queensland University of Technology's ethic board (ethics approval 1900000933). The purpose of this study is to explore the role of videogames during difficult life situations, through the lens of emotion regulation, need satisfaction and passion. All responses collected are anonymous (and any emails collected for the opt-in prize draw etc. are stored separate from the data).

For more information about this study, please see the information sheet via the link or you can contact me through my email [jessica.formosa@hdr.qut.edu.au](mailto:jessica.formosa@hdr.qut.edu.au)PC Gamer ran an [article](https://www.pcgamer.com/the-lo-fi-open-world-of-this-occult-rpg-looks-thrilling/) on an upcoming lo-fi RPG called Dread Delusion that reminds me graphically of Cruelty Squad meets Morrowind. Whereas Cruelty Squad turned me off because of its intentionally obtuse controls, this game piques my interest. It has a very PS1 otherworldly charm.

However this is the newest game in as many months that seems to fall into the lo-fi/grotesque/sensory violence category. Games that seem intentionally designed to be visually messy, noisy, and even unpleasant.

[Golden Light](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ugtivW5CmSQ) and Post Void are other games that fall in this genre.

I suppose it's a sign that gaming as a medium is maturing - or at least, has *matured* - because visual arts, music and cinema have undergone similar trends with unorthodox, surrealist trends come to the fore. The Beatles' Yellow Submarine and trippy films from the 60s/70s come to mind.

Are these games an indicator of a gaming counter-culture coming to prominence? are they going to get bigger or become niche? What's driving this interest in these grotesque games? Do they represent a kind of rejection of the uber-polished corporate AAA games that have become the norm over the last 15-20 years?

I don't have any answers but I'm genuinely curious if anyone has thoughts or insights on this emerging genre.


Edit: This post kind of blew up, I don't think I've ever had this many responses to any post I've had. Thank you all to those who've contributed lots of great comments. I appreciate it!Most open world games have fast travel.  I don't think that's a statement anyone would care to argue.  Fast travel is very important in a large world where otherwise there would be a lot of walking.  Without fast travel you can very well end up with a game loop that overall becomes tedious.  This can be compounded by poor variety and static mob spawns like in Dragon's Dogma, where until you unlock the fast travel you have to run by the same exact mobs in the same exact place every time, which can become very tedious.  But, with the common iteration of fast travel that we see, many times immersion is broken.  Skyrim is an example.  You go on the map, click the Riverwood button and a loading screen pops up and now you are in Riverwood.  I always find the moment I get bored of the walking in Skyrim and start using the fast travel is around the time I'm about to stop playing.  Compare Skyrim to Dragon's Dogma, at least before you unlock fast travel you have to think about how you are going to get from point A to point B.  What enemies will you pass?  Will you fight them or run?  Will nightfall come before you reach your destination?  If so, what will you pack?  In that way a tedious gameloop can be an engaging set of choices.    


Another option is having more fun and engaging methods of fast travel.  Think Mario 64 shooting yourself out of a cannon, Dishonored having a teleport that makes you the character move very fast, or even Skyrim where rather than using the conventional fast travel in the game, you use the whirlwind sprint glitch where you can paralyze yourself in the middle of the shout and fly across the map, which may break immersion, but is a player choice and can bolster replayability.When people complain about not liking JRPGS or turn based combat, I have a feeling they're not actually complaining about this combat system in theory, many of them will get lost in tactic games or sim games that are just as laid back and casual, the problem people have with JRPGS is how much of their time Is wasted on fights that are non starters. 

The fun from games like God of War or jedi fallen order comes from feeling like a badass, and you can still get that feeling from mowing through enemies that realistically pose no threat to you, the games can't be full of these encounters but a few every once in a while are actually good ways to give the players respite, essentially they give quick fixes of dopamine while the tougher encounters are there to give rewarding happiness to the player. 

RPGS don't have the same fantasy, the fun from these games from a combat level comes from feeling smart, from thinking at a macro level and finding ways to balance the myriad of factors in a battle, you can never replicite this by giving the player a ton of easy battles they can mow through. Players don't feel smart going through a fight they already know they'll win, and yet many RPGS have MORE non starter battles then games where these types of battles can actually bring some enjoyment to the player. Seriously when was the last time you ever enjoyed a random encounter where you were more than 2 levels up to your opponent? Those encounters will happen hundreds apon hundreds of times throughout a playthrough.

I understand level progression is a big component of JRPGS and that means you have to have some grinding throughout them, but please get creative in how you divy that out. How about adding challenges to random encounters so that even if the fight is easy, completing the challenge won't be. Or how about relegating grinding to a endurance mode where a player fights an infinite battle with more enemies being added, that'll be challenging while still making progression feel inevitable.So I love Obsidian Fallout New Vegas and Outer Worlds are some of my favorite games of there’s 

I love that the speech skill actually matters in these games and you can talk your way out of situations instead of fighting but the speech skill is arguably op as hell in these games

I mean it’s no point not to level up your speech skills in these games 

Even in the Witcher 3 it’s no point to not get delusion so you can use it in dialogue to make quest easier 

I think it’s way to balance rpgs to not make speech skills a must but also make it a useful skill unlike SkyrimThis is something I noticed when cyberpunk released, i’d just come off a 3 month binge of Escape From Tarkov. Now for all the shit that plagues that game, movement isn’t one of them. When I first started on Tarkov I found the movement system clunky as hell, but as time went on I found that it actually ruined other FPS games as the movement in those other games felt so static and boxed in. 

This was super apparent when I played Cyberpunk 2077, for a game that so heavily focuses on the ‘first person’ aspect, the actual movement feels like you aren’t playing as a human but more so a camera on wheels. There is absolutely no ‘weight’ to your actions at all.

Most people think ‘inertia’ is to blame for this, although I think it’s something else. Escape From Tarkov, for example, has no inertia. Yet still has that weighted feel to it like you are an actual person running around. I think this does have a lot to do with movement speed but there is also many other factors (that I’m unfortunately not smart enough to notice) It’s more so just a feeling that you get from the responsiveness of the character. 

I’m wondering what all you lovely specimens in this subreddit think about this, do you notice these things in video games and does it affect your opinions of the games quality?Hello everyone, today I want to talk about the Mission Rating System in 2013's Assassin's Creed 4: Black Flag, 2014's Unity and 2015's Syndicate.

&#x200B;

The way it works is that once you complete a mission in any of these games (a mission being a structured activity you need to manually activate like a story mission or an Assassination Contract and doesn't include Random Events or challenges), the game gives you an option to rate the mission you just played from a range of 5 stars.

&#x200B;

Assuming everyone who uses this system rates as honestly and fairly instead of trolling or whatever (an unrealistic ask, I know), I can see the benefits of this system. Since the AC games are relatively formulaic and consistent in design rather than making major sweeping revisions per entry, seeing how different missions get different responses can help gauge what needs to be changed and iterated in future games. For example, if every tailing mission gets a low score from players, it lets Ubisoft know there's something really wrong with Tailing Missions and they should either be removed or changed (and they were removed after Black Flag). If every Sandbox Assassination gets a great score except Sandbox Assassination number 4/8 for some reason, it lets Ubi know they were on the right path for the other 7 Sandbox Assassinations and something went wrong with number 4.

&#x200B;

However, I wonder if this does provide accurate data to work with anything other than something universally negative or positive. 2 Players could rate the same mission in different ways depending on lots of different factors. Let's imagine a straightforward Assassination Contract. 1 player could rate it low because it's just a straightforward side mission with no additional story or relevance. Another could rate it highly because they had a neat time using a novel strategy. Another could rate it low because it has higher level requirements than their gear and they had a rough time in combat and so on. And there's no way to send additional feedback. A player can't say they rated it low because there's no story or because it's rough in combat for lower leveled characters. They can only give a star rating. And of course, while there is a mission replay system, how many players will go back and play missions which may change their perspective? And again, all this is assuming everyone who uses the system actually uses it properly. I imagine most players probably ignore it or give troll information and very few players actually rate missions to what they feel it deserves.

&#x200B;

I imagine Ubisoft probably already gets additional data from players' ratings. Like how much they rated it but also their overall completion, gear, levels and stats etc and that probably helps find correlations. But I wonder how that accounts for more story and lore based players?

&#x200B;

I also wonder how long it takes to actually implement any changes the feedback offers and if that affects the validity and value of the feedback. Like, in the case of AC, Black Flag, Unity and Syndicate were made by different teams at AC and in very close succession. Suppose after Unity's release, the Unity team find that players really don't like missions focussed on Social Stealth for whatever reason thanks to the rating system, even if they tell the Syndicate Team to change their Social Stealth Missions, it would be too late into Syndicate's Development to be able to rework Syndicate's Social Stealth missions. But it wouldn't be late for the Black Flag Team. As an aside, this is likely why Origins and Ody don't have Social Stealth but Valhalla does after fans complained these games didn't have social stealth.....only for Valhalla to resume making lacklustre social stealth.

&#x200B;

Also, one possible negative of this system is that it does show the game is a game. Something like say, Uncharted, which works hard to keep the transitions between levels as seamless as possible might not benefit from such a menu popping up when you complete a chapter.

&#x200B;

Personally, I feel that such a system would probably still work best in AC games given their formulaic structure and design, but also for live service games like Genshin Impact since the game is constantly being adjusted and having content added so getting a sense of how players are feeling towards individual quests would be useful knowledge to have. Maybe even stuff like online shooters where after you play a match, you can say how you felt about that match and how much fun you had. Though Ubisoft did drop this approach after Syndicate. Perhaps because most players weren't using it enough? Or because Origins Onwards are much more fluid about their quests so there aren't traditional missions to trigger exactly like 4/Unity/Syndicate which made it more odd to add such a popup? I guess we may never know.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

So yeah, what are your guys' thoughts on this? So I was thinking back to the good old days with my N64 and how far we've come since then. But I thought to myself, "Have we really"? After all, the Switch uses itty bitty cards and does pretty well for itself. On top of that, they can cram a lot of data onto one of those cards. So I present the question above. Is a cartridge *that* archaic that they are too impractical today?

 Does a blu-ray or whatever's used now just blow it out of the water? I wonder because it's the console that determines how graphically impressive a game is and loading times and all that, right? Games on the Switch don't look as good because of the hardware, not the media the game is presented on... I think. I also thought that with digital games being so commonplace now it could help offset the costs of producing cartridges for the physical release.

 I just kinda want to see it and how it could do today. Nostalgia could help to push that style of console to do okay... maybe.I've noticed this in a lot of games I've played over the years and I recently started playing Divinity Original Sin 2 and noticed the same issue again. Unless you go thievery, the cost of items in shops is too prohibitive in the early game to buy anything.

What commonly happens in games is that after roaming the world and picking up gear and doing missions you become rich as fuck and shop prices don't mean anything anymore because you could just buy them out.

But shops are useless most of the time late game anyways. Your gear is going to be better than anything they have. You probably already have most of the skills you want if they're buyable. Crafting doesn't mean as much. You really need the money in the early game when you want to patch holes.

Back to DOS2, I have another save with a party of 4 and half our armor slots aren't filled because we haven't found armor for that and we just straight up can't afford to buy armor from the shops. So we're super weak going into battles, costing us resurrection scrolls that cost even more than the armor, those things cost 1k each when we probably have 500 gold to our name.

I talked a lot about DOS but that was just the example I had on hand and can be seen in a number of games I've played. I think Witcher was in a similar spot.I am far from a fan of China's policies and draconian measures against their people and the world, but the ripple effects of the online gaming reduction to 3 hrs/week for minors may be a net-good for the industry as a whole. 

I grew up in the NES/SNES days and I remember being shocked at the ability, well over a decade later to download games on the XBLA. You could get GAMES to your console without having to set foot in a store, reducing time to actually play it, amazing. 

*Achivements*
However, from that point of providence, everything has gotten so much worse. I can't play any game without there being some arbitrary achivements list. It used to be that Achievements were just that, something the player had to go out of their way to, y'know, achieve, and get some acknowledgement of it. Stat tracking is cool. What isn't cool is the constant low-level achievement of "You completed the tutorial, here's a badge". 
*Multiplayer modes*
Multiplayer shoe-horned in. Call me an old curmudgeon, but single player games should be just that. I constantly see so many games shoe-horn in some half-assed multiplayer aspect that takes away from the single player, to hawk microtransactions and the like. I understand monetizability, but it's gone too far. 

*Multiplayer games in general.*
Call me an old curmudgeon, but I really dislike multiplayer games as a whole, and what they've done to the landscape. Everything is some massive Fortnite clusterfuck or massive multiplayer nonsense which takes a long time to matchmake for, or a game gets re-tooled to BE multiplayer ruining the base game. Marvel's Avengers and Baldurs Gate Dark Alliance would have been far better games if they were never aimed at being a multiplayer game. Hell, games like Destiny would have been phenomenal if it was single player, or balanced as such, since having to worry about the failure state/ability of OTHER players makes the game exponentially harder. 

Games as a whole, I think, have prioritized multiplayer games and with it have prioritized skins, emotes, and other shallow nonsense faffery that flat out don't interest me, while game mechanics themselves are being experimented on with indies. The single player game is relegated to the occassional blockbuster epic (God of War, Horizon Zero Dawn) or Single player games with an unobtrusive MP integration (most Souls games), but are as a whole the minority. 

Maybe locking off such a large market share to single player games will mean companies will have to work a bit harder to make better SP games, maybe throw in more funding (even if it means monetizing the SP experience more) to add novel gameplay to take advantage of the now locked off market share. 

Or maybe I'm just too old, and gaming isn't for me anymore. Skins and emotes don't interest me, and rarely have I ever been excited to play with other people as a feature.Many regular posters here at [r/truegaming](https://www.reddit.com/r/truegaming/) may often wonder how to improve their posts to better improve possible discussions, but have been unable to get the feedback they desire in any form besides a downvote. This monthly post is designed for frequent posters of [r/truegaming](https://www.reddit.com/r/truegaming/) to receive the feedback they'd like in an organized fashion.

If you are seeking feedback for your posts, we recommend linking to your threads and explaining your thought process in posting them. Explaining the reasoning behind how you posted may be key to finding out what you did wrong and what can be improved. We also recommend including what type of discussion you wanted to start within your threads, and what you believe your own strengths/weaknesses are as a discussion author. This way, people can gauge how you see yourself and can give feedback appropriately.

If you would like to give feedback, we emphasize to please be constructive and polite when doing so. This post is designed for posters to learn from their mistakes, and in order to do so, a decently-sized explanation of their mistakes may be needed. Please also consider replying to those who may not have any replies yet, for even the smallest amount of feedback can help discussion authors.After the most recent expansion I decided to give WoW a try, I played MMORPGs a long time ago - Everquest, Guild Wars, so I was looking forward to finally experiencing the most successful MMORPG ever.

But right from the start.. it was wierd. The main issue was that the world was empty, dead, in 2 months of play I never really interacted with anyone. Beginner areas, expansion areas (Panda island, Lich Kingn island), and even the capital cities other than people AFK outside auction houses. I stopped playing because I realised it was basically a single player game with old fashioned combat.

Progression also seemed broken - everything was very easy to kill and you really needed to be brain damaged to die. Yet at the same time there was no sense of getting stronger because enemies seemed to scale with me, so even after +20 levels the combat was similar. In fact levels seemed pointless in general - at the start I gained new spells and skills, but then each level became meaningless - nothing gained, nothing changed. The most extreme example of broken scaling were some of the raids - I couldn't find any groups so I tried solo entering raids - where I could aggro hundreds of mobs and slay them all in one AOE hit.

Other social aspects seemed dead - joined two guilds where nobody talked, and chat channels were silent. I like MMORPGs so I'm surprised that it was so antisocial, its not what I expected at all.

I guess the game is entirely designed around existing players, but in that case what is the point of all these empty areas? Or old raids where you can 1 shot entire armies? Why not just remove them? There was an option to start at max level, but that doesnt negate how pointless 90% of the world was. The best way I can describe WoW is it felt like visiting an empty virtual museum.So we can avoid a semantical discussion about what a traditional RPG is, I'll give a few examples to clarify what I'm talking about.

I'm talking about games like Pokemon, like Persona, like Earthbound, where you have a party of characters that attack in an established turn order. 

And I will be talking specifically about the combat.

What makes them good?

I'll be perfectly honest and say that I vastly prefer live-action games over turn-order games. Its why I've never gotten around to playing Chrono Trigger and have never fully finished Bravely Default. 

I find that the turn-orders can often be a drag on the mechanics of the game. Its often times hard to tell when you should be debuffing/buffing, when you should be healing, when you should be damaging the enemy, etc. So it makes harder difficulties in games like Persona 5 feel like a chore to figure out what the best route through might be. Where-as you play a live-action game like DOOM and the skills you need to improve in order to be better at the game are fairly apparent. At least for me.

Games like Persona 4 or Pokemon Diamond/Pearl can be a slog to get through due to the high number of resets and long fights. Just watch how long the health bar drains in Diamond/Pearl versions. But I don't mind the combat as much in other turn-based rpg's like in Persona 5, since the combat feels much quicker and more engaging than in other games. 

Even in some traditional rpg's that I love for the story like Final Fantasy X or Dragon Quest 8 can be difficult to get through. Because the games are so long and drawn out, you need to constantly grind in order to keep up, and the fights themselves can take forever to complete. If you mess a boss fight that takes 20 minutes then you'll be set back really far. But if you lose the boss fight to the Marauder in DOOM Eternal you're only set back a couple of minutes since that fight doesn't take too long to complete. 

To me, I think that the gameplay in traditional rpgs should find ways to be snappier and more engaging for the player. I don't necessarily mean something like the bullet-hell mechanics of Undertale, but perhaps the follow-up mechanics in Omori might be satisfactory.

In order to keep up with the times, this is also going to be important. Games are much quicker paced these days so having mechanics that feel like a waste of time to the player might end with the player quitting the game altogether to play something else. 

There are two things that are important for this type of game that comes to my mind:

The combat needs need to be engaging beyond just setting up attacks and then watching them all come out one-by-one.

The combat needs to move relatively quickly where most trash fights shouldn't take more than a minute to beat. And boss fights probably shouldn't go much beyond 10 minutes to defeat either. 

What are your guys thoughts? I'm not in love with this genre, but there are exceptions that I'll replay until the end of time like Persona 5 Royal. Someone with more rpg experience could probably correct a few of my own thoughts as well as add their own. What do you guys think the difference maker is in an rpg? What makes them better overall experiences?So there is a complaint in many areas of the creative arts like video games, comic books, films, and so on, that the philosophy of better representation and diversity in characters are done with poor taste or are not done for the sake of implementing a good measure but for the sake of marketing or profit.

To add to this, there are complaints that this is done or influenced by the lobbying of more countries or political entities

Like for example, America (for example, always wanting to portray America in a very positive and heroic light, especially war is involved (Eg: Micheal Bay films or films like Top Gun) or any event that involved a paradigm shift (some historical films such as the Patriot do this);

or from other countries like China (there are criticisms that many films, video games and so on had to be edited or changed because of the sheer pressure of what is deemed acceptable in China like adding skeletons or themes of death, or the controversy that China had a biased view towards black people or those within the LGBT community because they are barely represented in Chinese media or they are edited out in main marketing products; or the representation of the mythological character Mulan in the recent live-action film

&#x200B;

Video games have also had this issue of misrepresentation or poor interpretation of diversity.

For example, Battlefield 5 included the option of playing as female and black soldiers on active duty in WW2. The issue is that these people were a very huge minority during WW2 and we did not see that many females or black people in combat uniform in WW2.

Other criticisms are the perceived poor implementation of other diverse characters such as people complaining that the main character in Assassin's Creed Odyssey is simply better than her brother counterpart simply because she is a woman, or that the criticisms that the general public believed that the implementation of gritty portrayals of females in the recent Tomb Raider games or the latest Last of Us game were done poorly.

&#x200B;

Something that I think is important to highlight is that judging the quality of representation of other diverse characters, whether female or black or Asian or Muslim or others, is mostly based on one's perception as not everyone will judge the same perception the same way.

For example, that is not to say that there have not been any good implementation of diverse characters in video games.

Examples that come to mind are

\- Faith in  Mirror's Edge,

\- the diverse characters in Overwatch and Apex Legends,

\- Ciri in the Witcher series,

\- several female characters in many fighting games where people claim that it is a good balance of representation without going to a certain extreme (eg: Chun Li in Street Fighter, Sonya in Mortal Kombat, Lidia in Tekken 7),

\- several non-white characters in fighting games (eg: Eddie in Tekken, Jax and Nightwolf in Mortal Kombat,

\- Ellie in Last of Us,

\- Maya, Amara and Lilith in the Borderlands series,

\- Lee in the Walking Dead games,

\- the Prince in Prince of Persia,

\- Miles Morales in the Spiderman game

\- Tommy in Prey and Connor in Assassin's Creed 3 (as they are technically Native American)

&#x200B;

.... etc

&#x200B;

So suffice to say that there are indeed "good" diverse characters in video games so how can these characters be implemented in video games "correctly"?

The thing is that video games mostly involve the re-occuring goal of empowering the player through the character that they are playing as so if the player is a female or black or a member of a minority group, they are more likely to relate to a character that is familiar to their social background or to their personality.

The issue that comes to mind is that most of these non-white characters also struggle from their own daily troubles because of their ethnicity, sexuality, gender and so on and it is the reality that they face on a daily basis, such as racism or sexism. So how can they be implemented within their character arc or within the story without overshadowing their other traits?

How can these types of characters be implemented in a way that fits with the lore or the theme of the game that they are in, or done in a way that effectively gives a certain message?

&#x200B;

For example, there has always been an issue of over-sexualisation of females in video games and this was a major criticism in GamerGate.

(eg: the original Tomb Raider games, several female characters in Mortal Kombat, Quiet in MGS 5)

But at the same time, this over-sexualisation works or fits well within the theme of the games that they are in -

\- for example, Ivy Valentine in Soul Calibur is very sexualised yet it fits in their character arc of rebellion and self-expression.

&#x200B;

Or at times, implementing the troubles that these characters face are also deemed as a part of the story.

\- Such as in the first game of the recent Tomb Raider reboot showed a brief "sensitive" scene where a character was about to take advantage of Lara.

\- Or in Horizon: Zero Dawn, there are some scenes other characters comment about Aloy, not just her being an outcast but because she is a woman.

\- Or in the Walking Dead games, there are a few characters that comment about Lee because of his skin colour

\- Or in Red Dead Redemption, the story gives a sort of commentary about racism, sexism and mistreatment in the story.

&#x200B;

So truly, this subject is a lot more complicated than one might think but there is still the question of how diverse characters can be represented widely to a vast number of people without risking that the latter believe that they are designed so the sake of "looking progressive" or some other political agenda of late such as political correctness or the recent GamerGate event.

So how can this be done?

&#x200B;

**TLDR**

**Some complain that the implementation of diverse characters in video games are done incorrectly or for political reasons (like political correctness).**

**Video games mostly follow aim to empower the player through the characters that they are playing and there have been complaints about poor representation of diverse characters in video games (such as over-sexualisation or over-emphasis on the struggles that diverse characters face), while others praised for the good representation of some diverse characters in video games.**

**So when it comes to the representation and nuance of diverse characters, how can this be done effectively, impactfully and whole-heartedly?**I was having a discussion with my friends about it, and they say mostly that rougelikes are a bad genre because the game heavly relies on **RNG** and because of it, its poorly designed and very badly balanced.

they said that because the game take away choice from you by you sorely relying on **RNG**, the game is artifically difficult since its the game's difficulty is "do you have the a god-run? then the game is piss easy" to "you had bad build, tough luck, good luck next run" and according to them, a well-designed game would just allow you to choose your builds and the game's difficulty would be designed and adjusted by the *developers* acording to said choice.

they also said the feeling of perma-death, is a very bitter one to swallow, "oh i have the perfect build and something insta-killed me making me lose a 45 minute run, fuck this game"

they say that replaying the samey looking procedual generated levels is also a chore before you get to the good bits where you're powerful, thus wasting their time.

my arguments:

* losing is part of the fun
* the game forces you to try new things and builds,as in normal games i would just use the most broken stuff, not sure if this is a good thing or not.
* procedual generation often adds variety to the gameloop so its not all samey.
* Your Skill Usually is still bigger than the RNG and the roll of the dice the game gives you, and good rougelikes allow you to manipulate your RNG to an extent where your fate isnt purely dictated by RNG.(game knowledge plays a huge role in this)
* debuffs/curses often add to the replayability of the game as a "spice" to it that usually normal games would only have that as "poorly made difficulty settings or new game pluses+ that just crank the health and damage of enemies to 11"
* *good* rougelikes have an immense variety of items to choose from, allowing for multiple possibilities of builds.


what are your guys opinions on this genre? do you guys think this is the reason why most rougelikes today aren't "rougelikes" but rather "rougelites"?I'm not exaggerating when I'm saying I played most of the popular (and even many less popular) games in the genres of ARPG (like Diablo, Grim Dawn etc...), and MMOs. I've also played pretty much any game that can be said to have an endgame.

Despite playing so many of these games, I don't think I've ever played a single one where I was truly satisfied.

I'm not even addicted to any game anymore. But I have this gaping hole, this void, this very annoying itch that NEEDS a good endgame, so I can be satisfied and stop gaming once and for all.

**I'm actually quite desperate, if not to find a game with a good endgame, to at least explain to myself "what is a good endgame?". What is it I'm looking for?**

I did have some thoughts about what a good endgame is. First of all, I believe it must be finite. This is why lately I've realized that the kind of endgame I'm looking for can never be a multiplayer experience. It needs to be a singleplayer product, not a live service where the company needs to keep you playing for thousands of hours, for years and years.

I can feel that a game's endgame is bad once I play it, but I can't actually say what a good endgame is. Does it exist? Or am I just delusional, an addict with a craving that can't get his fix no matter what?Hello everyone, today I want to talk about Uncharted's harder difficulties, what I find its faults are and what are some ways it could be improved.

&#x200B;

Let's begin with what I feel are the aspects to a good hard mode in a game. To me, a good hard mode isn't just a mode where enemies do more damage and/or you have less health. It's a mode that demands the player really learn the ideal systems of the game and those systems are more fun at that higher level for the people playing the game. And that if the player then plays the game on an easier difficulty, they can sweep through the game even easier. To use an analogy, it's like weighted clothing in Dragon Ball. It makes the experience itself harder when using them but it improves your own performance so if you take them off, you're better at the game.

&#x200B;

To use examples from other games, Devil May Cry's "Dante Must Die" has enemies be much faster and more aggressive, even having transformations if the player takes too long. And the player can't cheese through it by spamming stinger or something. This suits DMC's gameplay of having the player do stylish combos and fighting enemies since the difficulty requires the player be more aggressive and active themselves as well avoiding sloppy play or getting hit since that also makes fights less stylish. If a player completes Dante Must Die and then plays on normal, they'll tear through enemies easily since Dante Must Die really thought them how to fight well and avoid getting hit.

&#x200B;

Splinter Cell Chaos Theory has its harder difficulties make enemies have better senses and deal more damage so you have to get better at sneaking which also means the easier difficulties become easier since you're better at sneaking. Same for Doom on higher difficulties since it demands the player get better at moving around and dodging or the Arkham games which require the player get better at attacking and countering and dealing with different enemy types quickly. Even with Pokemon, Rom Hacks that make enemy trainers have better teams and AI and require the player be on Set Mode or Nuzelockes changes how players approach battles and team building since now the player would need to have to switch their Pokemon around more to predict attacks and not rely on a single Poke sweeping with a single move.

&#x200B;

This brings us to Uncharted. Typically, Uncharted's main challenge comes from combat sections consisting of standard 3rd person cover shooting but also fun movement and melee systems. At its best, Uncharted's combat can have a player run through the battlefield, weaving through gunfire, jumping and climbing stuff, shooting enemies, meleeing them, jumping enemies then take a "break" by taking cover and waiting for your health to recharge. Games from Uncharted 3 and onwards have taken steps to make arenas less linear and to encourage the player to move around more by having enemies try and ambush the player and have some cover start to break like an action movie. On Uncharted's easier difficulties of Explorer (Very Easy), Easy and Moderate, combat sections can be quite fun with these movement mechanics and the wait times for health regen aren't too long in a fight. But on the harder difficulties, Hard and Crushing, that's not the case. Enemies are far more accurate with their shots and do so much damage that the player will die very quickly if they're in the open. This makes all the fun movement mechanics completely unviable so players are stuck with only the 3rd person cover-based shooting. And the time players have to spend healing is often most of a firefight since even popping out for a second to shoot will result in the player taking a lot of damage quickly.  You don't even get better at the game upon completing it on Crushing since none of the skills from effectively camping translate to making you better at movement aside from making you better at headshots. This makes the harder difficulties boring to play since instead of providing you with that typical Uncharted/action movie adventure during a firefight, it just becomes a drag. Now there are games like Metro that also have difficult firefights behind cover where you die if you're exposed for a second on higher difficulties, but the game is typically built around that kind of gameplay and rewards the player for playing smart. But Uncharted doesn't do this kind of difficulty doesn't complement Uncharted's design, turning it into a worse game. I have similar criticisms to other games with a similar design like the Call of Duty titles. It's like if in Splinter Cell, enemies were fun to sneak through on normal, but on hard they have x-ray vision so you have to shoot them to have a chance at completing the level. It's like if in Batman Arkham, enemies were fun to fight on Normal but on hard, the only way to play is to kick them in the shin, run away and then repeat the process.

&#x200B;

You may say "then just don't play on anything harder than normal" and fair point. But I say if you're going to include harder difficulties, why not design them to be fun and reward the skills the game normally requires or are cool at least? It would certainly increase replayability at least and may even make the easier difficulties more fun in the process.

&#x200B;

So what are some ways to improve Uncharted's harder difficulties to bring it more in line with my idea of an ideal difficulty?

&#x200B;

The main one I have is a rework to the way health works. Normally in Uncharted, health works like in every other shooter. But what if there was a system that gave the player a shield (framed by opponents missing more of their shots) or just healed the player faster depending on how they fight in combat. So if a player does a melee attack, then a headshot, then a diving attack, they instantly get full health and/or have enemies miss their shots during the sequence. I think this would be an improvement for a few reasons. If a player doesn't care about this and just wants to play it as a cover-based shooter, that option is still there. If a player wants to be more creative, the system facilitates that and rewards them by extending the time they can stay out in the open before needing to take cover to recover. And it rewards skillful play because more skillful players can extend this time for longer during fights. And it makes fights play like a cool action movie which is what Uncharted is going for.

&#x200B;

In conclusion, Uncharted's harder difficulties aren't very fun or rewarding to play since they don't test nor encourage the interesting mechanics of Uncharted's combat, turning the game into a boring cover shooter with lots of waiting thereby defeating the point of the harder difficulties. My proposal to improve this would be to make it so the player gets a shield/instant recovery for playing in cool ways which would both make combat more skillful and interesting, reflect the game's "Action Movie" vibe and complement the existing level design and even encourage the easier difficulties to try being cool.

&#x200B;

So yeah, what are your thoughts?When I was a kid graphics were king. That was the main defining factor that games and even new consoles were judged upon, "does it have good graphics?". And as the years have gone by, graphics have gotten crazy good, not photo-realistic or anything, but Star Wars Battlefront II (2017) really blew me away with how amazing it looks, and that's a pretty old game. Personally, if graphics never improved past that I don't think I would be too upset. 

The more important thing to me has become game mechanics + story telling, i.e. Control (2019). That game has been impressing me at every turn (not finished yet, please no spoilers!), and the graphics are pretty standard. In fact I did not notice the graphics at all, for how good or bad they were, they were just there. To me, the way the story unfolded and the mechanics were presented was way more impressive and interesting than a video game that looks like real life. The feeling of immersion offered by Control is a target a lot of games miss these days, even when they really polish the product nicely. 

What are your thoughts on the matter?Currently, I am having a problem with media discourse and especially gaming-related discussions.  
People do not differentiate between different types of statements and that makes making a point a lot harder and can decrease the quality of a discussion.   
At first, I want to formulate the types of statements:  
**1. Neutral Statements**  
Neutral statements are descriptive in nature. These statements do not evaluate anything, their whole purpose is to give information and context.   
Example: Maria Bros. 1 is older than Mario Bros. 2. These statements are factually correct and can not be discussed.   
Now the problem becomes when discussing less clear things, yet I first want to start with the other types of statements to build my argumentation.  
**2. Preference Statements**  
2.1 Motivation  
It is allowed to like anything and have personal preferences, but it becomes a problem when the argumentation ends in: I think it is just better. This is like the infinite regress of discussions for video games.   
"Why do you think it is better?"  
"Because it is better."   
To make a point, there need to be clearly defined aspects, otherwise, it is not possible to discuss anything. While people are allowed to like something without having these aspects in mind, a fruitful emotional discussion is difficult to have and most of the time it will only center around why it invokes these feelings. This can be helpful, but it also can miss the point of conversation, especially if two games are being compared. Personal preference can stop people from having "formally" correct discussions because discussions are firmly grounded in logic.  
2.2 Definition  
A preference statement is a statement that indicates the personal interests of a person. While a person does not know all their preferences and they can be "wrong" (example: I will never enjoy an FPS game, but then proceeds to enjoy DOOM Eternal), the preference contains qualities to evaluate something.  
Example: I like good graphics and they are important to me.  
While this does not differentiate art styles (personal example: I think that both Zelda - The Windwaker and Doom Eternal are gorgeous games but in different ways), it at least has some input for the other person and provides criteria.  
The more specific a statement is, the better for the discussion as dissecting non-specific examples is extremely hard.  
This leads us to the synthesis.  


**3. Synthesis**  
Example:   
I like orchestral soundtracks more (preference). DRAGON QUEST® XI S: Echoes of an Elusive Age™ - Definitive Edition has an orchestra soundtrack that some prior versions lack (objective statement). Therefore I like the soundtrack of this version the most (Synthesis).  
By using an objective statement and a personal evaluation it is possible to construct something constructive and it opens multiple possible discussion points.  


1. Reason for the existence of a preference
2. Other games that did something similar/games that completely deviate from the preference.
3. And so on.   


Of course, there is a problem:  
Less concrete statements.  
"Mario Odyssee was easier to produce than God of War (2018)". This or the opposite has to be true because different amounts of the workforce were needed and specific skills asked. 

There is the possibility to break it down:  
Into hours the developers spent, how much money it costed to develop. These metrics exist and the limitation of information makes it impossible to properly discuss them. While specific aspects are not easily compared, it is possible to at least get a grasp on the magnitudes.   
These arguments become less coherent because they are based on assumptions. The moment an assumption is made, the person has to identify it and communicate that it is an assumption.   
Humans are not omniscient, but the more/greater assumptions a person has to make, the less believable the argument becomes that the person will want to make in a synthesis.   
So try to be precise and search for specific examples that represent the bigger thing and keep your assumptions limited and logical.  

This whole thing is more of advice than a formal absolute construct. If people use this "logical thought system", discussions are easier to have.  
I still fail my own formula, but I think that it would help the overarching goals of this subreddit.  
"I guide others to a treasure I cannot possess."As we all know, many people see a 'true RPG' as something that has a protagonist with barely any backstory or personality so the player themselves is free to fill everything in as they desire. I'm not here to argue genre descriptions tho, but rather the idea that  in my head that there is such a thing as too much of a blank state and that even puristic RPG's can benefit of having characters with tactically chosen pieces of their backstory defined.   


I'm gonna be using fallout new vegas as the game to explain my idea and reasoning, as you might or might not now, it's seen by most as the best 'true fallout' game since the protagonist gets barely to no backstory and it's all up to the player. Unlike fallout 3/4 where the protagonist gets a good amount of it. Nothing really to argue here yet, pretty understandable. However a problem I had with fallout new vegas and RPG's like it as a whole is that I feel the protagonist has so much of a blank state they actually have no reason to interact with the game world as much as the player will end up doing. So fallout new Vegas is a game that no matter how you approach it, you're gonna get politically involved in the game world and eventually decide it's fate. However at the start of the game there's no incentive to do this from the player, they are just a mailmen that miraculously survived getting executed during the job, and the only goal they have at the moment is to find their killer and retrieve the package they were supposed to deliver. Granted, once they achieve this goal the game is gonna nudge them into the political side and the ending of their choosing in the game. However, before you reach that point the game is expecting you to follow a path that goes through most of the game world and interact with the many attractions in it. Expect many of these end up taking a stances for and against the many factions of the game, why would your character forego their original goal in order to go help in military camps? help some extremist group in making sure they can overthrow the rest and achieve control of the land, help a powerful but weakened faction that is hiding from the rest until they can regain power..... Sure the player having full control of their blanks slate can fix all of this, but I'm of the belief RP elements are at it's strongest when the player has some defined elements to RP and work around with, which NV has none off. Truth is that the protagonist in these games do the stuff they do because the player wants it first and foremost.  


Now to the interesting part, how would you balance this? How would you give just enough backstory so the protagonist has reason to do what they do in the game while still giving the player a lot of freedom on the why?   


One thing to decide this imo is to look at the general themes of the games, what is the protagonist gonna get involved with sooner or later no matter what? Determine these things and give some backstory on that. Eg. in fallout new vegas you're gonna get politically involved with the factions like you want it or not, so why not give the protagonist some backstory that indicates they're interested in getting politically involved. Heck you could easily give the player some freedom into choosing what kind of political alignment the protagonist has. Do they want to be a ruthless leader? Do they want equality for all? a democracy? Do they want independence?.... All of this give a reason and general alignment for the protagonist while still giving the player the freedom to RP the why and how.  


What do you think, is there value in putting extra effort in balancing this? How would you do it?

Edit: I think I made a mistake here mentioning new Vegas since the majority of comments here are about the game rather then the actual point of the post, not to mention the downvotes. This is not a new Vegas critique nor solely focused on how to improve that game, but rather just an example to explain why I think too much blankness can be a problem. Again I'm not just talking about nee Vegas, but rather RPG's as a whole.im 20 years deep in the fps scene and it never used to be this bad. back in the counterstrike days it was a rarity, and even then it was a shamefulness attached to it. 

nowadays it seems like most people cheating are putting that aside to just be ahead of everyone else. is this something solved by a better AntiCheat? or are moving towards a future where this is more the norm?

i saw that Windows 11 is due to enforce TPM and Secure Boot which will impact a majority of cheats, but that doesnt mean a workaround wont be found just as fastI don't believe that the actual revenue scheme is public, but many people have speculated that the way developers are being paid if their game is put on gamepass is that they are paid based on the amount of hours the playerbase actually spend playing their game.

I'm sure there's also some kind of "sign-on" payment, and most probably a minimum monthly payment that gets dolled out to developers, but it seems that the majority of the revenue developers would get would be from recorded play hours of the gamepass users.

Doesn't this lead us down the path of a developer race to create the most addictive popular gameplay loop possible? 

A revenue system where you pay a flat monthly fee and gain access to everything, from AAA to indie, removes any relationship of **price --> quality**. 

In the retail market you have generally had 'price premiums' to pay for 'higher quality' (i.e. longer development time, larger teams, larger game worlds, more detailed assets, bespoke music, art, etc.). You know in the retail space that *generally* a $60 game is going to have a larger world, more voice acting, better graphics, etc. etc. than a $10 game.

In the retail market there is a boundary and developers are proportionately rewarded for making games large or small, but with a 'flat fee' system like gamepass, that seems to disappear.

So am I missing something, or are we going to see a deluge of games purely designed around being as addictive as possible?Of course this is not a generalized situation yet, there are plenty of exceptions to this rule to be found every year. And hell, I've never explored a game more freely than I did Red dead redemption 2.

But there's this growing trend of open world blockbusters to just, throw content at you with no incentive for exploration. Two of the most recent titles I've played fell under this rule: Ghost of Tsushima and Horizon Zero Dawn. Granted, I might have contributed to this, as I "rushed" both of them by only doing a couple of side missions, but the flow of the game never felt "welcoming" or "stimulating" towards exploration.

I used to play games very slowly back in the day, absorbing the worlds I traversed through, and the story would more often than not, click with such a dynamic. But now, nothing "calls me" to explore the world. The filler that fills the desolated landscapes of Horizon are exactly that, filler. They feel artifical and are "just there", you don't go out of your way most of the time to discover anything outside of the first couple of hours.

I think it might have something to do with character for me. I felt truly incentivized to see the world react to Arthur in RDR2. Feeling like a performer improvising outside of the script, trying to discover new things about my own character along the way. For a lot of other games, content is there for "the player" to waste hours in. Other than that, the worlds are becoming less of a landscape to interact with, and more so one to conquer. All I can say is that, after all these years, Skyrim remains a refreshing experience for so many people because of how humbling the world is. You're still a Godkiller with dragon powers and blah blah blah, but the world felt so much more massive than you. It existed without you. Your journey existed within its limits, it didn't exist as a result of your journey.I am not sure if this is because of peer pressure or something because I like both series and I have learned that both of them have their own controversies and poor releases by both companies, let alone the controversies of the philosophies and the work environments of both companies   


(eg: unpaid overtime in EA, and the recent "frat-boy culture" in Activision Blizzard)

&#x200B;

My judgement tells me that I should not be so hyped before a game is released as experience tells me that over-anticipating before release is a risky move and you cannot always be sure that you will get what you were promised. Also, both series have been marketed and designed to have a short shelf-live while also promoting more spending because of their season passes and (mostly) paid DLCs.

&#x200B;

So I want to be sure that I am careful before making my final conclusions before any game is released. 

Though the internet is showing a different story.

There is a lot of anticipation and hype for Battlefield 2042 while also a lot of criticism already towards COD: Vanguard. 

I am not sure if this is due to peer pressure or whether it is because of the current legal battle in Activision Blizzard because of the frat boy culture within the company, even though the latest releases of both franchises have had poor reception and not as much support from both companies.We're seeing a lot more AAA story driven SP games make use of character swapping in the last 5 or 10 years. I am personally torn on it as I've felt both positive and negative reactions when this happens. I'm curious about how others feel. Some questions: 

 - Would you rather no swap at all or do you welcome it if done right? (and what does "done right" mean exactly to you?) 
 - Do you think swaps are becoming too predictable/standard these days in AAA story games? 
 - How far into the story/game should a swap happen? 
 - Should the new character inherit the old's inventory/skills/stats/etc... 
 - Would you prefer a mandatory swap at a certain point in the game or an optional swap feature so you can alternate back and forth (similar to GTA V for example)? 
 - Which games do you think did swapping the best/worst, and how can future games improve the swap? 

Many of my favorite (and many of the highest rated) story driven SP games in recent years have had the character switch. Games that come to mind are The Witcher 3, The Last of Us (1 and 2), GTA V, Red Dead Redemption (1 and 2), Uncharted 4 has some character switching moments to it too (also considering the fact that The Lost Legacy was originally planned as DLC for Uncharted 4 which technically wouldn't be a swap during the same "story", but still a different character to play as in the same game had it not been released as a separate game). 

I realize these are only 3 different developers but they are good examples to go off of with varying approaches to swapping, and many pros & cons in each game. One of my main complaints about swapping is if it permanently switches characters or if the new character's story section drags on for a long time. The main thing that I (and a lot of other gamers) can have trouble with is growing attached to the first protagonist, building up their stats and inventory, becoming familiar with their playstyle based on their abilities and weaponry... only to have things abruptly cut off when the character switches and you are left wondering if/when you will get back to the first character who you are already so invested in. The best example of this is The Last of Us pt. II. I personally didn't have a problem with the new character (I actually really liked her character) or the things she did leading up to the switch, it just always felt like I was constantly waiting for the story to switch back to the main character and get back to her inventory & skills that I had been building up (combined with the constant time jumps/flash backs in the story, it just felt a little too jarring overall to me as far as the pacing goes). I do think however that TLoU pt.II is a great game overall and it plays much better on the next playthrough when it comes to digesting the story and character swapping. Overall it was a really well crafted story and a bold approach, I just think that a lot of the negativity that came from this 2nd character actually (maybe unknowingly) often came from the fact that players were just settling into the original protagonist and feeling like they were just getting into the "meat" of the story when suddenly we were thrown into the shoes of an unfamiliar.

I've found the easiest character switches to digest are ones with brief (but interesting) sections of the story where we play the majority of the game as the protagonist, then (usually near the end of the game) we are thrown into the perspective of a different (but well known) character. The Witcher 3 and TLoU 1 are examples of this (in these games we switch for some really interesting sections of the story which felt well placed, then switch back to the main protagonist)... or the Red Dead games would also be examples of this (though in these games it's a permanent switch near the end of the game). What I liked about the permanent switch in RDR games is the fact that you inherit the previous characters' inventory, which I think makes the transition feel much better and easy to digest from a gameplay point of view.

GTA V's character switching seemed like an interesting and bold experiment which I think worked out overall, but maybe not well enough to repeat. I did like being able to choose which character you'd like to play as for many sections, it fit well for free roaming since you can choose the character who best suits your preferences... but I don't think the swapping mechanic during missions was necessarily something that felt more fun in any way or "enhanced" the gameplay in any way. Multiple characters like that will also inevitably lead to less character development for each one, less time spent with each one and less "investment" in characters overall I think. I appreciate Rockstar's attempts at creating multiple character options in recent games though, with the additional attention to detail that it demanded in RDR2 as well to make some missions possible to play with either character, which meant performance capture with both actors separately and different dialogue based on the 2 different characters (and different performance capture/dialogue for free roam moments too). GTA V's multi-character approach combined with RDR2's multi-protagonist story makes me wonder if Rockstar have any intentions of building a story for a future game where you can choose 1 of say 2 different characters to play through the FULL game as. It would be really interesting to have a full story to play through with whichever character you choose and different dialogues (perhaps different outcomes/encounters based on each character). If that were the case I'm not sure whether I'd prefer the option to swap back & forth (like GTA V) or to have to choose a set character at the beginning of the game. It would certainly encourage a replay if there are 2 different fully fleshed out characters with different dialogue and unique story moments, but on the flip side sometimes people don't want to play a long game like that twice and just playing once as 1 character might leave a feeling of "fomo" about how the other character's questlines might differ. 

I'm ranting a bit here but just curious about other opinions on character switching, the best and worst things about it, maybe some other examples from games I haven't mentioned.Returning to old hardware, I’m always reminded of how various advantages and limitations of a given system shaped what games looked and played like.

This, of course, is most visible between console generations. But even within the same time frame the differences used to be very pronounced. Generally, one wouldn’t mistake a PS1 game for an N64 game or a Dreamcast game. Each system had its overall look, sound, and feel.

Given 10 screenshots from obscure, anonymous games, most people on this sub would do a good job matching them to platforms such as: NES, SNES, Atari 2600, Amiga, DOS, Saturn, GBC, PS1, N64, Dreamcast, DS.

Today, in comparison, with most systems being x86 machines of various shapes and sizes, the only factors differentiating games are often frame rate, resolution, draw distance, etc.

On the one hand, I personally miss the diversity that hardware differentiation created. Developers had to work with different strengths and weaknesses of each machine – and it’s interesting to see what they came up with.

I love games that squeeze the most from each system or take its particular strengths to an absolute extreme (while also finding genius ways to work around limitations). Games that cleverly use particular hardware, from unique controller to unique chipset, are always fascinating to study. Finally, I tend to geek out on seeing how the same game was adapted/rebuilt for each system, and how different the results could be.

That being said, while I appreciate this kind of diversity, it’s quite understandable why things have changed. With today’s hardware there are far fewer glaring limitations placed on game devs – hence, they can focus on bringing their vision to life, rather than working around N64’s cart size or PS1’s rendering limits.

So in short, I myself am split on this. Hardware not standing between the creator and his vision is not something to be upset about. However, constraints are (and always were) generally good for innovation and creativity.

This isn’t meant to be a “back in my day…” type of a post. I’m happy with the many unique games we get today. Surely, diversity doesn’t come just from hardware. But still, I do wonder what kind of games we would be playing if there were 3-4 VERY different, largely incompatible, mainstream systems, being developed for today.I think at this point it's safe to say that there's enough games that employ the gameplay loop of the Souls series that we can pretty much call it it's own genre, and people have been using the term Souls - Like for a while now. And, certainly there are enough games at this point where i think it would be applicable to name a genre after that gameplay loop/mechanics. However, as a big fan of that genre and as someone who's played a fair share of Soulslikes i find a lot of games that try to go for the Dark Souls style focus either on the bosses or the punishing difficulty getting to the boss. Which, don't get me wrong, those are absolutely a big part of the Souls games but the one part i think isn't nearly as well focused on, and it is a very big part unfortunately is the level design.

You see, what made the Dark Souls games enjoyable, at least to me, wasn't the bosses or the difficulty (though those certainly are parts of it) but what grabbed me most, particularly the first game, was the absolute brilliant level design. Dark Souls 1 in particular i think has one of the best level designs i've seen in a game. Every single part of the game flows into itself brilliantly, the levels are both sprawling enough to not be linear yet recongizable enough that you will rarely ever get lost in them (Except for Blighttown) and the intercconected pathways bringing you back to a bonfire that you thought was so far away is just great. Not only that but the environments themselves are memorable to traverse through and each of them have their own themes and music to them. 

That is something i think a lot of other Soulslikes are missing. For example: Remnant: From The Ashes. Don't get me wrong, i love Remnant and granted the level design gets better once you progress but that firs section of the game is just boring. Moving through bland post apocalyptic landscapes and traversing copy pasted dungeons to get to the boss

Same thing is present in Hellpoint. Though here the problem is more to do with the fact that the levels are not distinct enough from each other, it's just the same metalic corridors over and over again

To be fair, some Soulslikes do not have this problem. The Surge 2 in particular has absolutely stellar level design but i think more Soulslikes in the future need to keep the level design in mind. Because yes, Big bosses and punishing difficulty is important, but you know what, i'll sacrifice those two for a good Soulslike level design any day of the weekSo I've been playing FTL:Faster than Light. It's a pretty old game, I'm sure many of you know it. Despite being pretty old, it's still pretty unique. 

I memory that still kind of haunts me: when I was in college, I got to class early one day. Set up my laptop, played some FTL while I waited for the class to start. A friend sitting behind me saw me playing it. After a while, he asked me "okay, when are you going to be done making your ship?". I explained to him that what he was seeing was the game, not a ship creator. He looked at me, half disgusted, saying "you play this?". 

Since then, I've been thinking "how could I explain to him why it's fun?". 

For those who don't know, FTL is played from a top down perspective. You can see your ship and the enemy ship, including their interiors. You never see the ships moving. 

The moment to moment gameplay involves selecting your weapons and telling them where to shoot on the enemy ship. Sometimes you need to adjust your power. Sometimes you have to tell your crew where to go, to fight enemy boarders or repair systems... 

Explaining it like that, it does sound rather boring. 

But what makes this moment to moment gameplay exciting isn't the combat, but rather what happens between combats. 

Between combat, you can make upgrades to your ship. Your primary resource for doing so is scrap. Scrap can also be used at shops to purchase new equipment, meaning you have tough choices to make. 

There are also text based events with choices, which are fun, but I also don't think explaining that to my friend would've helped my case... 

The game is also really punishing. Some people call it completely unfair, based on luck. But then, other people have 80+% win rates on hard difficulty, so it's definitely not all luck. Good strategy is key. Knowing when to save and when to spend, knowing what fights to take and when to flee (probably one of my biggest problems: I very rarely flee). 

All of these other mechanics really make the moment to moment gameplay exciting, to me at least. Sure, you're just clicking on your weapon and clicking on the enemy ship, but you earned that weapon by making tough choices. 

There is also decisions to be made, such as whether to fire on the enemy shields, weapons or piloting. But that's hardly exciting... 

I don't know. What this post really comes down to is the super simple and seemingly boring gameplay being made more exciting in the greater context of the game. 

I'm sure FTL isn't alone in this regard... But I cant really think of other examples. I guess you could say the same about autobattlers, or maybe MMO's, but yeah. 

I know I'll never be able to go back and explain to my friend why it's a fun game, and even if I could, I don't know if he would understand, and that's fine. It's totally understandable if someone only wants to play games with exciting moment-to-moment gameplay.I know a fair amount of people in the gaming community as a whole do not like blank slate protagonists at all. To a lot of people, a blank slate protagonist is a lazy attempt to make the players create the main character for themselves because the developers couldn't bother to create an actual character themselves. Others just can't get invested in a blank slate character enough to care about the story at all. And don't get me wrong, those are all valid complaints. 

But, i think, for certain games blank slate chracters work much better than characters with an actual backstory and personality to them. Sometimes (if done well of course) a blank slate character can actually enhance the experience of a game you're playing. And i'll give two good examples for this:

&#x200B;

1: The Fallout series:

This one goes without question i think, so much so to the point that when Bethesda decided to actually give the protagonist somewhat of a backstory and give them a voice fans were actually upset. A blank slate character for the Fallout series (And the Elder Scrolls now that i think of it) are perfect for the open world where Fallout takes place in. Having a protagonist that is not a blank slate (Like Fallout 3 somewhat did and like Fallout 4 massively did) takes away from the roleplaying aspect the series is known for

&#x200B;

2: The Dark Souls Series

This is an example where not only does the blank slate character enhance the roleplaying opportunities, it also enhances the overral cryptic story of the series. The Chosen Undead and the Unkindled one...their names are the only slight backstory you get for them, and, in the Dark Souls world, that is all you need. The vagueness of who or what your character is enhance both the storytelling perspective of the games as well as the presentation of the games as wellSo let me try to elaborate.

Most of the gaming news that I encounter comes from many sources - gaming news organisations like Gamespot and IGN, and also a lot gaming influencers or meditiators or personalities related to gaming like for example AngryJoe or TotalBiscuit (RIP), or ProJared; or at times, even news from reddit or another gaming-related website like Kotaku.

Experience taught me that within every piece of news, there is a story behind this and you cannot be sure whether there is an agenda of any kind of behind this or possible misinformation or bias.

So I inform look into multiple sources or implement my own thoughts about something instead of simply accepting it blindly.

&#x200B;

And related to this subject, I sometimes have thoughts that really go against what many people think about something.

For example, I think that the reason why people hated Last of Us part 2 is because of the over-hype that it got before launch and the whole misinformation about the leak of the death of a character before launch too and people hanged onto this idea without really examining the game in its entirety. 

So much so that people think that Naughty Dog treated the Last of Us as a cheap franchise that they can crap on and market for sequels. I do agree to some extent because I do not think that a sequel was needed but examining the game in itself also gave me the impression that the game was misunderstood because it is meant to be a game of sufferring, trauma, conflict of interest and human vulnerability.

And I think that this is something that I really admired about the game because rarely did I feel that a game can make me feel like this while I am playing.

&#x200B;

Other examples come to mind as well like for example, people are complaining more about Vanguard though I am not sure why.

 

Though I do understand this to some degree because it is not worth it economically to invest to buy a game at full price but only gets support and updates for only a couple of months until the next one comes out the day after.

That is something that I am also frustrated about because I feel that Activision focused more Warzone and Cold War but the quality is lower when compared to Modern Warfare 2019 which does not get the same amount of love.

&#x200B;

In constrast, I am not that enthusiastic about Battlefield 2042. Maybe I am not into futuristic games as of late or maybe I have my own opinions about EA.

&#x200B;

Or sometimes, I think that some games are too beloved or treated too harshly and the impression that I get is that there is little room for exploration of the different attitudes to this and it often boils down to group think - if a game is good or we think that it is good or it is going to be, you better accept it. and vice versa.

&#x200B;

There is a certain cult-like mentality that coming to mind which gives me the impression of how gaming news are distributed because of how we treat the validity of certain news or ideas based on who is giving them.

Like for example, I remember how much people used to really adore AngryJoe for saying that his reviews are truthful and honest, though my perception tells me that I cannot rely solely on his word to affect my final thought about a game, or that I sometimes think that his ideas are exaggarated or biased.

Sometimes, I think the same thing about anything related to gaming like whether you like Dark Souls or not, whether I like COD or Battlefield, whether you prefer console or PC, whether you are a fan of GamerGate or not, and so on.

&#x200B;

There is a feeling that there is a lot of groupthink involved and I would like to ask for your feedback about this.I’m at the outset of an arguably foolish quest to identify and rank the most “complete” video games of all time. One of the categories I have decided to track in gauging a game’s completeness is “combat.” To be sure, not all games sport a combat (or “battle”) system—nor should they—but combat is such a near-ubiquitous occurrence in gaming, generally, that I figured any comprehensive review of the medium should account for it.

All this said, I am having a HECK of a time nailing down my methodology for comparing and then ranking video game combat systems, namely because there exist so darn many. Really, I’ve spent hours now just watching and reading about the dozens of combat system subtypes I never even knew existed. So, my predicament: how do I devise a methodology that goes beyond the three major categories of video game combat (real-time, turn-based, and hybrid) but not one so granular as to lose viewers in the weeds by taking the time to differentiate between, for example, the “cancel-based combat” of *Grandia* and “active time battle” first popularized by *FFVI* (sorry if this is a terrible example—hopefully, you get my point)? As the preceding example also illustrates, many combat system subtypes are largely specific to franchise, rather than genre at large. But even centering my methodology primarily around genres would be problematic—after all, I’d argue that the combat in *Gears of War* has more in common with *Uncharted* (given the heavy reliance on third-person cover shooting) than it does *Call of Duty*, though *Gears* and *CoD* are both classified as “shooters” whereas *Uncharted* is “action-adventure.” Likewise, *Mordhau* and *Soulcalibur VI* are both classified as “fighting” games, despite featuring wildly different virtual camera perspectives. 

I’ve now cooked up several woefully flawed attempts at classification and am beginning to lose hope of ever creating one that could make for an entertaining video. For a laugh, here’s my “best” draft:

* **Melee Simulator** (first-person fighters like *Chivalry II*)
* **First-Person Shooter** (everything from *Wolfenstein 3D* to *DOOM Eternal*)
* **RPG+** (this category would meld third-person ARPGs, hack-and-slashers, and related genres into one, given their often overlapping combat mechanics… but it doesn’t make sense to put *Diablo* in the same category as *The Witcher*, so this category still needs major work)
* **Fighters** (games like *Street Fighter*, *Soulcalibur*)
* **Real-Time Strategy** (games like *Homeworld*, *StarCraft*)
* **Turn-Based** (*Persona 5*, *Into the Breach*… any game with even loosely defined turns)
* **Platformer** (games like *Hollow Knight*, *Super Mario Bros.*)

Ideally, I’d assemble a combat system category list like the one above, identify the games considered by reputable critics (and maybe crowd-sourced surveys) to be the best of said categories, and then assemble a video that ranks/analyzes the best of each category. If I really feel like pissing people off, I may even cross-contaminate the analysis with a (decidedly worthless) “best of all time” ranking. I could also envision building a massive bracket with the best of each category and then opening it up to voting as a fun waste of everyone’s time.

In conclusion, I appeal to this community, which surely sports veterans savvier to combat system nuance than am I. How would you go about categorizing combat systems? Is it a pointless endeavor? I am very open to feedback of all sorts, even if it’s just to stop by and say, “Don’t you have anything better to do?” (Answer: no.)I've been following a lot of in-development games lately, and have been struck by how often the release date ends up being delayed.  Some of these are minor, but many are pretty significant: 1yr+ delays, or "once-per-month" delays, where every month the release date is pushed back again (one in particular has changed their release date at least 10 times).  This seems to be an issue with both AAA and indie developers, and spans across genres.  Of all the games I've been excited for lately, none have released when they said they would, and many missed by a huge margin.

It got me curious: why are delays so common in gaming?  I don't work in development, but in my industry, major project delays are pretty rare, and usually result in major backlash if they do happen.  With experience, you generally know how much time/manpower a project is going to take, and a good project leader can coordinate resources/benchmark along the way to make sure that things keep on schedule.  With the number of games out there, I'd imagine the gaming companies must know approx. how long most development tasks will take by now.

The only difference I can see in game development is the importance of user feedback, but gaming seems unique.  User feedback is equally important for things like movies or books, but those are generally very good about keeping their release dates.  The only movies I've seen delayed are usually due to major unforeseen issues like a natural disaster, and not so much for entirely reshooting a film due to a poor screening.I grew up playing CS1.6/Source and had fun times using vBulletin/forum clones to discuss about the game/servers/maps, and to even make new friends. Though I was only 9 during those times admittedly. I'm 20 years old and I mostly play zoomer games like Valorant and League of Legends. Riot removed the League of Legends forums ages ago and replaced it with Reddit. It's a horrible alternative for me.  


The whole site feels like a tiktok group where the only content you'll ever see is memes, game clips, and bunch of eSports tournament stuff (which I don't really care about) and it's hard to find any meaningful content. If you try criticizing about the game you just get downvoted once or twice and your post is now hidden to other users unless they dig deep.  


I don't think there's any other text forum for those games. I'm pretty sure that this isn't the only game that's doing this trend nowadays. CS:GO and other Steam games has the Steam forums which you'll find meaningful content, and active threads are constantly bumped up so interesting threads get more messages which is way better for a game.  


Don't get me wrong, I like Reddit if I just want to have a laugh or see updates about the game. But I don't think having only Reddit as the "forum" to have players discuss about the game is good.It has been nearly 10 years since Skyrim, and 6 years since Bethesda Game Studios' last big single player game Fallout 4.

In that time, the modding communities for these games have thrived, with exceptional work being done by amateur developers as a hobby. Take Enderal for example, a total conversion mod for Skyrim that some argue is better than the original game. There are many more mods that completely transform the game, an endless treasure trove of content. It's because of incredible mods like this that Skyrim remains popular to this day.

At the same time, no professional development studios have come close to making a game like Skyrim, with it's huge amount of systems, freeform sandbox gameplay, items that have their own physics, etc. Nothing else has scratched the itch for me. One of the main explanations I see for this is that developing a game like this takes tremendous effort, and the Creation engine is like no other as it gives BGS the tools to facilitate making these immersive worlds. Obsidian tried to emulate the formula in Unreal engine with The Outer Worlds, but ultimately fell short, the world felt much more static and I wonder what they could have achieved had they built it in the Creation engine (like they did with the amazing Fallout New Vegas).

My question is this, why don't BGS licence out the Creation engine to professional developer studios to make games with? We've seen what amateurs can do with the Creation kit modding tools, now just imagine an AA studio making a new game with these kinds of tools. It could result in a ton of great projects, and Bethesda would be making bank with licencing fees considering how popular these kinds of games are.

What do you think?So you've probably heard of Neopets. Online pet simulator, full of flash games, yadda yadda. Did you know it had a ps2 game tie-in?!

Neopets: the darkest faerie, is my new bar for tie-in material, and I realize that I sound like a crazy person so let me try to explain why. The game is about the titular Darkest faerie, and she's doing evil stuff. The two heroes, Tormund the knight and Roberta the magic user must set forth on an odyssey across Neopia, and put an end to her foul machinations. It's a fantasy story for kids. Shiny knighthood triumphs over wicked sorceress. But the game is made with a clear level of care towards Neopets as a property and a world, and it really shines through.

(Quick tangent: I know you're wondering "Neopets has a world? Neopets has lore??" to which I must bare to your virgin mind the horrible revelation that neopets has undergone a long anthroporphic shift, and long ago eschewed it's virtual pet roots in favor of creating an in-depth fantasy world populated by anthros. The virtual pet stuff still sticks around in places though, which is overtly comical. Like, the money you collect in TDF is Neopoints. Like the ones you earn on the website.)

Anyway, TDF is my bar for tie-in's because it completely abides by existing canon for the neopets world. If we go to a location that's been mentioned before, then chances are good it will feature references to the website and an established character or two. It really feels like the game has opened the aperture that the website normally keeps closed, and has revealed to you the full breadth of neopia as a place. And compared to how much is established in the lore, the game barely shows you anything! They could get a whole sequel out of this! you know, if the property was worth... anything.

My favorite moment recently came when I went to a see a swamp witch, and discovered it to be an established character from one of the websites tie-in comics that I had read as part of my research into the larger brand. It was super cool to see a character I knew appear in what could easily have been a total filler role. 

But here's my final trap card: here's the final piece of the tie-in puzzle: TDF effects neopets canon as a whole! This is the thing that always ruins tie-ins: they aren't acknowledged by the original work, but TDF is considered fully canon! It's events are referenced in later stories, and one of the player characters, Roberta, shows up on the site as a shopkeeper! It's immensely refreshing to see a tie-in that was truly valued by the people licensing rather than just being seen as a throw away side product. I, being a sweaty nerd who loves continuity and details, really wish more stuff bothered.

What do you think? Am I insane, or should more tie-in games endeavor to be like Neopets? And how do you feel about Tie-in games in general? Buffet me with your opinions!For those who are unfamiliar, superbouncing is a glitch in Halo 2 which allows you to reach incredible heights, far above that which would normally be possible.

[This](https://youtu.be/MsorVRFyUAg) is one of my favorite superbounces and it's also one of the most difficult ones to do. It's called palm monster (although I do about 6 bounces consecutively in this video, the palm monster refers specifically to the one that sends me soaring to the top of that building (around 0:36 in the video), and the entire sequence can actually be done in as little as two bounces). Pay attention to just how small the trees get after I hit the monster bounce.

Basically, you must jump from a specific height and land on a specific type of geometry/grid line (or the boundary between two different textures), and if this is done with the correct velocity you will bounce off the ground into the sky, sometimes virtually out of sight.

What makes bouncing so much fun is that it requires a lot of practice and skill to perform (the degree to which can vary greatly from one bounce to another). It's a game within a game. It's a very chill experience and very cathartic for me to hop into Halo 2, put on some lofi beats, and just bounce for awhile.

Back in the day, however, superbounces could also be used in online, competitive games. Superbouncing may have been considered cheating but there was no way for the system to test for it or know if someone used it, so it was somewhat rampant. You had to be good for superbouncing to be of any real help to you in competitive games though. One of my favorite things to do was to grab a sniper rifle and bounce out of the map, or take the bomb to the enemy's base by traveling safely outside the boundary of the map.

Which brings up another point; superbounces could be used to break map barriers and even to reach (and pass through) [actual holes](https://youtu.be/uHR4IMk3Xmc) in the barriers, themselves. Some of these bounces (which take you to these holes) seem so perfectly placed that it's hard to believe superbouncing as a whole was just an accident.

I used to spend hours practicing bounces back in the day and had great fun doing it. I'm very pleased that there's still an active bouncing community (we even have monthly bounce nights). By using Project Cartographer (a free version of Halo 2 with custom games support) we're able to have a dedicated bounce server where we can hang out and bounce.

There is still a very active bouncing community; you can check my comment history/profile for more information if you’re interested.Hello everyone, today I want to talk about a pet peeve of mine I've seen in 2 open world games in particular, Spider-Man PS4 and Cyberpunk 2077. The feature in question is that certain points during certain missions, the game will tell the player to wait for a while before the next stage of the mission can begin. In Spider-Man's case, it's mostly limited to the main quest where after a major climactic event, Peter will say something like "that was intense, time to cool off for a while and go on patrol". Then the next main mission will not pop for a while, encouraging the player to partake in side activities. In Cyberpunk it's a similar case, only it can happen for any class of quests, not just main and the time to wait isn't consistent, seemingly being anywhere from a day in-game to several days + a few minutes.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

Let's consider the pros; firstly it allows for story sanctioned breaks that may allow for more optimal pacing than if the player took the break during say, an urgent series of quests. It communicates to the player they can take a break now and it encourages the player to do some side content. It's also a nod to realism that some stuff takes a while to happen

&#x200B;

But I find it not worth it and more annoying than anything.

&#x200B;

Firstly, I like to play open world games by doing EVERYTHING before touching the main story and then blasting through the main story. So in Spider-Man, the game expects me to go out and do some side activities like finding backpacks or research labs, but I have already done everything. So I'm left just sitting there playing on my phone until the game lets me play the next story mission. For Cyberpunk, it's often not clear how long I have to wait. So I have to use the in-game sleep thing to sleep for 2-4 days at a time and then go around walk around for a while and hope the mission updates with the call. I imagine most players probably have some quests left when these breaks pop up so it's less of an issue but still.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

Secondly, I find it interrupts the story more than it helps. Like in Cyberpunk, I want to see more of Panem's story, but there's frequent breaks and even if I have other quests to do, it feels like an interruption so I either have to go do other quests for a while or sleep for 4 days and then go and do another quest before I can finally get back to the storyline I am interested in. I'm going to go do all the quests anyway. This just feels unnecessary and it takes my agency. Plus it can seem punishing if you do some side questing before you get one of these waits, like if you had done your questing a couple missions later, your time wouldn't be wasted.

&#x200B;

Imagine if you're watching the Mandalorian and part way through an episode you have to go the bathroom. Instead of just pausing the show to go to the bathroom, the Mando turns to the camera and goes "If anyone wants to go the bathroom, go now, I'll do nothing for the next 7 minutes aside from stand here and polish my guns or something". While that is generous, it wouldn't really be a fun or efficient idea. And if it did do that, most people would probably fast forward through it every time it happens because they don't have to go the bathroom at that moment. It's the same with video games, if I want to take a break to go do side quests, I'll do it anyway. I don't need the game to force me to do them. Plus if I do them early, I should be set for the rest of the game.

&#x200B;

Now, I understand this is a minor issue in the grand scheme of things. The time wasted in doing these waits isn't so long. But regardless, are there ways to compromise so you maintain the positives while minimizing the negatives.

&#x200B;

Solution 1: The Cyberpunk approach (ironically).

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

Cyberpunk has a solution for this. Some quests that ask you wait have a marker at the mission start area where V will sit and wait at and the next quest will start automatically. As an added bonus, it also adjusts the setting depending on the quest (like spawning NPCs and cars that are required for the quest). This helps because it maintains the appearance that time has to pass while still letting the player play on.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

Solution 2: The Batman Arkham Knight Approach.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

In Batman Arkham Knight, instead of asking the player to wait at certain points, the game just goes "Master Bruce, things have gotten quiet for now, you can use the time to go do side quests or keep investigating the Arkham Knight/Scarecrow i.e the Main Quest". The beneifit here is that it tells you the story is taking a lull for a short while but still gives the player full agency in what they have to do without wasting any time whatsoever.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

But if we must have some waiting, there is one option:

&#x200B;

Solution 3: The GTA V approach.

&#x200B;

In GTA V, quests for heist prep activate after a while with a text message. But normally you have other quests also active or given to you at the same time so you always have something to while you wait. The smaller number of timed quests given at specific times also mean there is way less of a chance the player has nothing to do but wait even if they do all the side content first. Personally, I'm still not fond of this because it means I have to step away from the heist missions I'm so interested in.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

So what are your thoughts?I'm sorry for the weird headline, I couldn't think up about anything good, but it's a topic that is bugging me for a while. 

Basically, it seems like the more realistic the graphics of a game are, the more realistic the content of said game needs to be. The easiest example would be The Division, were people thought that it felt off, when a human didn't die immediately from a headshot, despite of it being a loot game. We accept that we can't one shot enemies, if we don't have the right gear in Diablo and we accept, that a bandit can survive an arrow to the head in Skyrim. We also accept that a Grenir in Warframe can take several bullets to the head, if we don't have the proper level and equipment, but as soon as you apply those same principles to a modern day New York, it suddenly feels off? 

Or take the remakes of Resident Evil 2&3, my personal pet peeves. Both games had outright removed or altered a lot of enemies from the originals, like the Giant Spiders, the Ivies/Plant 43 ( Large, walking plants https://static.wikia.nocookie.net/residentevil/images/8/8c/PoisonIvyRE2.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20080813065531 ) or the Grave Digger ( a giant worm https://encrypted-tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcQd3hSNklX9ZJHtfN68XKjbX9kChOxIqt4kl4HJCv96H-L50LhmoEABbqZpj-QXNGnK8rE&usqp=CAU ) .

And it caused quite a discussion in the fanbase. Some people, including me, were disappointed that those enemies didn't get the opportunity to shine in modern graphics, others said that they would be "too out there" and would look silly in a modern game. 

And it isn't really a new phenomenon. For example, in True Crime LA, you have a realism based game, which has this one mission where you have to fight a literal dragon. And while I thought that it was cool as hell, other people said that it destroyed the tone of the game. Or take Skyrim, where people discussed about that four legged dragons would be truer to European mythology, while other people argued that they couldn't work anatomically.

It just seems weird to me and that people seem to apply a double standard here. As I said, we except a lot of weird mechanics, like surviving a headshot, in fantasy or sci-fi games, but as soon as we use the same mechanic in a game based on our modern day, it's considered to feel wrong.

And if yes, then why is that? Have we come to a point, where graphics mimic real life so closely, that anything not existing in our world feels wrong and creates an uncanny valley affect? After all, people were fine with shooting down toy planes with a Minigun in GTA San Andreas, while in GTA IV and V, a mission like this would be considered too silly. Or is it a cultural thing, because Japanese developers don't seem to have any problems to throw demons, zombies or giant monsters into their modern cities, while the closest Western game we have to this, is Vampire the Masquerade: Bloodlines.They’re supposed to be games about forming bonds with people to help you defeat the evil that lies within the mind and whatnot, but they end up making you feel like fucking Machiavelli, always trying to tell people exactly what they want to hear so you can best use them to upgrade your Personas and make your life easier. It’s the literal opposite of how friendship is supposed to work and it really cuts into the message of the game. 

There’s some obvious reasons why the social link system is kinda fucked: first, there’s a max social link level (10) with each person, and past that point there’s no reason to ever speak to them again. Raise your hand if you’ve ever completed a friendship. It’s just not how they work. Why would the game motivate me to never talk to my closest friends again?

Second, the game lets you know when you’re gonna gain a social link level before you decide to hang out with someone. This turns the motivation to chill with the lads from enjoying chilling with the lads to “what can I get out of the lads” and that’s kind of a miserable thing imo. 

Honestly, I think the best way to fix this whole problem is to make “completing” social links an essentially impossible task. Make each one long enough that rather than trying to complete every link with everybody when you play, it’s more just about who you prioritize, and your relationship with each person can just keep getting deeper if you keep getting to know them. Easy solution to say, hard to implement since it’d require a lot more writing. What do y’all think?"Why can't I just summon my mount anywhere? Keeping track of my horse just adds tedium and adds nothing to the design."

I perfectly understand a take like that. I encourage takes like that. It's perfectly valid, and the end goal is often about saving time and making the "meaningful game play" flow as smooth as possible.

I just think there are cases when "Tedious design" is also "meaningful design" to a significant amount of people that enjoy games but don't get caught up in more traditional definitions of "good game design." The Simulation genre I think is indicative of this. "Simulating" driving a train would be filled with lots of mechanics that would be antithetical to "good design". It's just the value of having so much detail and effort into it's details to make it all feel "real" is sometimes...not always, but sometimes more important to the general gaming audience than having textbook "good design".

Red Dead Redemption 2 is a game that is critically acclaimed, undeniably popular, but bring it up in a discussion among "Game Design Enthusiasts" and it starts to get torn apart for it's dozens of little "Game feel" sins. Some critics will argue that it got too caught up in the "simulation" and forgot to make a "fun game."

But I just have to ask, why is it remaining popular then? Is it simply it's hollywood tier production value? Or is there more value in having *tedious detail* to the general gaming audience than we thought?

Basically, I want to live in the world where making a Simulation Game with a AAA budget is a more viable strategy. When can I get something that flies like DCS but with a Rockstar Budget and cinematic storytelling?So This question had recently come to mind after, randomly coming across a Final fantasy 16 combat breakdown. I think I was having a ff kick, cause I recently started play the first game again. The guy was talking about how ff 16 was to fast to be using a ATB System. It's system looked like it be trying to use more of a DMC combat orientated game. This peeked my interest, but it wasn't until he said " FF mainline never had turn based combat. They used ATB system, so Remake letting players move and attack just add more options. " I'm not fully quoting the guy, so I might have said a few things wrong. But the main point was, this combat isn't much different from what we already have. Which got me to put in some thought about a system I took for granted.   


If this system is no different from what we had then why is ff the first to show it in this way. Why is it not used more. In terms of alot of action systems they generally have a cool down for Abilities. Dragon age comes to mind, you have a basic attack, but you can pop of a abilities at any time. Once u use a ability it must go thru a cooldown. This system allows you to start combat at your strongest, by have all your actions be ready, and on there own separate timer. (Disregarding animation lock) Unless your playing a mmo thou the amount of skills is usually caped at a number less than ten.  This is probably due to amount of buttons on a controller, and shortcuts they want a person to remember. This feels to me like the common way to do a action game. Games like Dmc, Bayonetta or not the standard, but there not far and few. there's also Darksouls combat that's on the rise. 

&#x200B;

1: This leads me to ask why haven't we seen more combat setup like KH? 

2:At a point why is Remake the first game to blend Action and turn based like this? 

3: Why hasn't Rpg Developer copied the KH model like they did Darksouls? 

4: What is it about Command Menu combat that it hasn't been seen in other projects? (that I know of.) 

5: Are they harder to design for, or flawed in some way?

&#x200B;

Ty if anyone can answer this. I like the systems, though personally I think KH, can take a page out of Remakes book about basic attack being outside the menu.The title says it all, but to elaborate on it, I recently bought Cyberpunk 2077 for $10 thanks to a sale at Best Buy. I also bought the steelbook version of Fallout 76, which can easily be found for about $12 with free shipping. I also bought that one too. A while back also bought Ghost Recon Breakpoint for $15 and also got the steelbook, from a similar sale at Best Buy. It's a competent shooter and the steel case will look nice, once I make a display for it. But but since I only paid $10 - $15 bucks for the games it seems that I'd probably get my money's worth. 

All the games have been "improved with patches" and are much better than at launch. FO76 seems like a much better game that it originally was, and CP2077 seems to still have way to go before it's considered great. However you can get a free upgrade to PS5 which should improve the frame rate at least. Breakpoint seems very budget, at least to me, but the cost of the game easily justifies the amount of enjoyment I'm getting out of it. Right now Breakpoint is a solid 7 (out of 10), game plus I got all of the DLC included. Considering that I only paid the equivalent amount that you'd pay for a fast food meal, if I get a few dozen hours out of it, that's well worth it to me. I wouldn't pay full price for either of these and if I did, I'd expect more but since I got them for such a low price, that makes it well worth it. 

I completely understand the frustration that someone who paid $60 for CP2077 and feel that they're completely justified in their complaints, but since I got my games for less, those frustration is almost non existent for me.   Hey guys, first time posting here and after 2 years I finally played Death Stranding ( No spoilers as I have not finished it yet ) I can honestly say thing game is excellent and I'm already addicted to playing it.

  
   Upon it release, it was a hugely controversial game for it's objective being a delivery themed game. Hence, people just laughed at it and just decided this game is just " fetch quests " the game. This is true. It is technically a fetch quest game.

  
   Fetch quests was widely hated in other games. This is because they just plain sucks on other games. 90% of other games has killing as it's main objective and fetch quest adds nothing to the game and the lore why you need to deliver/recover that item usually isn't that interesting. The mechanics of the games usually aren't tailored for delivery. therefore, it just a quest for the sake of being a quest.

&#x200B;

   Vice versa , in Death Stranding. Delivery was made to be the main subject of the game. The design was tailored to that aspect and the tradeoff ( imo ) is the combat. In this game, the combat feels like a chore but I don't exactly think of it as the same as fetch quests in other games. It still fun too run from enemies. Fetch quests without any substance just plain sucks.

&#x200B;

  Anyway the point is any mechanics sucks if it's not designed well, or not focused at. For examples, killing can be boring too if its jsut kill 4 of (x) things.In a lot of other games, with rather binary approaches to how you choose to roleplay your character through your decisions, I find myself always swinging towards the good guy run cause of how bad it feels to be a total shitlord of the sandcastle kicking variety. Often, though, this leaves me feeling like I'm just playing somebody really flat and milquetoast.

I'm happy to rp a bit against the grain, if I feel it's not just being a dick for the sake of being a dick. I enjoyed some of the renegade options in Mass Effect 1, especially blasting that one piece of shit corporate guy when the option presented itself.

Atleast I can argue that being a logical moral decision in its own right instead of the "Wanna be literally Hitler and wipe out an entire civilization" that I remember from games like the first KOTOR where, as far as I recall, you could wipe out a species that's living under the sea. It's hard to feel motivated to do that, especially when I still feel empathy for characters, even if they are fictional.

Disco Elysium distinguishes itself in its rping choices. It fits the contours that are established for the protagonist. He's a fuck up, inhabiting a social role (cop) that isn't exactly beloved by a lot of people. In my first playthrough, I still played to a lot of my own personal ideals, though enjoyed taking him the nth degree with his lust for drugs and faux pas.

Playing again, it's been fun playing up the thin skinned power tripping choices, along with hypercapitalism and gutless centrism. I feel that I'm engaging with the texture of the world where I'm not iterating that ideology but am instead exploring it. There's a layer of meta critique in the writing that makes it something really special, both as a literary experience and as roleplaying.

Plus, it's really fucking funny. Humor is a great motivator to trying out approaches that you wouldn't ordinarily consider.I actually really love JRPGs. I like the gameplay, I especially love the boss fights. I love the party setup, and having to carefully choose when to heal. I even love the really long, drawn out battles of attrition and the strategy involved.

But I feel like this all goes out the window when the game starts to add status effects, especially in boss fights. Oftentimes, the boss will have abilties that will say, totally prevent your characters from casting spells, which means the healer will be out of the picture for several turns. Or they have abilities that will confuse your party members, which has the same effect. What this is doing is basically taking away your abilities and control. All of the work and progress you have done up to this point has basically been rendered useless, and instead of using your party to its full abilities, you now have to "wait out" the turns until the status effect wears off. The difficulty now comes from the fact that you are prevented from using your abilities. Is this good game design? In my opinion it is not.

When people complain about grinding in JRGPs, I find that it is almost always because the boss uses lots of status effects that renders your party members incapable for a few turns. I actually really love playing JRPGs somewhat underleveled, if the fights are fair, but the status effects basically force you to grind since it means you have to withstand several turns of being inactive.I'm not a professional but I got into a discussion with an indie dev recently because I used real-life anecdotes and examples to explain why I  didn't like something, what do you guys think, should games be treated as if they were created in a vacuum? I mean should reviews and opinions be solely based on the game world itself even with all the blanks it posses?

To be clear on my part it was a friendly discussion and nothing serious but it got me thinking, I've read in the past the phrase "games are not conceived in a Vacuum" or something along those lines because some people thought that games should be treated as completely disconnected from reality and others though that it simply isn't, I'm more on the side of the later, no matter what you create it isn't conceived out there in the vacuum of space it does have a root somewhere, normally RL,  and more often than not it is full of holes because we take some things for granted, so it is natural to fill those holes with real-life examples of the same thing, and just to be clear again I only use real life as a way to exemplify and make my point easier to understand.

So what do you beautiful people think? also if there was an actual conclusion to those discussions years ago please link the article if you can.

&#x200B;

to be clearer as u/teerre put it when I posted elsewhere what I mean is:  "You can point out that some class or event's portrayal in a game isn't fair to the real life counterpart and therefore the game is at least ignorant and at worst hurtful. That's a legitimate criticism. " so what do you guys think?This is the thing that I picture when I hear the name "Call of Duty" - high-intensity and extremely insane and chaotic action. Even if this is over-the-top and probability unrealistic or too good to even happen, whether today or in the near future.

Most Call of Duty games follow this trope to the point that it is like a Micheal Bay film (with the exception of some titles like Black Ops or the recent Modern Warfare game).

But after replaying Call of Duty 2 (and also with the Back2Fronts mod), it made me realise how this trope of high-octane insanity in a COD game really fits in Call of Duty 2.

Chances are this idea of insane action originated from the intense grittiness that is portrayed in some WW2 films like in Saving Private Ryan and the "all-in" approach of most of the battles that occurred in WW2.

Many historical battles show this and continued to persist to almost extreme levels like the Battle of Stalingrad and D-Day and the use of Blitzkrieg tactics and the combination of many destructive arsenals in most of WW2.

This honestly makes sense that the introduction of Call of Duty 2 takes to the Eastern Front in 1941 where the Battle of Stalingrad was at its highest.

This is also the case because it really shows you the sheer brutality and insanity of the war, especially in Veteran difficulty. The AI is precise (maybe too precise because they can see through smoke somehow), the damage is impactful and sometimes nerve-wracking, and the battles are often intense so you have to be on your toes and use your wits most of the time.

It really shows you how much of hell it was in fighting through the battles of WW2 and the implementation of other mechanics in the game also facilitate the feeling of being one soldier in a large mass of massive armies fighting against one another.

In most Call of Duty games, you are given the portrayal of a badass elite soldier. In Call of Duty 2, your portrayal, while sometimes special, is meant to show you that you are just one cog in a large and highly efficient machine that is meant to work together to achieve their objective at all costs.

The AI is often helpful or gives you the impression that you are meant to be a team player like for example, when they say that there is a German in the Northwest or in the next building, this is not just filler dialogue, this is actually accurate and they are indirectly conveying information to the player.

Not only that but the game does not hold the player's hand when it comes to completing objectives. Yes, it tells what you do because you are a soldier who is meant to follow orders but it does not tell you how to do it or follow a linear path every single time. It leaves a lot of room to the player on how he/she will take out the enemy one by one.

The game rarely tells you to go here or do this or get this done in a specifically pre-programmed manner. It tells you "get over there and get this done at all costs".

I am honestly amazed that despite how old this game is, it is really well-made its design of how it makes the player so small inside a much larger chaotic mess of a war and how much it is meant to give you the impression that you are just a common hardened soldier who is trying to push through the sheer insanity of war and your job is to survive and get the job at all costs.The fight against Champion Gundyr in Dark Souls 3 is, in my personal opinion, not only one of the best and most enjoyable boss battles i've ever had the pleasure of fighting but it, more than any other boss battle in Dark Souls 3, was the one that stuck out in my mind the most. And for the life of me at first i could not tell why. The fight itself isn't spectacular or anything, it's not a feast for the eyes, you're not fighting a god or a lord or a giant or a monster like with the other boss battles, you're just fighting a tall dude in armor. But after a while i think i nailed it down to two distinct reasons why this fight was so memorable to me and how other games could use this to make their boss battles more memorable or interesting

&#x200B;

1: He's unlike any other boss in the game both lore wise and presentation wise

This i think is SUPER important if you want a specific boss battle in your game to stick out. Dark Souls 3 is a game where you fight so many things: Crawling monstosities armed with heavy weapons, zombies, skeletons, witches, gods, former gods, lords, guardians, priests and so on. Pretty much all the other boss battles in DS3 have this otherworldly "I'm going up against something 10 times stronger than me and i can barely manage to squeeze out of the fight alive" feel to them that, while epic, does tend to get a little stale after a while, especially since this is the third game in the series that does that.

Gundyr on the other hand is just like you, in practically everything but height. And that's not a hyperbole, it is stated in the lore that Gundyr is basically the Ashen One who was supposed to do what the Ashen One does in Dark Souls 3 only his Fire Keeper died as he was too late. So you are basically fighting someone like yourself or, the closest thing these bosses can get to fighting someone similar to you. This grounds the fight to your level, makes it feel more humbling in a way, that in a world where you lay Lords, Gods and dragons to rest you fight this man very similar to you. It's this distinction that makes Gundyr more memorable

&#x200B;

2: Gundyr's fight, more than any other fight probably in the entire Souls series, feel like an actual fight

What do i mean by this exactly? Well, as anybody who's played the Souls games will tell you, pretty much all of the bosses have their own second phase where they pull out something new to spice up the fight, making themselves stronger, faster, making them attack more quickly, making their magic stronger etc. The best way to describe it would be an anime power up to spice up the fight.

With Gundyr, you get none of that. There's no magic powerup, he doesn't make himself stronger, he doesn't pull out a random new weapon out of his ass midway in the fight, he doesn't use some spell or far reaching attack to stun lock you, none of that. It's just you and him, mono y mono, may the better fighter win. Gundyr more than any other fight in Dark Souls 3 truly tests how good you have mastered the game's controls and movement up until that point in time and it's another reason why this fight is so memorable to me and how sometimes, you don't need anything fancy for a good boss battle, just two equally matched opponents (more or less) duking it outSo here is the thing. I really like the lore of some games because the franchises behind them appealing. Different franchises have their own allure that draws my attention and makes me want to learn more about the games and their background.

Then there is another factor - how these pieces of lore are given to the player and how they process them. Because sometimes, the lore and how it is given differs in my motivation to actually listen or read them.

First of all, I must highlight the difference between 

\- wanting to learn more about the lore because I have a genuine interest in a game (say, for example, I want to learn more about the mystery and factions in Fallout because I like the charm of a post-apocalyptic 1950's America, or wanting to learn about the mysteries of the Brotherhood in Assassin's Creed because of the allure of conspiracy and mystery); 

\- and wanting to learn more about the game because I need to understand more of what I am going through based on how the information is distributed (for example, Skyrim has a lot of books and are dense with stories but there is so much that I find it to be too much to digest or uninterested to learn more)

&#x200B;

Because to be honest, how the information is given actually makes a difference like for example giving small paragraphs or tiny bits of information to the player or giving an entire essay.

For example, in Doom Eternal, pieces of lore are there if you wish to learn more about the world and they are often just short paragraphs and they do not disturb the flow of the game too much.

I feel the same with some other games like the recent Wolfenstein games or sometimes in some Deux Ex games or in the recent Prey as these are slower-paced games but are also dense with hidden lore because there is a lot of mystery to uncover so the pieces of information that you gather are not that dense or do not disrupt the flow of the game.

&#x200B;

In contrast, other games just did not make me motivated to learn more about the world or I feel that it was too much to process. One game that comes to mind is Destiny 2 or Warframe, especially if you are a beginner of the franchise. You start the game but have little explanation of what is going on or why which made me question as to why I am told to do A or B or why I am so important. They felt like a chore to go through because the lore is too dense and vast and not structured in a way that is understandable or intuitive.

&#x200B;

EDIT - sometimes I feel the same with giving the player an overview of the mechanics or other hidden tricks within a game, especially if the game has many. I remember when I played Men of War 2: Assault Squad and there was little information to help me to learn about the game's mechanics or what made it different from other games. 

Other games also fall for this like fighting games, especially ones that are quite in-depth like example Gear Guilty and make it more difficult for new players to learn the ropes slowly and constantly.The term "Obligatory Sewers  level" is the kind of joke with a carnel of truth-there are SO MANY games that have that one level takeing place in the sewers.  I tried to think why that is, and came up with a number of answers:

* It's a variation of the obligatory water level-in which, a level which presents the challagne (pressence of water) in a very straightfoward way. 
* Sewers are both a sort of maze but also rather grid like, which means they are inheretnly potent with level design potential
* Sewers are gross and creepy and can be that one "dark" level

What do you think?Back 4 Blood would have been an awesome follow up to Left 4 Dead... in 2015. The biggest issue people have with the otherwise excellent L4D2 is the lack of any progression, something that really caught on around the time of its release. In 2009 almost every multiplayer game took a page out of COD4's book and added leveling up, perks, customization, everything we come to expect nowadays. So now we have games like Payday, Vermintide, GTFO, Deep Rock Galactic, etc., that all have these things. But that's just a small part of the changes to the co-op shooter formula these games have made. They aren't just L4D clones, they're all doing something new and interesting.

Now in 2021 we have what is essentially Left 4 Dead 3 with Back 4 Blood. It's L4D with perks and leveling and a... hub world? Because in the time between L4D2 and B4B those have become commonplace in the genre. The problem is that B4B is *just* that. There's nothing interesting or new added to the mix. So if you thought progression was all that was missing from L4D2, after playing through the beta a few times I can tell you that is not the case. You could make the argument that the progression system just isn't done very well, but I'm not so sure. 

All I could think of while playing was "is this any better than L4D2?" We're talking over a decade later, a game that in some ways is *inferior* to its predecessor. Particularly the animation, writing, and polish. And maybe if I crank it up to max settings it would, but I don't even think *graphically* it's that much better either. All of that aside, I think just at its core design, Back 4 Blood feels dated. It is a carbon copy of L4D with gun attachments and "10% More Stamina" perks.

**One final note:** I know people are going to point out "the game gets more complex/fun as you level up!!" If your game requires me to play through it a few times before it *really* gets good, then no thank you. The games I mentioned earlier are fun from the start even though they have progression. I shouldn't have to unlock the game's full potential only after playing for 20 hours. That being said, hell yeah I'm gonna play the game on Game Pass, but no way in hell would I pay $60 for this game.