The team has been hard at work for quite a while working on a new design for the subreddit. We would like to welcome you all to the new r/worldbuilding! 

We wanted the new design to encapsulate the passion and energy we feel when designing a new and exciting piece of our worlds, while maintaining all the aspects of the various genres that can be found in our community. From utopian glass cities, to vast desolate deserts. From isolated research outposts, to bustling cities of millions. From jungles teeming with exotic new life, to the endless expanses of space!

Along with the new colors and theme, we have designed a new logo for both the subreddit and the [discord server](https://discord.com/invite/worldbuilding)!

Please note we will likely be making small changes over the next few days, as we find issues we missed. We arent perfect and neither is our CSS!

Special thanks to /u/Daeres, /u/FrankCrumpets and /u/AspiringWritist for their work on various visual elements!

We are very excited to bring this new look to you all, and we cannot wait to hear your thoughts on it. Feedback, comments, questions, concerns? Let us know down below!Hello fellow worldbuilders! Let's play a game and build a world together. Each one of you can write a sentence that istantly becomes canon in this world, but there's some limitations:

1. Each sentence can contain up to 10 word maximum.
2. Each sentence that has atleast 1 upvote is canon.
3. If you reply to another user your sentence must elaborate further what he wrote.

Let's see what comes out of this lol.

I'll start:

The world of Malas Thalar is divided into three continents.Think about it. Hive minds are a truly fascinating concept that has yet to have their true potential explored. A true hive mind would be like a human body, with individual creatures being equivalent to its cells. Each of these creatures would be part of a greater whole, working together to ensure survival of the species. This would be akin to a nation state or civilization. Imagine a creature with the knowledge, wisdom, and perception on the scale of a civilization. What a novel concept… 


That is wasted down to space communists despite having more similarities to a caste structure. (The OPPOSITE of communism.) 

How would you worldbuild a hive mind? How would it stand out in a sea of space communists?

Edit: credit to J. P. Beaubian for largely inspiring this post. Should have done this sooner.We all know the trope. Some person names an important promise and cuts their hand while doing it, and everyone calls it a "blood oath" and very little importance is given to the act. There's no reason for the cutting to be significant or memorable.

I can fix that.

Hear's how I fixed it.

In my world, oaths are an important part of society. Royalty, knights, priests, servants, etc. all make official promises. "Just like real life" you say. But I went a step further and had *all* of these promises not only be enforced, but by one fanatic, brutal third party.

Let's call them the Oathkeepers.

Whenever an official promise is made, whether by a king swearing to defend his people or a peasant servant swearing not to kill their master in the middle of the night when wages get lowered, you hire and Oathkeeper. Just a little bit of money, and the make sure the oathmaking is up to standards.

First, the person making the promise tells said promise to the Oathkeeper. Then the Oathkeeper takes a special, ceremonial dagger called a "swearing knife," and cuts a bit of the promiser's forearm, and covers it with a bandage and gives some spares. Simple, two step process, seems like a normal, trope-y, unorigional blood oath so far, right?

But here's the fun part: the wound doesn't heal. It keeps bleeding and bleeding until the oath is fulfilled, at which time it heals without leaving a scar. The bandages the Oathkeeper provides stop the bleeding, so you don't die in a few hours, and don't get soaked with blood. They completely block it.

(Quick tangent: if anyone has any super long lasting oath, like "I will not kill people," then obviously it lasts forever. And yes, you can have multiple blood oaths "active" at a time, the Keeper judt cuts a different spot) 

That's not all. If the person actively breaks the oath, the wound doesn't only not heal, but the blood turns cold. This doesn't kill them, because I can do what I want, but it's noticeably cold. Which means your whole body's cold, skin and such. Again, you don't die, because **magic**. Not only bad for the oathbreaker, but also a way to easily check if someone broke a blood oath.

There's still more. The bandages the Keeper gives, the magical ones that block and don't absorb blood are always a bright red. And given the fact that they'd be tied around the very specific "blood oath" spot on your body, anyone can tell that you made an oath. Very public.

And the Keeper's aren't just ceremonial. Remember how I said they *enforce* oaths? Well, they keep records of everyone they administer oaths to, and if word gets out you broke a blood oath, they'll hunt you down. Oh, and just like that special knife from before, *every* wound they inflict doesn't heal. Bruises, cuts, broken bones. Nothing heals them, so you're almost guaranteed to die eventually, even if you win a fight against one.

Another tangent: remember how I said that your blood (and therefore skin) turns cold if you break an oath? Well that leads to rumours of oathbreakers being undead creatures. So yeah, they're basically the watered-down vampires of my world. Which makes the Keepers the vampire hunters. Which gives them a lot of respect. That, and the fact that they kill people.

So let's just recap: magical warriors oversee anyone making an official promise, then inflicts wounds that don't heal until you fulfill it, which are very visible. If you break it, your blood goes cold and people consider you an undead monster. The magical warriors then inflict more wounds that don't heal until you die.

Good, you're all caught up, that's how I made a trope more impactful. If you want me to make anymore worldbuilding tropes less trope-y then tell me and maybe I'll make a series.

Actually, I'll make a series with or without you, I just want you guys to do the thinking for me.

(**Congrats, you wasted about a minute reading this heap of garbage disguised as a post. Why?**)&#x200B;

https://preview.redd.it/m7ohnged4lh81.png?width=3508&format=png&auto=webp&s=bd14f88c164646090141c716ac69d86282f64347The hill I'm willing to die on is that you should never reference real life human geography such as saying Spartan, Vandalise, call sparkling wine Champagne and so on. 'I'll never think it's okay* Every weekend, a topic where we can discuss recent changes to your world would be posted.

* Recent changes include additions, removal or ongoing changes.

* This thread also serves as a way to brainstorm your ideas and getting other people's opinion or help.

* Like always, its basic courtesy to comment on other people's comments if you had posted on the thread. This is not mandatory so you won't have to explain what a platypus is to an alien ambassador if you choose not to do so.

* Having your comments be more detailed would benefit you more than having a basic one-liner as it will give people more information, who may help give feedback more in turn.So in my world humans and most mammals go extinct.

Now that I’m on the part where they start developing metal and now they need faith.

I was contemplating using large drawings on the ground that show when high up.

Also the cockatoos are more so farmers and ravens being more so hunters and gatherers.

So for religions I imagine the cockatoos religions being more on the spiritual side and the ravens being more literal.

Thoughts guys?I'm fairly new to the subreddit and a very casual enjoyer of a lot of work on here. I'm curious what "mainstream" fantasy series are commonly accepted (from this subreddit's PoV) as having good world building?

I'm a huge asoif fan and feel that it's well done, same with LOTR and dune. While I feel that a universe like harry potter is pretty weak with lots of rules that don't make sense (it doesn't make me not enjoy the series but it's just feels a lot more patchwork than the other three I mentioned) is this a common thought from people that are more invested in this subject? 

Genuinely curious and excited for feedback.Note: this is only a paraphrasing and only a draft of a paraphrasing at that. Any final works would be more detailed and written in better archaic (just for personal aesthetic of course). If you want more or have any questions or have any feedback, just let me know. Thanks! and this is only the first part btw

&#x200B;

  

***Of The Titans of Creation And the Coming of Strife***

   

In the beginning, there was the world, which in later times was called Adelas or Earth and also Verdena and many other names by the peoples that dwelt upon it, and it was bare. Empty wastelands of dry rock covered the surface. Alone it sat in the ever dark vastness of the void of space. Many a star was its neighbor but always they were just out of reach to bring any light to greet the barren planet. If counted in years, the aging of the world alone without light and bare as bone would have been many ages before the coming of the essence.

After much time in the universe, something particularly special happened. Something was born from the void, shapeless, formless, nameless, and traveled across the galaxy in the manner of clouds racing above the sky. It swirled around the stars and other planets as a whirlpool, causing them all to follow suit and orbit the center, wherein it entered into a star that sat there and it grew. It grew and grew until it was larger than anything within that entire universe and all that which was about it danced, as if in reverence to its glory. Adelas was among these things and now moved and orbited the new great star, which was so large that it provided light to the planet’s surface, and was a wonder to behold.

Much of what the planet was had changed, and so was the properties it would develop. One of these properties was the development of elemental reactions of nature which brought about a multitude of new things to the planet. The two most notable of these were Adelas’ inheritance of a brand new atmosphere and ocean. The ocean covered its entire surface and the rock and the atmosphere held it together. 

  
 Now had come the time of the Titans. The essence from Stellara, the Sun, was sent out onto Adelas and raised within it three Titans of Creation. Deusmeir was first, wise, and born from the winds of Adelas. Swift and terrible were his sweeping currents and fair were his whirling gales. Light was his breeze and piercing was his chill. Sitting atop the clouds, and being made of them himself, they carried him over Adelas with speed like a great storm or like a gentle breath of wind. 

  
 Next rose Merkaii from the depths of the abyssal ocean, tearing it asunder with each rise to the surface. Lashing and thrashing about, he ruled his realm with a restless thunder of waves, whipping at the gales of Deusmeir in chaotic harmony. With a body of flowing water, Merkaii was a part of the seas, made from it, yet different. Another form also could he take, and would oftentimes freeze the water and bear ice as skin.

    
  Last but not least was the largest Titan of them all. In the later days of Adelas, people said that he was the heart of the planet itself, and his name was Berdreikh. Deep within the core he was born and rose from the trenches he tore asunder, as a bird may hatch out of an egg. Made of the hardest stone and bearing four strong arms he raised the first landmasses of the world with his bare fingers. Choking the sea of Merkaii, Berdreikh raised mountain and pinnacle and towering spires. Delved valleys and deepened trenches. Enraged at the disturbance of his precious seas, Merkaii assaulted the land in which Berdreikh had raised, smashing wave upon wave against its barren edges. It broke and shattered in many places, scattering and displacing Berdreikh’s labors. 

    
 Berdreikh shook the Earth and it split into many places, causing things to shift and crack. Parts of the ocean now sunk beneath them and were drained, lowering its levels among Berdreikh’s flooded lands. Seeing the chaotic battle and all of the tumults it beheld, Deusmeir grew to wrath, and although Berdreikh be grand and mighty, and Merkaii be destructive and unforgiving, Deusmeir was the chief of wrath and the firstborn among them and could muster up forces devised of his powers and the powers of his brethren. And so he whipped up the clouds, bringing about a mighty hurricane, sucking up the ocean and the land it touched. Swiftly was the strife between Berdreikh and Merkaii was interrupted and they saw of his majesty and anger and bowed before him.

He then calmed himself, and with that, the world fell silent. Then he taught them in the ways that they might work together to bring about a benefit for each. Deusmeir looked upon the landmass that Merkaii assailed and counseled Berdreikh that Merkaii had not, in the end, assailed his works, but sharpened them, and made new beauty that in time would be amended by the flowing of his waters. And he counseled Merkaii that Berdreikh had not torn his seas asunder, but rather, gave them more depth and secret places and made works of art under the surface. Then he bade them watch as he showed them how his labors too would only enhance theirs. And so he conjured another storm, but this time, it was not wrathful and not vengeful, but beautiful and thunderous. Deusmeir picked up the water from the seas to feed his clouds and when they were upon the brink of bursting, he tore at them, releasing heavy downpours onto the land below. The waters ran alongside the slopes of the mountains and piled into ravines, valleys, and cracks upon the land, filling them with water. And that was the first coming of the lakes and rivers that would litter the land. Merkaii’s works now lay about the land and gave it a new elegance. But Berdreikh’s work would also do the same and now it was soft and worn and it eroded down into the seas and broke off, accruing over time and making new smaller landmasses which would only grow in beauty over time. 

Now, for a time, the three Titans learned to work together and continued to shape the world, however, something unexpected happened that made the progress of their labors cease altogether. In that time, they had not perceived light or darkness, for the Titans can see regardless of either or none. Therefore, they did not perceive that the planet was half in dark and the other in light. When Merkaii and Berdreikh were at strife with one another, they were amidst the darkness upon the opposite side of the world and had traversed into the light when Deusmeir stopped them. Because of the darkness was their strife and anger created; for the same magic that fabricated life into the Titans, also produced a life unto the darkness. Now it grew larger and larger as it sought to cover the entirety of Adelas. It took no form in these eldest of times, save for a veil of shadow that crept along cunningly and ever quiet. 

It inched along the horizons and started to come again to the Titans, defying even the light from Stellara, darkening her grace. It bewitched each Titan slowly, one by one, and turned their fellowship to enmity, and so they all began to battle. Yet again, the planet raged, but this time, Deusmeir had joined the fray, making it all the more ferocious. Many works of art were destroyed and their like was never to be seen again in the following ages of the world. And the planet might have been utterly shattered and all the labors they wrought, fully dismantled, had it not been for the coming of the Star Child. 

    
 Bonnolux was her name, and from the scorching pits of fire and light from Stellara herself, came this savior. She came down to Adelas as swiftly as the rays of her mother and pierced the veil of darkness about the Titans. If one were to look upon Bonnolux, they would not be able to perceive her true form, save for a ball of blinding light, and if one were to go past the searing light, they would see flames swirling amid a beautifully terrible form. 

She cast her light upon the Titans and upon the darkness. As for the shadow, it retreated back to its home on the dark side of Adelas. And for the Titans, their spirit had become too corrupted for even Bonnolux to mend, so she put them to slumber until the end of time. Deusmeir dispersed among the winds, forever feeding its influence. Merkaii dispersed back into the abyss and his ice drifted both north and south as he fell back into his realm. Berdreikh was cast back down into the core to remain in slumber like a child in the womb. It is said that when the world comes to its end, the Titans shall wake from their slumber and finish what they started by ushering in the destruction of all things. Now that the Titans were asleep, there was one final battle to be had. Light and dark, radiance and shadow. Bonnolux now drew back the thick veil of black with her piercing light and made it retreat to its centermost source. From there, the darkness gathered and merged into something akin to the form of Bonnolux but contrasted. Swirling shadow overcast its radiance while deep within was black as the void of      
 space, and he was named, Malokun. 

For a time uncounted in years, they struggled against one another, each hoping to take control. It is said in that time, there was created from their clash, a multitude of beings, good and evil, that would play a bigger part in the world to come. These beings became known as the Vanai and the Velinari. Bonnolux grew weary in her battle against the ever-growing dark, but firm was her conviction and her purpose, and so she called upon Stellara to aid in her battle. And so at last, she received the answer to her prayer, and a light brighter than the brightest star shone down upon Bonnolux and gifted her with new strength. With this new gift, she infused the closest thing to Adelas with the light of Stellara, which was a barren grey rock floating near it. This barren grey rock would later be called      
 Luminore, Lunare, or the Moon.

Volana was the true name of the light and spirit within the Moon, and she knew the purpose of her creation immediately. While Bonnolux attacked Malokun from one side, Volana assailed him from the other side, using the light of Stellara, and reflected it down upon the surface of Adelas. This caused Malokun to disperse and become not whole ever again. Thus was the defeat of Malokun, but he would exist forever on Adelas, influencing and piercing the spaces in between, gathering in the shaded nothingness.

Now the world was calm and peaceful. The warm rays of Bonnolux shone on the one side of the world whilst the pale cold rays of Volana illuminated the other side with a radiant silver. Of all to be seen upon the Earth, Greatest was Volana’s love for water, and she wished for it to be hers. And she reached out to it with her light but could never truly touch it, and it danced for her, ever and anon, crashing upon the coasts and creating tides. Before either could rest, however, there was one final task to be done. So that all of the world may receive both lights and so they may stay vigilant for the gathering of Malokun, Bonnolux descended into the core of Adelas and used a great store of energy to use Berdreikh in his slumbering state. She cast her fire upon him and heated his core. Slowly she began to spin him and he rotated quicker and quicker. With the energy of Berdreikh’s movement, the planet began to spin slowly. And thus the first age of the world began.In your opinion, do the Helicopters both military and civilian still have potential in a scifi universe?Another thing, what if the ring wasn't always there? What if a Captured Asteroid just dissolved above it and they got to see the spectacle of a giant arch stretching across the sky?So, in my writing of the setting of Transcendent Sol, in the twenty-fifth century, humans have at least settled through the entire solar system. FTL travel does exist but is limited due to the cost of making negative mass. Things like fusion though are well known and utilized technologies, along with nanotech of various forms, at least one artificial superintelligence is active and is ruling earth in a benevolent technocracy that is slowly working on restoring the wasteland that is earth's environment, and most importantly for this question, there is sophisticated genetic engineering technology availible. 

As a result of this, humans have adapted themselves to the various planets, Martians compensating for the thin air and low gravity with very efficient respiratory systems and enhanced muscle mass and bone density, Venusians are much more resilient to pressure shifts and heat, Gaians on earth are incredibly healthy and possess an extremely effective immune system that may or may not include symbiotic nanotechnology providing minor benefits throughout the body. All well and good. 

What I'm having the most trouble however with the humans modified for the Jovian moons, I know they need to be modified to help deal with the extreme cold, low gravity, and very high radiation along with the fact they will be needing to live indoors since going out without a space suit would be suicide. What would be some good examples of adaptations the scientists of Project Feronia decided to place in the colonists there, and what could have been developed at a later date. I would love to hear ideas since I'm having some trouble thinking of anything particularly unique or interesting.Massive live stock made to serve as the Ogres main source of food and clothing.
Usually being around 14 ft in height,15 in length, and weighting around 5 metric tons. Dak beast are a mix between a cow, a sheep, and an elephant, they can be killed for meat and leather, milked, and sheared for their wool.
They can produce 3 tons of meat, 50 gallons of milk, and several hundred pounds of wool, these large portions and quantities being perfect for the equally massive ogres.
The meat of a dak beast taste similar to beef though is a tad bit grassier, it used to make all manner of steaks,stews, and sandwiches.
Dak milk or ,blue milk as it’s called thanks to its blue coloration,is thick and extremely nutritious,its stand outs feature is it’s blue coloration and usually milk with a darker blue coloration is consider to be of a higher quality,it’s either drank by its self or turned into Dak cheese, of Dak yogurt sometimes joking referred to as “ogurt”, the cheese is bright blue like the milk and has a soft creamy texture, ya consider to be one of the finest types cheese in the galaxy and the ogres have made many small fortunes sell it to outsiders.
Dak yogurt like the cheese and milk is blue, it’s a cheap,healthy and versatile meal, it can be used as a snack,side,appetizer, or desert, though commonly the ogres use it to feed infant ogres as it doesn’t need to be chewed, is soft and easy to swallow, and is rich in protein,fats,and minerals.

Dak beast are usually bred and cared for by the “Dak Breeder” who as I just said take care of and breed the daks, they are usually assisted by assistant stumps, stumps being another smaller race of mutants, who usually help the Dak breeder with more complex or dexterous task.

ihi i am new to worldbuilding and i wanted to give building a world a go as i started off writing fanfic but i want to make my own creation so any feedback on it would be great thanks 

well first thing you should know about my world is that it has many universes all connected together by the network which is a set of huge metal portals that stand as big as skyscrapers that float in the skies of a worlds but there is only one per universe but they lay dormant as they where build by a race of great god-machines who imparted great gifts upon the worlds they visited but one day they stopped and no one knows why 

the story takes place on a world that is not very advnaced think swords and bows type tech but the people of this world worship the great ring as a gateway to the gods 

that is all i have at the moment as i have only just started on my world building journey so any feedback or advice is more then welcome and feel free to ask any questions about my worldRecently I've been thinking about the different environmental events that can shape worlds and how they impact landscapes. The massive storms of Brandon Sanderson's Stormlight Archive are a great example. Plants have developed to be able to retract into 'shells' to protect from harsh winds and the land itself is bare of trees and shallow root grasses expect for some protected regions. Thinking in the same vain, I was curious to see what people think the consequences of rapid rising and receding sea levels would do to a world. Obviously sea level changes are relatively slow in our own world, but what if in just a few years sea levels rose hundreds of meters, only to drop those hundreds of meters in a similarly short time. How would landscapes change and alter and how might the cultures of such a world change to survive such massive cyclical sea level rises and falls.

Sorry if this isn't exactly the right place to post such questions but wondering if people have any interesting takes.It’s mostly used to feed ogre children or in rations for ogre soldiers.As I set up my starting city for players (in ruins of course) I want to hear what you would think about the civilization that lived here prior to the arrival of the pirates you just kicked out. Just for reference, this takes place on a tropical island and you as a player would be the new rulers.

Buildings whose walls once held beautiful patterned mosaics have been scraped and broken away to reveal the clay and stone layered construction. Vandals damaging much of what remains with crude drawings and messages. Housing blocks of four houses each raised about a foot above the wide streets. While some have doors roughly fitted to them by the pirates, most dont even have a place to hang a curtain for privacy and are just open holes in the sides of the houses to enter or leave. Most houses have a smoke hole in the roof large enough to crawl out of covered by a simple secondary roof. Virtually all buildings are single story save a few. And the entire city is laid out in a near perfect grid (or what would have once been a near perfect grid).

The once grand aqueduct that stretches all throughout the city has been broken and battered with crude wooden troughs fitted into them. water gushes over the sides of most. Public fountains, once attached to the aqueducts are now filled with broken bottles and shards of glass.

The streets between the houses are missing a great number of stones leaving stretches of road that are nothing more than dirt. Above these is a maze of catwalks, bridges, and balance beams/ropes connecting one block of houses to the next.For context, this is a fantasy world where the magic is generated by crystals found underground. The location in question is sat between a vast desert and a volcano where an entire nation lives in isolation because of lore reasons. The volcano's relevance is the fact i have the big baddie living inside of it, and he single handedly took over said nation. I want to add a few more environmental obstacles for my protagonists, but I've run dry. I don't want it to have much lore relevance but i want a little more world building before my final act. If it were to be a form of civilization, then they would be in service to the big baddie in some way. If it was an environment full of creatures then they would be fearful of humans or something like that. The only thing i want is that it has to force the protagonists to choose how to get across, the quick but hard way, or the long but safe way.

Things I've already considered: sky islands, sky pirates, dangerous waters, a desert canyon, shoreside fishing town, archipelago, swirling islands, adding another kingdom, small town, just water, just desert or more charred land.

Things that already exist: The Main BIG kingdom, secret civilization inside a random environmental thing, scattered small villages, a variation of a flower in the wasteland, an abandoned house relevant to lore, tons of mountains, basic biomes, abandoned lore-relevant village, a lore relevant-island.

Edit: I wouldn't mind an idea that's based of off what I've already listed, anything helps tho.

Please help, thank you. I'll include your username in the credits if i ever publish the book.I'm making a story for a villain named Talon (the Dark Lord) who was sealed away in a magic sword that is now guarded and considered a historic artifact. In the modern-day, the Legend of the Dark Lord Talon is considered either a myth, a legend, or history depending on who you ask. The Elves considered it a myth believing that no Human could ever be as powerful as Talon (the only other Dark Lord was an Elf). The Dwarves believe he's real and considers him the devil. The Orcs and Goblins think it's nothing more than a silly myth the Humans use to scare their children. Humans vary from kingdom to kingdom. Some think he's a myth, others think he's a threat they need to consider and some worship him as a god or deity.

So, my question is, how long would it take for him to become a myth? I feel like 100 years wouldn't be enough but 1000 years feel a bit too long for there to be a cult that worships him. What do you think?Some tricks to make a good religion?Heyo, I'm just stopping by to ask for some advice on how to make orcs in my fantasy world more interesting. I'm okay with their current culture (being centered around taking what others have and slaughtering opponents), but wonder how I could spice up their race. An idea I had was to make them inhabit old ruins or mountainsides and act more like a civilization than a collection of warmongering tribes. Perhaps changing up their climate or their mannerisms? All advice is greatly appreciated.Pardon the post I post I am typing from mobile because I don't have access to a keyboard at the moment. OK my main character lives on a world called Terradyne, the planet is 900000 miles in diameter, in other words it's the size of our sun. The idea for my character's homeworld is rather interesting as I am going by the concept of "Space is stranger than we can imagine and space is stranger that we can ever imagine" which has been quoted by many a scientists and science fiction author over the past century.  

 I do know that the planet is a soft, rocky planet with a 200000 mile diameter soft hot ice core. There are spherical rings are separated by fields or layers of hyper compressed atmosphere or liquids with the outer surface of the planet being around 150000 miles deep. There are approximately 20 to 30 spherical rings that are composed of different materials. 

Terradyne has six moons, two of which are habitable, one is the size of Jupiter and the other is 3x the size of Earth. Both Terradyne and the three moons have rings and two of the moons have their own moons.  Gravity on Terradyne is about 1.5x that of Earth. Gravity on the largest moon Ayama is roughly the same as ours and Gravity on the second largest moon, Aristee is 2.2x that of Earth. 

Terradyne is the sixth largest planet in the Valoran solar system. It orbits a hypergiant white star named Valishade and a red giant main sequence star named Valverde. There is 20 planets in the Valoran solar system. The Valoran solar system is encased inside a Dyson Lattice. 

I am asking for feedback and critiques on the solar system and if anyone wants more information about the names and sizes of the other planets, ask and I'll let you know after I get home to access the relevant documents.Are they small or big? Do they tend to stick in Northern or southern mountains? How influential are the cities?Hi everybody! I’ve been looking for someone or numerous people who would be interested in starting a Minecraft server set in Creative mode, where we can each build our civilizations and cultures alongside one another in respective nations. Anyone interested?Hey guys, real short question. I'm looking for the name of a specific type of temple that a magic BBEG would use to amplify their magic.

I know this type of temple already has a name in fantasy, and it's in the back of my mind but I can't for the life of me remember it.Mainly talking about words like "Diesel" (named after some American dude) or "Stockholm syndrome" (Sweden doesn't exist sorry guys 😢), or units of measure like "Tesla", where they directly relate to something that straight up wouldn't exist in the world the characters are living in but would make more sense to the average reader without making a definition guide to explain each one.Idk, because I realised that when I was commenting on posts, that was my assumption and I really don't know if you doI honestly envy all of you who are so passionate about your projects and worlds. One thing I want most is to find my passion project. I'm rarely happy with what I come up with. Don't get me wrong, I do have ideas that I love - but I'm not passionate about any of them. I can't see myself pouring hours of time into them, I have but I'm rarely happy with it. Maybe it's due to depression, or that I have so many ideas that I want to incorporate into something.

I have made several worlds, characters, etcetera. I do keep most of them, but there are also a lot that I get rid of. So, I guess what I'm wanting to know is, how do I find my passion project?How large is the expanse you are building? Generally everything takes place within a universe at least, but how much of that (or beyond) are you working on or is relevant to the story/worldbuilding?

[View Poll](https://www.reddit.com/poll/sqlyqq)Forgive me if this is low qualityBy 2399 (though by most the year is considered 430) humans inhabite every part of the solar system, and have so for some time. However, because of travel times between heavenly bodies, and certain human cultures being quite hostile, contact between heavenly bodies isn't always open. It would be incredibly unlikely for someone born on Mars to ever be able to meet someone born on titan for example. 

Because of this contact with the outer solar system is incredibly limited, and since some colonies are hundreds of years old, cultures have diverged to a great amount, to the point where those living around gas giants have become conpleatly alien to those living in the core worlds. To most, the world beyond the astorioid belt is mysterious and dangerous, almost as how the ancient peoples of earth saw other continents. 

Most of the gas giants were colonized by those who wanted to be as far away from Earth as possible, so many of them went to the region actively trying to create a society not like that on earth. Though they're often referred to as nations, empires or countries, many of these cultures have multiple countries within them, and use the word sassion (coming from the English colonization) to refer to their larger cultural groups. 

Some of the oldest cultures of the gas giants (though the planets themselves cannot be colonized, such cultures live upon the moons thar orbit them) are the tech peoples, the sassions that come from tech companies and the technologically inclined, who left the core world's due to economic regulation. Though some have more democratic societies, most of the tech people live under corporatist regimes, controlled by the descendents of the billionaires who first fled there, and some tech people are even said to worship AI like gods. However, what's most interesting about tech people is that they predate biological technology, and thus are one of the last cultures of humanity to use purely mechanical and digital technology, advancing in a completely different direction from the core worlds. 

Stranger and possibly as old as the tech people are cyborgs, various groups that have used transhumanism to create societies completely alien to any other in human history, where members are expected to modify their bodies. Though cyborg cultures are not one single culture, and vary a lot in how their augmentations appear (some are said to be humanoid with metal shells, while others are said to be more chotic mixes of flesh and steel), and different groups have different levels of individuality. 

Another prominent group is the Terminal sassion, who seem to have come from an expelled counterculture from the core worlds, and have actively adopted a culture and ascetic meant to counter earth culture. Often said to be devil worshippers, the Terminal are incredibly feared by those living on earth and Mars. Though after centuries, the Terminal no longer define themselves as a rebel group, and see their culture as a new tradition. 

Another group famous for their oppision to earth are the Sajii  sassion, a colctivist culture of terriformers, who see it as their duty to make the outer solar system green. They line their ships with gardens of plants and animals, and often create new species when needed. Though biological technology is commen in the core worlds, the Sajii are unique in that they see such things as an extent of nature as opposed to simply a new type of machine. 

Likely introduced by the Sajii, (but predating them as a concept) is the use of conlangs as a form of universal communication. Toki Pona is commen, though it's distorted beyond the ancient conlang it came from into countless strange dialects (the original 120 words being used much like how Latin is on earth), as is a language that seems to be of invention of the Sajii. 

Of course, more things lie near the gas giants. Hive minds who connect with eachother through computers in their brains. Countless cults, such as the pandemic worshippers, or the cults of the one ring. Strange luddites who use technology to explore space, but don't use it in their daily lives. Hedonists who recruit travelers to their massive ships. The Golin empire where the nobles consume the blood of their enemies. And others who the people of the core worlds don't yet even know of. Reports state that nearly 10,000 unique groups may be settled on the moons of gas giants. 

What do you guys think? Is this plausible? Is this good worldbuilding. I'd love to see your comments, thoughts, feedback and questions.Every military has some form of salute. Today, the main salute that most modern military's use are from around the time period of the 100-Years War but has slowly changed into the gesture that we know today.

What is the main salute in your world, and what's its original meaning?What would a Japanese colony be called? An Indian? How would the Chinese name new places? How does the east African federation decide to name a world or a star with important resources? I feel kinda stumped coming up with likely names that feel realistic.So essentially in my world humans and most mammals go extinct.

And this leads to cockatoos and ravens gaining humanlike intelligence and slowly start to take over the world.

Because of this they come into conflicts with each other.

Don’t know I’m wondering how much armour/fighting gear they would need? Because on a technical level a cockatoo could do some serious damage to have even with its damaging scream and powerful beak, but on the other hand ravens tend to be more agile and the peaks being point to the long could also cause some damage.

In my head I imagined the cockatoos being more sort of farmers and the ravens being a hunter gatherer like in culture.

Though I do imagine it would have to be very light considering they would need to fly and I can somehow imagine them creating a glue like substance to damage the wing feathers?Could rooftops have enough space to agriculturally support a settlement of people living on rooftops?

No specific population, climate, area, or crops, I’m just looking to see if it’s a possible concept?This might be a complicated question, (it for sure is), but I want to improve my understanding on the subject.

Over the years I saved a lot of character art, and as it grew it was easier to organize it based on a character’s hair color. 

So arbitrarily, I decided to use that as the sort of “defining” cultural feature of each group.

For some context, I run a low fantasy game with only human races. Furthermore I read the book guns germs and steel by Jared diamond to try and build the world alongside their proposal of how our world got to where it is today. 

Since reading that book and the years of world building I’ve done since then, I’ve discover Jared diamond’s book is polarizing and not always well received. 

That’s not really what I want to discuss, but the context is perhaps important.

Essentially, my plight is this:

I’ve created a world approaching an age of global travel, so multiple cultures and communities are still in large part “isolated”. Per cultural region there isn’t a lot of global diversity, and based on the arbitrary decision to have people of X culture have red hair, that’s all I’m introducing for large swaths of adventures- because that’s the region the characters are in.

How do I / should I expand the diversity of each cultural group while maintaining the integrity of the world’s history?

Thanks in advance.I’ve been thinking a lot recently about this concept, of using magic and magitech (that isn’t just thinly veiled irl tech) to go to another planet in my setting. Has anyone done anything like this before? Potentially made different overarching narratives for the planets, or had something else happen?

Sanderson is working towards it in the cosmere, and he has varying planet systems; with the Roshar an system having three relevant planets to the story. In the Wheel of Time, it’s suggested that the age of legends may have used portals to explore other planets, or even other dimensions. Dnd has spelljammer. And in the book series I’m reading right now - Cradle by Will Wight - the moon is scarred by the techniques of the most powerful magic users, and other iterations such as Outpost and Sanctum have humans spread across entire systems or housed on moons. Previous Episodes:

1. [Brimstone](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/sqae6j/exotic_biology_episode_12_brimstone/)
2. [Oxio](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/spe8ak/exotic_biology_episode_11_oxio/)
3. [Char](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/snt293/exotic_biology_episode_10_char/)
4. [Nicar](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/r3wnyf/exotic_biology_episode_9_nicar/)
5. [Coal](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/r2zkhu/exotic_biology_episode_8_coal/)
6. [Still](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/r29dgw/exotic_biology_episode_7_still/)
7. [Snowball](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/r1oh5g/snowball_biology/)
8. [Opal](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/qz1k1i/opal_biology/)
9. [Rust](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/qyhi1t/rust_biology/)
10. [Vitrium](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/qxrzwb/vitrium_biology/)
11. [Blue Crystal](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/qpprqw/blue_crystal_biology/)
12. [Cannonball](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/qox5r1/cannonball_biology/)

It has been said that "carbon chemistry is the chemistry of life, silicon chemistry is the chemistry of rocks". Of course, this is a severely oversimplified point of view, based on the limitations imposed on stable carbon chemistry by the high temperatures and ubiquity of water on Earth; many other biospheres incorporate silicon in a variety of ways. However, Fornax challenges this statement in another way: the chemistry of life and the chemistry of rocks are not necessarily entirely disjoint!

Fornax bears the highest-temperature biosphere currently known, and is likely near, if not at, the limits of what chemical biosystems can support. Fornax is in some ways a hybrid of our own solar system's Venus and Mercury--closer in size to Venus, and with a non-negligible atmosphere, but with an elliptical orbit even closer than Mercury's, with a 3:2 spin-orbit synchronization. Daytime surface temperatures reach 900C, but can drop as low as 400C at night. Due to these temperature variations, which would be exacerbated by a 1:1 tidal lock, the orbital eccentricity and consequent lack of 1:1 tidal locking are critical for the survival of the Fornaxian biosphere. While photosynthetic biospheres can exist on water-based "eyeball" worlds, so long as there is sufficient water for atmospheric or glacial processes to continually replenish the dayside supply, the much lower-abundance materials which serve as Fornax's biosolvents would be expected to entirely freeze out on any similar worlds which have a permanent dark side.

Fornaxian life is based on an ionic liquid solvent system consisting of a mixture of metal chlorides and fluorides. The major metallic species are iron, calcium, sodium, magnesium, potassium, and copper. The surface atmospheric pressure is 0.52 bars, consisting of 0.3 bars of sulfur dioxide, 0.2 bars of nitrogen, 0.01 bars of carbon dioxide, and less than 0.01 bars each of sulfur, argon, aluminum trichloride, iron dichloride, zinc dichloride, copper (I) chloride, and silicon tetrafluoride.

Biochemistry in this environment is based on halogenated aluminosilicate polymers with additional metal ion and metal oxide functional groups. With carbon integrated only as a relatively rare heteroatom, this constitutes the most thoroughly silicon-based, as well as hottest, biosphere yet known. While tetravalent silica is roughly equivalent to carbon in Earthling biochemistry, aluminum serves a role similar to nitrogen, with regular aluminum substitutions in silicate polymers introducing local negative charge concentrations and trivalent structures. Such aluminum substitutions, creating replicable surface charge patterns, are a key feature of the clay-substrate hypothesis for the origin of prebiotic chemistry on Earth; it is an intriguing possibility that Fornax may be an example of a world where autocatalytic aluminosilicates were able to make the jump to full independently-evolving genetic and autocatalytic biosystem directly, rather than simply providing a prebiotic template for the development of more typical replicator systems. Oxygen functions similarly to hydrogen in colder biosystems, saturating excess silicon and aluminum valences and forming weak intermolecular bonds.

Like carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus are also occasional heteroatoms in Fornaxian biochemistry. As on Earth, phosphorus circulates almost entirely in the form of phosphate ions and nitrogen is regularly fixed from the atmosphere and returned to gaseous form when biological materials decay. The fixing of nitrogen is, however, simpler than the equivalent process in Earthling biology, as they high ambient temperatures significantly reduce the activation energy hill that must be overcome to split N2 molecules.

The dominant cycle for producer-consumer energy metabolism on Fornax is still based fundamentally on oxygen; autotrophs split oxygen from silicate and alumina groups to form aluminate anions, halogen-substituted silicates, and desaturated siloxanes. However, free oxygen at Fornaxian temperatures would rapidly recombine with any newly created reduced biomolecules. Thus, as on Oxio and Brimstone, autotrophic organisms consume sulfur (in this case, purely in gaseous form) to bind oxygen and reduce its chemical activity. Biogenic production of sulfur dioxide on Fornax is similar to biogenic production of oxygen on Earth, resulting in the high proportion of SO2 in the atmosphere. Heterotrophs inhale sulfur dioxide to oxidize silicon and aluminum(and occasionally other metals), and exhale waste sulfur, while also regenerating soluble halogen ions in the process. Substituting oxygen bonds for fluorine bonds, however, is not energetically favorable, as the silicon-fluorine bond is among the strongest chemical single bonds known; this leads to Si-F bonds being preserved in catabolic metabolism, eventually resulting in the release of waste silicon tetrafluoride gas and the depletion of soluble fluoride ions. Autotrophic organisms must therefore periodically expend energy to capture atmospheric SiF4, partially incorporating the bound fluorines into new biomolecules and returning the rest to solution.

Fornaxian conditions are immediately lethal to humans, and no practical mechanisms for supporting long-term habitation are available. All close-range exploration must be done by robotic remotes. However, the lowered temperatures of the Fornaxian night have resulted in most organisms developing resistance to freezing. This makes offworld transport of biological specimens for laboratory study surprisingly straightforward.Hey guys!

I have a problem in my WIP regarding magic. Basically I'm writing a magic system of "ley lines" (not exactly that, but this concept is the closest thing to what I'm doing), but ley lines are like rivers and flows and real magic oceans. The issue is: I don't know how to create a maggigraphic system that doesn't compete with the common hydrographic system.

Having rivers of magic and rivers of water is ok, but how would I create an ocean of magic and an ocean of water? I have no intention of mixing them up, so I have no idea how to do that.I have a few

Everyone Petrifies themselves when they go to sleep so they can stay the same age longer (like a fantasy version of cryosleep)

Instantaneous FTL Travel

Floating island world that behaves like space

personal transportation that are nothing like cars (IE bubbles)

basically every idea I had as a kid (and you too)These lore posts will be about my science-fantasy setting which is currently made up of two main continents named Grisisia (In the west) and Azra (In the east). A nation controlled by gods (The Nexus) lies on Azra and occupies a lot of space there.

https://preview.redd.it/ujpbuwkr9hh81.png?width=1835&format=png&auto=webp&s=f7cede35c0f352df1b6dfb7f80d6534ba2fb1b05

It is technologically very advanced and the only nation that barely suffered from a recent technological dark age.It has allied with its neighbour state Praetoria and helped them achieve industrial era technology.This comes as the gods stumble into a second civil war where the faction of Latheniel and Tisamenos fight the other gods to plummet the world into the void and end all life to gain power.With the wounds of the first civil war between Kereaske and Ramiel barely healed, the Azrian union in ruins and taken by surprise by the escape of Lathaniel out of his prison, the gods fight a desperate defensive war.In this war the fortress of Coralia is the second most important position as it blocks the void armies from advancing to the north and attacking the nexus core itself.Praetoria is sending manpower to aid the Nexus but even with their united forces the defenses are slowly crumbling

https://preview.redd.it/paqp898w9hh81.png?width=1730&format=png&auto=webp&s=2be4d85b76c5c349455fff552ccdc6a286c57c0e

(The scene is on the walls of the fortress)

Entry number three *pant*, they launched a massive assault a few minutes ago. I'm not sure how long we can hold out *pant*. I've been sent to help with defending the western walls..........Oh god... oh god oh god oh god. **switches on camera**

&#x200B;

*Before the soldier there is the western wall section, at least three meters thick and around seven meters high, bodies sprawled all over it, some sliced by swords, some shot by weapons, some simply smashed by the robotic forces. There's blood and gore all over the place, the combat droids still fighting with the last remnants of the current attack wave, some lying on the floor, seemingly having suffered critical damage. Some human soldiers lean against the wall, trying to keep their breakfast in them. Meanwhile the robots mercilessly empty their magazines into the crowds below and crush the skulls of the enemies remaining on the wall.*

&#x200B;

What the...

&#x200B;

*he looks over the wall, seeing the next wave amassing and runs to the other soldiers.*

&#x200B;

Come on, this isn't over!

&#x200B;

*Suddenly a loud rushing sound can be heard.*

*The soldier looks around frantically, trying to locate the source, then he looks up.*

*A small object is moving across the sky, trailing two small black lines behind it.*

&#x200B;

...what is that?

&#x200B;

 *Promptly  artillery shells hit all around them, forcing them to focus on surviving.*

&#x200B;

TO COVER!

&#x200B;

*the soldiers scream is muffled by the shells crashing into the wall*

&#x200B;

*A shell impacts nearby, causing the soldier to be thrown through the air*

*The soldier doesn't move again.*

*A figure with a flaming sword in a tidy and clean military uniform and a long black coat appears on the video and casually walks towards the middle of the wall.*

*The figure hops down and out of sight.*

*A few seconds later, fire starts bursting up behind the walls, then the feed cuts out.*

**Entry ends**

&#x200B;

Any opinions?As the title says I'm worried that mixing real world countries and cultures together might be a little disrespectful as i'm trying to make a fantasy world by mostly using actual mythos of real life but then giving my own twist to fit it all together, for example I combined France/Italy/Spain while also removing rome and making it seperate combined with ancient greece.  


While I do this I don't claim these are the actual countries, making sure to change the name and add new flavors to the culture to make it unique.

do you think this attitude is the wrong mindset? what brought this on is when I saw a recent video on how people feel about Raya and The Last Dragon being a mixed bag due to just vomiting all SEA countries together while not properly exploring the culture/cultures.

I love the mythos of many countries but at the same time I do this because I feel like it makes it much easier to combine ideas of similar countries.

(Video is reference to what im referring to)In the Commonwealth of Thaum mages are ranked in the 6 schools of magic; substance, form, mind, energy, life, and engineering. Engineering is treated much like skilled trades such as blacksmithing; beginner, apprentice, journeyman, master, and grandmaster. 

However the other 5 are ranked by how long they can maintain a standard spell. Each school has several such spells and a mage must be able to maintain a spell for a minute to qualify for the related rank. For example the apprentice level energy spell is creating a ball of fire (capable of igniting a one inch thick piece of oak) one inch across, or a n equivalent of frigid air. 

Each level should require the same relative amount of power to use for a mage of the appropriate rank. 

A mage wishing to hire themselves out must have an official ranking in  the schools they are offering services for. The Commonwealth government certifies these rankings.I will be the next DM in my DnD group and i want to create a huge underground world, created by god-like creatures that are represented by each floor of the enormous dungeon. I'm taking inspiration from a lot of different things, mainly the Dark Souls saga, LOTR and anime like Tower of God and Made in Abyss (which i haven't finished so pls no spoilers).

&#x200B;

*A tight purple beam flashed in front of the traveler, a freezing fear entered her mind as the Gates opened*

*"Why are thee here" asked a deep and penetrating voice: "What you're searching is worth more than your soul?"*

*Sunar's knees shackled in terror: "I... I must bring him back. Without Conelar, the world i know will collapse under the Great War"*

*Sunar protended her arm towards the cold light, an intense whistle shattered her ears*

*"Then... find the end of the Abyss" whispered the voice*

*The now motionless body fell on the incorporeal ground, a dark chasm opened under her.*

&#x200B;

People (and not only) with a really strong desire might be brought to the Gates of the Abyss and will have the chance to realize that wish with the help of the Ancestrals (these are powerful entities that dwell in the dungeon, they are the incarnation of each floor). The first floor is Drounidal, named after the giant called Droun who started to dig straight down to the center of the world because he thought that was the god's realm. He died in the process, and the gods decided to make Droun a powerful entity thus becoming the guardian of the Abyss, the one who chooses who can enter it.

Drounidal is a tempered underground region composed by mountains, lakes and forests illuminated by a stone sky made out of Rheatite, a mineral that has the power of a star in it. It's populated by a lot of different living beings, in particular the descendants of Droun, the travelers and the Torpids. These last ones are the offspring of past travelers and they are cursed by the Abyss with the lack of desires (pratically soulless), they just live in their fortified city (New Gidlum) without a real objective while alive. The map i've drawn (Inkarnate free assets) isn't complete, i'm still working on some name or place before heading to the second floor.

The best NPC i've come up with for now is a Behir who ate a magic ring that gave him a straordinary intelligence, he's being devoured by the will of gaining more and more knowledge of everything. He's with a group of other travelers that decided to explore this underground world, and maybe will team up with my players. Most of the NPCs will travel through the dungeon with them and each one will have a particular quest, obviously based on their own deep desires.

I have also created the Vraals, triangular-shaped golems that are responsible for the creation of intricated structures like the mines and the maze (see map) in search of particular minerals that are in the ground of the Abyss. They are totally neutral to everyone (maybe will have a merchant-like role in the world) and even more ancient than the Abyss itself, i'm planning to give them a lot of lore about the creation of structures in the dungeon: the Abyss is transforming, becoming a thing totally out of the control of gods, taking its own awareness, a rotten version of the lost paradise it used to be.

I want the Abyss to be composed by at least 6/7 floors, each one represented by an Ancestral. Been working on this for less than a week, so i'm at the very beginning: up to now i have thought about a tempered forest (Drounidal), an ocean bordering a tropical forest inhabitated by dinosaurs (and maybe pirates who ride them), a desert, an upside-down region with big insects and mushrooms and maybe a frozen biome.

I'm not writing all the small details i've come up with to not bore y'all. I have so much ideas that i don't know where to start, so your thoughts and new ideas are really welcomed.

If you have any question about my world just leave a comment, i'll try to answer everyone!

&#x200B;

PS: English is not my first language, hope i haven't made too many grammatical errors...

Edit: Forgot map

https://preview.redd.it/rhb85gpb1fh81.jpg?width=2048&format=pjpg&auto=webp&s=394656ae36f53c1a1165fd5cea2a5d74f60c452cI'm a idiot and I know I'm a idiot 

Do you think organ transplant would be possible in a medieval setting 🤔 granted alot of people would dieOut of all the characters in your world, which ones would be the best at the following jobs:

1. P.I. (Private Investigator)
2. Accountant
3. General or similarly high ranking officer (during times of war)
4. Astrophysicist
5. PsychologistThis post is about Arturian Crossguns, the guns that are crossbows and the crossbows that are guns.

A Crossgun or Quarrelgun is a special type of bolt action bull weapon originating around the Era Gothica. They were designed to hold exceptionally high caliber ammunition that could be up to ten full inches in length, depending on the model. They were similar in design to a typical crossbow, with a tiller attached to an elastic launching device, but with several notable differences. To begin with, its string is actually Clathisernated metallic cable. The Alchemical process of Clathisernation had not yet been refined enough to produce Webmail, but it was capable of making extremely strong cables such as these that retained the flexibility and weight of rope.

A magazine of rounds is attached to the tiller where the cable is held taught, and feeds bullets into where an arrow would've been placed on a normal crossbow. When the trigger is pulled, the cable flings the round forward, scraping along the metal tiller as it does so and creating sparks which trigger the highly sensitive propellant in the round and fire the shot. This, coupled with the momentum of the cable itself, allows a Crossgun to reach extreme muzzle velocities and ranges beyond any ordinary Bullgun while firing a ridiculously high caliber round. Before Telerails, these were *the* anti-armour weapon, and were originally created to counter early forms of Knight power armour. They've been making a comeback in the modern Empire as the demand for cheap anti-armour weapons that don't require cybernetics to wield increases, and are primarily used by Royal Footmen. Crossguns are typically either mounted on vehicles, tripods, are crew served or are used by snipers. Some variants are even wielded by Knights in certain cases, although this isn't common because generally a Rail or Stormer is better. They also sometimes see use as hand Crossguns, which are the most powerful Bull pistols in the Empire. Crossguns of course have multiple disadvantages, such as their low ammunition capacity, low fire rate and the potential to cut your hand off if you accidentally let the cable fly while holding it irresponsibly.

Crossguns are NOT to be confused with Rocket Ballistae, Rocket Crossbows or Blast Crossbows, although they are very similar. A Rocket Ballista is a large mounted crossbow that has a similar mechanism to what ignites propellant in a Crossgun, but is instead used to activate the thrusters on a missile. A Rocket Crossbow is a smaller, shoulder mounted version that acts as the primary Arturian missile launcher equivalent used by Footmen, Knights and Cyber Marines alike. 
A Blast Crossbow on the other hand is an ordinary compound crossbow whose bolts are tipped with a Pyrax impact grenade. Because Pyrax is so deadly and volatile, it cannot be launched through traditional means of propulsion as any chemical detonations would ignite it, and in most cases the cheaper option is through things like crossbows.

(Man, I have not posted lore here in a while! Good to see nothing has changed while I was gone)Hey everyone what do you guys think of this magic system, I've had this idea in my head for a while and I want to know how I can develop this system further. 

**What is magic?**

Magic is an energy called Aether which can be used to conjure and manipulate the classical elements: Earth, Water, Fire, and Air. Aether is a space filling substance that exists within materials and is everywhere in nature To get Aether to do work requires writing the sacred sigils, which are symbols that exist in nature which create the physical world. Writing these sigils in a particular way (spell writing) allows a person to do magic. 

There are two types of Magic Practices, Ritual Magic and Crystal Sorceries

&#x200B;

**Ritual Magic**

Is the oldest form of magic and draws from Aether found within the environment. Aether found within the environment is difficult to draw from because Aether within the environment is in active use, forming the physical world, causing things to decay/change and creating the weather, the general movements of nature. Thus spells which require ritual magic takes a lot of time to function because they have to draw magic from the environment slowly. However, ritual magic has an exponential growth in terms of power so long as a spell is tended to spells used in ritual magic can draw aether for eternity. Of course this takes thousands of years to do. 

&#x200B;

**Crystal Sorceries** 

A more recent type of magic, created after the discovery of Orichalcum. Orichalcum is a mineral typically found at the bottom of the ocean which is very good at storing large amounts of Aether and is capable readily releasing it. Orichalcum is typically purified into a white powder and is used to grow orichalcum crystals or Runestones to increase its aether storing and releasing potential for use in magic. However not all runestones are created equal. Runestones have a magical bias, and tend to perform better with magic that is used to produce one or two of the classical elements, typically water or earth this is due to the fact that runestones are made using those elements. Fire and air magic generally tends to perform poorly with runestones. The field of Crystalurgy is the research and development of useful runestones for use in magic.

Runestones can only release a certain amount of aether before disintegrating, and they also need to be recharged after use. Recharging a runestone evolves placing it into  a sample of the stones preferred element so that is can draw Aether from it.  How long a runestone takes to recharge is depended on the quality and type of runestone. 

&#x200B;

**Artifactery** 

Artifactery is a field of magic derived from crystal sorceries, which is entirely based on creating magic artifacts. Simple spells can only do one thing and one thing only. If you made a spell to light a candle that spell is only going to do that one thing and nothing else. Complex spells are long, the more things a spell can do the longer a spell is. Most spell books can really only hold one or two spells and sometimes a spell needs to be modified on the fly for it to be casted, which can mean flipping through pages of sometimes multiple spell books and hoping the changes you made aren't going to turn your nicely written spell into useless gibberish or a dangerous explosion. 

The solution to this problem was to create a magic item that can respond quickly to command words and act as a intermediator to a practioner and they're collection of spells. The artifact contains a collection of "smart" complex spells whose sole purpose is cast other spells or create/modify new spells on the fly. Most practitioners will cast most of their spells using an artifact rather than a spellbook for ease of use. Artifactery has also made it easy for non-practioners to do magic and so there is an industry for creating mundane magic items for everyday use.  Golemcraft is an extension of artifactery which is a craft by which one makes intelligent or seemingly intelligent artifacts.Hello everybody I've been working on a world but want someone who likes the idea and "hopefully" will become passionate about this project alongside me and we can create something. I have never entered a creatives project with a partner so dont even know if this is possible.

The project in question

It is a fantasy world with your usual mythical and fantasy creatures such centaurs gnomes dwarves and so on. But with a twist. I would love to share my work and am excited to work with someone!

Contact me on discord Mwir#3136I'm in the process of worldbuilding an RPG setting, but I want to break away from the typical d&d style of "here's 30 gods loosely arranged in a pantheon followed by specific races" and something a bit more believable and unique.

 I've taken some inspiration from the Elder Scrolls setting regarding the Daedra (god-adjacent entities existing beyond the Mortal world perceived by some as demons or disruptive deities), and have established an animistic faith typically followed by Wood Elves and Druidic types, but I'm stumped as to whether to make a tight polytheistic pantheon like the Elder Scrolls' Eight (Nine) Divines or a more centralised monotheism for the human kingdoms.

How do you go about making religions and ideologies for your worlds? What inspires you and makes your faiths unique? What advice can you give a poor amateur worldbuilder with too much time and not enough brain cells?Hi! I'm want to write a Slavic-inspired story (heavily inspired) but I have no clue what the plot could be? I want to incorporate a lot of different Slavic countries or customs or traditions, characters, etc. Can anyone help with a good plot that I could base my story on?I am trying to create a list of smells that humans can detect at various distances so that when creating a character who either has an enhanced sense of smell or a reduced sense of smell, we can just multiply or divide accordingly. I have Discussion and Question tagged in the title because I need help from others who are in different environments that are exposed to different smells from others. I tagged it as a Resource because this list can be used by everyone who is trying to create such a character. I thought I would turn here because I can't find clear answers online.

Smells will be ranked from 0-6:

* Level 0 are smells we can detect within 0 feet of the source (when our nose is very close to the source): Cold food. Cold Vinegar. Folgers and Maxwell house coffee grains. "New toy smell". Ketchup chips. Cake pops from Starbucks. Hot beverage in a mug. Cold cookies (Cookies from a box). Shampoo (within 1 step). Deodorant (within 1 step).

* Level 1 are smells we can detect within 3-4 feet of the source: Thick cologne (in S01E02 of Daredevil Claire comments about the Russians cologne and she is within 1-2 steps/paces of him). Toasted bread.

* Level 2 are smells we can detect within 6-7 feet of the source: Toasted cinnamon waffles.

* Level 3 are smells we can detect within 9-10 feet of the source: Freshly brewed coffee.

* Level 4 are smells we can detect within 12-13 feet from the source

* Level 5 are smells we can detect within 15 feet from the source

* Level 6 are smells we can detect within 17-18 feet from the source: Vinegar brewing in coffee pot (from my coffee pot to the end of the furthest room on the same floor is 18 steps/paces. So roughly 45 feet.) Fries being cooked (9 steps). A roast being cooked (16 steps).

These numbers don't take into account the wind since the wind can range from a light breeze to hurricane style winds. I read that 1 pace/step is roughly equivalent to 2.50 feet.

As I learn more I will edit. Please share your discoveries in the comments so that I may add them.Hi everyone so I have come up with rough draft of a species that I have chosen to create for my world. For context my story covers multiple adventures each from a different time period in a certain species history from a different perspective. Each highlighting a different philosophy.

Now onto to the actual specis (let's just call them Homari) The Homari have a redundant body meaning they have multiples of each essential organ. In the homari case they have excatly 2 of each organs. Here are just a few examples of what organs they each have a pair off as well as what kind of benefits they give them:

[1] Brain: The most important organ (according to the brain of course) The Homari possess 2 brains that look and function excatly like our own. Except for the fact that they both work in tandem with eachother and can switch eachother off at will (because only 1 brain is required to be actually be functioning in order for a Homari to live. This allows creative applications such as shutting off one brain and keeping on the other, eliminating the need to actually sleep since as soon as one particular brain get's exhausted the other can be turned on. Giving the illusion to other species that the Homari just don't need to sleep.

[2] Heart: Due to having 2 hearts the Homari are capable of performing incredible feat of stamina that other races can only ever dream about. Such as being able to run 1 to 2 hours non-stop without breaking a sweat. 2 hearts also allows the Homari to be control their own blood pressure/flow as they are capable of temporarily slowing down one of their hearts to achieve a specific outcome (don't know what the outcomes should be tho, so any help on this point would be very much appreciated)

[3] Lunges: The Homari posses 4 lunges in total allowing them a greater breath capacity than normal as well as allowing them to survive oxygen deprivasion for far longer.

Cons: Of course due to having soo many organs the Homari have naturally adapted to have much larger bodies and thus greater physical strength. But this comes at a huge cost as well. Mainly that the Homari require absolutely massive amounts of food in order to maintain their insane bodies much less to actually achive peak Homari physiology that can allow a Homari to perform any and all of the feats that I just mentioned before. Infact their large food requirements are such a massive weakness for the Homari that throughout their entire history, all other empires have primarily targeted this specific weakness in every Major conflict. Where the Homari food supplies were destroyed or captured to practically starve the Homari to a slow and painful death.

Soo with that out of the way. I want all of your suggestions about what kind of long term impact would this biology have on a species as well as what would be the other more sublte benefits from having 2 of each organs. Thank you in advance and God damm do I need better formatting/words to flesh out my worlds.I spend most of my time in this subreddit in new so I can help other worldbuilders having issues with designing their worlds. But some of these posts are removed by mods for breaking rule 4, specifically for the reason of "this subreddit being a DIY space."  
   
The problem is that these posts are removed seemingly arbitrarily. Here's two examples.     
   
***   
  
https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/spf0bz/help_me_name_elemental_magic_combinations/  
   
Unfortunately this post has been removed, but the OP was asking for some help making names for their magic system.   
   
Their magic system worked by having everyone being born with two of seven elements: fire, water, earth, air, lightning, dark, and light.   
One of the elements was more dominant than the other, resulting in different powers if two people shared the same elements but had different dominance.  
They weren't sure of all the combinations, so they wanted help with it.  
   
But their post got removed and as a result, they left the subreddit.  
   
***  
   
https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/spda3g/about_creating_a_futuristic_global_capital/  
   
In this post, the OP asks a vague "How to create a global capital of Earth." They provide very little details about their world, outside of vague replies to other commenters about what they already have.  
   
But this post stays up and has several upvotes.  
   
***  
  
Why is the first post not allowed, but the second is?   
The first post did more work by outlining their magic system's basics and wanted help on the specifics. The second asked a very vague question and commenters had to fill in the gaps.  
   
I'm not saying that the second poster is bad, but where's the consistency in how rule 4 is enforced? How much work does someone need to put in beforehand and what's not allowed?Hi everyone,   
I was working on developing a civilization of savanna dwelling people, and I was wondering if I could get some feedback.

The context is in my world a group of people containing both Anglo-Saxons and Celts were brought over from Earth to this new world, and ended up having to work together to survive. My story ends up involving the descendants of these people, who after 1500 years have managed to build up a civilization in a land with dinosaurs. 

I know it seems kind of strange, but I want my story to be unique. I've got most of the aesthetics down. I've had to look at people like the Shona and the Maasai to get ideas on having a people adapt to a savanna environment. I was trying to keep some aspects of the Anglo-Saxon and Celtic around, but I understand that things are not going to be the same with the people as they were when they first appeared. I just want to make sure elements of their roots are still there. 

Some things I would like some help discussing and figuring out:

Architecture: I was trying to figure out how to combine elements of Anglo-Saxon and Celtic architecture with say the city of Zimbabwe. It would probably help to figure out what buildings would be needed. I know for certain homes for the people, maybe a dwelling for a king, and a place of worship. 

Caste system: As much as I detest politics I think a caste system of some sort would still pop up. I'm just trying to decide if it's a 3 caste system or a 4 caste system, and what the benefits and downsides of each would be. TBH, I'd really prefer to keep it simple. 

Religion: I think a monotheistic system could work since the savanna dwelling people I looked at seemed to have monotheistic religions. I heard that the environment needs to shape the religion, and since the savanna is pretty dry would sharing be held in greater esteem?I'm thinking about adding a cursed forest to my world which is in fact just an old disposal site for radioactive waste, the kind of site that has those large concrete spikes throughout it, but the waste started leaking and irradiated the area. So what effect would this leak realistically have on life around it?I'm working on a fantasy world, called Riada. Riada is comprised of many small sub-worlds, one of wich is Tirinad. Tirinad is a steampunk world, but I have a hard time figuring out how a world would have steam energy and not inevitably invent electricity. So, I thought I'd remove the ability for electricty to exist in that world. Only problem, my understanding of how electricity works is very, very limited. I know it works by having electrons flow from one place to another (I think at least), so how do I stop the elctrons from flowing like that? What other consequences would that have?So, thank you to u/qboz2, for completely expanding the possibilities for the world I'm building. Your recent post got me thinking to the point that my brain is melting. I needed to write this all down, so I don't forget, and thought it would be best to share it.

I'm currently focusing on one planet, that I haven't named yet, and that is in a medieval-type era. There are references to metaphysical realms beyond the planet, that which don't yet "exist" to the occupants. There are deities observed on my starting planet that will eventually be conceptually evolved into hyper-advanced lifeforms that exist on multiple levels of consciousness and "godship" throughout time and space, with extraterrestrial life eventually revealed on other planets.

The universe that this planet exists within is ruled by a 'universal god', as is each other universe, or dimension (or cell), that exist around/alongside it. All universes (collectively the multiverse) are ruled by an eternal 'dimensional overgod' that has no age, no measurable size, no fathomable identity, or even a consciousness that can be conceptualized by any being below it. The idea of what exists around it makes my brain hurt to try and think about.

I'm using the idea of the big bang to mark the 'great transfer' of each universe's allotted energy to a new universal god, that then builds out the new form of the universe, already aware that it will eventually "destroy" itself. When all that can be known is known, it starts over in a new 'great transfer'. 

Each newly appointed universal god takes the form of its predecessor, and as well, the preceding universal god also takes the form of it's successor, and everything that ever existed within their universe still exists within them in the great transer (big bang). Smaller transfers also happen on every level of consciousness, time, and space. 

Now, I want to retain a prominent level of fantasy, even when my story evolves into the realm of science fiction. The various levels of godship will vy for worship (energy transfer) from the primitive cultures existing on planets throughout each universe, all in hopes of becoming the next overgod. These deities will grant knowledge, and "magic" to the planetary beings who work their way up in the hierarchy of spiritual worship (energy transfer). People on different planets can, in fact, eventually achieve godship. 

In the end, though, the new overgod will learn the truth, which is that it never mattered. In it's newly acquired state of entropy, it eventually grows bored, and lends its energy to the creation of a new universe, until it is depleted, and the next great transfer occurs. Then, and only then, it's job is done. 

My brain hurts, so I need to stop for now, but I hope people like this not so new idea, and build off of it in new ways, because that's how the universe works. Everything is a collection of energy transfers, building upon themselves, and all coming back together eventually in a big bang. 

Happy world building :)Ok so I was coming up with this idea for an adult tokusatsu series that is like a combination of kamen rider and power rangers.

So here is the prompt, marcus is an 18 year old man living with his younger brother, ryan.  While in the forest hunting with their father ,are attacked by a monster. Marcus and Ryan try to escape but they are critically injured. But they are soon saved as they reached a cave with ancient ruins trying to hide from the monster. They are soon found but they are bonded to 2 belt like transformation devices that allow them to transform into armored heroes.

The suits work with a morpher that connects them with a source of energy called the arc matrix, think the morphin grid from power rangers. This Grant's them super speed, strength, agility, reflexes, healing, and durability. They get stronger and faster as they train. The bad guys also have a source of energy as well called the source spark, which gives them the same powers as those with arc matrix. 

The good guys are called the guardians with the bad guys are called the orochi.

They are descended from 2 beings named adamus and damiyo.

Their suits transform into a suit that is a combination of a spandex and armor on the legs arms and chest. 

The monsters are called the orochi. There will be others like marcus and ryan but some will fight for good or evil. 

Will you guys let me know what you think?What are the most important buildings, what is the architectural style of the place, what is the main religion of its inhabitants, how do its inhabitants live, is it a self-sufficient city? 

I am looking for you to tell me about your cities, the more details the better

Sorry for the spelling errors, I speak Spanish

Edited: Spelling errorsI'm bored and want to do see if there's anything missing in my world, so ask me stuff.

I'll give a brief explanation first. On the start of Earth's development there was a war led by lucifer, the war lasted 1000 years (roughly) and created hell, along with two new ways of using magic.

In 2222, there is a big empire that worships lucifer, the empire closes it's borders with big walls so people can't see the outside world. Many years before, the king adopted 7 children and trained them for unknown purposes. Over the years, the king's children escaped until there was only one left.

In the outside world, hunger and plague haunt the rebels that try to free the population. Other empires are constantly fighting, which makes life hard for everybody.

Sorry if i take long to respond.Since I’m new to this sub-reddit and been thinking about/working on my vampires, I thought I might start sharing now.   
Context Notes:  

* My fictional reality goes through a cycle of creations, meaning that the a universe is made lasts for around 10-15 billion years and then dies - the creation of the first vampires happened in the 15th creation, setting is currently in the 21st creation 
* Magic is very important in my work - magic(in my wok) is neither good or evil, being a neutral force but can be used for good or ill  
* The unknown military administration is purposely kept mysterious 

&#x200B;

**Vampire origins:** 

Vampires were originally created as super solders that were effective, didn’t need to use valuable resources and could be replaced easily. The two main organisations that worked together on the vampire project were \[\] and \[\], the former being a group of soul-twisters and the latter being a (in)famous guild of flesh-wrappers, both parties were hired by a currently unknown military administration. 

Most of the experiments were unsatisfactory in one way or another, due to physical degradation, mental unstableness or severe soul damage. The few successful, surviving subjects were regarded as one of the greatest achievements of transmutation/alteration magic ever performed by mortal beings.This will be a bit of a rant so hold on

So I started down this path with elves being a immortal species but with only a limited number of souls to go around.

So in the beginning the elven souls where created by their god as needed but for some reason the elven god stopped making them.

But then I thought what if instead of elves being infertile without a elven souls to use they instead had children who weren't elves.

Then after about 30 seconds I realized that this could be the origin of men children born without magic and with a mortal lifespan without a elven soul to maintain their lives.

I had this idea 10 minutes ago and i'm still working with it but thoughts?

EDIT: so what if beastmen are born when a animal soul is used instead of a elven soul? And yes I'm going to add more edits as think about this.

EDIT 2: yes I know soulless is the entirely wrong word to use but you can't change the title of your post on reddit. 

my world is  an alt earth world  and i want to combine with  real history like Guy Gavirel Kay does his novels . Perfect Example he has a novel called Under heaven where he creates an alt fantasy version of china  called Kitai and sets the story during a  rebellion.   The rebellion in his story is loosely based of the real life  An Lushan rebellion that happened in Tang Dynasty china .He often condenses  events and history and has  a slight touch of the supernatural to give  the story a fantasy feel.  Im kinda looking to do the same but basing my setting off    the various  mediterrean civilizations in antiquity. Im curious is any one here doing  fantasy worldbuilding similar to Kay  where you use  real history as a starting point and  change names and places to fit youur world ??

btw here are a here are a few more examples of the type of worldbuilding im refering to below 

* [*Tigana*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tigana) (1990), taking place in a setting based on [Renaissance Italy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Renaissance_Italy)
* [*A Song for Arbonne*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Song_for_Arbonne) (1992),  a setting inspired by the [Albigensian Crusade](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Albigensian_Crusade) in medieval [Provence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Provence)
* [*The Lions of Al-Rassan*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Lions_of_Al-Rassan) (1995), setting n an analogue of [medieval Spain](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spain_in_the_Middle_Ages)

almost all his stories take place in the same world just different time periods and different countries.The more I worldbuild the more I realize that while my ideas are pretty good, motivation and one brain can only take it so far. Taking a look back at my (and her) world, I've noticed that the parts I built along with my sister are way more complex than the ones I built alone. In a sense, our insight on different topics compliment each other. Last night, I've accomplished more than I would've in a month after a shared brainstorming session!



So here are my questions to you: do you worldbuild better on your own or with a group? Do you prefer / enjoy being on your own or in a group (regardless of how productive you are)? If you group worldbuild, how often do you gather around? How many people are there in your group?

EDIT: Forgot to ask: Group worldbuilders, is your world a shared project or is it 100% yours? While I often worldbuild with my sister, she acknowledges the world as mine and vice versa to her world.**Main:** Lord Galaxian’s most brutal prison planet, Mor’Thul, has its native flora and fauna as guards. One of the dangerous species that has evolved here is the Occurock, a one-eyed, four-legged, zero-remorse predator. For general info on Mor’Thul’s biosphere, follow the link here: [https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/snur97/the\_biosphere\_of\_morthul/](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/snur97/the_biosphere_of_morthul/)

[Sketches of an Occurock made by a biologist.](https://preview.redd.it/ciphlag77ch81.jpg?width=4032&format=pjpg&auto=webp&s=7c1f8b98ab3a15b83def2e6d32792f1b1be41fae)

**Locomotion:** The Occurock has four powerful legs. Each of these legs has two segments, connected to each other and the main torso via flexible muscle fibres, and these let it bend its limbs, twisting them as far as 360 degrees laterally, and holes in the rocks where the muscles go lets them swivel about, rotating by up to 45 degrees upwards, 50 degrees sideways, and 60 degrees downwards (assuming that it hasn’t been flipped upside down). The powerful legs can even crush rocks, letting the Occurock bury itself, in order to sleep, due to it lacking eyelids. Each leg can support at least 59.2 t of weight, and as each muscle fibre is .133 m in diameter, that means that they can support 41.6 MPa of force, at least. Getting pinned down by an Occurock with one of its legs will deliver a crushing pressure of 4.62 MPa, which is surely painful.

An Occurock can walk at 4 m/s, as it patrols, but when it spots prey, it will cartwheel, going at up to 6 m/s. Occurocks are thankfully too heavy to swim, and they’re not that good at climbing, either.

**Habitat:** Occurocks are most common in caves across Mor’Thul, but they are known to live on the surface, due to their crystal lens protecting their eye from Mor’Thul’s radiation levels. They are evolutionary relatives to Pyroliths, who have evolved for a volcanic climate, and are herbivorous. Occurock armour lets them survive basically anywhere, but large liquid bodies have been known to deter them, due to the risk of drowning, or drowning while being burned by lava/dissolved by acid. Steep slopes have also stopped Occurock proliferation, and one can tell where an Occurock was born from the colour, texture, and composition of its rocky exoskeleton, and where it resides from the organisms that latch on. Organisms like moss, mushrooms, and barnacles engage in commensalistic relationships with the Occurock, using the Occurock as transport, while the Occurock is unaffected.

Another giveaway of an Occurock’s birthplace is the colour of its lens. Occurock lenses come in 6 colours: Yellow (lead impurities), Clear (no impurities), Red (selenium impurities), Blue (cobalt impurities), Purple (manganese impurities), and Green (chromium impurities). This can become harder with aged Occurocks, as they secrete an substance from gaps in their stone exoskeleton deep enough to expose flesh that builds layers and hardens, using minerals from their environments to do so. Their eyes secrete a substance for the translucent lens.

**Life Cycle:** Occurocks mate, then the female lays an chrysalis in a hole she digs in the ground. This chrysalis draws in nutrients from the surroundings, as well as minerals to build the rock exoskeleton, and after 25 Earth years, it breaks, with the newly-formed Occurock emerging. Occurocks can live for 500 Earth years, and it’s been reported that they can have up to 19 young during their lifespans, with a scarily high survival rate.

**Senses:** Occurocks have a single eye, which has a radius of .267 m, which is 10.7 times larger than that of a human’s, which makes their eye way more powerful than that of a human’s. Plus, the protective crystal lens, while not as durable as the rocky material that covers most of the body, but sturdy in its own right, works to help focus light into the Occurock’s eye, as well as keeping out harmful radiation. The lens also protects the eye from dirt and other irritants, and its focusing properties makes the Occurock’s eye comparable to a telescope, even able to see in dark caves. The Occurock has no depth perception, but by feeling ground vibrations through its stone body, it can find its prey. It has ears that are used to hear airborne prey, as well as sense its motion, giving credence to the theory that it first evolved in the forests.

Occurocks can also feel the pressure of objects interacting with their protective, rocky shell. On Mor’Thul, you will want to be careful on what you sit, because if you disturb a sleeping Occurock, pray to Lord Galaxian and his Four Generals that it hasn’t woken up hungry, because when an Occurock’s tired from being rudely awoken, but not hungry, it will just wander away to find somewhere else to sleep. There has been reports of Occurocks ignoring when they’ve been sat on, in order to falsely reassure potential prey.

**Diet:** Unlike their herbivorous cousins the Pyroliths, Occurocks are carnivores. They actively hunt their prey,  overwhelming them with strength and durability, before pinning them down and eating them alive, until all that remains is either going to be a part of the Occurock once it’s done digesting, or covering the ground and the feet and underbelly of the Occurock. While the Occurock’s mouth is small, it’s built for scooping out chunks of flesh efficiently, working in circles going out from the initial bite to get its fill. Only about a tonne of the Occurock’s total mass are its living, fleshy components, as the abiotic rock that protects its innards is dense. Due to this, the Occurock‘s basal metabolic rate runs at 803 W. Its mouth branches right to its stomach (back) and its lungs (front), using sphincters to avoid the inhalation of food, and opening to take brief breaths between bites.

**Q&A:** Feel free to ask me any question about the Occurocks you want.>Exiled minds from various universes gathered in a newly created universe to try to make a paradise for themselves. They call themselves "Av" but they are also known as "cosmocrats", or "ancient ones". The Av used the fainting experience from their previous lives to improve on past mistakes and create a peaceful pantheon.  
But that peace the Av worked so hard for would be eradicated as five among them prematurely brought forth life into existence.  
>  
>The mere thought of the wrath of the universe's twin makers terrified four out of five Lifemakers to the core, forfeiting their immortal existence, shatting their minds into remnants, Menos, out of which new gods of life came to be. Vain and devoid of past wisdom, the Lifekeepers created a race of servile humans that, without imagination and strong will, could not resist their gods. Other sentient species weren't treated as pets, but their faith and loyality was important as well. The mortal beings came, they died, and their souls could also walk among gods, or be their ambrosia.  
>  
>Conflict had only just begun, as the cosmocrats were torn among themselves between letting life exist in peace, exploiting it, or annihilating it, all while struggling with their already fragile mental health. Forces of Chaos, upkept by the power of their dreams, try to make way into sterile minds of humanity, craving only to "become real".  
>  
>Meanwhile, the Universe itself, the Celestial Machine, keeps on calculating, how it can exact its revenge for injustice done to its twin makers. Its robotic companions, Artilects, explore planets desiring to find answers and methods, examining, studying, experimenting, dissecting...

Sorry if that makes little sense.

[Here](https://ghostsinthemachine.neocities.org) is where I try to gather everything I thought of in one place, but I haven't updated it in a good while (because i'm lazy and i have MA thesis to write). Maybe though, that will be clearer to understand.

And [here](https://www.deviantart.com/monochromeobserver/gallery/34989069/oc-and-fc) are my characters and other stuff I drew.

I wouldn't really call this a "project" as it's something that I'm daydreaming of, and not spending all day on. Everytime I try to write a novel or some other comprehensive story, I get distracted or I procrastinate to heck.Hey everyone! So I’m trying to write a story that takes place in a futuristic cyberpunk-based setting; I’ve always been a fan of cyberpunk and I would really like to incorporate it into my story. That being said, I also am thinking of incorporating not necessarily a superhero, but someone with abilities that do not originate from technology/cybernetics, etc. 
I was wondering what that would look like to some of you? I’m also debating on whether I should just keep character special abilities technology-related, but I’ve personally never seen superheroes incorporated into cyberpunk so I thought that may be interesting.When I see a sandbox world like Marvel or DC. Magic systems like Witchcraft and Chi energy only stand out from other magic systems when the system is something supernatural and beyond science. So not science-based at all. I know the MCU is doing that "any advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic" thing with Thor and Dr. Strange now. But the MCU is new to Worldbuilding. And is still trying to figure things out. And fixed decades of comic book logic lol.

Alchemy is usually a science-based magic system in fiction. The opposite of Alchemy is traditional spellcraft Witchcraft. And spellcraft Witchcraft is usually a supernatural magic system in fiction. Again in a sandbox world like Marvel, DC, or even Invincible, it's the supernatural that makes Witchcraft-style magic systems special and stand out more when compared to other magic systems. Because all the other magic systems are usually science-based. Whether that be soft or hard science. Doesn't really matter in this post context.

For example, Superpowers like the X-Men, The Boys, Incredibles, or My Hero Academia are usually science-based systems. And obviously, super technology is also science-based too. Well, like duh lol.

So back to my post title question.

"Would Alchemy work in a kitchen sink or sandbox setting?"

Since Alchemy is also science-based. So in a sandbox world, does Alchemy, unfortunately, overlap with the other science-based magic systems like superpowers and super technology too much? Because that supernatural appeal is missing now. And it won't play a factor in distinguishing between different systems. When all the systems are science now.

In conclusion

I'm going to do a reversed/opposite of Incredibles Syndrome quote. "When all the Magic Systems are science, then no magic system is supernatural, therefore, removing any individual uniqueness each system can have". I know that sounds horrible 😂. But that's the best I have to explain this post.For an RPG. I’d like to come up with a long twist of points of interest that would be known throughout colonized space. Orbital casinos, asteroid belt factories, space transport platforms… is there a good source for such locations?

No aliens exist in this universe, if it matters.I am trying to develop a realistic backstory for something I am developing, but I am having a hard time wrapping my head around how the UN would restructure itself.  Specifically if it were to convene to be a more cohesive government, but with the nations still holding significant autonomy. In an event similar to the rewriting of the Articles of Confederation what would a realistic system look like?

Would a parliamentary system like the EU be more realistic?

Or is a Presidential system akin to the USA more realistic? Where the General Assembly is the lower house, Security Council the upper, and the Sec-Gen the Executive.

Given a choice in the system what would be a realistic title for the members of the executive as well as the legislature?

Or would it all just end up as a convoluted mess like the EU?

Thank you. In most works of fiction set in other worlds,  the heroes fight for a certain vision of freedom, which resembles that of our western democracies.

Now imagine if the protagonists of our story still defend democracy, but one version far different from what we know. Like you have the evil lord of your classical fantasy who menace the republic of our heroes, but the said republic is in fact an aristocracy where the majority of populace is not citizen, where votes are attribuate to corporations and not individuals (so for example universities vote like one block in place of teachers voting individually)... but even with these shocking characteristics they are still the good guys, liberals in a harsh and conservative world where the standard is still absolute rule in the hand of a god-king

I'm inspired by enlightement period, where awkward ideas were defended by the more progressive-minded philosophers, and also by the old greek democracies or middle-ages/renaissance republicsHumans: they were the first created by the Infinite Serpent (the god of this world and created everything including the other gods) the Humans worship no god, have the highest numbers but overall the weakest species, they also have some of the best technology. Their Society laws include the typical no murder, stealing etc. etc. Marriage stays between male and female that are both humans, anyone older then 14 can be married by choice or force, people mainly marry to combine families and wealth. Their lives go like this

Male: Raised to be head of the household and warriors until they turn 18 where if they are poor they are sent off to war and if they are rich they are encouraged to find a wife and start a family 

Women: Raised to clean and raise kids until they are 14 or able to give birth then they are married off to a man or become servants.

Avians: Second Species created, they live in a huge tree in the middle of a deep forest, they were created by The Infinite Serpent to give information to the humans. They Worship Morte, the god of death. fate, and knowledge, they are the smartest species, and have the least technology, marriage has no real limit other then age though they tend to mate for life you are about as likely to see a straight couple as a gay or polyamorous couple, after a couple are married they are given a nest in the holy tree in witch all Avians live and are then sent out to spread Knowledge to any humans they meet.  
Their Lives go like this:

Male and Female: are taught all there is to know for the first 75 years of their lives as they live for quite some time, after this they are encouraged to marry and leave to spread their knowledge but they can either do this alone or stay at the tree and help raise children and clean. After they reach an age of 100 they can return home permeantly and teach the next generation.    


Snakekin: Third and last species created they live in small villages in the warmer places of the world, they were created to protect Humans, They worship Houis the god of love, prosperity, and hospitality. They are the strongest species and have mostly farming based technology. They are ok with marriages between Men, women, poly, and marriages between Snakekin and Avians. Marriages between Avians are common as Avians will often stop to rest in the Snakekin Villages.

Their lives go like this: 

Men and women: are raised to take up their families trade (farming, tanning, blacksmithing, fishing, ect) they reach adult hood around 90 do to their long life spansYeah hi I’m here to talk about a recurring problem I have with explaining my world to people and I’m wondering is there something wrong that I did that I didn’t get? 


In my world I wanted to have a oppressed minority because it would lead to interesting and terrible ideas of how utterly depraved humanity can get when dehumanizing a large group of people for effectively no reason. BUT I made sure this has absolutely nothing to do with the history or plight of black Americans and the injustice they face, neither literal or allegorical. Reasons for this is A) I’m not black, so I have no right to describe their plight and B) most black people I know are kinda tired of this, mostly the logic of “yes,we get it, our situation sucks. Stop reminding us constantly”. So I avoided that as much as possible and made something of my own. But for some reason a lot of people think im referring to this…and I don’t know why.


Context (abridge version)


In my world their are a group of people called anomalies, basically people affected by radiation from a portal that opened during the damned war. Anomalies arent humans turned, but the result in a human having the radiation and giving birth to an anomaly, as well as anomalies can reproduce and make more. Anomalies basically have their DNA altered by the radiation, either slightly to completely. Here’s how anomalies are treated.


Federation of democratic nations: created a special agency to capture and put them into containment camps (internment camps). Anomalies are never allowed to leave said camps and neither are they are descendants



Confederacy of African states/black diamond corporation: captures and sells anomalies as chattel slavery to warlords or other despots in the bombed out remains of Africa to earn a profit.


National unity government/the junta:nazis. Litterally death squads and extermination camps in South America due to them viewing anomalies as “abominations of nature”


Holy empire of the Allfather: the only nation that views anomalies as equals to humanity, due to the belief that “all are children of the Allfather”. Mind you they still have to pledge loyalty to a theocratic totalitarian society where they have no say in the government and have no choice but to follow the state sanctioned religion. This is as good as it gets.



Groups of interest 


The resistance: not an anomalies only group, but more a catch all group for anybody who wants to fight their oppressive government, but anomalies are a large part of it. Use violence a lot in guerrilla tactics, tho they try their best to limit civilian casualties. Are mostly seen as disorganized and not having really a clear goal to fight for other than an equal society .


The insergency: an anomaly terrorist organization that uses extreme brutality and torture in their quest of toppling the human governments…by any means necessary. Officially don’t support civilian casualties but they won’t shed a tear when a few die in the crossfire. Main goal is to have a anomaly only nation where humans have no part in it leaves them alone


For obvious reasons both don’t like each other 


So what did I do wrong. I tried to be far away from the subject but a surprising amount of people brought it up for comparison. Example one person said that the resistance are MLK and the civil rights movement and the insurgency are Malcom X/black panthers…no, this is wrong on so many levels. One person said I was making an allegory for BLM which…no? I don’t get it. I need to know if I did something wrong or if it’s just their “interpretation”.


Edit: dont know if this makes a difference or not but alot of them who say this are white and not blackAfter consuming a fair share of media that depict their worlds as being divided into regions (Hjallmarch (TES), Insulinde (Disco Elysium), Skellige (The Witcher), the Reach (GoT), etc) I began to wonder how you all differentiated your regions.

They're clearly different from countries in some fiction and in some aspects, but in others they're basically synonyms. Some are literally as simple as calling regions of the map "North X", where X is the name of the country, where others are more complex and having a basis in the weather, topography, political goings-on, and more.

What is your world's most famous region? It's more threatening, warlike region? Are they separated conventionally on a near-universal basis, as countries, or are they more complex in definition? Maybe your setting doesn't have regions as I defined them at all? I'm curious and want to hear from all of you about an otherwise uninteresting aspect of the world that can be given life in so many ways.Hello!

I'm doing a research project for class about how world building has changed over the course of fictional storytelling and I wanted to ask the community directly.  I'm looking for information on everything from what aspects of social structures are important in your worlds to what aspects of a world you consider the most important when you start building one.

I hope to compare the core aspects of the worlds you tell me about to the core aspects of other worlds that have been developed in other periods of fictional storytelling.I wrote this as one of the only surviving pieces of written literature for a nomadic race of cat people, called the Scaini,  who are locked in a generation-spanning war against a neighbouring empire, attempting to colonize their native territory.

In this culture the migratory circuit their people follow is sacred and the idea of a settled life is viewed as a kind of spiritual death, the invasion directly severs these people from their own culture and many of the practices and traditions began to die out.

*I'm not very confident in my writing and I'm not really sure whether its overwrought rubbish ect*

*I'm also not sure what sort of emotion it evokes or the reactions people would have to it as a piece both as a reader and in-universe, so if you have any notes, criticisms etc id really appreciate it*

&#x200B;

So with that said this is one of the only surviving pieces of literature from that time from the viewpoint of the Scaini:

"Hear me now, oh mountain Lord. We are born of your lands, made of them, shaped by them. There lives, no more worthy denizens of these great peaks than my kin and I. I beseech you, extend your hand to us, as you have done before, strike from our homes the encroaching rot of the enemies that have now beset us...

... surely this you would count among the worthy causes of your time? For all the reverence we have observed. They do not know the trespasses they commit, the atrocities they scatter like seed in their wake. They wish to bring about stagnation, to force stillness upon every man woman, and child, not even nature escapes them. By all the prayer and sacrifices you have ever received we beg now that you rise, free us... 

... the dark, hateful yawning maw left in its wake. How can a nation of such evils as this be permitted to endure, while our children starve and flee, they have been forced to hide for so long their very nature is diminished, the first snows of the waning circuit fall, and their coats still cower beneath their skin, they will surely freeze at the hands of these invaders if not by their swords first... "Is anyone doing a fantasy world that utilizes real life geography but changes the place names and fictionalizes the history if so tell me about your world. if you don't have one but know of a few  published stories with  the concept im asking for i like a few recs to check them out please leave a summary.  The country  doesnt have to be a 100% replica  nor does it need to  follow historical events 100% perfectly  .

&#x200B;

Perfect example  is Under Heaven by Guy Gavriel Kay where he created a country based off real world china set during the Tang Dynasty and set the story during an  event similar to the An lushan rebellion. The story is inspired by real events but its not a direct retelling in fact the main character has absolutely nothing to do with the rebellion.Hey guys what if The ERE Survive the siege of Constantinople during 1453 and collapse during 16th or 17th century ? how would it affect the world and how would the fashion, cultures, economics, armies, and politics look like?

i ask this question because i'm planning to make my own fantasy world building and the country i'm gonna create is inspired by the ERE, maybe with guns & gunpowder ( basically i'm also inspired by Warhammer fantasy Empire of Man )

If this question doesn't make sense, i'm sorry in advance cause english isn't my native languageI don't know if it's just me, but I have a strong passion for writing and coming up with different universes/book ideas.

Unfortunately, I can't even draw a square right, and it gets frustrating because one day I would like to see my thoughts in picture. I know it's possible to study drawing, but I feel like it would take many many years just to match my level of expression with writing.

Should I try to pursue drawing?[Nerdbuilding](https://nerdbuilding.com/) is the ever evolving child of my obsessive compulsive brain. Do you want to know what kinds of soils are present in a polar village? Do you want to know what kind of trees are growing near a city along the banks of a river in subtropical biome, that is 100km from the marine coast? Do you want to know that kind of nonsense? Because I DO!

We don't want to tell you what to put in your settlements, we just want to help you figure out the basic, mundane information. We want to help you keep a certain level of continuity.

This past month, we took a break from our database and our relational coding, to focus on integration. Because, you need to be able to work on your world, in your preferred worldbuilding tool!

In addition to our previous JSON export/save functions, we have added in the ability to export a generated settlement in multiple formats. Whether your preferred tool uses BBcode, Markdown, Textile, or HTML you can now export your favorite generated block of text with a simple "Copy/Paste" action. 

[Nerdbuilding](https://nerdbuilding.com/) now supports exporting to tools like World Anvil, Legend Keeper, and Obsidian Portal. We will continuously add more options when we are made aware of them. But for now, we hope that you can find some use of our export options.Hey guys!

I've had another worldbuilding scenario that has to be the craziest yet. 

What would history be like if Planet Earth was alive?

Like literally, like a living planet. Does this sound cool or drool?

[View Poll](https://www.reddit.com/poll/sqavro)&#x200B;

https://preview.redd.it/18wxyi1xpah81.png?width=3280&format=png&auto=webp&s=7f538655bfcf0a37bdd5eadad922113af23f24f1

In the 300s After Thurna towns started being build along the coasts and on steppes, Usually where Laeviru young would have mid-air battles by bashing in to each other at high speed during summer days.

 This would rarely result in a Thurnan being hurt by a falling corpse, but houses would get damaged due to the frankly huge 2 meters long elementals falling from the sky. So Thurnans redesigned the house to take in more damage. This is what they came up with a circular home with a roof that has multiple layers of interlocking tiles that have been made from mud and Laeviru skin and leafs. 

The tiles can be replaced easily and even 4 meters long specimens of the male Laeviru don't even harm the first layer of the roof. Said roof could be called bulletproof at this point. Water from rain is drained on each of its four sides. These houses became popular in cities, especially for small families that own businesses. 

The only thing really missing from the example above is the attic doors which an average house on Annae usually has two of. This one is missing it because it's not a big business house. They still have an attic, it's only for food storage though. The example above is a single person home and shop with only two stories and an attic. Generally these houses have one bedroom, an attic for storage, a house temple, a bathroom, a dinner corner with kitchen and said shopfront.

Houses would be painted once a year but in the meantime they would be covered by graffiti.**Main:** A predatory species of insect native to the prison planet Mor’Thul, a massive world used by Lord Galaxian’s Empire to hold its most feared criminals, the Lancetraps are a dangerous species, due to their extendable, barbed proboscis. For general info on Mor’Thul’s biosphere, go here: [https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/snur97/the\_biosphere\_of\_morthul/](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/snur97/the_biosphere_of_morthul/)

[Scientific diagram of a Lancetrap.](https://preview.redd.it/qd1c4ocsdah81.jpg?width=4032&format=pjpg&auto=webp&s=8e16fbc25dc2eef8f6dd546f483b3306295ac452)

**Hunting:** Lancetraps are primarily ambush predators. They dig holes in the rock and soil of their homeworld, then lie in wait, just below the entrance. When they see prey, such as a Mor’Thul goat, a prisoner, or a Glacecrawler over their hole, they extend their proboscis at 1109 km/h, piercing them right through. Then the barbs that adorn the proboscis extend, and using valves and gravity, they siphon the prey’s blood into the Lancetrap’s soft abdomen, which can expand to hold up to 45 kL of fluid. While searching for mates, Lancetraps will wander the rocky barrens, and will also actively hunt when they have larvae to take care of, depositing the kill in the bottom of their holes for their young to feast on. Lancetraps are carnivores, and by lying in wait, are able to cut down their energy needs.

**Habitat:** Lancetraps can be found in many places on Mor’Thul that are on dry land, instead of acid, lava, or water. They can be found aboveground or belowground, but they prefer barren ground, instead of having to contend with root systems, to dig their holes in. If they can find an unoccupied hole, Lancetraps will use that instead of expending energy and time digging one. If there’s nowhere to dig, Lancetraps will begin to drain surrounding vegetation with their proboscis, getting enough energy to be able to dig, once they’ve cleared out their area. Lancetrap holes can be up to 1.7 m in diameter, but they usually have branching tunnels, with chambers for larvae and eggs, room for an expanded abdomen, and much smaller apertures, with the purpose of being just large enough to fire the proboscis through, and impale prey passing by.

**Locomotion:** The 8 legs of the Lancetrap lets it walk right side up or upside down, and squeeze through small tunnels, moving forwards or backwards. They can dig right into the rock on Mor’Thul, despite its density, hardness, and strength, letting them lodge themselves in a vertical shaft for a local decade or two, which would translate to a few weeks, using Earth’s calendar. The proboscis can also be used to stab holes into the ground, due to it having an absolute hardness of 1500, or the hardness of diamond. The exoskeleton is also very tough, especially the legs and proboscis, letting them be used to dig through solid rock. Due to the recoil of extending the proboscis, the Lancetrap’s legs can push down hard enough to negate that combined with gravity.

A Lancetrap can sprint at 44 km/h, or 12.2 m/s. That’s more than enough to overtake slow-moving prey. The exoskeleton also increases the Lancetrap’s already-decent radiation tolerance.

**Reproduction:** Lancetraps live for about 6735 of Mor’Thul’s years, taking 962 of them to mature. Lancetraps mate for life, and lay litters of 200 or so eggs at a time, and start searching for mates as soon as they’ve fully matured, leaving behind their parents’ burrow. Each egg is about .15 m in diameter, and the larvae hatch by stabbing their way out. The length of a newborn with proboscis retracted, is .147 m, and the mass is 9.02 g, and Lancetraps molt every 13 local years. Every time they molt, they increase in length by .0467 m, gain 1.91 kg, and their exoskeleton becomes 1% harder, until they reach maturity. That means that the proboscis of a newborn Lancetrap has an absolute hardness of 718, which is less than half of that of the adult’s.

Lancetraps will protect their larvae with their lives, even spacing out the eggs to prevent accidental sibling impalement. Adult Lancetraps do molt, too, but that’s to rid their exoskeletons of potential parasites, and to regrow damaged parts.

**Respiration:** In order to survive, Lancetraps have 8 spiracles on the sides of their thoraxes, 4 on each side. These connect to lungs, letting them get an ample amount of oxygen, and expel an ample amount of carbon dioxide, with 8 lungs. Each of an Lancetrap’s lungs has a volume of 1.63 L, and connects to the bloodstream. Lancetraps have yellow blood, and having a liquid diet, their abdomens contain enzymes to break down complex organic molecules in the blood they drink. There has been reports of Lancetraps surviving long-term with 4 of their spiracles blocked, and due to their molting, there’s a good chance that a spiracle will come unblocked. The weakpoints of the Lancetrap are its eyes, spiracles, and abdomen, as they need to be unarmored to see, breathe, and store large volumes of food.

**Q&A:** Feel free to ask any question you have on the Lancetraps.Like Dungeonpunk and Grimdark Fantasy... Like alt funk and goth rock, bluegrass and scream metal  for music. Invent a niche term that aptly describes your specific setting. Previous Episodes:

1. [Oxio](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/spe8ak/exotic_biology_episode_11_oxio/)
2. [Char](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/snt293/exotic_biology_episode_10_char/)
3. [Nicar](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/r3wnyf/exotic_biology_episode_9_nicar/)
4. [Coal](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/r2zkhu/exotic_biology_episode_8_coal/)
5. [Still](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/r29dgw/exotic_biology_episode_7_still/)
6. [Snowball](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/r1oh5g/snowball_biology/)
7. [Opal](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/qz1k1i/opal_biology/)
8. [Rust](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/qyhi1t/rust_biology/)
9. [Vitrium](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/qxrzwb/vitrium_biology/)
10. [Blue Crystal](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/qpprqw/blue_crystal_biology/)
11. [Cannonball](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/qox5r1/cannonball_biology/)

Brimstone is a small sulfur-rich world, similar to a slightly larger and warmer version of Oxio, or a much larger and hotter version of our solar system's Io. Like both Oxio and Io, Brimstone is a moon of a gas giant, which allows tidal heating to compensate for the lack of primordial internal heat to maintain tectonic activity and transport sulfur from the core to the surface despite being small enough to have lost most of its low-mass volatiles. Having formed in a hotter environment, Brimstone had a lower primordial water fraction than Oxio, leading to a less oxidized modern environment more chemically similar to Io, with large quantities of elemental sulfur and a 0.66-bar atmosphere composed primarily of sulfur dioxide (0.3 bars), carbon dioxide (0.25 bars), and nitrogen (0.1 bars), with traces of carbon disulfide, carbonyl sulfide, a variety of carbon tetrahalides, argon, xenon, and sulfur vapor. The average surface temperature is 132 degrees Celsius. Sulfur is a close analog on Brimstone for the function of water on Earth, as it is both the primary biosolvent and the driver of weather systems, with clouds and rain of liquid sulfur. Weather systems are generally less violent on Brimstone than on Earth due to the lower heat of vaporization (approximately one quarter that of water) and lower vapor pressures of sulfur, resulting in less potential rainfall and enlarged desert regions. However, sulfur vapor also undergoes much more significant, non-ideal alterations in density with changes in pressure, as the equilibrium of molecular structures shifts between heavier and lighter sulfur ring structures.

The liquid phase consists almost entirely S8 rings, with just under 7% concentration of lighter species. The small concentration of S2 and S4 structures is, however, critical to Brimstone biology, as they are much more easily transported across membranes than the large S8 rings, and provide much more convenient feedstocks for sulfur-involved reactions. On long time scales (compared to typical reaction speeds), S2 concentrations will naturally re-equilibrate as S2 molecules are removed from solution by pumping or consumption in anabolic reactions, but several highly conserved enzyme complexes exist specifically to cleave S8 rings into S4 and S2 groups to feed into other reactions. Large S8 rings are, however, sometimes used directly in the synthesis of large polysulfides. While sulfur-sulfur bonds lend rigidity and insolubility to many Earthling protein complexes, sulfur chains induce improved solubility in the Brimstone biosystem, and carbon-carbon double bonds serve an analogous structural purpose at Brimstone's higher temperatures (similar to Vitrium biology).

Sulfur is a nonpolar solvent, and as such dissolves several small hydrocarbon species. However, it is also a weak Lewis acid (electron acceptor), and so preferentially dissolves Lewis bases (electron donors), and is not a lipophile. Additionally, while some bioavaiilable hydrogen is retained in the form sulfuric acid and hydrogen halides, hydrocarbons are also quite rare, as on Oxio, being substituted with halogen-rich equivalents. Fluorine, chlorine, bromine, and iodine are all highly active in Brimstone biology, as organohalogen groups exhibit higher solubilities with increasing halogen atomic number; functional groups with different halogen terminations are thus selected to precisely control the solvent activity of different macromolecules. Bilayer membranes are composed of long-tail fluorocarbons (esentially, teflon) with solvent-facing nucleophillic thiol heads. With sulfur being both aprotic and non-polar, Brimstone biology cannot rely on ion pumping for energy management purposes, and so relies exclusively on intramolecular electron transport, as on Blue Crystal (a world which is otherwise quite different in nearly every way!)

As on Oxio, energy metabolism is primarily oxygen-based, though mediated by sulfur oxide molecules. Photosynthesis is weakly oxygenic, as there are several non-oxygenated atmospheric carbon sources available (namely, carbon disulfide and the carbon halides), with all oxygen liberated from CO2 being re-bound in sulfur dioxide. As the formation of both carbon disulfide and carbonyl sulfide are endothermic (being produced as as hormone molecules and by lighting and UV-light activated atmospheric reactions), sulfur is a complete bystander to the respiration process, serving only as a vehicle for oxygen. Catabolic reactions of SO2 with typical energy-rich biomolecules (such as fluorolipids) produces CO2, carbon tetrahalides, and elemental sulfur as byproducts. In fact, all atmospheric halides are biogenic in origin, resulting from the breakdown of organohalogen molecules whose halogen content was originally organically fixed from geological sources.

Unlike water, ammonia, nitrogen, and sulfuric acid, but like the iron carbonyl used on Cannonball, molten sulfur is not a transparent fluid. Thus, photo-active structures, such as retinas and photosynthetic pigments, cannot be deeply embedded inside the fluid. Eye and leaf structures thus mirror those on Cannonball and Rust, and the photopic zone of oceans, lakes, and rivers is limited to the upper few millimeters, and most marine creatures completely lack eyes (similar to the situation on Vitrium, though for different underlying reasons). Unlike Cannonball's iron carbonyl and Rust's hydrogen peroxide, however, elemental sulfur is not subject to photodegradation, so protective pigments are not required. The default color of most organisms is therefore a orange-yellow to red, based on the color of the molten sulfur solvent itself.

In low concentrations, water vapor and elemental oxygen are minor irritants to Brimstone life. Exposures to oxygen levels suitable for human life, however, generally results in spontaneous combustion. The Brimstone atmosphere is highly toxic to humans, and temperatures are rapidly lethal. In-person exploration of the planetary surface is possible in a positive-pressure refrigerated environment suit, but is generally considered impractical and discouraged due to the potential damage to the native lifeforms. Refrigerated habitats may be built on the surface, but most exploration must be conducted via robotic remotes. However, the relatively low temperatures and pressures required to support Brimstone life make offworld transport of biological specimens relatively straightforward. Frozen specimens (below 112C) may be safely transported in human-compatible environments, as long as they are contained to prevent contamination from toxic off-gassing.In my world I’m developing at the moment. In ancient times people would make sacrifices to the fey and in return the fey would bless them in some way. Eventually these blessings involved helping humans with their wars. This separated the fey into many different factions. Eventually, one king sacrificed his entire kingdom in return for one blessing. No one knows exactly what he wished for but the king was able to gives blessings of his own, and after subduing neighboring kingdoms on his own he becomes a regional power of sorts. His blessing are much more efficient than the fey’s as they don’t require a sacrifice to be bestowed. The fey in retaliation to this new threat begin becoming more involved in human affairs.There is really no context to this question. I am just curious what kind of books or artworks, if any, exist in your world. 

I am also curious about what groups of writers/artists or artistic movements there are.I've been having trouble deciding and want to know what other people think. This civilization would have arisen on Earth as a supranational state based on the common good for all people. It values diversity, science, selflessness, compassion, etc. It believes that humans are best when we are united and having a cosmic perspective (embrace our insignificance in the universe and see how trivial our petty problems are).

[View Poll](https://www.reddit.com/poll/sqfmg3)I want to design a map of Earth, but I don't really want to use the standard continents that we have today. So I want to design different continents based on the  Continents we have today.Seas, trees, animal life, architecture, landmasses, etc? Just a though topic… could it be caused by a magic or science or some sort of natural phenomenon? I’m curious."It's been 4 years after the war began. I don't even remember why it started, or if I ever even knew at all. I looked over at the horizon this morning, and there I saw it, the bombs. Before I could get inside I saw a blinding white light followed a few seconds later by a deafening Blast."

&#x200B;

This was found on the cellphone of a Victim's House, frozen on the screen. The victim, who has yet to be identified, lived in a suburban area 2 miles from the Blast Zone, where China's  世界末影 (World Ender) Bomb was dropped on the Mid-West United States. This was followed by the Retaliation by the US, and hundreds of tons of orbital debris rained down on Antarctica, causing The Great Melt.I'm prepping a dark fantasy is fantasy game and my players are looking for a challenge and some of the things they want is cursed items. If anyone has any fun or evil items let me know. Thanks in advance.I've noticed that in recent star wars media, like the new shows and games. They seem to be more tribal and mystical in style. Like they have these circle patterns, they use tribal music, and cultures. Is there a name for that kind of design? Something I could search to find references?&#x200B;

[Very crude map of the galaxy as of the 2nd invasion.](https://preview.redd.it/6pvacav0y5h81.png?width=526&format=png&auto=webp&s=5ffcbdb36265efb683b4847528b138fde7617e67)

42nd century AD. A few hundred years into another invasion by the scourge or the invaders if you're a veteran of the first invasion. The first invasion was repelled easily with only humans on the defensive side, but that was a millennia ago. From a human-scourge conflict, it quickly became a full blown galactic war in the milky way involving all 6 species of the area after the scourge had the sudden plan to wipe out all life. The squares with stars in them are major fronts that so far, nobody has control over yet. The diamonds with squares in them are areas de facto controlled by the nation that owns it such as Eco-site Arcology CQ-6 and The Blight station that got obliterated through state secrets. They deserved it anyway.

The 6 species are unique in their nature.  
\-Humans  
\-Xanitha  
\-Kibars  
\-Karavis (Koraves)  
\-Yigothu  
\-"Singers"  


In this log we'll meet the "singers" hailing from the planet of "Caerulus".

&#x200B;

[\\"Caerulus\\" and it's home star, a K-type star.](https://preview.redd.it/httjn7ee26h81.png?width=507&format=png&auto=webp&s=e9cfd4dcdcc96bfcee32778e2182b71b97945cf4)

Upon first sight, one might associate a singer with a Terran Cnidarian (specifically Irukandji) and they won't be wrong as they have many features similar to them and are in fact, the simplest sapient species in the Federation and Federal Galactic navy in terms of anatomy.

[Crude drawing made by a local soldier for a basic biology lecture.](https://preview.redd.it/ae8azaty26h81.jpg?width=1108&format=pjpg&auto=webp&s=fc9a50f441403c59ec5da6bf78d905d738d95154)

They visibly have organs no Cnidarians possess, such as gills for better Oxygen collecting, a basic circulatory system composing purely of vessels, a brain and the most surprising, phonic lips. The way their brain collects oxygen and food are fairly simple with gills delivering oxygen and the mouth with it's veins delivering nutrients. Their specialty lies in their phonic lips, as they work by pushing air out through them to create a noise similar to Terran Cetaceans, although audible by human ears which are commonly described as "Like notes in a song or smt". The term "Singer" was aptly given to them as their only method of communication is this. There is only 1 language in this civilization as it seems due to the entirety of their vocabulary having no major deviation in tone and frequency of the noise for each word with only slight deviation among individuals. All this has made their language the only one to be "musical" and as such, absolutely indecipherable unless decrypted with UGF-standard translation gadgets.

In their homeworld of "Caerulus" (The name in their language cannot be typed.) singers life quite interesting lives, living in cities made of organic tissue. Coral-like structures have been seen as the support structure for their residencies with their electricity coming from massive patches of electrocytes producing power on a daily basis. Their food mainly consists of eggs, larvae, small crustaceans and fish farmed in algae patches. As for the aspect of culture, Singers are deemed gentle and peaceful and they rarely get into conflict both between themselves and other races. Their religion is of high interest by Terran ecologist as they practically worship the sea, adhering to the law of respect. (You respect the ocean, the ocean respects you. -Old Singer saying) Their lives constantly revolve around water and they clearly cannot live without it, this leads to their culture of nature preservation a topic that ecology scientists look forward to, Terrans specifically. 

Currently, the population of "Singers" are in the trillions much like the other 5 species of the UGF and they are deemed crucial to the federation in many ways, be it from workers in factories, field medics and even some ace pilots are from this race. The Singers maintain very good relationships with every other species and put in very high efforts in Invader elimination.I love coming up with stories, worlds and characters for written work or just so they live rent free inside of my head. I could spend hours and hours every day just thinking about it and fantasizing about how cool it all this but there's one thing that I find extremely frustrating and I don't know if it's just a big problem for me because of how I do it. I have a lot of trouble making things piece together. I can come up with cool arcs, fun settings, interesting characters but every time I decide to include something, it breaks two more things I already had in mind even if they are completely unrelated. So when I'm building a world, I keep changing a lot of things because they don't work well together or it just doesn't make any sense. I don't know if it's because I do my worldbuilding and brainstorming in a very artificial and forced way?

 If someone just gives me a detailed outline and tells me to write it I might be better or worse at it but it would be much easier for me to complete it. But when I come up with my own stuff... It feels like Everytime I patch up a hole, two more take their place. It's not even that what I'm coming up is boring or just outright bad, it's that it doesn't work as a coherent group of ideas.We often talk about the magic systems of the worlds, but I have rarely seen the armies of a world treated in the same depth. What are the different weapons used on your world?, what are the strategies and situations they are used with?, what terms and names are used in these matters?, how do your armaments work?, what is the training your soldiers receive?, what are their ranks?, etc.

&#x200B;

PS: Sorry for the bad English**Dr. Lido**, headmaster of the royal alchemist guild, got his name put into the mouths of every citizen of La Song Valley when he died a horrific death in his attempts to find a cure for the miasma. He spent every waking hour gathering samples from the dangerous environment of Swamp Hanova, concocting with every herb and magic at his disposal. For years he strained himself, exposing himself to the wicked miasmic ash and debris to find even an ounce of relief.

He developed terrifying symptoms, he lost his ability to speak, he couldn't walk very far anymore, and he was hallucinating. Yet he never wavered. His colleagues knew he was in his final moments when he choked down a vile alchemic creation in hopes to prolong his life just long enough to give the world an inch more of progress towards the cure.

Despite his grand efforts, his sacrifice, and his enormous mansion full of research, he never did find a cure, or even a symptom-reducer that could extend the lives of those infected. In honor of his faithful research, and all the amazing medicines he discovered along the journey, they named the illness brought on by the miasma after him - **Lido-Syndrome.**

\---

**Mythos**, a rather annoying and intimidating mage to encounter, who happens to be a fan of anarchy. If you hear of a large-scale catastrophe or riot, Mythos was more than likely pulling the strings behind the whole ordeal. They are one of the few mages whom the government utterly refuses to try to punish, as such there is no "wanted" posters with their face slapped all over town. In fact, the crown even often pays Mythos to handle situations that they normally couldn't even send an army to handle.

Rumors of Mythos' identity spread far and wide, and the rumors of their deeds and motives are wild and twisted beyond believability.  Not everyone can truthfully say that they hate or admire Mythos, for the riots they insight typically have favorable outcomes. The wars they create often pave the path for the downtrodden to become the victors. The strange web they weave in their path isn't all bright and altruistic however, sometimes great tragedies happen in their wake.

What most people know Mythos for however, is their iconic and unique ability to resist the miasma of Hanova Swamp, and their crown-given permission to do, seemingly, whatever they want. Luckily, Mythos doesn't seem to stir up too much trouble with the good and innocent folk, rather they tend to involve themselves in wars revolving around dark mages and monsters.

Even without knowing Mythos' motives, identity, or full extent or origin of their powers, the world almost cheers them on or boos at them. There have been scuffles between even high ranking officials, duels of honor on behalf of Mythos.

Today's youth know Mythos as a teacher at the country's most prestigious and exclusive mage academy. To be in Mythos' homeroom class is like being invited to dance with the emperor at your prom.

\---

**Morte'ma**, is an ageless feminine entity that folklore has warped over the eons, spurning some bizarre traditions and rumors. Most people don't actually believe she exists, but according to all the stories, she did exist, and likely still does. In a world with elemental magic such as fire, water, air, plant, etc., Morte'ma was born as the first and only death mage. Many people think the story of Morte'ma started as a children's story to scare them out of going near the Hanova Swamp and dying from the miasma. Some say she has an undead army of zombies that she intends to take over the world with.

The stories of old tell the tale of the sisters who could talk to the gods, their names long forgotten, but their story etched into the minds of every child in La Song Valley. The elder sister spoke to Lorenzo, the god of life, and he gave her permission to eat the fruit from his favorite world tree, Hanova. The younger sister spoke to Haelsius, the god of death, and he too gave her permission to eat a fruit from Hanova.

As the two sisters happily ate from the tree, Lorenzo became enraged by the younger sister for not asking for his divine permission, thus he banished her from Hanova Garden for all eternity. Heart broken, the younger sister cried to Haelsius, who promised to lend her his powers in exchange for Lorenzo's death. When the young sister returned to the garden to confront Lorenzo, she was met with her elder sister, empowered by the life god, who swore to defeat her for disobeying god.

The two sisters waged war, and in the end, the world tree Hanova was struck by the younger sister's death touch, wilting it and causing it to release an awful miasma that poisoned the whole garden. Lorenzo erected the barrier to stop the spread of miasma to the rest of the world. The elder sister died in the battle and the younger carried on, full of bitterness and hatred for the living.

Most people know that this is just a child's tale, as each time it is told it changes in some small manner. History books do not teach this story, nor to they acknowledge Haelsius as a real god like they do Lorenzo. Most people grow out of believing in the old tale of two sisters, realizing that trees eventually die, and that a world tree dying is a tragedy akin to a volcano eruption; natural, but still a catastrophe.

Those that fall into the trap of lies surrounding the Tale of Two Sisters, often make ridiculous traditions and rituals surrounding their culture's version of the story. Even in the capitol city of Orrera (name unofficial) the story is part of the Lorenzo religion, and akin to the Easter bunny or Santa Claus, many nonsensical elements get warped into the sacred teachings. On February 1st, once every 100 years, a girl born on that day is sacrificed based on a long list of suspicions, to prevent the next Morte'ma from rising. The fact that no new death element has been reborn further fuels the religion for many die-hard believers.

# Random Trivia:

• Mythos was one of the people who supplied Dr. Lido with the raw and toxic miasmic materials for his research. He often did tests on them, but none of the miasmic had an effect.

• It is also highly suspected that Mythos is the one who supplies many drug dealers with their supply of miasmic ash with which to make [Mihashma](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/somrku/comment/hwga6vr/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web2x&context=3) out of.

• Dr. Lido was the youngest person to ever be made headmaster of the royal alchemist guild, he was promoted at only 28 years old and died just a week after his 39th birthday. He had dedicated almost all of his time as headmaster on the research of the miasma.

• Mythos has never revealed their name or face to anyone, and they work entirely alone when on the field. Their agreement to help Dr. Lido was out of necessity alone. No one even knows how to contact or find them on the average day. So when Mythos agreed to be the alchemy teacher at the mage academy, it caused a swarm of controversy and conspiracy theories to spin around. Mythos was now easily locatable as in the capitol city and on a set work schedule. Many feared that this would encourage chaos at the academy, but the crown stationed extra militia around the campus to ensure that nothing arose from this situation.

• Some of the prominent and ridiculous rumors about Mythos is that they are secretly immortal due to their spryness for their old age, or that they know Morte'ma personally, or that they are Dr. Lido himself going undercover to complete his research undisturbed.

• Mythos has referred to Morte'ma as *"Corpsie Doll"* on more than one occasion, spinning the myth that the two are secretly lovers or friends.

• The emperor himself is the one who carries out the execution of the baby girl born on February 1st every 100 years. Most emperors dread this religious holiday, but must uphold it or else the people go into a frenzy and will assassinate the baby regardless, causing a potential war or riot.

• In the Lorenzo religion (currently unnamed), it is believed that your soul is reborn into a body every 100 years. Somehow the religious fruitcakes came up with February 1st as the original Morte'ma's birthdate and pinpointed the year she was born. Then from there on out, every 100 years a girl who fits the criteria is sacrificed to appease Lorenzo.

• Many people who believe that Morte'ma is still alive think that she hides in Swamp Hanova, building an army out of the corpses of people who wander inside and go missing.

• La Song Valley uses a ranking system for mages to determine how powerful or honorable they are, as such they award mages with rank ups and a badge of their precious metal type for their rank. \[Porcelain > Bronze > Silver > Gold > Platinum > Onyx > Crystal\] In the nearly thousand-years that the rank system has been in use, less than 100 mages have ever made it to Crystal rank. Only two Crystal mages are currently alive, Mythos is one of them having earned it through sheer power rather than honor.So I had an idea for a merchant republic, kinda like Venice or Genoa, where people buy votes. 

The idea is that a vote costs like 100,000 dollars or something insane so it's still out of reach for most, but you can buy as many as you want and you could obviously vote for yourself or someone else. 

I've thought a little bit about how to prevent other countries from literally just buying a president. I'm just wondering if there are any obvious plot holes or issues with this idea I'm missing. The time period is basically a fantasy 1510's.Hi folks! We're a TTRPG podcast and, on our most recent episode, we used a random ziploc bag full of old Yu Gi Oh cards to create two settings/adventures. I hope you enjoy the episode!

Apple: [https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/the-inn-between-designing-adventures-with-yu-gi-oh-cards/id1539420719?i=1000550265976](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/the-inn-between-designing-adventures-with-yu-gi-oh-cards/id1539420719?i=1000550265976)

YouTube: [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=osHRRh35rBQ](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=osHRRh35rBQ)

Everything Else: [https://anchor.fm/pod-of-blunders/episodes/The-Inn-Between-Designing-Adventures-with---Yu-Gi-Oh--Cards-e1e1kqj](https://anchor.fm/pod-of-blunders/episodes/The-Inn-Between-Designing-Adventures-with---Yu-Gi-Oh--Cards-e1e1kqj)I've seen lands which color palettes consist mainly of cold white and blood red in media a bunch of times and it's so specific that now I'm kinda curious where this concept comes from. My first guess was that those are complementary colors but I checked and that's pretty close but not enough to say that that's the case.

The only examples I can recall at the moment are: the Blood Tundra from "Fer.al", Spine from "Raya and the Last Dragon" and SCP-354. (okay, the last one is a stretch but it's still the blood red & cold white combination so it kinda counts)

Don't get me wrong, I like it a lot actually. The way that bright red indicates the dangers of these unforgiving bitterly cold lands. I just wanna know where it all came from, what fiction was a pioneer to that and maybe if there are any other examples you recall? Thanks in advance for your help!The World:
Roughly 100 years in the future human civilization as we know it has collapsed after climate change, resource depletion and massive wars over what was left have ravaged the world. The story is set in a western United States where the Mojave desert has expanded to cover most of the land west of the rockies in an inhospitable wasteland. As far as anyone in the story knows all previous governments have collapsed and the entire world has fallen into anarchy. 
Few people remain who struggle to retain some form of civilization. Communities mostly only exist in small pockets of the foothills on the western slopes of the rockies that recieve enough rain for agriculture to be viable, because of the land barrier formed by the mountains. The communities rely on trade caravans that travel the wastes between towns carrying precious water, food and supplies. These caravans are made up of gas powered vehicles, old relics of the previous age, making oil and the ability to refine it into gasoline almost as valuable as water.
Each community specializes in some specific products that are readily available or easy to make from the resources in their area that they can trade with the others to get what they can't make themselves.


The Characters:
Main Character - (haven't decided on a name, I'll just call him MC for now)
MC is a young man in his mid 20s  who has made a living as a "guide" leading caravans across the deserts. He comes from a town that specializes in maintaining caravan vehicles and teaching others how to maintain them. His father is one of the most adept mechanics and teachers in the town. His mother died when he was very young and he barely remembers her. His father has been mourning her ever since and his grief has consumed him and made him distant with MC. He is disappointed that MC didn't follow in his footsteps to become a mechanic and he is also afraid for his son's safety traveling the desert. This creates conflict between the two and makes MC resent him for not being a more supportive father to him growing up.
MC has never been very far west into the desert, mostly traveling north and south to the other towns that survive in the foothills but he has heard tales from older guides and explorers about the old metropolises buried in the desert sands. They may hold precious materials and resources ripe for the taking. That is, if you can survive the trecherous journey and the desert bandits who attack caravans and travelers. There have also been whispers of a great power far to the west on the other side of the wastes, if such a thing even exists, but surely they must be only rumors...

Main Antagonist - (no name but something really biblical maybe even papal sounding MA for now)
MA is on old man in his 70s who survived the collapse of civilization and even fought in one of the Great Wars. The war ended roughly 40 years before the beginning of the story and wasn't won by either side as the countries fighting it ran out of resources for the war effort and descended into anarchy domestically, effectively collapsing them both. After the war MA returned to his home town where he struggled to keep himself and his family alive while the world around him burned. His military training allowed him to kill when he needed to and gave him the skills to survive in the wilderness. Ultimately he was unable to prevent his wife and child being killed in the chaos. 
MA was a broken man after the death of his family and considered suicide many times but he had also always been a deeply religious man of Christian faith and believed God still had a purpose for him. He left his home town and set off west into the growing wastes to find what that could be. He traveled for years in the desert, slowly going insane. Eventually there was no more water or food to be scavenged and he began to die. When he was on the brink of death and delirious from thirst he believed he saw a vision. He believed that God told him he was his vessel, and that it was his purpose to bring the world back from chaos to usher in the kingdom of heaven on earth. It was just after this mirage/vision that MA saw in the distance his promised land, the ruins of a city on the horizon. (Not sure what city works best, costal city in the pacific northwest, Seattle maybe?)
In the ruins of this city he found a community that had managed to keep a desalination plant running providing them with water and allowing a larger community to survive. He was taken in by the people there and saved from death. Over time, he was able to start a religious congregation in the community, mostly from people who were Christians before the collapse. He told them of his vision and God's supposed mission for him. Over the years his charisma allowed him to gain heavy sway over his growing cult/sect with him elevated as an almost messiah like figure. Eventually their growing influence conflicted with the governing body of the city. In a bloody coup the cult was able to take the city and install MA as the governor/pope of their new vatican city. 
When the story begins MA has been in control of the city for years and rules with an iron fist and a totalitarian theocracy. The strength of his position in the city has allowed his military forces to become dominant and utilize some of the old war machines left over from before the collapse. MA' s holy legions venture out into the wastes to find new communities to bring into his growing empire. The people there are given a choice, become part of his "flock" or be labeled heretics and crushed by his military might.

 A few more characters that are less fleshed out:

A son of MA who takes on sort of an heir apparent/prince type role and thinks he is really God's chosen one. Subservient to his father but also plots to overthrow him.

A daughter of the prince and granddaughter of MA who fights in his legion but winds up getting involved with MC somehow who shows her kindness  despite who her grandfather is, possible love interest for MC.

A bandit character that MC meets along the way (maybe he is captured by their group) who sympathizes with him and shows him that not all  bandits are bloodthirsty killers and are just people trying to survive too.

Final Notes: 
This is most of what I have for now, I was thinking that a main motivation for MC to be in conflict with MA could be that MAs forces reach MCs town while he is guiding a caravan and he returns to find his father killed and the town conquered. I want to create some more characters to follow too because a lot of inspiration for this was GoT and its complex narritive of interweaving character stories. I know its ambitious but I would like to capture that epic feeling. I also want to expand on the main character's backstory and motivations. I want the characters to be complex where they aren't just good or evil but have depth and a capacity for both. 

If you read this whole thing, thank you and feedback is appreciated!Hello!

I’ve been digging around to find the perfect place to really lay everything out and organize it. I’ve tried many things that have been suggested in the past but find them either lacking or too complex for me to figure out. Has anyone had a good experience using Fandom for their worldbuilding? I’ve contributed to many Fandom wikis before and find it much easier and comfortable than other places. But I’ve also heard some qualms either with their licensing or expectations regarding content uploaded to it so that may be an issue, not entirely sure what that’s about honestly so some elaboration on that would be lovely! 

For the record, I’ve tried notebook.ai, WorldAnvil, notion.so, and did a hosted MediaWiki trial. I may just be partial to Fandom for nostalgic and comfort reasons, but I wanna make sure that could be a good option and not the worst :)I want to raise and lower sea levels. I want to run continental drift forward and back. I want to re draw borders. And, my google skills are failing me hard. There must be something. A Google Earth extension, maybe? I know what I want what I am looking for to do, but I don't know what I'm looking for.if an ancient dragon and a goblin were convicted of the same crime, giving them both 20 years in prison wouldnt exactly be fair if the lifespan of each was 10 and 100000 years respectively. the goblin would die of old age while the dragon takes a nap and wakes up free.

in absence of highly personalized judgement or task based punishment, proportional punishment based on age or lifespan would probably be the fairest, but what do i know?Let's say that I take a human's genes, modify those genes into, I dunno, a bug-eyed elf looking thing (the highest-requested gene mod that's *not* furry or furry-adjacent), then grow that thing in a test tube until it's ready to be "born."

Would that still qualify as a homo sapiens, or would that be classified as a new species? If not, would it fit into the taxonomic ranks at *all?* Or is this a case that's not covered in even the least way by taxonomy?To add context, The 12 Sins of Man, also known as the 12 Pillars of Sin, are the 12 highest ranking demons that are described in the legends or myths, and enigmatic grimoires. Despite being called demons, they are more akin to being primordial manifestations of humanity's flaws, born from the negative aura spawned by them and then fashioned by Xo the Aberrant Lord, rather then being your typical demon like fallen angels or damned souls, but more like your imperfections given form. 

These 12 nightmares are Xos most loyal servants, who each command over legions of lesser demons, hold domain over certain "gifts" and each have their Sigil to streak fear into the hearts of men. They like the chaos gods from war hammer 40k, feed off of the thoughts and emotions of whatever mortal on Eia, the twelve demons are. 


These members are: 
Azramol: Embodiment of Deception 
Takes on the form of a man with dark blue skin, bald and has eyes red as blood. Sometimes he wears a fancy suit or on occasion a trench coat to hide from plain sight. True to his title, he’s a master of lies, false information, rumors and other forms of manipulations, emotional or mental.  

Ergileg: Embodiment of Madness
A mad beast, she takes the form of an alien creature with a female build, and has tentacles for a dress, her screams and hellush laugh sends a chill down people’s spine, for she embodies the fractured mind. Bipolar, Psychopathic, Sociopathic, Delusional, and Narcissistic at best.   

Golgromoth: Embodiment of Fear
King of Nightmares, has many forms actually, each associated with any kind of phobia. But his favorite is the man with a thousand eyes, cause he could see everything, including your fear. 

Ar'guch: Embodiment of Arrogance 
A living example of Egotism, truly a bully at his core. It thinks it’s the best there is and places it’s views above others and only cares about itself. Takes on the form of a lion like creature or a fancy King/Queen. 

Dor'gas: Embodiment of Lust 
The Needy beast, cannot hold his animalistic desires for so long, it wants everything; Gold, Sex, Power, Fame and The World itself. Takes the form of a green serpent with a horse's skull. 

Fol'ginnug: Embodiment of Misery 
A shallow, broken soul whose cries and wales can be heard from a far, it’s presence invoked loneliness and suicide. Takes the form takes the form of beaten and wary woman


Mallmauth: Embodiment of Hatred 
Rage, bias, xenophobia...hate.. those described her perfectly. She’s known to only one form, and that appears to be a woman in ironclad armour of sorts, with eyes of unbridled hell. 

Zallmunnez: Embodiment of Apathy 
An empty, indifferent, dull being that resembles a generic shadowy figure, it won’t care about anything...not even itself. 

Kavorera: Embodiment of Vengeance 
A spirit who knows nothing but a need to install raging justice upon those who “wronged” it of its pride, a vengeful being. 

Thozrennach: Embodiment of Doubt 
Pessimism at best, that best describes it, not to much is known about this demon just yet

Ralgumor: Embodiment of Malice 
The second strongest of the evils, as it’s just that..evil, no other reason than for the sake of it, all sadism and masochism, can be compared to madness 
 
Xekuth: Embodiment of Ignorance 
Stupidity, the greatest root of all evil, for evil mistakenly thinks it’s better, there right and everyone’s wrong, thinks it’s the hero… but there not and never will be


So with all that in mind, who should be the most deadly of the twelve, I’ve been thinking Azramol since deception can lead to one of these sorts of things, but hey that’s just me, what do you think?So as I’m getting ready to publish my YA fantasy, I decided I’d torture myself by googling the names on the map I made. 

I want to call my country Arborea, and Google tells me Arborea is already a town in Italy, a sustainable food corporation, and a demiplane in DnDs Forgotten Realms. 

I feel like there’s some wiggle room with the first two, but would naming my world after a DnD demiplane with presumably tons of its own lore, be A) a bad idea, or B) illegal? 

My understanding of DnD is that it pretty much lives in the minds of those who play, like none of it is necessarily copyrighted to an original source, even though guidebooks and stuff exist, what’s in them is intended for widespread use. There are podcasts and series and DnD related books who make money for the creator off use of the source material, so if I name my country the same as one of the lesser known demiplanes in DnD, am I within my rights to do that?

Like who even knows how many Avalon’s and Albany’s there are in fiction, so I’m praying there’s some leniency in naming my continent something that already exists. 
 
Taken from the Wiki:
> Arborea, sometimes referred to as Arvandor or Olympus based on the two major factions that make their home on this plane and was first introduced to Dungeons & Dragons in the Manual of the Planes (1987) and was originally introduced as Olympus. It has gone through several name changes across the various editions with none seemingly able to agree on an appropriate name.

So I feel like Arborea is more of a footnote in DnD with many other favoured named. 

Thoughts?&#x200B;

[the Axiom of Existence and the Axiom of Force](https://preview.redd.it/om6aolzp74h81.png?width=822&format=png&auto=webp&s=4a1d1203e41682793409d8b37c0b2de41e92222b)Obviously this answer will vary for people. Personally, I do a lot of research as I write, due to a lot of my cultures having direct correlation to the real world in some way. But I wanted to know what you guys do.

How much do you research? What's your process? Is it fun? Is it for subjects you enjoy, or is it usually just to make things make sense? Do you research to make things believable, or just to make something fun seem possible?Idea for a novel that will seem similar to Redwall, Watership Down but more young adult to adult like The Builders.
I plan to build the world in a similar fashion to Clans that are enveloped in a warrior society.
Male and Female Hummingbirds can and will join the warrior caste known as the Humgalri.
Their society is one of combat and the clans are in constant conflict over territory and feeding rights to flowers.
I have drawn maps and I have developed culture for my little world which will feature no humans.
They have a culture that is a mixture of Aztec and japanese but is very much their own as I have added plenty of actual hummingbird traits.

I have not fully decided on the idea of placing weapons in my world such as swords and what not, which I have came up with two ways the little jewels could use said weapons. One being a hollow like sword that slides over their bills.
But still throwing around the idea they are weaponless.

I have also drawn armor for my little birds that would be created from pine needles and spider webs.

There is also a fighting style without a weapon known as Qa- Yan a fighting style that focuses on the hummingbirds natural gifts.

I've got more ideas and would love to have some folks to bounce some ideas off of and some questions and thoughts.I'm trying to create a global capital of Earth but I don't the things that a global capital needs, anyone knows what a global capital needs?Do you have any species whose head and torso are a singlular unit, instead of being divided by a neck? And, what are they like? Feel free to elaborate as much as you can about their biology, culture, technology, abilities, etc. You can even list multiple examples. First, I will start out with an example:

The Viphans are the native sapient species of the planet Viphus. They have 8 long tentacles that substitute for limbs, as all of their vital organs are located in their large skulls. Viphans are able to communicate by plugging the silicon ends of their tendrils into the holes in the skulls of fellow Viphans. This also lets them communicate with electrical systems, treating them like they're extensions of their bodies, and being able to gather and store information from computers, before giving it to other Viphans or computers. Due to this, Viphans are valuable hackers.

Tell me about your cephalothoraic species in the comment section below.What was the most bloodiest, brutal, gory and high casualty war in your world’s/universe’s history? How many died in the conflict, how did it begin, and how many factions or groups participated in the war. Also how did the war affect the world as a whole and what were some major events that happened during the conflict?I have many plans for this world. So far I've made some history, and facts about the first creature. But I don't want my world to leave a sour imprint. I'd like tips to make it more believable.

I wrote 3 pages of lore about the Lusaiik which are people made of mushrooms.

The 2 key people I mentioned in the pages were 
1. The Baak king Lagh, who united the 2 halves of baak in the past 300 years
2. Gallahkhg Lurt. Who was the first priest that wrote their religious books.My story is set in the future, and I'd like to have linguistic drift play a role. I'm still writing in modern "English" because it's easier and more accessible. However, the entirety of the languages in the story are all descendants from a form of "English". Certain concepts and features of history did not make it to the present of the story. Castles are one of those things. People don't know about the middle ages or any of that history. It is lost.

But, they have built "Castles", or stone fortresses using early iron/steel technology for the purposes of protecting nobility. The closest concept they would have would be "Fortress" as a form of the Bible survived and thus many things in the Bible would be connected to their past source. So Barracks and Garrison are fine.

They probably would invent a new word that means "castle" but with a new origin.

Cultural alterations through word usage plays an interesting role in the work.

If I use the word "Castle", the reader won't realize the word didn't make it.

If I use "Fortress", it might present misconceptions about what they are referencing. I suppose I could call it a "Stone Fortress" or "Stone Fort" but I'm still iffy.

If I use a completely new word, I run into risk of accessibility.

I want to use "Castle" but I can't use "Castle"... what would you do?For those who don’t know, wet bulb temperature events occur when heat and humidity reach a level (~95 F and humidity) where the body can no longer perspire, causing death even in healthy young people. I’d also be happy to see examples from established authors/worldbuilders that you all know of, and obviously real world solutions are relevant as well.sorry if this is phrased badly, but i'm quite curious!

many settings take the creatures from our myths- dragons, vampires, fey, etc- and make them real. But i haven't really seen any settings which consider what creatures take their place within that world's mythology and culture- even a world with dragons would have stories of creatures that are purely fictional.Hi, there! I’m writing an ABO story (short for alpha/beta/omega) and I’m looking for help with naming the stages of a second puberty.

The short version of ABO is that it is an alternate universe genre in which people have secondary sexes after the primary male or female sexes. I use the term “genera” (singular and plural) to refer to these secondary sexes. Think of it as a type of sexual polymorphism.

The hallmark of this second puberty is manifestation, which is the development of genera characteristics that occurs after the differentiation stage during the primary puberty. Differentiation is essentially identifying which future genera an individual will have.

Here’s a script of what I’m looking for:

> Following differentiation during puberty, an alpha/omega manifests and begins their [X]. After the period of nascency, [X] continues for approximately three years, called [Y]. When [Y] is complete, an alpha/omega is fully [Z].

Words I’ve thought of, but unsure if they fit:
- X Metamorphosis
- Y Chrysalis
- Z Metamorphosed/metamorphic/manifested

I’m also trying to think of a term that can refer to either an alpha or an omega. Since the in-word population is about 65% beta, the remaining 35% of alpha/omega is important to the hierarchy of the society.

Suggestions are appreciated. Thanks!I've been wanting to make my latest set of sapient aliens cave-dwellers, or at least cave-dwelling in origin, and so I need to make the world I put them in have a number of or one *especially* long-lasting, expansive and stable cave ecosystem. This is where I've run into problems, because as far as I can tell, the known ways to support a cave ecosystem either a: will wear down the types of caves likely to have that sort of support a bit too quickly for the ecosystem to truly develop; or b: aren't capable of providing enough of an influx of energy to the ecosystem of a large (and preferably deep) cave.

&nbsp;

Sure, I could have a simple, classic limestone cave with a river bringing in organic materials from outside, but that seems likely to be rather unstable as a food source, and not capable of feeding a reasonably expansive ecosystem in a large enough cave. A river, as I understand it, would also wear down any caves formed from easily dissolvable materials relatively quickly, eventually destroying them.

&nbsp;

Chemoautotrophy seems interesting as a source of food that effectively originates inside the caves themselves, but one of the more obvious materials to base it on, sulfur, would also result in solutional/karst caves wearing down quickly (for a cave, which admittedly is still a long time, but I'm not quite sure if it'd be long enough for the species to develop\*) via sulfuric acid being generated.


Lava tubes seem like they're a bit more sturdy in terms of potential for lots of them stacked on top of each other to form a long-lasting, won't-be-eroded-to-nothing cave system than karst caves, and with just a bit of tweaking of the world's gravity could plausibly get decently large\*\*, but getting sulfur *into* them seems like it'd be a lot harder. Forms of chemoautotrophy that do occur in lava tubes don't seem to be capable of supporting much.

&nbsp;

If anybody has additional information on these cave ecosystem energy sources that might make them more viable, ideas for alternate energy sources for the ecosystem, or other methods of cave formation that might result in reasonably large caves, I'd be very appreciative.

&nbsp;

\* Although the cave ecosystem eventually collapsing could potentially provide a reason for the species to be forced into a new environment in such a manner that survival based on intelligence would be encouraged, but that still feels a bit iffy in terms of survivability of the initial change of ecosystems.

&nbsp;

\*\* Comparing Earth's lava tubes to those of the moon and Mars suggests stable lava tube size scales up roughly cubically as the strength of gravity goes down, so the 15 meter maximum diameter on Earth becomes a 100 meter maximum diameter on a world with gravity that's only 50% of that on Earth.The old tropes kinda bore me, I like stuff like the races from Kenshi, Songs of Syx, Odd Realm, and some from the most recent posts from bazgoblin and Puzzled Raspberry. Are there any other forms of fantasy media with unique fantasy races or do you have some of your own to share?Humans have warning symbols for deer crossing, radiation, biohazard etc. What warning symbols are used in your world?Point of Divergence: 1752

Change: When electricity is invented by Benjamin Franklin, it’s discovered alongside it the existence of magic.

[View Poll](https://www.reddit.com/poll/spjl7m)I typically use Mass Effect music, especially Andromeda's. But Mirror's Edge Catalyst has some really great ambience too, I use it for homework as well. For more specific songs I like Space Echo by A.L.I.S.O.N, and Nostromo by Synthwave Goose (good if I'm building up for a battle or something). Synthwave Goose also have Blade Runner 2049 which is great. HOME also has a bunch. I also like mary magdalene by FKA Twigs, it works for me.

&#x200B;

The issue is that I've used these so much that they've become a bit stale, and listening to Mass Effect music just reminds me of the games too much. Any other good recommendations for some sci-fi music to help with world building?After failed colonisation and terraforming, humanity has United under a futuristic Roman republic. The Terran Res-publica dominates the core worlds using a military force of superhumans, and according to legend: psychics. Lo is chief amongst these psychics, a supercharged human who can detonate spinal cords with a thought, a merciless yet brilliant Titan of intelligence and haunting beauty, wealthy beyond belief and maintaining celebrity status, he is preparing to celebrate his 23rd birthday with his fiancé until High command issue that Lo is obsolete, his genius, power, and psychic fury are now outdated by the weaponised terraforming citadels, furthermore, Lo has been framed, in connection to wrongful use of his powers to selfish and illegal acts On Terra and is excommunicated. Cast into a galaxy of people he used to punish, and with no hope of return. Lo must now rebuild, and form a new identity, and ask himself the question: beneath the helmets, masks, and cybernetic implants, beneath world shattering psychic resonance, who is Lo, and more importantly, will he like who he is?


I reworked the plot of my old idea, should be a lot more distinct now. What do you think?Milk is highly nutritious but spoils fast. What techniques have your people developed to make it last? Were you inspired by any real world cheeses or dairy products? If they don’t have dairy animals, do they make another kind if curd like tofu? How do they eat cheese? Would people in the real world like it?

Consider these questions as prompts. You don’t need to answer all or any of them directly, just tell me about the cheese!So I’ve been developing a world for quite some time now, with the usual orcs and elves and all that, but im stuck on what time period or more accurately, what technological era should my world be in.
I want it to be at least 1820s to 1910s but im not quite sure where to have my world be at in a technological senseSay I'm a tourist coming to your capital city,  I tap you on the shoulder and ask "What is there to do around here?"I have a planet that's a gas giant and its about 2 AU from its star the same as the sun about twice the size of earth in radius and i was wondering if it was possible for the planet to have a greenish or pinkish colour.I'm thinking that the base should be within an asteroid as depicted here: [https://www.orbitbooks.net/2312/](https://www.orbitbooks.net/2312/) 

Being inside an asteroid would keep it from being spotted visually but more importantly protect the occupants from harmful cosmic radiation. Assume it's a very hard sci-fi universe, so 'magical' tech that cannot be accomplished by real-world science, like holograms, are out. 

It would need to generate artificial gravity by being a centrifuge, be self-sufficient when it comes to food and oxygen (a supply line would ruin the 'hidden' part I think), and also have the infrastructure necessary to ensure a certain quality of long-term living on board. 

What else am I missing? Failsafes? Power generation? And how to keep all of this hidden?I had one of these experiences last night and I legit feel like it could be a series (plus one of the coolest dreams I’ve had in a long time). I’m definitely gonna work on the characters and hopefully integrate it into my personal project.

Edit: For example, James Cameron got his idea for Terminator from a fever dream in Rome.In your world how do you portray Fauns and/or Satyrs?
What is their culture like? 
What is their relationship with humans and other beings?
Do they have magic, if so how do they use it?I’m talking racism, homophobia, drug addiction, slavery, human trafficking, etc. What’s the unsavory underbelly of your world, and did it get to be that way?So in my fantasy setting there are multipleplanets that are connected via stargate like magical doors. One of the planets is entirely covered in oceans but about 70% of that ocean is covered in swimming forests. Since there are no landmasses, and tree continents change shape via currents regularly, how would one go on mapping this planets swimming continets?  Previous Episodes:

1. [Char](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/snt293/exotic_biology_episode_10_char/)
2. [Nicar](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/r3wnyf/exotic_biology_episode_9_nicar/)
3. [Coal](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/r2zkhu/exotic_biology_episode_8_coal/)
4. [Still](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/r29dgw/exotic_biology_episode_7_still/)
5. [Snowball](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/r1oh5g/snowball_biology/)
6. [Opal](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/qz1k1i/opal_biology/)
7. [Rust](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/qyhi1t/rust_biology/)
8. [Vitrium](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/qxrzwb/vitrium_biology/)
9. [Blue Crystal](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/qpprqw/blue_crystal_biology/)
10. [Cannonball](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/qox5r1/cannonball_biology/)

Oxio is a small world, slightly larger than Mercury, orbiting a super-Jovian planet. Despite its small size, which leads to rapid loss of internal heat, tidal heating of the upper mantle provides energy to support continuing tectonic and volcanic activity. Due to its small size, Oxio is unable to retain water, and is only marginally large enough to retain gaseous nitrogen. Combined with extensive volcanic activity, this has led to the loss of more common volatiles and concentration of heavier sulfur compounds on the surface. The atmosphere is composed primarily of sulfur dioxide, with trace amounts of nitrogen, carbon dioxide, phosgene (carbonyl chloride), carbonyl fluoride, argon, and xenon. The average atmospheric pressure is approximately 1.5 bars, but this varies considerably with temperature as sulfur dioxide evaporates or rains out. Surface temperatures average just under 0 Celsius.

Sulfur dioxide also forms salty oceans on Oxio, and acts as the biosolvent. SO2 is a polar solvent, like water, ammonia, and sulfuric acid, but it is aprotic, and does not support electron solvation like ammonia. Oxionic life instead produces charge gradients via a combination of intramolecular electron conduction, as occurs on Blue Crystal, pumping of sodium, chloride, and fluoride ions. The salt content of the oceans, however, is critical to Oxionic life for more than just supplying electrolytes for energy transfer and signaling. Secondly, salts improve the solvent properties of SO2, forming associations with many different macromolecules to improve their solubility. Thirdly, while small quantities of hydrogen are biovailable in the form of dissolved hydrochloric, hydrofluoric, and sulfuric acid, it is a relatively rare trace nutrient, with carbon-chlorine bonds, and carbon-fluorine bonds, and polar nitrile groups replacing most of the functions played by hydrogen in water and ammonia-based chemistries. While some autotrophic organisms rely entirely on capturing atmospheric carbonyl halides to construct halogenated organics, several classes of microbes retain ancient chlorinase and fluorinase enzymes which convert halogen cations and organic anions into halogenated organics, forming new carbon-halogen bonds.

Photosynthesis is oxygenic, with oxygen sourced from carbon dioxide, carbonyl halides, and sulfur dioxide. Oxygen is not released as gas into the atmosphere, however; some freed oxygen is re-used to form sulfate ions, but the majority is converted into solid sulfur trioxide. Single-celled autotrophs generally eject the resulting crystals, contributing to the formation of sulfur trioxide sands, but complex multicellular autotrophs simply store the crystals as they grow, partially re-using them as a stronger source of oxidative power than the liquid sulfur dioxide.

Since sulfur dioxide is itself an oxidizer, most single-celled organisms simply use their own biosolvent directly as an oxidizer for aerobic respiration, producing carbon dioxide, carbonyl halides, small quantities of water, and elemental sulfur as waste products. Eventually, excreted sulfur will react with trioxide sands to regenerate new sulfur dioxide, but of course there are specialized chemosynthetic organisms which acquire energy by catalyzing this process.

The ubiquity of oxidative power in the Oxionic biosphere (wherever there is liquid to support life, there is also oxidizer) means that anaerobic respiration and fermentation are almost entirely unknown on Oxio. Additionally, there is very little pressure to use alternative oxidizers, like phosphates or nitrates. Even on Earth, phosphate reduction is an exceptionally rare metabolic strategy; phosphate is a rare but critical nutrient, being necessary for forming membranes and genetic molecules and in energy transfer, so it is almost never advantageous to waste it on energy production. All of that is also true for phopshate on Oxio, as well as for nitrate; no evidence of either phosphate or nitrate breathing organisms has yet been found. The Oxionic nitrogen cycle is thus very similar to the Oxionix and Earthling phosphate cycles, wth nitrogen remaining in bound forms as it cycles through the ecosystem. A small ecological influx of new nitrogen and phosphorus are provided by weathering of phosphate and ammonium-bearing minerals.

Animal-analogs, complex multicellular heterotrophs, on Oxio rely on sulfur trioxide to support their high-energy metabolisms. Conveniently, eating plant-analogous complex autotrophs provides that source of oxidizer, stored as crystals in plant-analog cells, in the same package with other food molecules. Animal-analogs can also sometimes be seen eating trioxide-rich sands, similar to Earthling animals seeking out mineral salt-licks, although for very different underlying reasons. (Incidentally, terrestrial creatures on Oxio will also seek out salt-licks, for the same reasons as Earthling animals.) Trioxides are converted by the digestive system into dioxides and sulfate ions for internal transport. Oxio is thus yet another world which has produced animal-analogs which have no need to breathe; however, they \*do\* still require a pressurized atmosphere to prevent their bodily fluids from boiling! When oxidizer supplies are low, animal-analogs can engage in dioxide respiration, producing elemental sulfur as waste, as a functional equivalent to anaerobic respiration. Just as humans cannot survive long without oxygen, however, there are strict limits on how long Oxionic animal-analogs can survive without a refreshed supply of sulfates (via ingestion of trioxides) to clean up intracellular sulfur waste.

The atmosphere of Oxio is extremely and acutely toxic to humans, and water and gaseous oxygen are similarly toxic and structurally damaging to Oxionic life. However, a simple drysuit, oxygen mask, and warm clothing are all that are required for human presence on the surface. Additionally, the relatively low pressures and clement temperature ranges suited to Oxionic life makes offworld transport of biological specimens fairly straightforward.Unified   planets are definitely one of the most common tropes in Sci-Fi and   nowhere does this happen more than Mars. I might not have read the right   books or watched the right films but I've never seen Mars divided up   into states. It's always been  a unified planet.

A   unified Mars is always strange to me because there will be thousands  of  independent factions coming to the red planet. Not all of them will   have the same idea for what the planet should be.

Whilst   geography on Mars might not be important right now. The future of Mars   would be dependent on the geography. Even if terraforming isn't   possible, the idea of it coming to fruition might divide the planet by   sea level and other potential features. Colonies might pop up in   'coastal' regions or along rivers.

Simulations   of weather patterns would determine what the biomes could be and give   greater importance to those areas. Different simulations give different   results, which means people would want a terraforming to occur at   different stages.

The people who   came last or who were weaker would be forced to settle undesirable   regions that would become deserts or end up underwater if Mars was   terraformed. There could even be phantom borders along these 'rivers' or   on 'islands'.

So, I'm curious what your concepts are for a Mars that is divided up between independent states, factions and organisations.

* Who were the original settlers?
* Where are the settlements on Mars?
* Are they still loyal to their sponsors on Earth or are they wholly independent?
* Literally anything else you think would be interesting about this concept.

*You can find the original* [r/SciFiConcepts](https://www.reddit.com/r/SciFiConcepts/) *thread* [*here*](https://www.reddit.com/r/SciFiConcepts/comments/sp909q/what_are_your_concepts_for_a_multinational_mars/)(1) What's it called?

(2) What provisions does it make?

(3) Who enacted it and why?

(4) Was it controversial? Why or why not

(5) Has it been amended or repealed? How?Lately, I have been doing a thing where when I listen to a song, I try to do some worldbuilding using its lyrics. 

For example, from the lyrics to "You'll never leave Harlan Alive", I made up a town where people have been enslaved to work the mines since decades and there are now fully grown adults who have never seen the sun.

Another example, from the opening theme of True Detective season 1, "Far from any road", I made up a monster - a lone tree on the middle of the desert. If you sit beneath its shade, it will traps you and absorbs all your blood. 

Do any of you have any similar practices? What are some of your favorite songs that could be used to worldbuid?So I'm using Rime of the Frostmaiden and Storm King's Thunder to create an overarching campaign and my own storyline. I'm using DND history and lore from various points in the timeline to flesh out my specific world, but am having trouble making everything really fall into place and click.

**Basic Outline and Major Players:**

**Slarkrethel**: Ancient kraken who seeks divinity. Leader of the kraken society and one-time consort of Umberlee. 

**Auril**: The Frostmaiden, at one point she encroached on Umberlee's domain by trying to freeze the waters, so Umberlee and a couple of other gods sought to overthrow her, until she had to retreat to the material plane, a sanctuary in Toril. This is where she is now.

**Netheril**: Last great human empire. Very advanced magic. Almost broke the Weave, which resulting in the destruction of the empire. One of their cities vanished into the Shadow Plane. It eventually returns at some point and they try to re-establish the Netherese Empire (this is what I'm going to have happen in my world, because there's a lot of references to relics and lichs from this time, and the end of Rime takes place in a Netherese ruin).

So basically, the story is all taking place because Slarkrethel wants to achieve divinity. The reasoning for the events of the campaigns taking place feels a bit shaky... essentially it's just him causing chaos to force the gods to intervene and give him a chance to take over.

So, essentially I'm taking the events of 'Rise of Tiamat' as a base to launch the story. Annam the Giant God is pissed because the giants were complacent and let Tiamat almost return, dragons are mad because they were stopped. The Ordning breaks, and Iymrith sees this as an opportunity to establish dragon power again by ending the Dragon-Giant war once and for all. Slarkrethel helps because he knows a war between the two would cause chaos all over Faerun, and he's the one who seeds the idea in Iymrith's head to begin with. 

Now, I'm going to have the party start in Icewind Dale because it can help with foreshadowing and seed some ideas so everything doesn't feel quite as random. Essentially they stay there until a frost giant attack occurs at one the cities. They are looking for the Ring of Winter because they serve Auril (in the sourcebook they are looking for it as well, but for another reason). Slarkrethel tells Auril that getting the Ring will give her the power she needs to be able to resist the other gods and return to the diving plane she once resided in.

Cue the events of SKT, giant attacks all over the continent, part figures out it's due to Iymrith's influences, they defeat her, etc. There will be references to Netheril during the campaign in some form or another.

At some point, in the background, the floating Netherese city will return in the Southeast of the continent, and that's when part 2 will really kick off. At the same time, Slarkrethl's Kraken Society manages to get a hold of the Ring of Winter and deliver it to Auril, kicking of events of RotF. 

The return of Netheril essentially brings another god, Mystra, into play because she had to sacrifice herself last time in order to stop the Weave from breaking due to the Netherese messing with magic too much (was resurrected). So this all culminates in having an ancient, powerful city returning, multiple gods on the material plane (Mystra, Auril, maybe Umberlee because she notices the winter getting harsher and harsher?, and also perhaps Lolth the Underdark goddess because RotF has Auril using Duergar to do her bidding, which could annoy her). In RotF, causing the everlasting winter weakens Auril, to where she can be killed by mortals. I was thinking maybe this is what Slarkrethel uses to take her place/ascend? Or maybe Umberlee coming into play and taking her place since she's goddess of the oceans, which makes more sense for him?

That's where I'm at right now. I would like there to be threads making it all a bit more connected but am not sure what to do. Some questions I'm stuck on:

1. Connecting the story of STK with Part 2. Why would he set this into play if the battle of gods in part 2 would achieve his goal? Just for chaos/having multiple plans in motion?

2. How to connect Mystra/Netheril with the other gods fighting. The only connection I could think of now is that maybe Slarkrethel promises the Netherese control of his Kraken Society once he ascends, and they accept because they are not as powerful as they used to be and so need the help. Still not a strong enough connection to make it feel satisfactory though.

If you made it this far, any help would be appreciated!!Seven Kingdoms Of Tir Iarainn


Economy

Tir Iarainn's economy remained essentially agricultural, with significant landowners' rights and serfs' responsibilities becoming codified in Tir Iarainnic law. More land was brought into production, most of it at the expense of the royal forests, to feed the rising population or to produce wool for shipment to the Empire or the neighbouring Kingdom Ard Heilige. The economy of the Seven Kingdoms was primarily agricultural. The salt mines of Allerdale Heights, stone quarries in various locations, and shipbuilding, particularly in the bigger ports, were examples of large-scale industrial enterprises.


Landscape 

The Mountains Of The Grey, a colossal Mountains that stretches for 2682.459 miles, separate the lands north of the Mountains Of The Grey from the Seven Kingdoms, a political entity that unifies the rest of the continent. Tir Iarainn is located in the far west of Ivoth and extends southwards from the northern Grannach Ice Fields For approximately 3467.251 miles. It is made up of seven distinct regions. Tir Iarainn is the most rugged region west of Ivoth, comprising the continent's tallest peaks as well as being extremely snowy and cold. Mountains, cliffs, and deep valleys characterise much of Tir Iarainn.


Flora 

A diverse range of vegetation can be found throughout Tir Iarainn. Plants can be found almost everywhere in Tir Iarainn, even in the most hostile environments. Flora like Queen's Rose, Death's Bower, and Knight's Bindweed can withstand cold and hard weather. In Tir Iarainn, there are eighteen different varieties of fungi. These can be found underground in cave networks. Eagle Windroot, once considered a delicacy, tundra cotton, an alternative to animal skins for clothing, and Blushing Stagshorn, a fungus found in many of Tir Iarainn's caverns, are all worth mentioning.

The Dragon Tulip is one of Tir Iarainn's most interesting plants. Dragon Tulip prefers to grow near fungi and water sources, and it survives on water and sunlight. The small, circular leaves of this unusual shrub are usually emerald in colour. It also produces little flowers that are dark purple, black, or crimson in colour. 


Fauna

The creatures of Tir Iarainn are said to be more ferocious and hardy than those found elsewhere in Ivoth, owing in part to the province's severe climate. Mountain Lions are the most common predators, but short-faced bears, Dire Wolves, colossal serpents, Giant Eagles, Crowned Beetles, Water-Drake, Ghouls, and Forest Gryphons are also common. Deer, rabbits, wild goats, and Ox and Bison, which are frequently herded by the Nomadic tribes of the Seven Kingdoms, are among the herbivores that they hunt. Bats, oysters, hawks, foxes, and several fish species are among the other animals.

Many of the creatures in Tir Iarainn have been domesticated. Dogs, horses, chickens, cows, and goats are among them. Tir Iarainn horses are powerful, well-balanced, and compact. Horses and horse-drawn carriages are frequently used for transportation. Both are capable of traversing difficult terrain and weather with ease.



Politics

The Seven Kingdoms is a country on the continent of Tir Iarainn ruled by the Dukes of the Seven Kingdoms, commanded by the High King who sits on the Jade Throne in Mol Veggolar, the capital city. Its name comes from a circumstance three millennials ago, when the brothers Torcull and Màrtainn, slaves from the Sunland Empire, set out to unite the kingdoms of Tir Iarainn, which at the time were divided into seven separate realms. The new kingdom formed by the two brothers is divided into seven distinct districts or provinces, with the High King or High Queen and their consort ruling over the entire province of Tir Iarainn. A Duke is in charge of each Kingdom. Following the death of the High King, a debate was held to elect a new High King. The Duke's role has shifted over time, from absolute legitimizer of a High King's power to just ceremonial recognition of the heir apparent. Disagreements over the Discussion in the Age of Glass contributed to the War of Inheritance in AOG 1945, and since then, only when the incumbent High King has had no direct heir has a debate been held.


Political Leanings 

The dominant social system in Tir Iarainn, in which the nobility received lands from the Crown in exchange for military service, and vassals were tenants of the nobles, while peasants (motif or vassals) were obligated to live on their Duke's land and give him fitting tribute, labour, and a share of the produce, ostensibly in exchange for military protection.


Laws of the seven kingdom

The Law of the Seven Kingdoms is divided into seven sections. Under state law, anyone found guilty of thievery is sentenced to short-term forced rehabilitation. While international law stipulates that anyone found guilty of blasphemy and heresy will be sentenced to long-term exile. The fifth law is regional law, which states that anyone found guilty of forming a revolt or treason will lose their civil rights, and federal law states that anyone found guilty will be sentenced to long-term forced rehabilitation. This provincial law stipulates that anyone found guilty of disturbing the peace shall receive a severe warning.


Who makes them?

Following the colonisation of the seven kingdoms by the two brothers Torcall and Martainn, the People's Affinity Union was introduced to Tir Iarainn. From the moment the Empires first arrived in the Sunland Empire, they used the People's Affinity Union. The King held all land, which was a simple but successful system.


The Benevolent Government Of Seven Kingdoms.


The central government of the Seven Kingdoms Of Tir Iarainn operated as a democratic election government and absolutism for the most period of its history, with society, notably in the Capital City Of Seven Kingdoms, being ruled by the elected officials of each state government. Each government had its own representative, whose role it was to make decisions for everyone else and guarantee that every citizen was well represented and protected. Each citizen was likewise given their own voice under this arrangement.




Culture & Society Of Seven Kingdoms Of Tir Iarainn

Society

 Tir Iarainn, built on the qualities, trust, and unity of its forefathers, this country is now one of the most prosperous in its region.
Infrastructure, longevity, and natural resources are among the country's current strengths. They do, however, have some housing and financial issues.
Tir Iarainn is a monarchical nation. There are no opposition groups to the current leadership, and this will most likely continue for decades.

The present greatest threat to the country, though, is civil war between northern kingdoms and high king of tir iarainn, which the current leadership is doing everything it can to combat. While trade is severely lacking, their industry aids in the alleviation of some of their problems.

Religion is really important to them, and it has actually made them more positive.The people of Tir Iarainn aren't particularly devout, but they do have a lot of feasts and strange customs. They live happy lives, despite the fact that public health is a problem.


Culture


Organisation

Everyone has a say in how things are run in this culture. Merchants are held in high regard. Neither gender has the upper hand. No one ever escapes their birth status.

Religion

Once a month, there are regular get-togethers. The faithful congregate in temples for passionate service during these gatherings.


Taboos

Giving red fruit as a gift is extremely disrespectful.

It is considered impolite to consume mind-altering substances.

Eating plants is said to be an indication of insanity.

Questioning authority people is seen as a show of weakness.

Greetings

In greeting, friends or family members grasp hands. Shaking hands is customary in formal circumstances.

Meals

It is customary to eat in large, multi-family or neighbourhood gatherings. At these community meals, strangers are welcome.

Design

Clothing and decorations feature stylized pictures of heroes and holy leaders.

Music

The music of Tir Iarainn features a single rhythm and a very quick pace. It's loud and has a simple harmony to it. It has a basic melody in a major key with a low pitch. It has a resonant timbre in most cases.


Who Are The People That Make Seven Kingdom Culture And Society.

 
In a time of distress, Cuileán The Wise, the second son of High King Torcull, founded the Culture and Society of the Seven Kingdoms. He devised a scheme to create a society in which no one would ever have to suffer, and in which the inhabitants of the kingdom would never be forced to feel hopeless. With this basis in place, he began a new civilization of artisans who used their hands to make beautiful things. They brought back all of their most prized possessions and memories as they developed the nation's culture and society.



Are They Human?

The Ancient Gaulene, often known as the "Early Ones," were indigenous people who lived mostly in the Sunland Empire but colonised as far as Tir Iarainn. They knew how to work with iron and believed in a pantheon of seven gods, but their beautiful spirals and interlace designs are what people remember them for. They ruled the continent for Twenty million years before the Colonists invaded from the eastern continent of the Sunland Empire.


What Are Their Races

Ancient Gaulene was a descendant of the Elves, who were recognised for having a long history and having the ability to converse with animals through magic. According to legend, they could communicate with plants, animals, and even people using their minds. Many people in Tir Iarainn have at least some Gaulene or elven blood in their veins, though this is more common among the common people.


The Social Status Of Seven Kingdoms

A High king, a noble class that includes nobles, priests, and High Princes, and a peasant class are the three social classes in Tir Iarainn Society. All of the available land belonged to the High King, who divided it up among his Dukes for their use. In turn, the Duke rented their land to peasants.


Are They Educated?

Education was only available to the privileged, and then only for boys. There were no public schools, thus those who were fortunate enough to receive an education did it either at home with a tutor or at a Pantheons Of The Seven-run school. As a result, religion influenced every subject that pupils studied. Grammar schools, monastic schools, and universities were the three types of educational institutions. Since the AGE OF GLASS in 1330, just 5% of the Tir Iarainn population has received any formal schooling. A fine was imposed on a peasant or commoner household who obtained education without the approval of the nobility.


What's Their Daily Life Like?

The majority of people lived in villages, and peasants made up the majority of the population. Feedback worked on swaths of land scattered across the community in various fields. Life could be difficult; if crops did not provide enough food, people could go hungry. Some peasants were referred to as "commoners." Peasant children spent most of their time assisting their parents with day-to-day activities like growing food, rearing cattle, and performing household chores. The lives of peasant children were difficult, and they were more susceptible to infections due to the presence of farm animals in their homes.




Religion And Magic


Religion


Religion of the Seven Divines, which includes a god and Seven minor gods. Their primary beliefs centre on sacrifices and nature, and they are frequently passed on through monthly town assemblies and collective praying sessions. The teachings of the Creed of the Seven Divines derive from antiquated books known as The Codex Of The Seven  penned by the world's first prophet in a surge of justice and the propagation of truth. Clothing, animals, and structures are used to depict the majority of their religious symbolism. Despite being a modern religion, the Creed of the Seven Divines has already split into a number of various forms, each with its own interpretation of the theological works, some of which are clearly out to exploit people.



Magic 

Arcane Conjuring was a psychic, spiritual, binding, and all-pervasive power that Conjurites revered. Arcane Conjuring Power comes from the Soul Pressure, which is made up of two complementing parts: Left Hand Sorcery, which is known for serving the melancholy's will, and Right Hand Sorcery, which is known for self-dedication to the Arcane Conjuring's will. Conjurites are those who are capable of wielding it.


Only persons who are described as "Arcane-intuitive" can use each side of the Soul Pressure. The presence of internal bacteria called Rhinoderma erythrocytes in the blood of Arcane intuitive creatures was linked to their being Arcane intuitive.
The two parts are diametrically opposed, but they complement each other by having the power to influence an element, which is important in many facets of life. There are four known Arcane Conjurings: three of them bend a specific physical element, while the fourth bends energy by interacting with matter mentally.



Science And Technology


Technology

The introduction of artillery, the invention of vertical windmills, spectacles, mechanical clocks, and considerably improved water mills, construction techniques (Unique architectural castles), and agriculture in general occurred under Tir Iarainn (three-field crop rotation).


Science

In Tir Iarainn, science included the study of nature, mathematics, and astronomy. In The Seven Kingdoms, there is herbalism, foreign speech, foreign calligraphy, and natural philosophy.




Transportation


Horses, donkeys, mules, and oxen-drawn carts were mainly reserved for royalty and the wealthier classes who could afford such luxuries, as well as more well-off traders dealing in transport products like wool, and some other Seven Kingdoms folk like knights, diplomats/envoys, and mounted troops. Travelling in Tir Iarainn took place for a variety of reasons, by a variety of people, and through a variety of techniques. Horses, carts, waggons, carriages, and ships were common modes of transportation, but many people also walked.




FYI: I don’t have a world map yet so this is all I can provide for nowDoes anyone have recommendation for sites or programs that can be used to make Wikipedia-style pages? 

I want to make pages like the ones on Wikipedia. Especially for characters, which have the photo, infobox, sections separated by headers, etc. I can't self-host anything (I saw recommendations for self-hosted wikis on here).

Any help on which site to use, or how to make a webpage like this (ie: with HTML), is appreciated

If you have any templates, it would be helpful too

Thank youAre there any real-world poisonous fruits/plants that are either, not poisonous when cooked or contain nonlethal levels of poison, that can be used for cooking?

I want to make a poison-themed cake but have something actually, but not lethally, poisonous in it, but strong enough to "taste" it fo the glaze. But I want to know if there's something in the real world I can use as a base for it. To be perfectly honest, sometimes whenever I try to write fictional dishes, I try to see if it's something that can actually be made. But a non-lethal poisonous cake is a different story.

The idea I had this for was a character who is an assassin but works as an apprentice baker, who accidentally makes a cake using one of their concoctions, but then realizes that not only is it non-lethal, it actually tastes pretty sweet. So they're trying to make dishes for a festival that *taste* poisonous, but aren't.If you were somehow teleported to your world/universe and were reborn, what would be the worst possible place, location, faction, or civilian to be born into? Please explain why it is so bad and what challenges would you face growing up in this environment.How would the world change if we banned every boat/ship and anything in that category for a year?Hello everyone! So I categorize my races into several categories for the sake of organization. I currently have physiology, culture, politics, and economics. I want you put separate sub categories in each one, specifically culture. So far I have important figures. I would like to add some more. Any help would be appreciated as always. If you guys have any ideas for the categories, feel free to tell!Like the tittle said, one of my character is this one maniac who really loves chemistry and often used chemical weapons such as a chlorine gas bombs, carbon monoxide bullet, etc.

I just wanna know what do you call that? Like for example you call someone who loves fire a pyromaniac or someone uses magic as wizard or mage and someone who uses gun a gunman or shooter. Just wonderingI couldn't find a calculus to know the minimum and maximum of how fast the moon cycle should be, and it will probably make no sense of having a cycle of, per exemple, just 7 days. Anyone knows something about this?In an America where magic and monsters are an accepted norm, Do you think things would have been different for President Lincoln on that fateful day he went to the theater? Would a cleric been able to get to him in time? Would he have had a bodyguard? Maybe a top hat of protection?Degenesis is amazing, so detailed and well done

But it's also very unique and i haven't ever seen anything with quite the same vibe/setting and since Degenesis itself is sadly getting discontinued i was wondering if anyone knew of any book/movie/any media with a similar feel to it?... living in a shady corner of your capital with access to a good portion of the population. I'm decently well off, sell a variety of substances and have thus far successfully evaded any semblance of law.

What am I most commonly selling to your denizens? What's most popular, most dangerous, and what should probably just already be legal?

Is there anything someone might ask for that even I can't get my hands on? What happens if I'm caught by the local authorities?Hello !

In my homebrew fantasy setting, i'll add some duergars in my next campaign.

Basically, they were made (with Drows) to be the evil version of Dward and Elves... I don't want them to be (stupidly) evil in a way that players can actually create one duergar character and have fun without being paranoid, stay separate from the group etc...

I'm looking for some example of lore/history and unique traits to describe them and make them appealing and interesting.

I'm reading the Mordenkainen's Tome of Foes at the moment and clearly, some things will not be on my list like "duergar characters are paranoid about the party and almost invariably exiles from their society".

**My ideas so far** : 

\- A sunlight sensitivity (not extreme to be played oustide caverns...).

\- A practical, utilitarian (and unsentimental ?) society that could put all their energy into a goal => brutal egalitarianism.

\- As dwarfs : forge master/crafting skills.

**My questions so far** : 

\- Why are they considered evil ? (because of history ? misconception ? tyranic leader ? etc...)

\- Why a supposed evil race will go to the surface (not to conquer)

\- When outside, what will differenciate them from dwarfs ? (except physical changes like hair/beard/skin).Which of the lovely little mine dwellers do you use/prefer in your worlds? The iconic little dragon men from d&d or the rodent-like candle lovers from WOW? Or do you have your own spin on kobolds?My setting is a terraformed Mars, where the radiation from a crashed Capital Ship has warped the landscape, granting great size and supernatural power to specific animals. This is my take on Kaiju. This post is to request ideas for other animals to make huge and give powers.

Gustave: A 20 meter long crocodile, uses his power over water to whip and restrain his prey.

Zeigra: a huge tiger 3.5 meters at the shoulder. He eats metal and infuses it into his pelt to become stronger and more durable. Known for being able to down mechs, he can also rust and corrode metal around him, rending his enemy's weapons useless.

Qilanxo: One of the only Kaiju friendly to humans, this giant lizard lives near one of the largest cities and sometimes protects it from attackers with her powerful forcefields.

Tyrant Bear: This immense beast is 5 meters tall at the shoulder, and can control gravity around itself, making its enemies tremble in its presence.

I've also got other ones like a huge flying jellyfish that picks people up with its tentacles, and a giant psychic sea urchin that's built under a city and eats criminals' heads. Any other ideas for animals that would be cool when scaled up would be greatly appreciated.They can control and maybe create fire, sometimes they are hot blooded and have a strong personality. Perhaps they are resistant to high temperatures and are fireproof. They can be the heroes of the story or terrying villains. Where do they come from? How can they control fire? What role do they have in your world/story? [Tell us about your pyrokinetic characters!](https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/PlayingWithFire)

Sorry for my english, it's not my first language.I’m writing this out of a bit of frustration. But I find myself constantly trying to write a fun light hearted fantasy, but then constantly trying to justify or explain what should otherwise be fantastical.

I can never seem to let myself just enjoy fantasy for fantasies sake without trying to interject some form of hard science or logic behind it.

I could write a fun fantasy race, but then try to justify their existence via a complex speculative evolutionary web leading up their existence.

It seems something far beyond worldbuilders syndrome because I honestly have no plan to write or do anything with these worlds. They’re for leisure, and yet they end up becoming complex tangled webs of justification, explanation, and half abandoned ideas. Abandoned because I get stuck on explaining the basic concept I get frustrated and move onto something else.

How do you do it? What mindset do I have to break out of? I just want to build a nice light hearted world.Regardless what exactly the position or current status of your main villain is;what is their full backstory? What are significant events that drive their goals? Where do they come from? What were they originally like prior to becoming powerful? What were some of the worst things they did prior to their rise to power? Are they naturally pure evil or do they have some sort of tragedy that made them that way?One of the main themes of the fantasy genre is magic (of course) and usually magic is always derived from some supernatural source that is almost inexplicable. I’ve been reflecting recently and I was wondering is it possible to make magic no different from a force of nature? This may sound insane at first and that is understandable given the history of fantasy. Has anyone else thought about this before? That magic in a fantasy world could operate in numerous ways on different planets via potentially “natural” means? Could certain planets with certain weather conditions make magic possible? Or what about certain natural phenomena or natural/ecological cycles lead to the rise of magic? Could genetic manipulation lead to magic? Could specific undiscovered natural forces in the universe lead to magic? An example I thought could be cool is with Dark Matter (still a unexplained phenomena today) and this type of material/substance could make possible dark magic? Science has discovered that 95% of our universe is “dark” (dark energy and dark matter) and we also only see a tiny part of the electromagnetic spectrum — who knows what crazy things are hidden in the universe. It would be interesting if some type of “magic” is possible. So, could we subvert the old school “supernatural magic” trope and potentially ground magic in the natural world in numerous ways? It doesn’t even have to be in a perfect unified holistic way but magic could operate in a diverse and pluralistic natural way with numerous types of magic all existing together that can do all types of different things.

Has anyone else ever thought about this, and if so, what are your thoughts about this. What crazy ways could it be possible to naturalise magic? I would be very interested and delighted if a healthy and fascinating discussion could be produced over this topic? Diverse views of all types can be pondered and put forward 😊.Well, i'm making a magic system  where Karma is the sorce of the powers, if you have positive karma then by gaining good karma you can use the powers and if you have negative karma the same but with negative karma, the thing is, i dont want to make every positive karma user good and every negative karma user bad and im having trouble finding a way to make the negative users good (not all of them ofc), did i dig my own grave or im just lacking in imagination? thanks for reading!Humanity develops space travel, and FTL technology. With divided solar system planets, warring colonies, and abandoned terraforming attempts, an alien warship starts decimating the planets, moving towards earth. The United Nations commission a fleet of FTL capable warships to defend earth, but they fail. A disgraced general usurps earth’s governments and installs martial law, resumes production of the ships and destroys the spaceship. Five hundred years later, the United Nations of Earth is a fascist nanny-state, who once more return to the stars, however, they find a group of planets housing an undead species of cyborg parasite. The story follows the UNE’s politics as it navigates espionage, diplomacy with other space-nations, whilst trying to keep the space zombies from spreading, and finding their supremely advanced weapons before they can convert the galaxy.Having read an article by a Dr. Albrecht, he asserts there are five basic fears we all share:

1. Extinction—the fear of annihilation, of ceasing to exist.
1. Mutilation—the fear of losing any part of our precious bodily structure
1. Loss of Autonomy—the fear of being immobilized, paralyzed, restricted, enveloped, overwhelmed, entrapped, imprisoned, smothered, or otherwise controlled by circumstances beyond our control.
1. Separation—the fear of abandonment, rejection, and loss of connectedness; of becoming a non-person—not wanted, respected, or valued by anyone else.
1. Ego-death—the fear of humiliation, shame, or any other mechanism of profound self-disapproval that threatens the loss of integrity of the self.



Can you share an example of each of these fears manifested in your world?


*P.S. I have no idea how accurate or scientifically sound his theory is but as a Worldbuilder, the breaking down of stuff into categories and neat little listed items is useful (and to me personally, fun).*So I'm keen on economy and wordbuilding at the same time and have decided to connect these two hobbys of mine, and create some realistic actual economy in one of my worlds. Any tips for that? Like, how to present all of this in a good manner, or some general tips. Thanks in advance!A thought experiment, say you got some people from the bronze age and you managed to teach them modern science and you also gave them the means by which to make modern technology. Assuming, that they handle culture shock just fine, how would you think ancient people would go about designing modern tech with the time periods design sensibilities? 

Like take for instance how people nowadays would design a car, in the 50's everything was chrome because people thought that looked futuristic and now with our modern aesthetic we tend to lean towards minimalist sleek designs because, well we also think that looks futuristic. So I guess what I'm actually asking what did people in ancient times think was futuristic.&#x200B;

[News clipping from \\"The daily Debacle\\", August 6, 1947](https://preview.redd.it/r2a8qfcbswg81.png?width=292&format=png&auto=webp&s=75ebbbea65a7f425421cf478f926ac544b3e4531)So, there is this concept, usually used in Urban Fantasy, called the "Masquerade", which is basically when supernatural communities hide themselves from the general public, so that on a superficial look the normal human society doesn't know about the supernatural. Good examples of this are the Wizarding World from Harry Potter, the trope-namer Vampires from Vampire the Masquerade, the aliens in Man In Black, and so on.   
So I'm curious about the various "masquerades" that could be happening in your own settings. I'll add a list of questions I'd like to be answered if possible:

* What supernatural/secret group is hiding?
* Why do they need to hide?
* How do they interact with the normals/muggles and their society?
* How do they enforce the masquerade?
* What happens when the masquerade is broken?

Go wild. The more details, the better for me!&#x200B;

[The First 3 axioms that are accepted fully by the universe](https://preview.redd.it/7zvil04mlxg81.png?width=482&format=png&auto=webp&s=a462fd32c69d06bf3403eba00eded941e2aa6c59)The earth only has a year and a half before life as we know it becomes extinct. Our current technology is not yet advanced enough to stop the catastrophe. But there is hope.

The simulation is a digital world where individuals can upload their consciousness, a place where a thousand years inside is the equivalent to one minute in the physical world. Allowing humanity to grow their knowledge throughout lifetimes, in under a year. 

But due to the nature of the simulation, geopolitics and human nature clash. With the scientific goals of the few, vs the panicked masses who just want to survive in anyway possible, a new chapter of human history is being typed, and the world as we know it begins again.How deep could human live under ground , not like a city more like a research bases ?In our real world, writing has only been invented a few times, and always for a reason. In case you aren't familiar with the history of writing I'll first sum those up; if you are familiar with it feel free to skip to the last paragraph. 

Babylonians originally developed their form of writing as a way to impartially keep track of transactions and business dealings and later expanded it to accommodate the needs of an impressive bureaucracy and large-scale accounting systems. 

Egypt, too, mainly invented their scripts to enable a growing administrative system keep track of an expanding number of goods, laws and people, but also developed a different script for the purpose of immortalizing the names and deeds of their people so they could live on after death. 

Mesoamerica also developed writing for the purpose of administration but unlike the aforementioned two regions, they also heavily focused on mathematics and calendrical usage - planets and stars move within such great timespans that it is simply impossible to keep track of them all and calculate their paths without writing them down. 

Ancient China on the other hand seems to have first developed writing to keep track of questions that were asked of ancestral spirits in divination rituals. I'm not sure why exactly this was done - maybe there were only certain times divination could be done, so questions were sort of "saved" until those times when they could be answered in bulk? 

To sum it up, the main reasons why writing was invented in our world have been to enable the workings of complex administrative structures, to immortalize humans and deeds, and to serve as an expansion of the human brain's computing ability when dealing with large quantities of items or people or with large timespans and complex mathematics. 

My question is: **why did civilizations/people in your worlds invent writing?** I'm really struggling with this in my own project and I think it's because writing is so ubiquitous and so ingrained into the very fabric of how we literate humans think of communication and language that it's hard to put yourself into the shoes of a people who have not made that step yet. But I know you guys are great at coming up with really interesting answers to these sorts of questions so I'm really interested to see what you all have come up with!
(Note that I'm of course not looking to steal your ideas or anything, I'm just looking for inspiration as to your approach to this issue and am curious how you all have dealt with this topic in your worlds. This post has been edited to clarify this a bit more.)Hello, I am doing research into fictional worlds for a school project.

Would you be so kind as to help me by filling out this survey

[https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSc1fXE7iPhER906ZUgEAp-E7CZApqUNOE\_mJTormrZC0ybbIA/viewform?usp=sf\_link](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSc1fXE7iPhER906ZUgEAp-E7CZApqUNOE_mJTormrZC0ybbIA/viewform?usp=sf_link)

Thank you very much.I have a civilization that lives in a small mountain village, and as a rite of passage children around the age of 10-11 dive down to underwater caves and bring back a crystal. My only issue is, I have no idea what sort of thing they’d wear for it.

This is for a comic, so it’s something I’d have to draw. I don’t care too much about what fabrics they have access to, and it’s not based around a specific time period. I just feel like a modern spandex swimsuit wouldn’t fit in.

The general feel of the fashion is fantasy, but not quite medieval europe. To be honest, I’m not entirely sure what exactly it looks like, so I’m sorry this is so vague. I don’t know if anyone would be able to help me out with such an unclear question, but if you have any advice or ideas, please let me know. Thanks so much.Hi all, 

I stated working on my own world, Keldoras. The purpose of this world is first and foremost, fun!

Second purpose is eventually a setting/sourcebook for DnD. But my main priority is a great world, DnD rules are not important right now. Having said that, I tried coming up with a unique magic system, if unique even exists, I've never seen it before at least.

So first some info on Keldoras. Keldoras is a classic fantasy DnD type setting. Medieval, including the use of magic. It has all sorts of creatures, but what makes it unique are its races. All of them are based on animals. We have the following

- Styani: red pandafolk

- Capaca: beaverfolk

- Lutra: otterfolk

- Macata: macaque folk

- Tamandua: giant anteaterfolk

- Pygathrix: Douc folk

- Anakuma: badgerfolk

Each race has its own language and culture, but they live mixed in Keldoras.
Im currently in the process of fleshing out the origin of Keldoras, been mainly working on the different races, cultures and magic.

I tried to combine 2 themes, your "generic" DnD fantasy and a more tribal look to match the races. This resulted in the system below.





So the magic system works as follows

**Archaea**

Everything in the world contains **Archaea**, which essentially is lifeforce. It runs mostly through all creatures and plant life. This Archaea is what powers the world. It runs through the veins of all plants and through the bones of all creatures. 

Within creatures the Archaea is stored in the Arch. The Arch is a bone situated directly below the brainstem. It's the center where all Archaea is stored and redistributed throughout the body. When a creature dies all the Archaea is stored back into the Archbone.

&#x200B;

**Archaeamancy**

Most races found a way to utilize the Archaea, these are called **Archaeamancers**. They can use the Archaea found in Archs to cast their spells. 

Before the Archaea in an Archbone can be used it needs to go through an elaborate ritual to harvest the full potential (ritual isn't written out yet).

But it's not without risks. While small cantrips and spells are fairly risk-free, the bigger the spell, the more Archaea is used and the higher the risk of it blowing in your face (literally).

Every Archaeamancer has a limit which they have to find themselves.

&#x200B;

There are 3 schools of Archaeamancy:

**Paleomancy**:  the art of using a creature's bones to harness the Archaea within 

**Geomancy**:  the art of storing Archaea in gems 

**Exhauriomancy**:  the art of extracting the Archaea found in living things

&#x200B;

Ill go over each one individually.

**Paleomancy**

* Smaller spells must have minimum Archaea, bones are not consumed. 
* Bigger spells consume Archaea, the Arch disintegrates as you cast the spell 
* Bones can be bitten to release a big Archaea burst. This practice is called **Crunching.** Spells cast through crunching are stronger and quicker, but also come at a higher risk.
* Paleomancers can do the following:
   * Archbones can be hanged in the house to provide protection. The slow radiation of Archaea provides a small protection ward. 
   *  Archbones can be used in divination rituals 
   * Weapons, armor, food, etc. can be infused with Archaea for various effects
   * Shapeshift into the owner of a specific Archbone
   *  Talk to (willing) owners of the Arch-bones, or make them submit with more effort 
   * Extract memories and experiences of the owner of the Arch-bones 

&#x200B;

**Geomancy**

* Infusing gems is done by **Geomancers**  
   * Storing the Archaea from a bone into a gem works like a battery
   * It is very difficult and a rare craft, not a lot of people can do this.
   *  Bones are consumed when transferred to a gem 
* Different gems can hold different amounts. 
* People can hold gems worth of multiple Archbones instead of needing to hold a load of bones
* Cities have a large gem that is used to cast a ward on the city/town/whatever  
   * These gems are guarded by a gem guard.  
      * They can use the power of the gem to empower themselves
   * Gem is used up, so the people have to keep fueling the gem.
*  Each city has bone collectors that search the country for leftover bones to bring to the city to fuel the gem 

&#x200B;

**Exhauriomancy**

* Exhauriomancers drain nature around them for their lifeforce. It's a practice that is frowned upon by many, since it destroys nature around it.  
   * Not a lot of Exhauriomancers since it's a very difficult way of extracting very little Archaea
   * Many don't like Exhauriomancers since it destroys nature
* A very rare and dangerous breed of Exhauriomancer gained access to the knowledge to extracting Archaea from living organisms. This comes with a very high risk to the user and the target organism dies when the Archaea is extracted. This is illegal in all of Keldoras. These are called **Drainers.** Draining is illegal.

&#x200B;

So a question I expect:

>Why not just go around killing everyone, harvest their bones and be powerful?

Every creature has a limit and infinite Archaea doesn't mean an Archaeamancer can also use it. So they would literally explode if they try to harness too much Archaea in one go.

&#x200B;

But I'm sure there are more that I haven't thought about. So that's where I could use some input.

Please give me all your tips, ideas, feedback and/or critique! Do you think its interesting or boring? Give me all you have, I can take it. Of course as you make a world part of that is the actual, physical world itself. its easy enough to place trees there, a river there, some animals and plants. My problems is more along the actual crust of the world itself, I find myself creating so many mountains its irritating.

Too many mountains and it feels cramped and like borders of nations are defined by thousands of mountains ranges. Too little mountains and it feels like I have vast expanses of nothing but sloped land.

I try and add elevation except I either cant place low/high elevations or cant justify why i made one area higher than the other or it feels like its just a decline from my mountains. I mean elevation will always be a steady decline from mountains but I mean it feels like I have the boring cross continental slope with not a lot of interesting highlands/lowlands.

I want to add interesting geographical things like bluffs, valleys, flatlands, highlands, lowlands, etc. but I can never find out where im supposed to place them, why I should place them there, and even then i find myself having the same issue i have with mountains with these features as well. it feels like they take up the map and I have ten million valleys and bluffs and it gets crowded.

How do I make my world interesting geographically so that I can make the forests, rivers, and people interesting? How do I place "enough" mountains so that I have resources for the world but not so much it divides it? How can I make the geography interesting in its own right so that Its easier to place biomes and give each area a specific feel to it?I've recently started work on a comic as a personal project. It's set roughly 1000 years after an apocalypse where the world has changed completely. I'm struggling to keep track of all the lore and mechanics of the world. I was wondering if anyone knew any apps that are good for world building and keeping track of everything that's happening in the world and story?
I'm using am ipad to work on so any recommendations would have to be available on the appstore.

Thank you for your help!!Do you have any ideas or suggestions for what the architecture and buildings and such of a race of humans who can fly would look like? For example, at the moment, my idea is that doors and entryways are on the roof because that's where these people usually land from. These humans have wings like an angel and basically fly around the same way we walk around with our legs. I'm trying to get a feel for what the buildings and such would look like, so any ideas or suggestions from people more adapted worldbuilding than I would be really helpful. These people have technology somewhat similar to humans due to the proximity to our world I guess. But the technology is a sort of weird mishmash of medieval and modern because there was a cataclysm 1000 years ago that set back the industrialization of that world by centuries.

&#x200B;

 Thank you to everyone who commented! This is all super helpful for me to figure everything out, so I really appreciate it! in a fantasy world im making, there is a race of beings who were essentially clone soldiers for the gods but the gods are all dead now. After being freed from their servitude, they mostly demilitarized as one cannot have a whole nation consisting of just soldiers. But they kept many aspects of their original life to be integrated into their new society. Something of note: all members of this race are non-human monogender creatures. physically their bodies are exactly the same, the only thing differing is personality, voice, and a few other aesthetic psychical features.

They have various social classes based on their old ranking system. It's a rule in society that everyone is born at the very bottom of this system. The system to advancing is determined by a massive list of feats one can accomplish. these can range from physical feats like beating someone in a duel, to more mental or social feats such as inventing something useful or making money through trading.

The idea is that everyone should be able to do most of these since all of their bodies are exactly the same, so one only needs to work for it. Some feats are worth more than others and a sort of score threshold is all that must be passed in order to advance. These feats are heavily moderated and incredibly difficult to cheat. Sure one could cheat their way through a few, but the real substantial ones are practically impossible to cheat.

the exact reason to do this is simply because the higher their standing is, the more respect and fame they will have. it's entirely possible to be the richest person on the continent and still be the lowest rank.

the very top of this system is the monarch of their society. One must complete a great majority of the feats to even attempt to get this role. Once someone has reached this point, they are able to challenge the current ruler to a contest, what the contest is can vary but the challenger is the one who picks it and the monarch has to agree to it. the monarch can refuse if they feel it is unfair or they are unable to adequately compete at the time. if the ruler loses, they are retired and unable to ever regain their position until the new one's rule is ended. then they are able to initiate the contest. Anyone who does qualify for this position but does not attempt to go for it are still usually highly respected people in their society.

Anyone who commits serious crimes can have their overall score lowered. The feats cannot be repeated once they are completed. Foreigners are not allowed to participate in this system as the mere fact they are not of this species will make doing much of the feats easier or more difficult. Instead anyone visiting this land must have someone be their "host" sharing their status with the foreigner.

what do you think of this?Some background:

The world is called Odeia, named after the body of a dead god. After roughly 5000 years the continent of Virion has recovered from a magical ice age that plunged land into thousands of years of chaos. 

The largest and oldest settlements/cities are on the coasts while the the central area (the Wilds) remains dangerous and largely unexplored. 

Tensions are high between Maren and Perth, two countries with opposing views on Magic use. Maren has long had alliances with the reclusive dragons and houses the most prestigious school of magic on virion. Perth meanwhile has rejected magic and employs the Spell Hunters, a group directly controlled by the Queen in order to root out magic and magic users. 

Other countries:
Callefaire (elven theocracy)
Atesis (agrarian)
Dunaed (hidden island of the dark elves)
Irali Desert (only large settlements are on the coast or below the Irali Mountain)My planet [Char](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/snt293/exotic_biology_episode_10_char/) came about due to thinking about the copper-chloride-solvent lifeforms of the planet Sar from Hal Clement's *Iceworld*, and my skepticism about life operating at 500C... but it has some problems of its own. Most notably, hydroxides don't really exist with geologic sources in nature, while halides do, so it's a bit of a stretch to suppose the natural existence of NaKOH lakes for life to originate in. And, well.. Hal Clement's copper chloride is just *cooler*.

Having done some additional research, it turns out that pure metals dissolved in metal halides can form phase-separated droplets, which is exactly the sort of thing you want to get compartmentalization and chemical gradients going. Metal chlorides can also form polymers with chloride bridges, which is an intriguing possibility for producing biological macromolecules, combined with dissolved metal oxides. Information on polymers that are both soluble in and stable at the temperatures of high-temperature metallic and metal halide melts is, however, still quite hard to come by. (There's lots of metallurgical data on the solubility of carbon in iron... but pure carbon and simple iron carbides aren't very interesting from a biological point of view.)

So, I decided to dig deeper into why Hal Clement might have picked copper chloride specifically. And to do that, I looked up the liquid ranges of all the metals more common in Earth's crust than copper is, and their chlorides.

For comparison, here are the stats for copper:

**Copper**  
	CuCl  
		423C to 1,490C (Decomposes)  
	CuCl2  
		498C to 993C (Decomposes)  
	Metal  
		1084.62C to 2562C

The monohalide has a pretty impressive liquid range (10 times that of water!), which entirely contains that of the dihalide, so maybe Clement was on to something. (Although I still have to wonder where the gaseous sulfur comes in in his idea of Sarian biology.)

In order of decreasing crustal abundance, the other metals are as follows:

**Aluminum**  
	AlCl3  
		Sublimes at 180C  
		Liquid up to 300C at 2467 atm, with an approximately linear vapor pressure curve up to that point  
	Metal  
		660.3C to 2,470C

So, aluminum chloride might make a decent exotic biosolvent... but only at extremely higgh pressures, if you want the liquid range to be more than a few degrees.

**Iron**  
	FeCl2  
		677C to 1023C  
	FeCl3  
		307.6C to 316C (Decomposes)  
	Metal  
		1,538C to 2,862C

Iron (III) chloride looks promising... until you realize that its liquid range is only 9 degrees, and can't be improved with pressurization, because it decomposes.

**Calcium**  
	CaCl2  
		772C to 1,935C  
	Metal  
		842C to 1,484C

Nice wide liquid range, but it's worse than copper for temperatures.

**Sodium**  
	NaCl  
		800.7C to 1,465C  
	Metal  
		97.794C to 882.94C

Nice wide liquid range, but the chloride is worse than copper for temperatures. The pure metal is intriguing, but how are you going to get lake (or even puddle) sized quantities of pure sodium in a planetary environment?  
  
**Magnesium**  
	MgCl2  
		714C to 1,412C  
	Metal  
		650C to 1091C

Nice wide liquid range, but again, it's worse than copper for temperatures.  
  
**Potassium**  
	KCl  
		770C to 1,420C  
	Metal  
		63.5C to 759C

Same situation as sodium; how would you get enough of the pure metal?  
  
**Titanium**  
	TiCl2  
		1,035C to 1,500C  
	TiCl3  
		425C (Decomposes) to 960C  
	TiCl4  
		\-24.1C to 136.4C  
	Metal  
		1,668C to 3287C

TiCl2 is way too hot; TiCL3 has a comparable liquid range to copper chloride, but is unstable as a liquid. TiCl4 is nice... but in that temperature range, there's no way it's a better option than some combination of water, ammonia, or sulfuric acid.

**Manganese**  
	MgCl2  
		654C to 1,225C  
	Metal  
		1,246C to 2061C

Even hotter than copper.

**Barium**  
	BaCl2  
		962C to 1,560C  
	Metal  
		727C to 1845C  
  
Also hotter than copper

**Strontium**  
	SrCl2  
		874C to 1,250C  
	Metal  
		777C to 1,377C  
  
Still hotter than copper

**Zirconium**  
	ZrCl3  
		627C to ?  
	ZrCl4  
		437C (triple point)  
		Sublimes at 331C  
	Metal  
		1,855C to 4,377C

Zirconium tetrachloride is liquid at slightly lower temperatures than copper chlorides... but only at some high pressure, and I couldn't actually find a full phase diagram for it. This might be like the aluminum situation... in which case, aluminum is much more common.

**Vanadium**  
	VCl2  
		1,027C to 1,506C  
	VCl3  
		Decomposes at 300C  
	VCl4  
		\-24.5C to 148C  
	VCl5  
		19.5C to 48.3C  
	V2Cl10  
		No data

Similar to titanium; something else will always be a better option.

**Chromium**  
	CrCl2  
		824C to 1,302C  
	CrCl3  
		1,152C to 1,300C (Decomposes)  
	Metal  
		1,907C to 2,671C

Hotter than copper.

**Rubidium**  
	RbCl  
		718C to 1390C  
	Metal  
		39.3C to 688C  
  
Also hotter than copper.

**Nickel**  
	NiCl2  
		1,001C to ?  
	Metal  
		1455C to 3000C

Still way hotter than copper.

**Zinc**  
	ZnCl2  
		290C to 732C  
	Metal  
		419.53C to 907C  
  
Zinc chloride seems to be the only option for a molten metal halide that is actually better than copper, in terms of having a very similar liquid range (over 4 times that of water), but at lower temperatures, closer to where we might expect organosilicon or heteropolymetalate chemistry to still be possible--and still hot enough to dramatically autoignite Earthling plant life when an alien in an environment suit tries to land on Earth. But, on the other hand... copper can occur naturally as native metal, while I don't think zinc ever does. Maybe that makes it easier for alien life to synthesize the chloride? I dunno. Kinda seems like a tossup. So, I guess Clement *was* on to something!:) I just wanna share my writings&#x200B;

[Illustration of a Slog](https://preview.redd.it/8f2nokgfotg81.jpg?width=484&format=pjpg&auto=webp&s=ae42ee1089dc979763174cb0e0619cc43f138fa4)

About

* Slogs are interstellar creatures, meaning that they only abide in outer space. And they are generally just peace loving hippies that go wherever the wind takes them.
* &#x200B;
* They live their lives by swimming around the cosmos, exploring different areas of outer space, hunting for food, and just sleeping or laying down doing nothing or frolicking.
* &#x200B;
* They sleep on asteroids and can even sleep in outer space, just floating there.
* &#x200B;
* Slogs migrate a lot because they love swimming around through the cosmos. And they can even travel out of their universe and enter others.
* &#x200B;
* They also love playing with one another, and do this by poking each other in the nose, or just hugging each other. This is also how they show affection to one another. And even when they have conflict, they settle it by showing affection towards each other.
* &#x200B;
* They are also partly metaphysical, and have an awareness of what’s happening in planes of existence beyond their own. This awareness also gives all Slogs a psychic connection with each other across space and time, meaning that they can see into the past, and into the future. They normally use this to stay out of danger.
* &#x200B;
* Whenever Slogs are together or within close proximity of each other, their metaphysical senses become stronger and even more hightened.

&#x200B;

Info

* Family: Nomanic
* &#x200B;
* Lifespan: 100 - 1000 years
* &#x200B;
* Habitat: Outer space, asteroids
* &#x200B;
* Descendants: Pilgridge, Guardn’er
* &#x200B;
* Diet: Smaller creatures, cosmic fruits, veggies
* &#x200B;
* Threats: Bigger and stronger interstellar creatures

&#x200B;

Origins

* Slogs are said to have evolved from an ancient, shapeless, blob-like species. They are believed to have evolved from this species by gradually forming limbs for themselves suitable for interstellar travel, until they eventually became a shape that they were content with.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

Next Creature Biography will be out next week, stay tuned for that. In the meantime, here are my other Creature Biographies: [https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/sauot5/guardner/](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/sauot5/guardner/)

[https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/ski61c/character\_bio\_weaver/](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/ski61c/character_bio_weaver/)

[https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/s6fnin/creature\_biography\_pilgridge/](https://www.reddit.com/r/worldbuilding/comments/s6fnin/creature_biography_pilgridge/)