**AskMenOver30** is a place for supportive and friendly conversations between over 30 adults.

**You do NOT need to ask a question** to post a new thread on **AskMenOver30**

**Women** are **completely** welcome to fully participate.

**People under 30** are welcome if they are on board with keeping the discussion enjoyable to the over 30 crowd.

If you make top level comment and you are not a man over 30, you must indicate your gender and approximate age in your answer.


**[Rules:( click here for an explanation of why each rule  exists )](https://www.reddit.com/r/AskMenOver30/about/rules/)**

1.   No relationship or dating posts.
2.   No medical discussions.
3.   No political threads
4.   No discussions of how the subreddit is run -> contact the mods in private
5.   No advertisements or self promotionals( YouTube channels, web sites, etc )
6.   Links to academic surveys are allowed. Post and wait to be approved. Do not contact the mods.
7.   Ageist, racist, sexist or other bigoted content is not permitted.
8.   Non-hostile and Polite content only - not a platitude, you will get banned for violating this rule
9.   Deleting threads as a regular practice will get you banned.
10.  Your account must be at least 3 days old,have at least 0 comment karma.
11.  YouTube links must have 1-2 lines of text for context (What it is, why people want to see it ).
12.  No memes or reaction gifs.
13.  No NSFW posts.
14.  Alt-right, antivax, MGTOW, RedPill, FDS, and posters on similar subjects are not welcome here.
15.  Follow Reddit [site-wide rules](https://www.redditinc.com/policies/content-policy)


[XKCD - Understand What Free Speech Is Not](http://xkcd.com/1357/)


**Got A Problem?**

* use the  **report** link under every post.  **All** reports are read by the moderators.
* send a description with the **report** for best results.  It isn't always clear what the problem is

# Contact the mods with this link: [message the mods](https://www.reddit.com/message/compose?to=%2Fr%2FAskMenOver30) 

- The mods have turned off their personal inboxes and they have turned off chat requests.



**Choosing Flair As A Mobile User**

*  Do a one time visit to AskMenOver30 on a PC or Mac and visit the side bar on the right.

---

*Last updated 2021 December 10*

---I'm 33 and I'm feeling it now - physically, mentally and socially. 
Moving a furniture seems to be a big task nowadays. Before few years it was so easy. 
I'm more worried about change these days - like changing place, company or type of work. 
Rejections and disrespects are hurting a lot more than they used to.
It is hard to find a good song these days,  or movies that I can relate to, or the athletes to whom I could idolise. 

Did it happened with you as well ? Or it is yet to happen ?So I'm 32 M and like my title states, I feel as if time is flying by at alarming rates. I was just sitting here watching season 2 of raised by wolves. I paused because I realized I needed a recap of season 1. When I googled I then realized season 1 came out the end of year 2020 and my heart stopped for a minute. I literally just watched that season "when it was released" what seems like maybe 6 months ago maybe a year at the most. I can not fathom that time has flown by that rapidly. It seems like ever since 2015 time has started flying very very fast. It also seemed like that year there was a shift in the world or maybe the universe. It felt much darker, the workd seemed much darker to me. I'm not the only one who feels this way. I've had others bring it up to me and we discuss it. It seems like maybe we had some shift with another universe very similar to ours. I know it sounds insane but I can't figure out another answer. The world I know would never elect a reality TV show host to be president of the United States. People seem so emotionless and cold now. Everyone seems distracted mentally. Everything just feels off. But most importantly time is going by so incredibly fast. 2 years seem like nothing now. I know people say as you get older times speeds up but this is more than that. Does anyone else feel similar or have anything add to what I'm saying? Thoughts?I'm (25) soon going to move out, I would be happy to read your experience on it and what comes after. Thank you!I'm not exactly an old man yet, but I definitely feel like my 20s were wasted. Not just because I wasn't in good shape, but that's certainly part of it. 

Thanks to a lot of discipline with food and weightlifting, I finally feel good about how I look. My mind still hasn't registered that I have visible abs. 

But whenever I think about my accomplishments, I can't help but think how nice it would have been to accomplish them earlier. That way I'd have more time to enjoy the benefits of those accomplishments.To me it is a piece of internet history and a cult classic. I don't think it was ever that popular though. It was very quirky and probably not for everyone.I have three children. They are just about to start a multitude of activities and sports at school and otherwise. Just wanting input from the guys in this sub that are finished the parenting years. What type of experiences were best for you and your kids? Unique activities or sports or social circles to get them into. Anything else you might recommend.35M South Asian. Have a head full of dark black hair. However, the hairs have started greying. ~10% of head would have turned grey. Don't want to look old. Is hair color to only effective option. Don't want to go bald. Men who use hair color, any suggestions?I'm hoping this is something many people go through, but right now I have zero insight into where to go next.

I've largely accomplished what I set out to do as a kid / teen.  I moved to the city I wanted across the country, bought the car / place to live I dreamed of, work in the industry I wanted, have a beautiful fiance and dog - the works!

I'm just finding it so difficult to map out the next move in life.  Continuing this work/weekend cycle for 20 years (and throwing in kids to the mix) sounds ... less than ideal.

Have any of you encountered something similar before?  What'd you change / do?Gentleman I would like to setup a little mini bar / cart in my apartment when I have guests over I can quickly mix a refreshing drink. Could be for friends and for when a date comes over.

So far I have a bottle of dry gin and some slightly flavoured tonic water (fever-tree). 

I’d appreciate any suggestions for drinks that are quick and easy to make.Like, if someone was truly hurting and upset and messed up and starting to lose control, should they reach out and admit it? Or just try and figure it out on their own? Answer might seem obvious here, but some part of me is concerned about having friends forever see you as messed up/weak/out of control. Thanks.Just turned 30. Single. Been in corporate sales for 3 years. Finished uni at 22. Worked part time until 25. Full time ever since with weekend work on my second job to save up money. Been in Business to Business corporate sales since 27 in Saas and Fintech. Since turning 30 my motivation for sales and the money has diminished and I think I am mentally burnt out.  Anyone else made the career change at 30? I feel strong anxiety as my work performance has suffered and Im close to being fired and feeling directionless on where to go from here.

Really need some advice. The anxiety is making me feel sickHi guys,

I have therapy starting soon, which is limited to 1 hour a week because it's accessible for many people. 

How do i approach it? I was thinking of writing a document that either:

1. analyses the different key problems in my life OR
2. goes through the past 7 years of my life year by year

This is just so I save time and money by introducing myself to my therapist.

Some of the key problems: losing father at 18, going to a top high school on scholarship and failing, resorting to crime to make money, slight PTSD from threats and kidnap attempts, being hospitalised for a month after threats which caused psychosis, gaining 100 pounds (50kg) due to psychosis medication following from being hospitalised, lack of sex life and going to hookers.

I don't want to use therapy as a place to just victimise myself. I really just need a professional safe space for me to come to terms with myself as I grow in life. I am worried that 1 hour only might not be enough. However the other options will be 4/5 times the price. 

How do i approach this? How do i know if this therapist is working for me? Do you guys think therapy is a worthwhile investment towards improving my mental health and habits in the future?

Thank you for any feedback!I’m a 38 male and before the pandemic I lived in Washington DC with multiple roommates. I’ve been working at my current job for five years now with a salary at $55,000 a year. When the pandemic hit I jumped at the chance to vacate to another city for a chance to live with my folks and save money. With the rent saved I’ve essentially given my self a raise. But now there is talk of going hybrid in the spring. And I don’t want that lifestyle anymore. I don’t have much of  an ego and roommates aren’t that big of an issue but I can’t help but feel like I shouldn’t be in this situation anymore. 

How can I do it on that salary? I looked outside of DC and places just  as expensive. 

To be honest I love my job and work and I wish the pay was enough for a studio apartment but it’s not.  DC is highly overrated area.  

If I could work remote from anywhere low cost I could own a home in a year and if I need to be in DC I can’t even afford to rent a studio apartment.Is that there is nothing noble about being the underdog. When you're in your late teens and 20's you can be rebellious and defiant, you are on your heroes journey or at least that's how you perceive the world. As time goes on you start to realise you are just one person and others have the same aspirations and idiosyncrasies  as you. Then as you get older you're expected to have your shit together and you're supposed to adopt a certain persona("I am in my 30's better start dressing in bland grown up clothing" to affirm how much of a grown up I am) There's so much to discover but that is the external world, by the time you're in your 30's you have some sense of self. I still have insecurities and in some ways do we really know ourselves but given my level of insight and introspection this is the most I'll probably ever know me.

I am 32 and the best thing about being old(er) is the sense of self; I remember how at the whim of society I was when I was younger, I used to work in a convenience store and customers used to give me anxiety. Now I work in a more high stakes field and I just don't care as much. I feel like I have more domain over my lived experience. However, the nagging feeling is that end of the heroes journey. I am a fully formed being who has lived out most experiences I will ever experience.

Reminds me of that copypasta from a few years ago where it talks about how you missed out on teenage love. The post was dumb but it did resonate with me.

Part of the reason I'll never have kids is because to me having a kid would be the acceptance that I am merely a passenger in this game of life.So I am 39 and happily married, with 2 great kids.  I had a very active social life in my 20's.  But then we got married and had kids, and life settled down.  A couple years ago, a friend of mine got divorced.  I started spending more time with him because he was going through a rough patch.  This eventually lead to me getting back out there and spending more time in bars.  Not the kind of bars with loud music and everybody getting wasted, but adult bars.  I made some new friends, which lead to me making even more friends.  I'm very extroverted, and know how to carry myself in a way that people seem to like me and feel comfortable confiding in me.

My wife is an introvert.  She has no problem with my social life, but she doesn't care to join me.  She likes talking on the phone with her friends, but they rarely do anything in person.  I have always been 100% faithful, and I intend to stay that way.  I make sure that I spend an adequate amount of time with my family.  But I had a night tonight that makes me really take a step back and wonder what the hell I'm doing.  The bar closed, and a bunch of people went back to one guy's house for an afterparty.  Everybody proceeded to get really drunk, random people were making out with random people.  40+ year olds getting drunk and puking.  I'm thinking WTF am I doing?  I have a wife and 2 young kids at home.  I personally was not drunk, I was just nursing beers all night.

Anybody else dealt with something like this?  I am actually a little bit concerned, is this how an almost 40 year old married father is supposed to act?  I feel like maybe I'm having somewhat of a midlife crisis?  Tonight just reminded me of nights I used to have back in my 20's, and it has given me pause.  Thanks for reading.Hello,

I am curious if others have ever considered taking a break from their careers for not only their mental health but their physical health?

I’m currently 32, will be 33 in 5 months. In June of 2020, I rather impulsively started a business that I had no idea what I was really getting into. In my 20’s, I graduated college and moved across the country to a place I really like. I got into the best shape of my life (lost 150 lbs), began other wellness practices including meditation and healthy eating, and found what I wanted to do in my life : business. The only issue was I thought my path to business was in the cannabis industry. 

This only lasted 12ish months before I entered the first serious relationship of my life with a woman who had a lot of challenges. I take full responsibility, but I ended up falling right back into bad old habits including severe substance abuse and an unhealthy lifestyle overall. My father passed in 2015 from cancer, and then ensued a period of about 3 years of absolute rock bottom including severe drug abuse, emotional despair, and more death. 

I somehow found the will to break up with my girlfriend at the time, which then led me to give up my substance of choice a year later. I cleaned up my act, sobered up, and got myself together again. I got back on the path of self-realization and self-actualization and going for my highest potential as a man and human being. 

Fastforward to now and I hit a rough spot in the last 3 months. About 10 months ago I quit smoking cannabis, which was the final breakthrough I needed to see clearly. I had been smoking for about 13 years heavily and daily prior. Needless to say the healing process has been hard and I have slipped into a deep depression. 

Upon consulting with my therapist and personal reflection I believe I need to take a break to reassess what’s going on with me. One thing that stands out is that I need to get back to consistently working out and taking care of myself daily to reach my highest potential. My business is low overhead, and as a business I made a strategic investment when I started up to have some capital in the future. I am thinking of taking a 3.5 - 4.5 month break to fix my routine and consistently workout for the duration. I need to fix my mental health and physical health to then be able to attack my business with all of me. I plan to also take a class, continue in Toastmasters, and resolve some unresolved matters from my past to clear out my mental space so when i do return i will have all the boxes checked to go absolutely all-in. Am i being naive that I can make the changes i want in that time and hopefully reinvest myself into my bysiness? Thanks for your feedback.I'd like to purchase a subscription to a print magazine that is geared towards men 
over 30. By 'lifestyle' I mean magazines that discuss things like family life, sex and relationships, health, culture, fashion, etc.

I'm aware that podcasts (and subreddits) are excellent for lot of these topics, but sometimes like being screen-free and tech-free when I get home from work. 

The closest thing I've found is the japanese magazine Popeye, but I can't read any hiragana or kanji and reading Popeye via Google Translate is tiring. Japanese magazines like Popeye, 2nd and Lightning have a visual style I find appealing, though these are fashion magazines at their core, and I'm looking for magazines which delve into other topics too.

The glossiness and 'luxe'-ness of magazines like GQ and Esquire are very offputting to me. The last thing I want to read is an interview with a celebrity dressed in Saint Laurent Paris slipping a latte and talking about microdosing.

I live in Sweden, so it'd be cool the magazine is based in Europe or can be purchased within the EU.Hi all

I am a contractor working abroad on a job which has gone on far longer than originally planned (planned for 3 months, currently been here 10 with another 4-6 likely to remain). For those 10 months we have been working 10 hours a day, 6 days a week, without more than a few days break here and there, and those have really just been spent in the hotel catching up on sleep.

I am burned out. Completely. Realistically I have done more than one years hours - probably closer to 15 months hours - in 10 months, I've not had any holiday, I don't enjoy the work anymore. And the physical signs are there - I went through a list of signs of burnout from an article I found online, and ticked maybe 90% of the boxes. I'm exhausted, grouchy, upsetting colleagues (who are also burned out and upsetting me), demotivated, short tempered etc. I'm also getting ill more frequently (just stomach rejecting food mainly), I feel like my body is just so exhausted that it doesn't even have the energy to carry out basic functions anymore.

Problematically, leaving outright puts both me and my client in a tough spot. On my side, covid has hit my industry hard and I went 8 months with practically no work, and the situation still remains fragile. This job is paying well and at home I'll struggle to find work which will match what I'm making here. On my clients side, I have a rare skillset and knowledge of my client's product, and even if they had somebody, if they came to site they'd need a visa and then 4 weeks quarantine on arrival - so they're looking at 2 months realistically to replace me, even if they had somebody to do it.

For those who've found themselves in a similar situation.... What do I need to do, or at least, what should I be asking myself? What could I be suggesting to my client? What options could I put out there?

I am thinking of asking for a reduction to a 5 day week... But I'd like to try and negotiate that I don't lose a full day's money - because I honestly believe in 5 days of being less exhausted I'll do as much work as in 6 days of being completely exhausted.

But deep down inside I just want to go home. I'm so sick of it now. I hate every day and do it only for the money, and because I don't want to screw over a client who has been both really full of praise for my work the past 10 months and also really supportive when I've vocalised my complaint. I feel that if 3 months has become 14-16, then these remaining 4-6 coukd just as easily be 8-10, and in 2 months time I will be wishing I'd given notice.

I'd appreciate any thoughts really, I don't know where else to reach out to, so I just hope somebody might have been in a similar place before.Hello everyone.

I wanted to know how everyone handles that people close to you are slowly dying or being apart more from family and friends?

In the past 5 years i had a few people who passed away that were apart of my life since childhood and i moved pretty far away too so im not able to meet my family that often too.

For awhile now ive been starting to feel depressed thinking about it but the thought of losing everyone (exaggeration) around me is making me sad and scaring me.

Is anyone else going through this?I don't feel like this all the time...

but I have noticed, over the years, that this one comes up again and again as like a soft spot in my subconscious. I don't actively feel like it all the time or think about it, but it creeps up every so often. I don't know, maybe it's just from like something I've repressed from childhood. In later childhood, I was bummed out a lot as a kid.

I've been telling myself, for years upon years now, *hey it doesn't work like that* or just actively rationalizing why this is a silly thought. It's like today I was having a decent day. Probably even pretty good. And out of nowhere, blindsided, I get this darkness creep up on me. It's not the feeling of insecurity of said *thought,* it's more of like a silent rage.

So I leave the grocery and sit in my vehicle for a second thinking what...the...fuck? I feel like sometimes my mind works on things in the background, while I'm focusing on something completely different, and by the time it's worked out into something concrete the background-I get this new feeling wash over me.There’s something that happened to me that I still haven’t brought to closure. Back in 2006 my mom used to have a drinking problem along with being bipolar. Her and my dad got into a huge fight(that she started) and my dad left the house to cool off and he came back home to find all of his music and music equipment(decades of magazines and his guitar and amplifier)destroyed by her. When he came home he snapped and tried to hang himself. Me and my brothers were at my grandmas house in Cleveland I think my dad dropped us off because he knew how bad things would get and didn’t want us to it. 

This eats at me everyday because I don’t know how to make sense of it. My dad is one of the kindest innocent people in this world and for something like that to happen to him is incomprehensible. I’ve  had a disdain for my mom after that happen. Never looked at her the same. The man breaks his back as a corrections officer to provide for her and me and my brothers and that’s the treatment he gets? What eats at me most is the fact that mad dad could be in hell right now from an understandable suicide, when he did nothing to deserve it. I’m 30 now but as I said before I still haven’t brought this to closure. I feel my dads pain. My mom is clinically bipolar but that’s no excuse. Could someone who’s dealt with a similar situation please help me get peace of mind.I've spent a lot of time up until this point reaching certain milestones in terms of career, relationship, buying a home. And I've wasted an awful lot of time. I accept all of that.

For the first time now the road ahead looks clear, so I want to be grateful for what I've achieved so far, forgive myself for what I've not done, and I really want to work on some personal goals, mostly in terms of good habits, personal growth, intellectual growth, all of which require a lot of time and work.

I've managed to break them down by year but - to take a simple example such as getting into shape - although I do really really want the goal, I'm worried I'll procrastinate and keep pushing it and then end up moving it from this year to the next, the way I've done with goals in the past. Maybe sharing these goals is a good idea? Or starting off really basic. Or I don't know. I'm not the most motivated of all people. I'm just a bit worried.  

(36m) I am having trouble finding anyone I can relate with male or female. It’s also really hard meeting people around my age now.

I have a really good life but, outside my business acquaintances and my GF’s (27f) friends don’t have any friends near were I live. I have friends from the military that live all over the country but just not anywhere near me. 

  I am doing very well and I live in a really nice community next to a golf course by the ocean. Were I live at there are not many people, if any, that grew up poor and I have not been able to meet anyone that I have anything in common with. 

I had to work really hard for a really long time to get where I’m at, lots of months with no days off. So I never got married and never had kids. also never learned to play golf.

Now that I have a lot of time off and a lot of time on my hands. I’m just hanging out by myself most the time. I am considering moving somewhere else but, my business interests are close so I am limited.

Does anyone else have this problem?    If so do you think it’s your age, background, or community?It sounds childish but still I need a place to ventilate .   


Back to young time  I used to play Age or Empires II with my friends. MSN game zone closed and everyone back to collage or Uni life. Long before that I still asked them whether they want to play this game few times before  but no one interested, so I just left it there for over 10 years untouched.   


Until before last year's Christmas, I learnt one of my playmate mentioned this game again and I got re-lighted in this game . So I bought it and tried. This game has been almost rebuilt and very soon I learn my playmate has become an expert level.  He requested me  PVP with him and I said I am no longer superb as before. He still wished so I give him one, and so as expected I lose and I given him a new headset as award  . This headset is a hit I wished to give him .   


Then those playmate come back and just before I posted this post and I rage quit the game . Seriously I know he is strong, and from this imbalanced levels I feel humiliated. I told my mate what my true anger is and they just said they did quit a while but they have played it again for a very long time . So until then I just realized I am the true newbie in front of the "old" experts .   


I don't like it, Seriously, I hope to play with them but don't like how it has gone.   
I don't like their advises, like watching youtubers how they play and listen to their talks while I was having a  quick lunch and given up my break or checking up with working emails and orders .   
And TBH I have never told them how stressful I have to wait til 10 pm then stay up to midnight 1AM for gaming (towards computer AI mostly) , sleep <6 hours and back to work for >12 hours start from 6AM each day. Real life is stressful (especially during this endless pandemic ).  


In this  last game I voiced out my true thoughts . Then they said "Leave this game  if you wish".   


\---TLDR-----

I believe I have lost 5 people from a stupid game that I thought I  knew.   
I am sad, mad,  crying and seriously I am depressed from the overall like self-asked humiliation.   
I fell myself is real old, outdated because I am not like everyone have to watch youtubers for gaming tips, which is a "Today's KEYSTONE" .     
I am also sorry that this game , which was once my favorite , has also turned into like other games that "follow the known tips / guides/ strategy to play" type.Hello, I hope it's alright me asking this question here but I need some guidance. I'm 21 and have an associates degree. The last three years I have been a seasonal wildland firefighter and was on a Hotshot crew this past year. I thought i might want to try something different so I've applied to other jobs in fish and wildlife. Ive landed a full time position at a fish hatchery which is pretty neat. The place is super remote though (100 miles to the nearest town) but I like hunting, fishing, trapping etc and it's set in some beautiful mountains so I think I'll stay busy.

Question is, there's a side that eats away at me that I shouldn't work full time yet. A lot of my old fire buddies spend the off seasonal nomading and traveling and I guess I just am comparing myself. Wildland fire afforded me the opportunity to make enough money half the year and spend the other months fishing and hunting.

 I've had to hustle hard to get this job without a Bachelor's Degree but I still wonder if I'm starting too young. My plan is to finish my bachelor's online while I work which I value and it will help me later in life. Any opinions or guidance is appreciated. I just want to make sure I'm considering both sides of the coin before I jump right in. One side of me says "don't pass up this super cool dream job" while the other say "do something seasonal so you can travel the world and culture yourself". I think of it financially too, I'm completely on my own and traveling is expensive regardless of what people say so I'd spend a significant amount of what I saved.

Cool thing is the hatchery is off grid and has a big garden I could spend time in. I've wanted to try that lifestyle of self sufficiency. It would allow me to hunt, grow food, raise chickens, teach myself canning, etc. 

I'm just a lost 21 year old who needs guidance from people who have walked further on the road of life. Many thanks!I'm turning 30 in few months and feeling a bit lost.

Through my 20s I had goals of achieving  financial security, education, material stuff etc... I worked on those and achieved it all. 

However, it all feels meaningless now and I go into cycles of self doubt -- Why am I doing all this? Why am I putting so much effort into life?

I'm trying to take my life to the next level now (financial independence, travel, hobbies, more education) but don't have the same kind of commitment and drive I had for my 20s goals.

Any advice?Hello  I had a question for all men over 30 . What are your main mental barriers that are hindering you from your fitness goals and what are some steps you have taken to overcome this?

All answers are greatly appreciated.I just wanted your opinion on something; I applied for a job via Linkedin, and I heard nothing for about 2 weeks. I just checked my voicemail (which I rarely do) and they had called me yesterday and left a message. No email or linkedin message, and I obviously didn't recognize the number. 

I found this weird; I am pretty crazy busy and I generally have to schedule phone calls, esp. with interviewers, as I am in the office full time.  Am I crazy?So, I’m in my late-40s and no stranger to challenges. I’ve been sober for over 500 days and I’m super proud of that achievement. I know how to stay motivated with my sobriety, but I can’t translate that to my physical fitness. That’s a big issue. I’m overweight and working from home has made me largely sedentary. My last successful exercise streak was a walking challenge but I could not stay motivated and lost all my gains. So, how the heck do you guys do it? Do you have some way to keep yourself disciplined? Is it a mantra? A tool? A reward system? I know I can get started, I just need to know how to keep going.

Tl/dr: I can stay sober but I can’t stay fit. WTF? How do you do it?

**Edit 1:** After so much great advice, here are the incredibly helpful takeaways for me so far.

* I'm going to start thinking in terms of discipline rather than motivation because *doing something* is always going to be better than waiting to WANT to do something.
* I Need to round up some accountability buddies. HMU!
* Heading to the gym, even if it's just to sit in a sauna, is going to be better than not going to the gym at all.
* I'm going to expand my concept of physical activity to find something I actually enjoy doing.
* Money (losing and or spending it) is a motivator. The health benefits will probably be worth any reasonable spend I make towards getting on track.

***Other ideas*** that make me love you guys and Reddit:

* Fear death more. 
* Become a swinger so I'll be motivated by more people possibly seeing me naked. 
* Go back in time and convince myself to not have children. 
* Replace my depression meds with exercise, ensuring catastrophe if I stop exercising to manage my depression (see: Fear Death More) 
* Start drinking again so I can have beers while lifting in the garage and listening to old school Metallica? 
* Literally loathe my body more.

In all seriousness, if you commented on this thread, I appreciate you with all my heart ... no matter how outlandish the suggestion.i have meandered through life aimlessly since graduating college. often feel chemically depressed. i start a lot of things but never finish. i’m forty now and i can’t even see what 45 looks like. i know this isn’t normal but i don’t know how to get out of this. have worked five different industries in the past ten years. get really good at what i do in anything.. and then.. poof. i am diagnosed with severe adhd but have begun to suspect i am also on the autism spectrum. i don’t take adderl or other meds because i hate what they do to my appetite and body. 

i’ve had one serious girlfriend before and that fizzled very quickly. nothing in the past eight years. all my friends are married and/or have kids and a mortgage. i know i shouldn’t compare but it hurts to not have that feeling of…  stability. 

friends have recommended therapy and i’ve done it before but didn’t find much value out of it. i mean to say, my behavior didn’t change. and so my outcomes stagnated. goals, plans, i’m good at those. just no follow through. 

as proof of how aimless i am: i don’t even know what i’m asking here.I've been wearing vans since I was 16, now that I'm 32 I'm starting to feel the lack of support is killing my feet, especially since I aim to do 12k steps a day.

What are your shoes for walking around in that don't look like new balance dad shoes?My wife will turn 40 in May, so I have some time to plan.  I've been feeling guilty for the past 10 years since I didn't really do a whole lot for her 30th birthday.  She, however, outdid herself the following year by doing a whole 30-for-30 for my 30th birthday:  30 of something small each day for the first 30 days of the month, which culminated on my birthday on the 30th.  I felt like a jerk since, and I don't want to make the same mistake from a decade ago.

How have you made your wife's milestone birthdays special and memorable?  Any advice would be much appreciated.I turn 20 in a month and im genuinely a bit anxious moving forward, my teenage years where so fucken good that i'm worried my 20s wont live up to it, what are some tips to make sure i dont waste away the next decade of my life, thanksHi everyone. I was wondering if any of you could give me your preferences in men's cologne/fragrances.  What scents do you like?  What scents have women commented on favorably to you.  Thanks in advance.I am a 30M. I am really passionate about programming and hope to make it my job one day, instead of my current line of work.

However, sometimes I feel so deeply depressed to my bones that I struggle doing anything other than my 9-5 job. I know I need to study my hobby, I even want to, I just cant. The thought of using *any* brain energy really pushes me over the edge. Never mind the amount required for programming work.

I can be in this state for weeks and weeks on end, sometimes longer. And I make basically zero progress in this time.

Can anyone offer me any practical advice so I can still engage in mentally taxing work, while in one of my deeply depressive lows...Do you feel the need sometimes to listen to sad love songs or is that not manly?I know many things that made youth so magical are harder to come by for many people as they get older but I really want to experience these things more because I missed out on a lot of these things when young because of bad depression since about 12 years old.

But I dont know how hard it will be to live life in the way I want.... I think the biggest and maybe hardest part will be  finding other people in a similar boat who want to live life the same way to be friends with.

For me, I think the things that make being young so nice are:

- few worries and responsibilities
(I'm not planning on having a kids as a result and may soon be able to retire early due to making a lot of money but if this doesn't happen then I still have a job which I mostly enjoy and can work part time due to the money being good)

- lots of friends who are all mainly focused on having fun and being adventurous
(so I need to find other people who don't want kids and who want/able to live a more carefree life such as traveling a lot....the expat community is good for this I think)

- health (I am very into healthy lifestyle and slowing down the aging process)

- lots of sex and dating (maybe harder to have as you get older because many people the same age are married etc but could still date younger women potentially)


I guess the things I won't be able to get back are:

- partying a lot due to many people my age having terrible hangovers, plus it kind of goes against the healthy lifestyle and slowing down agings thing

- the endless hope of unlimited possibilities...I think this is something that young people have which you just naturally just lose a bit as you get older due to knowing you have less time less and also becoming more realistic about possibilities (although maybe you just get more cynical with age rather than being realistic...I imagine artistic types still keep this sense of possibility as they age)Just as title says. It’s a senior position that I am definitely qualified for, but I have zero experience with anything government. Not sure what to expect or where I can negotiate. Any suggestions appreciated.

Edit: A very big thank you to everyone that chimed in and offered advice. I got the job!!!!!Which one is most beneficial in the long run?I did read the rules but this is very close to possibly relationship advice, so I apologize in advance if it ends up this post needs to be removed.

tl;dr is the bold.

**I run an online hobby group with real life meetups.** The hobby it is for is not known for its great communication skills, but my group is one of the few that's closely moderated and therefore accessible to women (if you catch my drift). **I have some men who make some women uncomfortable, but the women don't want me to actually ban these men.** 

**I've seen screenshots, and the creep level is "very lonely and very bad at socializing" instead of sexist or sexually predatory.** I haven't really had a problem with talking to women in my life so I don't know what sort of advice to give to these men. **But I do need to talk to them as the organizer and make them know their type of behavior isn't ok.**

**Does anyone have any resources for me (or them) to read that basically explains "how to not be creepy toward women" without also insulting them in the process?** I have spoken to members before about social skills when I had something specific to point out (like unintentionally seeming pretentious) but I don't have a good idea on how to tackle "don't be a creep." 

Thanks in advance.

**Edit:**
I obfuscated this too much. It's one guy. In any case, I was able to come together with my other mods (most of whom are women) and come up with something. I ended up with a bulleted list of specific things to stop doing followed by our commitment to a comfortable and acceptable group for everyone, including him, and that I had found some resources if he wanted them.

If anyone else happens to find themselves in a similar situation,       
The most helpful article I found was this one:       
https://www.askmen.com/dating/dating_advice/ways-men-creep-women-out.html

Followed by these, although they're not as well written and nonjudgemental as the first one, surprisingly.      
https://medium.com/the-ascent/how-to-know-youre-mansplaining-and-then-stop-5b006a4f361f        
https://www.allprodad.com/how-to-stop-mansplaining/

Added context:

The group doesn't ask reporters what to do and we just take their word for it. The group has been around for a little over a year and I've banned several people already.  This situation was awkward to deal with because the reporter came to us with screenshots unprompted and specifically requested we not ban in their initial report.Humor is a big part of a good relationship for me... just wondering if any of you feel like you can joke around the same way with your GF as you do with your guy friends?Hi, female, 30+ here seeking some different perspectives and experiences as I start losing confidence in my internal job promotion strategy and counter offer.

I was offered my boss’s job (same responsibilities) at a lower title and significantly lower pay. I know they want to keep me and have hinted there’s spare money in the budget to negotiate. But the company is under a tight budget this year.

I have only had stellar performance and recognition at this company since I joined over 7 years ago, and I have more years of experience than what my boss had when she was offered the role.

To me, there is no doubt in my mind that I should ask for the appropriate title and corresponding salary. I have written out taking points and prepped my elevator pitch.

My socialization as a female is now working against me. I say sorry for everything, and I’m never blunt. So I’m feeling uncomfortable and losing some confidence. I also feel bad to put my future boss in a position to choose between my compensation and the compensation of others on the team (I know that’s not something I need to think about right now, but it’s the inevitable reality).

I’ve talked to several females about this, and it’s probably the company culture, but none of them offered me any concrete advice or encouragement. They listened and said “that’s a tough situation” and said they hadn’t really negotiated their salaries before (?). But when I talked to one male colleague about a promotion he is under consideration for, he was going to ask for more than what I’m planning on asking for, and he’s more junior than me!

I don’t mean to extrapolate my experience of gender norms beyond my company, but I think it’s helpful context.

I really hope to not go on the job market, but the truth is if they can’t meet me at my boss’s current title and pay, I’ll definitely be open on the job market looking for that more senior role, or at least a role that pays what they are offering me now but has fairly compensated responsibilities (which is to say, 45 hour weeks, vs 60). So I feel emboldened to make sure they get this right because I know they want to keep me, but they can’t do so by subsidizing their budget shortfall with my compensation package. 

Any advice?As I am turning 30 soon im noticing major changes in life. In short, im really becoming someone i dont want to be. Short tempered, angry and bitter about life and the direction its going. Wife is constantly upset with me because of it. 

I have a steady job making decent money. Gigging with bands on weekends to bring in extra money and  even staying over at work. This new stress level just seems unbearable. Im not much of a drinker..only at gigs. No drugs either. 

Just angry and feel like my 20s was wasted and now  struggling to get set for my 30s. Is feeling like this normal?To kind of get to the thick of it I am 29 years old and I feel like life worked out for every one of my peers except me. I graduated college with a bachelors in business but continued running a private piano lesson business for a few years. Then I got offered an opportunity in a hotel and have been working in travel ever since. I just got furloughed from my 55k a year job. It is very expensive where I live on Long Island so I unfortunately have to stay in a place that my mom owns and drive a car I pay her for. She is very controlling and looking at where the car is at all times, coming into where I live to complain about how I’m keeping it, asking me where I’m going all the time, constantly threatening to lock me out or take the car away. I do not know what to do. I somehow  need to earn enough to get out from underneath her but I don’t know how. Like I said I have a bachelors in business but have only really worked in hotels.

I have a girlfriend who is older than me but I do not see a future with but I am too scared to break it off so we can’t even pool resources and live together during this time.I have a solid personal morning routine. Wakeup at 5:15am, drink coffee and enjoy silent time, 6:30am workout at the gym, shower and get dressed, make bed, make breakfast, then at 9am I am ready to start working.

But many times at 9am I'm kind of twiddling my thumbs wondering what I should start on. Especially on days where there are no urgent deadlines or fires to put out. There are days where I do plenty of nothing. I feel like having a solid morning work routine that I can do every single day will get me jumpstarted in work mode and motivated to tackle larger projects that I've always said I'd get around to.  Does anybody have a good morning work routine you do when you get into the office or start work at home?Me and my cousin are having a debate. He said you cant get anything, but i said it has to be something. 
So help me win this debate yall. LolI think as I am getting older, I want to prioritize and take care of my skin. What is your skin care routine and products that you have found that are total game changers and did wonders for your face and skin. 

TIA17 year old dude here.

I have a hunger for knowledge particularly on topics in which the information needed to have an entry level understanding is high (areas/fields where to an outsider it seems like people knowlegeable in that area/field seem like they are speaking a different language). Examples of what i would consider topics with this characterstic would be; Foreign languages (pretty much any), music (theory, history or culture), pretty much any academic field esspecially the hard sciences and philospophy or engineering (particularly car talk) just to list a few off the top of my head.

It seems like the older adults that are present in my life only have a real proper understanding of maybe 2 fields, or somekind of vague understanding of alot of them, for instance a docter who knows music, an architect who speaks german (Natively English), a great writter and philosophy lecturer who knows about engineering and cars.

Considering I have this long list of areas that I'd like to eventually have some sort of expertise in but simultaniously being aware of the fact that the older adults in my life havent been able to achieve this seems disheartening. Should i narrow my educational goals down to less things? If i did put all my time and effort into being an expert on these things would i be sacrificing/neglecting other things like social development?

Any perspective from men who have been around for a while is useful. Thanks.Question for the over 60 crowd...

I’m working on a fictional story. The main characters are seniors in college during the 1976-1977 school year. I have the skeleton of the story worked out, but I would like to add additional ambiance/color to the story. If you have any vivid memories of your time in college in the late 70’s, I would love to hear them.

For instance…

What was dorm life like? Did you have a roommate? Did you have a radio in your room? What did you fight about or bond over? Was there a communal activities room with a TV? Were the showers communal (stall or gang)? What kind of dorm rules did you have, especially about having visitors? Was there a dorm mother? What were campus parties like? How easy/difficult was it to get alcohol and/or pot? What did you do when you were bored?

How much of “the real world” affected your daily existence? How aware were you of Vietnam vets returning home? Were you afraid of getting drafted?  Did the Nixon scandal really affect you at all? Were you politically active at the time? Were there activist groups on your campus (women’s liberation, environmentalists, etc.)? The oil shortage? How aware were you of racism?

What technology did you have access to? Did you have a private phone in your dorm room or was there a communal pay phone? Were party lines still a thing? Did you know anyone who had actually used a computer? If you were using a computer, what did you use it for? Did you own a calculator? A typewriter?

What was dating like? If you were straight, what was a typical date like? Was premarital sex common/expected? Did you know any females who got pregnant in college, and if so, what happened to them? If you were gay, how did you find other queer people? Was the hanky code actually a thing in your area? How did you learn about it? Were there other tells that helped you identify other queer people? Where were the best places to go cruising? How much did you know about sex at the time and/or how did you learn the things that you knew?

How did you spend your weekends? Did you have a car when you were in college? If not, how did you get around town? Where was your typical hangout spot? What did you and your friend group typically do on the weekends?

Money…How much did it cost to take someone out on a date? How much did your job pay, if you had one? Did your parents help you at all with an allowance or sending you money? What did you consider luxuries?  What did you have to do without when you were budgeting?

I’m really curious about anything you want to share, but fair warning, I may include your experiences in my story.Especially if you’re the kind of man who “has it all”… 

Preferably something inexpensive.Over the past two years many of us have shifted to remote working.  Since it seems like remote work is not going to disappear overnight, I'm thinking it's finally time to upgrade my home working set-up.  For those of you that have gotten standing desks during the pandemic, has it improved your quality of life?  Any lessons learned, or things you wish you had known before you bought yours?

If you have any models/brands that you love, please share any recommendations.  Thanks!

**Update** \- Thanks for all of your feedback.  I just ordered the Varidesk Essential (48"x24") desk.  It got good reviews for sturdiness, and I like that it came in a slightly smaller size than some of the other brands.  [https://www.nytimes.com/wirecutter/reviews/best-standing-desk/](https://www.nytimes.com/wirecutter/reviews/best-standing-desk/)My girlfriend of several years just broke up with me. I don't have many friends, I have no family, and I work from home. Everyone is telling me focus on myself, learn to love being alone, etc, but I can't find meaning in anything. I read, exercise, listen to music, clean the house, but it all feels pointless. I realized today that I have nothing to look forward to anymore. I just do things to pass the time so I can go to sleep, wake up, and continue on. 

So I'm curious, for any other single men out there - what do you all look forward to?I’m turning 30 this month. It seems like with every day time and space seem to be changing. When I was a kid, the next school district was extremely far away, and the 80s existed aeons ago. 

Nowadays I am in awe of how compact we are, how LA and NY are only a flight away. My grandpa is 92 and tried to sneak into WW2…everything seems so much more connected and real than when I was a child.

I’ve also tried to make friends from around the world as well. There are people from Indonesia, Siberia, Gambia, and Costa Rica I talk to frequently. Especially with the internet, it’s mind blowing how close we all are to each other, really.

When I look at old videos of the Nazis or pictures of people from the civil war or feudal Japan it’s easy now to see them as normal people, and really not far away from modern people at all.

Has this happened to anyone else?Hey fellas, I am 33 and struggling more and more with the three things I described in the title.  I had a major loss in my life with my dad passing away in November of 2020.  Since then I have moved from Texas to Colorado with my wife and pets but have maintained working at the same company where I am a upper level manager. Work has definitely been a stressor along with strife between my wife and my family.  I love my new home and life in Colorado and my wife and I are trying for our first baby (another stressor). 

I know I have a lot going on right now but it’s getting to me more and more and there doesn’t seem to be a turning point for it to get better. I find myself constantly wondering if I’m doing the right thing at any given moment.  Sometimes paralyzed in thought searching for something I’ve forgotten about that would explain the dread I feel.  That anxiety turns to guilt due to the wasted time, manic energy to make up for lost time, then a crash where I sink into a depression.  I’m not sure if it’s depression because I wouldn’t describe myself as sad or really feeling anything.  I’m apathetic and numb. 

I’ve seen therapists in the past and while talking helps with the grief of my dad, it doesn’t take away the anxiety.  I think I may need to see a psychologist but I’m not sure.  Has anyone else experienced something like this?I’m 28 years old and have been in school for all of my 20s, haven’t broken into the industry I’ve wanted and I barely became an “engineer” last year. I’m 2 units away from a MSEE but feel like even after all this time I’m not even sure it’s what I wanna do anymore. All my peers and younger brother are already on their path to an mba with a very high salary cap. I kinda just live the same day on repeat, work (stare at my computer going to meetings, or attempting to review documents), gym, and then make dinner with the hopes I’ll have the energy to sit down on the computer longer to finish this stupid degree. My anxiety thru the roof and I’m very lonely - no friends. Sometimes I get the urge to just leave my current job and just apply to whatever sounds cool but idk how well that’ll resonate with a BS in applied physics. Any good resources?I’m almost 50 and I’m pretty confident that this is my midlife crisis. Just without the red convertible and infidelity. EDIT. after thinking about it this is a bit untrue. I didn’t buy a red convertible sports car, I bought a Jeep Wrangler. But I swear I have NEVER cheated on the wife. 

I’m well established and esteemed in my career and within my company. Though Covid has changed the way things happen which causes some adjustment. It has been difficult but I’m managing. But still I just don’t find satisfaction in it. EDIT. Pre-Covid my company had a contract that I was passionate about. That contract ended and I lost my favorite types of client interactions. Professional interactions where I could feel important as well as serve the client needs. 

I’m financially stable so find my self buying and collecting things. The focus changes every so often. Last year it was whiskeys. This year it’s guitars. But even when I find a real gem I almost immediately start trolling eBay, or the liquor store, for the next one. 

Been married 25 years. I love her deeply. We have a very healthy relationship with regular intimacy. We have been able to increase our communication so things have gotten better over the years. But still, I fee unsatisfied. We have sex and within a very short time it’s like I can’t even remember it.  I get a BJ but I find myself being critical in my own mind finding ways things can be better. I have come to the realization that this IS NOT HER, it’s totally me and my general discontent. EDIT. We have the national average of 2.4 kids. All of whom are grown to the point that that really don’t need me like they used to. I’m super proud of all of them and they are really great kids who are making their own path. 

And then on top of all of it I’m aging and I have to deal with everything that it brings. Bad back, aching knees, slower to heal, thinning hair and thickening waist. While I don’t tie my sense of self to my appearance but I can’t lie that I’m not completely ok with it. 

I have very little for social interactions. I play the guitars I collect and have been trying to get a blues band together but while everyone TALKS about wanting to play, the actual playing is few and far between. I find myself in some ways desperate for non-work/non-coworker interactions. 

What I’m doing to be proactive:  My wife and I see a therapist every other week, with about every third just for me.  The next session is this week so I am going to make sure that I address this with her in session. I’m seeing a doctor of medical assisted weight loss.  Guitar lessons with a Nashville professional musician.  I’ve even though about joining the Freemasons. 

But still, I wanted to see what other guys do and to see if I’m alone in this or have a coming experience.Idk why, I've had plenty of time but I just can't bring myself to do anything in the gym anymore. Usually I work on shows that occupy 60-80 hrs a week of my time and every day is a different location so I have to kind of put it aside until the show's over. But I haven't been in that situation since before Thanksgiving and now I'm just kinda brain dead about it. I can't find any fire. 


I'll go to the gym, and it'll be my goal for the day, but it'll be the most passive gym sesh ever. Like i said, it's like im brain dead the minute i walk through those doors. For the past ten years I'd try to adopt a 5/3/1 type of power lifting routine and now it's all I can do to lift anything, and I'll be lucky if I even settle for 15 minutes of bike riding.


I need to get in and burn some weight while I still can but I can't manage to do anything. 


Anyone else get in a huge slump like this? 
Advice?


Edit: I'm 32 for those of you who care. ALSO, ive never gotten this much advice or comments in general from a post. I'm trying my best to slowly read all of them and IM GREATLY APPRECIATIVE of all of you'll and your advice.Here in a couple months I'm going to be turning 20 and with the covid quarantine I feel like I wised up to a lot I could be doing better but still feel like I'm lagging behind. I was curious what you guys would think some of your biggest Life changes were even if it's as little as a small daily habit. Anything could help, thx y'all.How does 40+ man make new friends? 

I am married with a couple of kids and don't have many friends. I have about 2 - 3 friends that I would hit up for a beer and shoot the shit. 2 of them are single and always out and about I catch them when I can. I've met other dudes though my kids daycare but they seem to keep to themselves don't really like to hangout from what I've gather. Seems like I'm always making the initiative. Maybe is just me.I’ve really started enjoying jazz music lately. I’m obviously very sophisticated and worldly now.I know many people this is a dream scenario, but I’m worried that I’m starting to highlight how little work gets given to to me. It’s a small 15 person company and I’ve been there 6 months. 

I’m fully remote and my only coworker for my side of the business is my boss, who has a lot of visibility into my work.  Me and him are the only ones in the company that can do my type of work and it’s a core service. 

We get along well, he likes my work, but he’s not a good delegator. He has a lot on his plate, and to be fair a lot of his work, I’m not able to do for him. 

To be clear:

* I do all my work, well and on time
* I ask for extra tasks
* I volunteer on company projects
* I try to anticipate needs of my boss
* Ive started building SOPs on my own
* I proactively seek trainings 

Last week I only had 3 hours of work to do and it was very easy.  I asked 2-3 times in different ways for more work. 

I just can’t keep asking for more work or it will highlight it to my company I constantly don’t have enough to do. I don’t want to just stop asking either.  

I have a side project that I can work on when I’m not doing my day job work. It a project that I like a lot, so I’m not bored or idle, but I want to stay with this company, I like the work I do get and I like the people. 

Thoughts?Hey r/AskMenOver30,

About me: UK based, 27 years old, university graduate, young professional etc. Never had a particularly well paying job but have great savings (£70k) due to living with parents for a long time and being frugal. My only big asset is my car worth £7k but I also have no liabilities other than student loan.

About a month ago I left a job I had as it was affecting my mental health. This job paid about £1.8k a month (about £30k per annum). I had nothing lined up which was pretty bold of me but my goal was to find something I enjoyed and gives me purpose/fulfilment in life; bonus points if it's well paid but that was not my primary focus.

By pure luck and a bit of networking, I fell nicely on my feet and I've got a 21st century form of income that pays very well but takes up all of my time. It's not what I expected to do, however I'm not in the corporate world of attending stand up calls each morning, back to back Zoom meetings, and checking my emails throughout the day while doing boring tasks.

What I'm doing now is not my standard career-based/professional job but it pays well. It's not 0nly f@ns, Btc related, adult work or anything illegal, however it's not your traditional job either. I'd rather not discuss what it is as that shouldn't change what I'm trying to ask :). I can say though that it's relatively easy, working from home, low stress and I feel in control of everything.

I'm taking home approx £5k a month from this. If I stuck it out, it could go on for a few months, or it could go on for years; I will never know and will live with that uncertainty. However it allows me to really save for my future.

I've got an interview tomorrow for a job that would be really rewarding. It's working for a mental health charity rehabilitating prisoners so they can settle back into civilisation in a way and giving them the care and protection they need so they won't be vulnerable or reoffending. It sounds amazing and I was super keen to join despite the low pay (£22k per annum). I live in a cheap part of the country (Newcastle) but still that's a low salary when you consider cost of living rising.

But I recently had second thoughts. It seems crazy to leave what I'm currently doing which is an incredible opportunity to set myself up for life. As amazing as the mental health job would be, I think my monthly salary would be approx what I'm currently earning per week.

**Do you think I'd be crazy for leaving what I'm doing now?**

In addition, I'm applying to become a firefighter. This involves lots of tests spread out over a length period of up to 6 months (all tests are unpaid). This is another 'job' that I'd love and get a lot of fulfilment and life purpose from, knowing I'm benefiting the community, potentially saving lives and making a difference to people's lives. It's also low paying job of a similar salary and I wouldn't be joining it for the pay, but the opportunity cost of leaving such a good form of income at the moment puts me in a difficult position about becoming a firefighter in 6-12 months (if I pass all the tests).

Both firefighting and the mental health job would have some career progression but right now I'm hitting the ground running in terms of building up my savings.So I am 21 and just recently got a career before finishing my degree and am making great money. The most exciting thing is it’s remote so I can work from literally anywhere as long as the work is conducted during 7-2 central time. I have about 3 more classes until I get my associates degree and I’d like to stop college after this semester and go travel in September. I plan on going to Montreal Canada for 1 month and if I like it I’ll stay another month. Then back home for a reset then off to Europe for some time and wrap up in Australia for a bit end of 2023. I’d really like to do this as no one in my family has really travelled outside of the US other than Canada and due to covid I never got a “college experience” in the sense of learning to live on my own and mature. I could also make a little bit of money from YouTube and tiktok if I document my experience as there aren’t any African Americans my age who’ve done something like this, at least that I’ve found. Would it be wise to stop after this semester and travel for the next year and half ? Or should I just stay the course with college even though I won’t use my degree ? My oldest brother is my father figure and Ik he’ll give me great advice but other advice from older people would be appreciated.As we move through life, are we the captains of the ship or are we just passengers?

Sometimes I look at all the moves I've made in life and ask myself what the Hell I was thinking. 

Other times, I think that we're all just doing what makes sense to us at the time with the information we have and the tendencies we've acquired. 

What do you think?Hey folks, turning 30 next month and looking to lean on some wisdom here!

I feel like I need to put it out there that I've been very fortunate. Though my house growing up was a bit turbulent (parents divorced, lost house in '08, family mental health issues), I kept really steady, focused, and liked to think that I inherited a blue collar work ethic while pursuing my degree and early career. 

I started in a call center years ago (not an easy job) and worked my way up to project management for the past few years. I've seen a steady progression in my career and solid compensation. I have good job - it's knowledge work, so I can't say it's backbreaking, but since it's a corporation, projects rise and fall pretty frequently, which can be mentally exhausting. Sometimes, it feels like just reinventing the wheel with some of the work. . . 

That all gets me to where I am now. Coming up on two years of working from home and I've been losing steam the past three months. At the start of the pandemic, I was able to keep working as usual cranking it all out. At this point though, there are days where I feel like I just stare at my monitor switching tabs and getting nothing done.

Has anyone been here and pulled themselves out of it? What did it take? What did you change? Appreciate all of your thoughts. Thanks everyone.Everything I use daily is either a holdover from my 20s or something I sneak from my wife. I think it’s time for a refresh.Maybe it's just my area but I don't enjoy bar scene here, there's like 4 vibes over and over and none of them seem fun to meFor me I had a shit social life for most of my life due to depression and social anxiety, and still do to some degree but it's a bit better. But one thing that keeps me depressed though is that I can't stop thinking about all the years I wasted feeling lonely and depressed while other people my age were having an active social life.

I wonder, if I have a good social life in the near future, will I be able to stop thinking about all those years that I missed out on? Maybe it will be easy to forget about when I'm actually feeling content with how things are in the present?

One thing that makes it hard is that I don't think I can simply make up for those lost years because I feel too old now to do some of the things now that I missed out on. For instance, being sociable in your 20s often involves a lot of partying for most people, but now my hangovers are awful so I want to avoid that. It also often involves being in tight knit groups which is harder to find when you are older, because it's generally just harder to make friends when a lot of people are focusing on their family and   have established friend groups.

(BTW I know it's pointless to think about the past but it's hard not to. I think meditation helps, as does exercise and generally being healthy. I will be getting therapy soon for this too.)

Has anyone else been in the same situation before, and did you get over it once life got better for you?I’m having a hard time finding a “passionate ” hobby. Something that can help me enjoy my free time regularly. I’m early-30s and honestly haven’t found anything I have a passion for. This is NOT normal, right? 

And it’s not without trying, I’ve picked up a few things over the years but fell out of interest quickly.

I don’t consider working out, cooking, watching/playing sports, reading...etc to be my true hobbies. I do all of them but haven’t found passions out of it.

Here’s what I’ve definitely ruled out:

- don’t care for tinkering and working with my hands. Tried a wood shop class in college and didn’t care for it. Volunteered for Habitat for Humanity for work events, don’t enjoy building stuff at all. Can do an oil change and watch YouTube for basic home stuff and that’s it. 
- don’t care for camping and outdoor activities. Tried and invested in mountain biking, hiking, camping.... didn’t care for it and the equipment is in storage or donated 
- don’t care for trying new beers, wines, cooking new meals, baking, etc... don’t get me wrongs it’s all delicious and I love food like anyone else but don’t find the act of cooking/trying new recipes all that interesting
- read sometimes fiction and non fiction novels and self help books. None have been so captivating I can get lost into for hours. I’m good after 20-30min and put my bookmark in. My book case is empty, go to the library if I wanna try a new novel
- same with creative writing/poetry and drawing/painting, dabbled in college with creative electives but haven’t cared to revisit any 
- tried web design, blogging, learning basic coding... nah wasn’t for me
- tried photography with an ex who was passionate about it, and I didn’t get into it. Still have my Canon DSLR collecting dust 
- tried learning and picking up chess after watching Queens Gambit... fell out of it quickly 
- don’t care for poker or billiards, okay if my group of friends meet and that’s it 
- same with video and board games. Last video game console I had was a PS2 and donated that long ago. Board games and other games with friends (ex Citizens Against Humanity)  aren’t fun to me and I do it just to be social 
- volunteer regularly at local food bank (and my office team lead for annual cancer walk) just to do something proactive but I don’t personally love it, just want to do something with my time on free Saturday mornings

Again I do like your usual “guy stuff” like sports, cars, video games but I don’t proactively partake unless I’m with friends.

I travel solo for fun time-to-time. Also travel a lot for work. But travel can be expensive and I’d rather find a hobby I can do myself at home without investing much time and money commitment.

On weekends unless I have a social event or volunteering find myself doing my daily workout, my daily run, eat dinner then Netflix and chill until bed. Gets boring but I haven’t found anything else to do yet that I truly enjoy.

Any other ideas? Yes I’m currently single and have no kids.

Edit: i played violin younger because my mother put me into it. Was okay I still have that violin, it’s not a big thing for me. Haven’t listen for new music. I listen to NPR in the radioWith advancing age, I feel the need to interact with a new group of people with different life experiences and ideas. Me being an introvert, it’s difficult for me to interact with strangers. If you do, How do you do it and become good friends with an new set of people?My wife is due near the end of March, I'm very excited but at the same time it scares the crap out of me. What did you guys do or what did your dads do that you never forgot?Since I got out of the Navy a decade ago, I've always pretty much been able to fall asleep within a few minutes and get a good night's sleep just about anywhere. But, just in the last year, I've been having trouble sleeping.

I can fall asleep all right, but I'll wake up within a few hours and be awake all night. Then, in the late afternoon or early evening, I'll get incredibly sleepy and wind up taking a nap.

I've been taking melatonin before I go to bed, but this has been hit-or-miss. I've also been working out a few evenings a week with similar effect.I'm in DC where pretty much the entire corporate workforce is still working from home. It just seems like DC is still waiting to go back to normal. Some places were set to come back last year after labor day but Delta scrapped that. Then it was supposed to be after the new year but omicron scrapped that. But majority of this city is following what the federal government is doing. I think once the Federal Govt has a workplace plan in place the rest of DC will mostly follow that. I'm just wondering how other cities are currently operating as far as workplace.

IMO I think workplaces need to decide by now on either remote work or hybrid. It's not going back to Feb 2020 normal. We're in too far deep for everyone to agree to go back into the office 9-5 mon-fri. Many places have proved remote work can work but there are advantages to collaborating in person. I just hate getting dressed up everyday, commuting 30-45 mins each way, to then just sit in front of my computer in a cubicle for 8 hours. 

Hello friends, I'm at the crossroads of life

I am 23 and I've just found a calling in my life. I am in the 4th year of my current college(economics) that I enrolled in just for the sake of enrolling in cause I wanted to be a part of the lives plan of going to college after high school. I hated and dreaded every moment of it and the 3 internships I had didn't really help either.  
During Corona, I found something that I was quite interested and I started preparing for admission to another college, but it eats me up so much that I will no longer be a part of that life scheme and that I will be the oldest freshman in the generation.  
Simply put everyone around me from my parents ( EE engineer and doctor), friends, relatives all have either finished college or have decided to serve in the military and I was wondering are there people similar to me who have enrolled in college a little bit later in life and have succeeded in their field of choice?  
I am just on the edge right now because my conscience is not clear that I should have done this a lot earlier...34yo here. I don't know if it's just different media triggers, but I find myself being reminded of my younger days more often these days. Memories of random moments and people seem to pop in and out as I go about my day. They used to be mainly from my earlier childhood days (elementary school), but it feels like more of my teenage days are being more thought of these days. Just curious what yall think.I’m an American. I own a house there. I have friends and family there. 

I haven’t been there in almost 3 months. I’m traveling with my wife and kids, and I have a fully remote job so I can work from anywhere in the world, really.

In feeling pretty disenchanted with the USA lately, and don’t really feel like going back. I don’t have any long-term visas arranged anywhere, so I can’t just stay indefinitely in another country at this point, but I’m seriously considered arranging that. Spain seems pretty doable, is a functional first-world country, and I already speak some of the language. 

I know that the problems the US has aren’t all particular to the US. Most of them happen everywhere to varying degrees, and overall, the US is still probably one of the better countries to live in, but I still don’t really want to be there right now.

Has anyone here who was from a developed country moved away? Did it work out for you? Did you have regrets? Did you ever move back?

The discussion is open-ended, it’s more of a train of thought than a specific question.My wife just had her first, in-person consult with our doctor as she is 13weeks preggo and had blood work with chromosome testing done.  

We're having a girl!

Curious how you prepared for the birth of your first child? How old were you? Any piece of advice you got and have hung onto/shared?I’m 46.   Starting to wonder where I’ll be in 10 yearsDid an interview 2days ago...Very engaging.interview..one of the managers ended by saying nice to meet you, you have alot of experience..... lasted 40min....one of the managers viewed my linkedin profile the yesterday.....i requested him for a connection...and he accepted this morning..good sign for a job offer soon?I have a 3 month notice period. The work has dried up and my projects are done. I have 2 months to go and feel lost with nothing to do. I know this is normally a good thing but feeling useless and discarded. New job starts in 3 months so unsure what to do with myself til then. Still being paid but unsure what do to day in day out with no work. And also feel guilty. Any tips?I have an advanced degree and for a long period of time I thought I will derive satisfaction out of my job and it will make me happy. I went through grad school grind thinking that someday I will get my "dream" job and it will all be worth it. Joined a big company in my niche field during covid and things haven't turned out the way I thought. I earn decent money but I don't feel happy. Covid has not helped as I didn't get to see most of team for almost 1year now. In general, work life balance is good and I can coast but because I put my "job" on the pedestal, doing that feels like a defeat/letdown. More than that, my brain just doesn't let me do that. I always feel like I need to prove my worth to my manager and like I am always in competition with my peers. The impending anxiety of failure is taking a toll on my mental health and I am doing therapy to help deal with that stress.

I have heard a lot that a job is just a job. I want to get to a place where I can treat it just as a source of income (not the anticipated source of happiness). I am struggling to do that though. Recently had a baby and that made things really hectic. I don't really have a hobby to keep me occupied after work or on weekends. In general, life just feels like a drag right now. 

So, my question for you all is, how do i care less about my job? Anybody with similar experience can give me any advice?I’ve been working from home and been a dad now for almost 2 years (daughter born April 2020). 

Compared to my old life sometimes I just feel like I’m on a loop. Also- due to the pandemic and being a dad my social circle has dwindled significantly. 

How has everyone kept friendships alive with so much isolation these past 2 years?Hi all, im 31, single & child free. I decided many moons ago that I don't want kids (a cross between personal reasons & potentially passing down medical issues). My most recent relationship ended because she wanted them & I didnt (i feel like I was fairly clear about it from the start, but such is life). 

So the big question, now what? I dont feel sad, more like unsatisfied. 

For context heres a little about me.  Recently finished my MBA & I work as an area manager for retail. Wanting to swap jobs in the near future & move to a different city as im ready to buy another house (I already have one). I have never really gained alot of satistaction or esteem from work, I dont dislike it, i just find it unchallenging.

A few months ago I made the decision to quit regular drinking, which made me realise that alot of my friends weren't really friends that I want to have in my life (more like acquaintances). I have a few casual hobbies but nothing that I am overly passionate about. 

Guess im wanting to hear from anyone who has been down the no kids path as to what brought them joy/satisfaction? How did you figure out what you're passionate about? Also. As a thirty something where on earth would you meet new people these days that isn't a bar (and if you aren't overly crash hot at sports)? 

Anyway theres a but to unpack there, appreciate anyones advice!Childless - generally wanted children but can't or didn't. Childfree - chose not to have children.

I'm 33 and turn 34 this year. Never had a serious relationship and am starting to ask myself if a life without a child is something I could be okay with. I'm asking myself if an amazing spouse or partner would be enough. The fear of aging and losing purpose in life weighs on me and I suppose with children there'd be more of a purpose to life. I also value relationships and love, but is a child necessary for that?

Two years ago I left an absolutely incredible women because she didn't want kids and I wasn't sure yet. Now I wonder if I should have stayed? I wonder if a life with an incredible partner would have been enough?

So childless men over the age of 30, how is life? Are you happy, sad, indifferent, etc? 

As presented so many times on the subreddit, men are not great at keeping communication with people in their lives. So often , men might have a friend or 2 outside their household that they keep regular contact with, or at least that is true with me. I was quite content with that as I could regularly re-connect at social gatherings with people I didn't see on a regular basis. Several times a year there were opportunities for this.

Since Covid, I have lost contact with almost everyone in my life. Not only were the opportunities at social gatherings to re-connnect absent, but now with all the mental health stressors out there , I'm not connecting with anyone on a meaningful level, except for my wife. I am seeing a family counselor, a marriage counselor, and looking for a self counselor. Seeking out and utilizing coping skills for the hardships in my life is starting to wear me down. I just want to have some sort of "normal" again, have a normal outlook without coping skills to dominate the outlook.

My question is : Men , how are you doing? What helps you stay in contact with the people in your life? For those who have lost connection and re-connected, would you share your story to encourage other men?

Finally, I lost my dad 6 months ago to complications due to Covid. I have lost connection with his wife , who is a sweet woman. The guilt of not staying in contact has weighed me down and has helped contribute to the sadness I am experiencing. I really want to re-connect and say I'm sorry.It happens especially to me when my blood sugar is low. I usually isolate and avoid any kind of human contact.So this probably a bad thing, but so far in my life I plan things to achieve with the next 5-10 years. When I was younger it was easier cause it was easy short steps like pass the next grade, get my driver’s license, go to college. Now that I’m 30 and have done all of that my only achievements are get married, get a house and get children all of which are hard to do and require effort from someone else (I’m working on the get the house part this year). So my question is what other achievements/goals did you all work towards in your 30s? Just wondering how else to improve myself.Mid-30s COVID surviving and ennui experiencing guy here. Feel like life has been pretty stagnant the last two years, and now thinking of picking up some not necessarily useful skills. I can already do things like cook, learnt another language, etc - so I'm thinking more along the lines of card tricks, or calligraphy, or what have you. 

Does anyone have any suggestions of skills they've picked up in the recent past just for kicks that I can steal?I'm just curious where other people are with this because it's something I feel very guilty about and if anyone can relate. I'm in my early thirties and have never been close with either of my parents. No childhood trauma or anything but they're very negative people who are overly critical and controlling. Growing up everyone were constantly screaming at each other and saying very mean things. I figured once I moved out they would divorce which is exactly what happened in my early twenties. Since the divorce they're both much happier and more self aware. But in a lot of ways it feels too late.

They since make more of an effort with their relationship with me I try to make more of an effort too. They both live thirty minutes from me and I try to see them both a couple times of month. But we have nothing in common, nothing to talk about besides small talk or politics (which I never like talking about). Anyways I can only stand being around them for a couple hours at a time. Most of the time I just feel angry, anxious, exhausted and feel bad about myself around them. They don't even do anything wrong anymore but I just find them to be draining. I feel so guilty about this because as I've gotten older I realize how they're not going to be around forever and they're the only people in my life and I want a healthy relationship but have no idea how or if it's even possible.

Wonder how your relationships with your parents have aged over the years as you've gotten older? Has it gotten better? Gotten worse?In another thread someone asked me why should adults read.

"Read" as in quality *books*.

At the bottom is the answer I gave.

A little bit after than conversation I got this great email from a Stoic email list I am on.

I am pasting it here as I think others would appreciate it.


---

from **[The Daily Stoic](https://dailystoic.com/)**

---



Oh, but I’m too busy to read, we say. Not now, with the kids, with the way things are at work, while I am finishing this up.

You don’t have time, really? As Julian Jackson writes in his incredible biography of the French liberator Charles De Gaulle, “While he was President, De Gaulle read two to three books a week—usually history, novels or poetry—and made a valiant attempt to keep up with contemporary literature. He always read the winners of the main literary prizes.”

The truth is, you aren’t making time to read. Meanwhile, the president of France found time to stay caught up on the greatest works of his day and of all time, in between bouts of saving democracy in France and governing the country for more than a decade.

You’d benefit so much if you made reading a priority. Think of Marcus Aurelius reading philosophy during his reign, just as other heads of state have benefited from reading Marcus Aurelius during theirs. Not only did De Gaulle make time for this, but, like we talked about in Read to Lead, he was even reaching out and talking to the authors he read. While still in office De Gaulle would write a letter to one young novelist whose work he enjoyed: “Your book drew me into another world, probably the true one,” he said. Like the main character, De Gaulle loved that he was “able to traverse it in zigzags.”

Seneca said that the mind must be given over to relaxing from time to time. It cannot be hammered repeatedly like an anvil. Instead, we need to be taken into a different world on a regular basis, so we can explore, forget, zig and zag. Books are perhaps the greatest portal ever created for entry into just such a world.

If you’re not reading, you’re not living, Seneca said, your life is a tomb for a living person. And books are the key to unlock that tomb and free you into different worlds...this one included.

How simple and great is that?



---

**My personal answer**

---

*"The worst book is better than the best movie." - the smoking man, The X-files*

Reading good quality books, fiction and nonfiction:

* helps you think
* improves your concentration
* improves your attention span
* improves your vocabulary
* improves you writing
* is a great aide for learning new things, you need to keep learning new things to live better as you get older.  Learning is also a pleasure that is an end in itself, beyond what it can do for you
* expands your world - by introducing you to different perspectives, different ideas, other ways of life, other places, in ways often not possible otherwise, like a novel written by someone in the 19th century or a biography of a historical figure. It lifts you out of your niche, out of your daily life to see beyond that
* is relaxing
* is entertaining and is often better quality entertainment than similar subjects in other media.

[Bill Hicks ' What are you reading for? '](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BwkdGr9JYmE) 

---I've struggled for years not knowing if the decisions I make are the best choice. It doesn't affect every area of my life but some of the big ones like career and relationships. I get overwhelmed to the point where I procrastinate making a decision or I freeze and don't make a decision until I have to and then it basically turns into a coin flip without weighing the pros/cons. I guess it's anxiety based but it's not completely debilitating where I can't take care of my responsibilities in other areas of life. Anyone else have this issue and been able to resolve it? Is writing pro/cons lists the best way to tackle this?Hi Everyone, 

I am struggling to identify what my hobbies are. 

It seems like so many of my friends and people in general have their thing. For example, one of my friends is a die hard skier and looks forward to every winter. Another friend enjoys dining at nice restaurants. Another friend enjoys visiting breweries and bringing back beer from all his travels. Another friend enjoys baking. I, on the other hand, enjoy many things and like to try everything (at the very least once). I recently began playing golf over the pandemic. I wouldn't call myself an avid golfer even though I enjoyed it. I like to eat at nice restaurants on occasion and I have a running list of restaurants I want to try but I don't seek out fine dining on the regular. 

What I do enjoy seems so mundane: drinking a nice cup of coffee, traveling, working out, going on a walk, chatting with people. Maybe this is a good thing. I mean, why not enjoy life's simple pleasures?

Anyways, thank you for coming to my Ted Talk!Is it a couple of hours (incl dinner) or less? I'm trying to figure out how to get more alone time on a daily basis (in the evenings).Title says it all. I want it thick, soft, f*ing luxurious, and I want it now. What do you recommend?I’m now 26, and I’ve noticed the past two years I’ve started tearing up during movies and have to fight back tears in public or around others. I’ve always been rather emotionless and never cry for anything. Anybody else having this issues or notice this?Wondering how often you guys go from clean shaven to deliberate scruff to full-blown pre-corona corona-beard. Does anyone else rotate seasonally? Like full beard every winter, goatee-only the rest of the year.

Related, roundabout what age did you decide "This is gonna be my default setting", and predominantly stick with one look most people would recognize you by?Hey folks. I’m on a timeline and having a hard time finding a house that checks all my boxes. I found one that’s pretty cool except, as the title says, it smells like cigarettes + air freshener. Have any of you tried to buy a house like that? How long does it take to get the smell out if I rip out all the carpeting and curtains?Things like hair/skincare products and other toiletries, cologne, haircuts, massages, gym memberships, etc.  Even things like mental health therapy and prescriptions too.I’m not talking about a bathroom break!

A moment that just happened which seems like “luck” or a “great fortune” that just changed the trajectory of your life for the better? 

Met someone special, got the job you always wanted, met someone who connected you with someone that helped you grow.  Maybe even played at the casino and you least expected it and won big. 

There are days at my 10 hour shift at work and I think, ah…when am I going to get my big break…

Anyone hit the gold?I thought this would be the best sub to ask, since I've received many helpful comments in the past here as well from men who have more life experience than I (M26) have.

Right now, I'm at a crossroad in my life. I see two paths before me:

Live to Work. Become a high-performing professional in an exciting field which aligns with what I've studied. It's about new technology that's in its infancy and could really contribute to a solution to climate change. It will give me a sense of accomplishment, and I also slightly feel the responsibility to step into this role. It will be hard, frustrating and I have to be all in to make it work. I'll have to move away from where I really want to live, and friends, hobbies and dating will have lower priority.

Work to Live. Get a job for which I'm not completely trained, but which is exciting as well. I am sure that I will get better with it over time, but this job will only serve to sustain my lifestyle. This will allow me to live in the place where I've always wanted to live, pursue hobbies, have a lot more free time, explore, make many friends and generally enjoy live. The job will not give me the satisfaction and sense of contribution that the first option will give me. It will also kind of mean that I won't take my responsibility to help combat climate change (I feel responsible because I could really contribute with my background)

It's a hard choice, and sometimes I wish I had a guideline in life which I could consult to base my choices upon. For now, I think I'll try the first option and see how it goes.Recently my uncle told me: "99% of the people I know ended up a bit dissapointed in what they expected making a career would bring them". This made me think a lot. I wonder what people who are   further in their career think about this dilemma. I hope to receive some insightful replies here.

EDIT: Thanks for all the nice and helpful replies, they are really appreciated. I, don’t know what to do with myself? Truly.

What is my purpose?

To experience life? How do I do that? What if I don’t enjoy it? 

My biggest question in life has constantly been, what do I do? How do I achieve some state of being content with existing? And I’ve read some many posts about this here but nothing works.

I feel my life is one big distraction from one moment to the other. I’m constantly trying to kill time or distract myself.

I have hobbies, but I weave in and out of interest with them, and in the end they often feel pointless and hallow. I rarely do any of them now.

I work a great job but I hate it. I don’t see a point in switching because the hours are great and I’m sure what I switch to might be worse. I don’t get paid much but i know i’s get fired if I switched to someone else because i’m an inconsistent employee.

I’m not interested in the entire / field industry I’m in. So you think, simple, switch to something else, but, I don’t know what to switch to. And on top of that with each passing year I find my attention span, focus, and mental capacity degrading. 

I don’t have any motivation to do anything, but at the same time I hate my situation. I know in the end, I won’t; or if I do, I’ll give up midway. But it’s not my job that’s the problem, it’s that I have nothing…in life? 

I don’t have a drive towards a single direction, no true ambition, just day dreams. I have a superficial light interest in many things.


I traveled a little, and while it’s enjoyable it often feels empty at times. Doesn’t erase the routine mundane life I have comes back. 

My dream was to have a life and kids with my partner but when she left I had nothing.

I have friends, but I don’t enjoy hanging out with them much as we have nothing in common. I’m just there because I need socialization in my life.

I am extremely lonely and have been mostly lacking in a very active social life. Never had a crazy fun 20s and my 30s aren’t shaping up to be better.

I get motivated to improve my life, and i’ll do something like go to the gym for a few months then i’ll think, what’s the point? I don’t even care to lift weights or how my body looks. The only time I ever want to look muscular is to impress a girl, but to me, I don’t care. 

I constantly think about women, and having a partner in life. I’ve had girlfriends. It didn’t work out. My last break up destroyed me. I still dream about that woman. Wanted to marry her. Wanted to have the kids and the white picket fence. 

Those past relationships haunt me. Tried the online dating aggressively for a few months and despite getting tons of matches, none of them went anywhere and it destroyed my self esteem. I shut down all apps and all social media and now I feel very secluded. Even with that, at this point, I’m starting to think, “what’s the point? They will leave me eventually?“ I turned down sex and haven’t been with anyone in over a year. I feel like a loser a lot the times, and I’m too scared to follow through or move on opportunities because I feel they’ll realize I’m a loser the more they get to know me and leave. And why wouldn’t they? I have zero ambition. 

I am very lonely; physically and philosophically and emotionally. 

I don’t have a motivation to make money or be successful, not because I have no interest, but because I often have no follow through. I just can’t keep up with anything before the ennui sets in. But I’ll be miserable about my situation.

All this time, and I haven’t found anything that makes me WANT to do the thing. I get interested in something for a few months then I lose it 

I sleep at 2-4am every night. I fixed it for a few weeks, and it made no difference on how I feel. 

Most of my 20s were spent the same way confused, lost, bouncing through life, not enjoying any moments.

To answer your questions, yes I’m depressed, yes I went through a break up a year ago, yes I went to therapy+ssris; didn’t help.

I just have no sense of who I am and what I’m supposed to be doing here. No idea how to be satisfied in where I am in life. I haven’t met a single person who’s this lost, all the time, his entire life.

tl;dr: what is my purpose? none of the daily parts of life are particularly enjoyable. grappling with my desire to do things and my inability to ever do them. feeling bored with experiencing how mundane life is. at the same time, nothing feels exciting. motivation issues, romantic hopelessness, lacking a purpose in doing anything. not drawn to any particular path, direction, no true discipline or motivation to go in any particular direction. feel lost. have always felt lost.I'm 31, enjoy running, and like to run 3-4 miles for cardio maybe twice a week. I ran 2 half marathons in my 20s but probably won't run any race longer than a 10k again. No major injuries thankfully. I do get hot knees after running every now and then.

Basically I don't have any major athletic goals, just want to avoid surgeries and be able to enjoy nice walks when I'm an old man if I'm lucky.I might only be a 23 year old man but I honestly hate how much pain most adults usually feel, I feel like I can't last one day without feeling any sort of pain. So my question for you man who are 30 or above 30 what were the worst thing you consider about adulthood?I just turned 30. Single. No kids. After turning 30 I began to question so many things such as do I want to do my current career for the next 40 years? I currently work in Business to Business sales and have been doing so for almost 3 years now. The grind is wearing me out and I hate feeling the fact I just turned 30 and now need to consider another path. I am interviewing around and getting a shit tonne of interviews so I know my experience is good and I am being offer some jobs with decent pay ( 80k plus). I have considered going into accounting for stability or some business/data analytics. I already have a bachelor and graduate certificate in an unrelated field.

I went to uni at 18. Smashed my first year in health science and then changed courses the year after to exercise science so I can get into grad school physiotherapy. I had turned 19 and got diagnosed with a skin condition on my face ( vitiligo) . I ended up with blown depression, failed lots of subjectd which lead to staying back extra 2 years. My marks suffered and I was unable to get into grad school physiotherapy.i had spent from 19 up to 23 travelling up to 1 hour a day to university for classes and 3 times a week to the doctors clinic for skin treatment to keep the condition at bay. Safe to say at an age where most people are enjoying their lives my social life was almost non existant. Once graduated at 23 I did a graduate certificate but at that point I was so worn out from the study, the travel and constant travel to get my skin treated. I ended up working casually at 23 and 24 as a security officer. At 25 I ended up getting my first full time day job and continued job on the weekends so I can start saving money hecause I felt so financially behind. I stopped my treatmentd at the doctors clinic because the time and travel wad afrecting my ability to travel for work. I ended up buying a small machine to use at home and skins been good since then. No outbreaks.

From 25 to 27, I got promoted. Then I got promoted again to work with the management team. My pay was still shit house. I had also dated and seen lots of women. I then made the jump to sales as I approached 28. Got my first corporate sales job in Saas. Did really well and was there almost 2 years. I got another job nownin fintech. And I absolutely hate it and now question if sales is even for me. I just turned 30 and I am having these questions now and whats bothered me is  lots of people my age have settled and popping out kids. Financially I have been able to save 100K in 4 years due to cutting costs, selling my car at 25 and working friday and sat nights. I workout everyday as it really helps aswell.

I havent been able to sleep properly lately though. I keep thinking my life has been a waste and keep thinking I will never make enough money to live in sydney, Australia or maintain a family. I keep thinking I fucked up in life. I am so over this feeling. Has anyone over 30 felt the same where they turned 30 and began questioning so many things?

I hate feeling like this and thinking I have some sort of undiagnosed anxiety, depression or trauma.Im 25 and when I look at 40+ guys they dont look as aggresive, motivated, full of life?

Wish you health and well everybodyGot into a discussion with friends. Most agreed that gaslighting doesn't have to necessarily be malicious or calculated. However,  one friend was adamant that there needed to be intent. What say you mature men of reddit?- This is not a gender-specific question, and I've also posted this same question to r/AskWomenOver30 as well.
- By basic adult life skills, I'm not so much looking for answers about emotional maturity.  I'm talking about basic stuff like cleaning up after yourself, staying financially self-sufficient, etc, shopping for your own clothes.
- By "other adults you know," it can include anyone from family members to friends/acquaintances to former SO's.Hi r/AskMenOver30, I would really appreciate your help!

* I am a computational social science student developing an online game which studies how people cross ideological divides on social networks.
* The responses from these surveys will be used as seed data for that game, but none of your personal information will be collected or shared.
* Each of the following links contains a \~10 question survey that will take 20-30 minutes of your time. Despite the length, previous respondents have found the surveys thought-provoking and enjoyable.
* Pick at random, they all offer a similar mix of topics. You can take as many as you'd like, depending on your time and interest.

I suggest [clicking here](https://www.random.org/integers/?num=1&min=1&max=10&col=1&base=10&format=html&rnd=new&cl=w) to select a random number from 1-10. Links to the surveys are:

[1](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSf1SB90RmerunkYQI9_Icy0S2EYr7G_m9jCyWNeUaR1lT_veA/viewform), [2](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdMOf6tEhLw1Aq16HDAjbF9wPKRn6kYGFmwztLJAPL1EYPlNA/viewform), [3](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSehH-C3gbK6Gzmd0I4R-CHCDGtp9_ALzg45VOOddS9Yc2Fspg/viewform), [4](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSfHut8N9KH8njcrxKuz7Qfql6rVRePzieqzxtTLa1UBkfxgMw/viewform), [5](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScqd_4D2as1nyB8QrGb22TXFtSKs_DpbQjXIWm6wbQqMAliaQ/viewform), [6](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdLE41f8Leyb5SGRXp3kku3lhjyyGQAfDdkD2YEhMbD38TegQ/viewform), [7](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSd83UR1SNs9Q-xDMz7YVD9-QxjInErpTu9mBP88Hy6LcHLW7w/viewform), [8](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSd2bi1IC_0plBAm4Ik0-FC2qcH3mLMr-1Np3epORXPRmrZSmg/viewform), [9](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSe207vQQ7lk3KnlGSk_Yb2m5511lYM3fkmworqvt7AAr7NI_g/viewform), [10](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScjMTdVgLPWPdCTV_zbcgAsiUSJf7dHSotNXVsXgA9TnAkpWA/viewform)I'll preface this post by saying I'm 27m, but thought this group may be appropriate to post as some of you all may have gone through something similar to what I'm experiencing. 

On the surface, I feel like I have nothing to complain about. I have a job that I like for the most part, it pays me well, no debt, no financial issues, I have parents and a sibling who love me, a girlfriend who wants to marry me. 

Yet, despite it all, I just feel lost and unfulfilled. Maybe calling it a "crisis" is overstated, but this past year I struggled with enough anxiety about the unknowns of the future that I started taking anxiety meds and talking to a therapist.

In many ways, I just feel directionless, spiritually unfulfilled, feeling like I'm just going through the motions of everyday life on autopilot and asking myself constantly, what's the point? To be clear, I'm not struggling with clinical depression or anything, but I am struggling with what am I striving for? What're my goals? Does any of this matter? And I feel like this lack of clarity is preventing me from making key decisions in my life such as marriage and starting a family.

Anyone been through this before or going through it now? Any advice you can share?only when talking or via messaging? both?

is it to sound less 'odd'?I left my corprate high paying job in las vegas , i got tired of it and how stressful it was. i got another job it was a temporary travel contract thats subject to renewal every year. it has been renewing every year for the past 5 years. i know that because i worked there before. unfortunately after i joined there has been a massive reduction in hours (this job used to have crazy overtime, like 60-70 hours a week, it became 20 hours a week) followed by a massive reduction in staff a few months later which forced me to sell my home as fast as possible because i couldn’t afford it. i had an emergency fund of 20k but then the AC failed completely, here is 7000$. i had to sell my home after i put the AC. all i had was 13000. that’s basically like a 3-5 months emergency fund if you dont work and if you dont have anything else break down

during all that time i was dating someone who she had the same travel job as me and she convinced me to move to north carolina. now we endup cobuying a condo in north carolina, now the messy part comes. we were supposed to be back to work end of january, i didnt get selected to return to the job; hence the reduction in force, now im in a new city with no job , no leads and my savings thats depleting slowly


im angry, confused and never regretted anything more in my life. i have been drinking all day and playing video games and just filed for unemployment. i have been sending hundreds of applications just to get rejection letters almost immediately. sometimes indont even feel like a man anymore, like why did i even leave, i wish i can go back in time and change how dumb i was. this was supposed to be a change to a better situation, but it turned out to be the complete opposite. im considering going back to vegas and trying to get my job back if it doesnt work in north carolina.but that means that i will pay 2 rents , which isn’t practical . i already not liking it here that much; we moved here because its closer to her parents but i didnt even notice that there is nothing here for me to do.i didnt expect the job to have a massive layoff. lots of my coworkers didnt get a call back, she got the call back but i didnt. 

there is now all these thoughts about how i wasnt good enough and im just mediocre at everything , i dont know how to stop these thoughts. 

anyone have any idea on how to stop regretting life choices and just move on? its killing me. this is basically like a fresh start

yesterday i got a call for a job that’s temporary for 3 months contract starts in end end of feb.  and im honestly tired of these BS jobs but i have to take it because there is no other options.Hey everyone...this is a difficult thing to put on paper but I've seen some fantastic discussion and advice on this forum and figured I could put this out here.

My childhood was wonderful. My parents were great. Nothing bad really happened to me. That is what I told myself my entire life. I dismissed and diminished the moments I'm told were things I should discuss. I would push back with...I'm fine now...others had it worse...nothing \*actually\* happened to me. Recently my GF has been healing from her childhood trauma and its been an ongoing discussion as we work to heal her when she pushed me to confront what she considered traumatic events.

Do we (as \~middle aged men) truly dismiss our trauma as nothing? Are we not traumatized when we should be? I've been banging my head over this for months now and reading article after article about "dismissing/diminishing" trauma has really made me think. I can 'poke' these moments in my life and feel nothing. I feel absolutely no fear...no pain...no sense of danger...nothing. I remembered those moments like I remembered a middling episode of Buffy the Vampire Slayer. Meh.

Anyway here it goes...maybe it would be healing if we speak our supposed traumas out loud even if we don't actually feel traumatized? I guess I will find out...

When I was 7 a 10 year old boy I was best friends with would come over to my house and convince me to take off our clothes, kiss and then he would lay on me. I won't go into many details but I'm pretty sure I was clueless about what was happening. Looking back with my adult eyes I realize something happened to that boy and I really hope he got the help he needed. That is all I think when I re-live these memories. I think I even said once to an ex I told this to it was normal for boys to do that. 

When I was 13 my mother worked late on Fridays and after school  had a solid 3 hours to rush home, grab my PC and heavy 13 inch CRT monitor and set up in my living room to watch TGIF lineup and play Baldurs Gate 2.  One gorgeous Georgia spring day, I got home early and opened all the windows up. I was deep in the game and Family Matters was on when my neighbor ran screaming across my deck(we had a shared backyard). Her hair was wet and she had no shirt on and was carrying her wailing naked baby. As soon as the door opened I heard another set of steps on the porch and a very pissed off dog. I don't think I ever saw the man...Anyway she was hysterical and in pain and I was...I don't know honestly...I don't know what I was. Someone broke into her bedroom while she was washing her baby and attacked her. Her dog threw himself on the intruder so she could run. I called 911 and then I stood watching Urkel build a robot while talking to the police and she shook in the corner. I didn't know what to say to them. I don't even know what I said even now. All I remember past that moment was going back to my room and seeing my window, about 15 feet from her window was wide open and I saw into her ruined bedroom. Nothing would have stopped that guy from coming into my house. 

When I think about that day I remember her fear...and the adult side of me truly aches for that trauma she has lived with. When I think about myself I dismiss me being a part of this...I was a surly 110ish lb closing in on 6 foot stick of a boy...the heck would he want with me? Of course he was going to the comely young woman next door...I have nothing to be traumatized over as I should have stepped outside and gotten a good look at the man. I should have thrown the brick at him that was covering our spare key. I should have ran and got my little league bat and chased him. I also feel shame for thinking how I feel about that moment when that young woman was the target and if it wasn't for her very good dog...well I have no idea what would have happened. 

My mother pointed out to me that my days of playing computer in the living room stopped around that time. I no longer rushed home and I started to have night terrors which was news to me as I don't recall them. I don't recall them catching the guy and my neighbors left their house not long after that. I hope they healed and are ok. I hope she felt safe again.

&#x200B;

When I was 14 I went to a waterpark with my cousin. He was 2 years younger than me and this was our freedom during the GA summer. Those days when my mom would get sick of us and drop us off with a crumpled 20 in my pocket and a time she would be back. Don't keep her waiting. 

I loved all the rides...I loved the waterpark so much...my favorite was the innertube rides that most have as their intro ride...it was the best ride in that park. You see the park itself was up a huuuuge incline to park. The tube ride took full advantage of that hill and it was wonderful. My cousin decided my 4th time down that ride was it and I promised to move on so I took my time down. He rushed to the bottom to move on to something else. I finally landed in the bottom pool by myself with my cousin starring daggers into me as he waited for me to drift to the side...well, parking lots on big hills have a major flaw...parking brakes fail. I don't remember much honestly aside from the smell of oil, gas and rubber and the view of a tire about a foot above me...thank whatever god is out there for the person who installed those chain link fences because it held for the 15ish seconds I needed to move...I even made a move back to get my tube before the 4 door sedan crashed right on top of that tube. My cousin and I stared at it for a solid 30 seconds before we saw a red faced middle age man haul down that hill and stare at his car...he screamed "Are you ok?" in total panic at us and we simply nodded. The teenager working the ride told us to get back as he jumped in the water...no idea why but man I get it. I would have done the same. This was probably the most exciting thing to happen all summer. I wonder how he retold that story to his friends?

Anyway...I do think about that moment sometimes. When I check my tires air especially I remember that smell...that mixture of gas, rubber and oil. But I don't think of it as a near death trauma right? It was just a bad day...I tried to tell my mother but she dismissed it as me exaggerating. I mean I get it...that's a wild thing to happen. If it wasn't for my cousin backing me up I wouldn't believe it myself. I do know that was the last time I ever went to that waterpark though. 

&#x200B;

I served in two of my countries wars. I recognize when I was in danger. I recognize what fear feels like with me. I know what it smells like on me. I am not one to laugh at danger. I freely admit my terror when I saw my orders. I remember the pain of seeing funerals...the reports of the deaths...knowing people who died and I'm very realistic on my capabilities while I was over there. I feel all of that...but when I go back to my childhood...I feel nothing. I recognize that this may not have been ok. These events may not be normal but until a few months ago...not far from my 40th...I never really gave them much of a second thought because I know so many other people with "real trauma". Maybe I'm shouting into the void but maybe these things need to be talked about freely? If these things are traumatic...then why do I fight so hard to dismiss them as normal events. I just don't know what to think.I just told my barber to give me the “Tom Sellek”, and I like how it turned out.*Asking for a male friend of mine
*polite, constructive responses only


career change at 60? 

he worked as a bartender for 30 years, has a 2 year degree in biology (from the 90s) and owns his home outright. He's in excellent health and excellent shape, so labor isn't an issue, but he has no interest in going back to construction.

Any suggestions?I noticed I am getting angry more as I am getting older.

I am 33 and I noticed it gradually increase from age 31.

I am getting extremely angry, just because someone doesn't change the side while walking on the sidewalk. I want to get into the fight just for that reason. I did not felt it before. 

Does it happen with you as well?What the title says. I feel like there is a good opportunity to make money off of the stock market but I don’t know much about it. I see some people who just do it a ton but I don’t get how you would stay so on top of it.I will be turning 40 in the coming months and need to pick a one of a kind gift to commemorate this birthday milestone. I’d love to hear some ideas from others on here as I’m having a tough time coming up with unique bday milestone gift ideas. A couple of notes:

* We travel plenty already to unique destinations
* I’m not in to cars at the moment as we don’t have space
* Budget is up to about $10k-$15k

Excited to hear your ideas!I’m in my early thirties, single and a 9-5er. I’m constantly caught up in nostalgia thinking about how great my twenties were and that the fun exciting phase of my life is well behind me. 

I kinda miss the weightlessness and not having responsibilities for anyone or anything but I do have my fair share of regrets for things that I have never gotten around to doing it in my twenties that I now consider too late or even pointless at times. Whenever I attempt to do grown up stuff I just get bored and long for the good ol days. 

How did you guys realise and come to terms with the fact that life’s isn’t gonna be the same anymore, was it a gradual process? Even better if someone can share their experience on how they made their 30s more exciting and fun?I was thinking about this and how much I always wanted to learn how to play drums or electric guitar. However I still didn't do it, and now I think I might be a little too old to start. Whta about you guys?

Anything you always wanted to do, but didn't do yet? Follow your passions!About 2.5 years ago, I moved to a big city where I didn't know anyone for a job. Covid hit 6 months later before I had any semblance of a social circle here and I've yet to really change that. Partly because of covid and partly because I'm not an overly social person to begin with. 

But I like going out and about and doing new things with other people. I don't really care for doing much by myself because I like sharing the experience with others. If I'm back in my "home" town where my old friends and girlfriend live, I love going out and doing stuff. But when I'm by myself, I never want to actually do anything or try new stuff. It almost just doesn't seem worth it the effort? Not sure how to explain it. I end up just sitting around at home talking to my old friends online, playing video games with them, or hanging out on FaceTime with my girlfriend. Or just dicking around on the internet. 

Don't get me wrong, I've done plenty by myself since moving but every time I do, it just seems like a massive chore to get myself out there. 

How can I learn to enjoy things by myself more?I am a twenty three years old male who is hoping in the future get in the business world, I have huge goals of building my own multimedia and entertainment company but I just don't technically know the first step in achieving this goal, I have been doing tons of research but I am still lost on the subject. If you are a man who do have his own business how did you done it and what sort of challenges have you face while getting started?Looking for advice from wiser men than me about what to do with the rest of my life. I started out in business and hated it, decided to become a doctor. Spent years getting a postbacc, taking the MCAT, getting volunteer and clinical and research experience. During that time I met a girl I really want to marry so I only applied to local schools. This application cycle is almost over and I'm pretty worried I'm not going to get in anywhere.

I'm trying to figure out what my next move is. I don't want to put off getting married and starting a family forever and med school is long enough even if I get in this cycle.

If I don't get in this year do I just try it all over again next year? What if I don't get in then either? Maybe I should be doing something completely different with my life? There are other jobs I can think of that I would like but I worry a lot about not making enough money to support a family (it's very expensive where we live).

Guys who are older than me....what's your advice? Costs aside, can this sort of lifestyle bring about a better quality of life? At present we can't find a nice house with a decent commute to work. If we go further out we can but it would be painful to do 1.5-2hours for the days we go in.Edit- as of 230pm +8GMT

There were a few comments that said that hair over beard 99/100 of the time and the answer is obvious but based on the replies, it looks like hair is the winner but not a runaway winner as some have mentioned. Maybe 60/40 in favor of hair over beard.

Also, https://imgur.com/IMmmP8A from the reply of /r/ihitrockswithammers

----------------------
I'm almost 40 with thick hair on my head but I cannot for the life of me grow a beard. I have splotches of hair on my face but it looks sloppy if I grow it out. Whenever I see someone with a full beard, it looks so manly and regal. I'm Asian but my dad can grow a full beard so I think I got it from my mother's side. Just wanted to get the inputs of the other men hear. Am I missing out on having a beard? Or should I just be thankful that I'm not bald as well?My daughter is in her 30s and has 2 kids. I thought she was doing good but I find out she's been evicted from her apartment and living in a hotel.

I want to help but I don't know if I can.

She was evicted before and I made suggestions for more affordable places but she didn't like those and picked one more expensive than the last one.

She used to be enthusiastic about school and learning but maybe in the past 4 years or so, she anti school saying she doesn't need a degree. She doesn't believe in public schools so the kids have never been to school. 

She drives Uber but I don't think it's enough to make a living. 

I guess what I'm asking if anyone can relate to sort of drifting along, and what turned it around for you?I’m curious about this. I started mine last year at 36. Realized something needed to change. That’s when I stopped drinking. Lost 70lbs and this November I started to get in shape rather than loose weight. In early December of this year I decided to get in shape. 

For the last month and a half I have exercised to an extent and intensity I haven’t done since I was 18. I’m signed up for a 100mi road bike race and I’m signing up for two triathlons this week. I can’t believe how great I feel and I was just informed what’s happening. 

I’m having my midlife crisis. It’s been 100% positive. 

I would buy a sports car, but I’m building a new house and it would be extremely hard to hide from my wife. 

So when and what did yours entail?Just turned 30 last week and have been contemplating if my current career is something I want to do for the next 40 years.. Been in Business to Business corporate sales for almost 3 years. My experience is within software and fintech. At first I enjoyed it, but the grind is wearing me down. Any guys on here that were in sales and moved to something else? I have been looking at sales operation analyst roles and salesforce administration/analyst jobs but would like insight from anyone that was in the same position.

Background: Finished degree in exercise science at 22 and failed a bunch of subjects due to health and psychological issues and was not able to get in graduate school physiotherapy as a result . Went into a bull blown bout of depression at 19 and failed lots of subjects. Worked casually at 23 and 24 and got full time job at 25 at call centre. Worked for 3 years over there, got promoted and then promoted to management. I jumped to sales account management with a saas company and nailed my targets. Was there for 2 years and now work for a fintech company.I know it’s supposed to do with energy levels etc but I’m finding it hard to see a clear pattern. For instance, I’m definitely not a morning person (takes me ages to get going) but if I’m able to motivate myself to start work at around 8am, I tend to get loads done. Likewise, if I run in the morning I feel great for the rest of the day… but my running times are way slower than they are in the evening and I don’t enjoy the run as much if that makes sense.

Just curious to hear from others. Are you a morning or evening person? And what patterns seem to work best for you?I am 48, 5'11 and 190 pounds.  I am naturally thin but with a gut.  I get lower back pain when I over-exert, including running.  I am not flexible.  I want to start working out in a way that is repeatable and habit forming and not overdo it.

I think it should probably start with a stretching routine, and maybe something like light squats and planks.  Maybe 15-20 minutes a day for a month or so, and slowly build it up.  I work from a home office so would like to do stuff right here on my office floor.

&#x200B;

Does anyone have the magic plan for me?

&#x200B;

Edit: You all have been very helpful. I will be taking all of this advice in. I have always known to go slow.  Now I know to go even slower. And to stretch properly.  I can do this, ha.  For real, thank you so much.Seeking advice from those who have walked away from the American Dream handed to you.  

I grew up in a household subsidized with food stamps.  Fast forward 20 years and my annual compensation now is +\- $600K.  The system worked for me and helped me climb into a new economic classes.  The system gave me an education and a shot at a coveted career.  

75% of me wants to walk from it all.  And the remainder tells me to stay for all of those who weren’t given a shot.  Do I owe it to the kids I grew up with not to waste this opportunity?

Is this a generational issue?  Is there a generation growing up soft? I’ve been coddled most of my adult life.  Maybe like Tommy Shelby, I need to be shoveling shit to stay grounded.  

Will someone over 30 point me in the right direction.I’m mid 30s and have no friends. We’ve all grown apart. I’m single with kids. It gets very lonely. How do you make friends at this age?My wife and I are getting to the point where we want a fresh start with our 3 year old. 

We currently live in a very cold area in the northeast leaving us bored and a bit depressed a good 6 months out of the year. In addition to that we are learning that my wife's family is quite toxic and my family while we get along don't seem to think of us as a priority.

My closest friends have taken off elsewhere, have died or have gone down the wrong path.

We love our neighborhood and our neighbors, but the weather really prevents us from seeing anyone this time of year and we are not much for winter activities.

How do you get over the anxiety of a big life decision like this when you know deep down it's the best thing for your family.20s is get the duck aligned.

Now I believe there are no timeline on what we should have done or accomplish. Also most of it are social construct on what should we be doing.

But what are some minor or even should accomplish from 30 years old and out?I’m not sure if this is the right sub for this but I’m hoping to hear from anyone that’s had a similar experience. 


On Sunday, my husband and a group of friends went on a couple hour long motorcycle ride to a restaurant they all like in the middle of nowhere basically. It’s something they all enjoy immensely. They aren’t your typical bikers, just very into motorcycles, working on them, riding them, etc. Not a club or anything like that. One of them is my cousin’s husband (W) and she (N) was also with them on her husband’s bike. A couple others had their wives/gfs with them as well. I was supposed to go but couldn’t find a sitter last minute for our 2 kids. 


On their way back about 20 mins into the ride, my cousin’s husband had a freak accident and wrecked his and another friend’s bikes. They were all ejected from their bikes but W got the worst of it and basically smashed face first into the pavement. My husband and the others obviously tried to help him but there wasn’t much they could do. My husband sat with him as he took his last breath. The ambulance arrived about 20 mins later and transported him. My husband had to ride an hour back home and we found out that he didn’t make it about an hour after that. 

My poor husband is absolutely crushed. W was an incredible friend to him and helped him with so much. That coupled with actually seeing him pass and the graphic nature of it has destroyed him. I’m trying my best to help and comfort him while also dealing with my own grief. I know mine does not compare to his. 

I guess I am just looking for advice on how to deal with this. Sometimes he acts completely normal and we laugh together as usual. Sometimes he just seems numb and distant and eventually breaks down sobbing. He has moments where he is short tempered and yells at me for small things. I’m trying to be understanding and not take it to heart because that is not who he is. But this morning he had an outburst directed at our toddler just out of frustration and it hit me that this can’t be ok. 

Also, he is supposed to see a counselor but keeps putting it off.

Any advice is welcome.I am  in a very bad place mentally, I am 24 yrs old will be 25 in 3 months time. I have achieved nothing so far in my life, I am stuck in a really low paying job . almost all my friends are making good money and starting to settle in their careers.  I believe, I will never be succesfull. my self confidence is crushed. I believe, I shouldn't be alive . It's a struggle to get up daily. there's this voice coming from inside my head which says no matter how much I try or how much  I work hard , I won't be able to settle in my life or make good money.  I have no will left to do anything, I will never be good enough. I don't have the courage to take my own life . now, the only thing I can do is wait for death to take me away .

&#x200B;Do you love your parents enough to have them as your "next door" neighbors?

EDIT: By that, I mean a home where your parents have their own living space and you (and your family) have yours.Like for most I can just say "oh I'm just tired" but some people try cheering you up or what to know how you're doing... and I feel its a catch 22, where as I can treat them like everyone else and lie (when I'm struggling) or I can tell them and share (which I think feels like I'm having them 'play therapist').

Yeah......I know this is a forum for over 30s but I couldn’t think of a better place to get advice on my situation 

I’m 26, in a 3 year relationship and I run a successful online business making good money 

On the surface all looks great, but I find I suffer with extreme bouts of restlessness

I wonder if I’m really spending my life how I want to, am I really in love with my partner, should I move country to experience something else while I’m young, should I spend more of the money I’m making or just save it all 

I think hitting 25 and 26 made me realise, damn my twenties are over and I’ve spent most of them anxious, over working and isolated 

I have a fear over wasting my time 

My friend circle has definitely shrunk since leaving college and the pandemic just made it worse, I find it hard to relate to people my age anymore

I think my biggest problem is having too many options (which I know is a privilege)

, I make enough to live however I want, I have an online business so I can work from anywhere, I’m young so I don’t have anything tying me to my country 

Anyone deal with this mid 20s restlessness? I would truly appreciate any thoughtsA phrase your parents told you or just the experience of life.Hello again!

I am turning to this subreddit for some help, insight, and wisdom.

Here’s my dilemma: (M34) struggling with career advancement. I am a top performer at my company. Won two awards in 2021; another the year before and have been recognized company-wide for my achievements. My book of business as an agent has reached 1M (within 15 months). I’m very grateful to be employed and good at what I do, I also really enjoy helping people, especially my clients with security in an uncertain world - *but* there’s no challenge anymore. I’ve maximized my career as an agent and I’m at the point where something has got to give. I’ve applied to numerous positions of my liking within the company and have been unsuccessful; I don’t want to do any lateral moves.

I would like to be a manager. I don’t have the title experience. But I have 10 years of leadership, training and coaching skills that have led to the success of other team members. I have tangible results with other colleagues, too. Applied to a sales manager role last month; it was given to an external hire. Hiring manager recommended applying to another manager role and I’ve been waiting a month to hear an update on an interview. I’m just looking for someone to take a chance on me.

I recognize that the easiest answer is applying elsewhere but every time I do they ignore my application and always offer another agent role. I don’t want to be an insurance agent anymore.

Lastly, I’ve been working remotely since 2018 so I know what I want in an employer (remote work, flexibility, managerial role, work/life balance, good pay) but with my current company, I don’t understand why I’m not able to move up. I’m fighting hard not be pessimistic but it’s getting exhausting. I’m losing faith and falling into the trap of believing other (negative) forces are at play here (nepotism, implicit bias, workplace politics, etc.) but I’m aware it could be a timing or an experience thing.

At least one or two times a week my manager and I speak about this and other work-related incentives and it’s just getting frustrating at this point. My manager has been nothing but helpful. He’s the only reason I’m still there.

What would you guys and gals do? Any advice?
So I've been in a rut lately and at the end of the day, I am closed off & dismissive to friends when they ask 'what's wrong/how are you,'....how do I apologize?

One instance was at the bus stop, another was seeing them at 24 hour fitness. Both times they tried talking to me and all I could muster was hi, then I walked away. I've been overwhelmed lately between work, personal life and just 'dealing' with life.

I know it's an asshole move but I don't know how to make amends besides texting them an aplogiy. Even then, it feels like I fucked things up by trying to sort it out/wallow (to get it out of my system) when they (inadvertently) snap me out of it when I just want it to pass by fully immersing myself in whatever shifty state I feel.At 46, I simply don't feel the urge to meet new folks, much less create new friendships.  I have a couple of high school buddies I shoot the shit with but my best friend and only close friend is my wife.

Folks who were in the same situation but somehow  lost your SO, what did you do to recover?  I feel like I have all my social eggs in one basket and I wonder if I should make an effort to expand it.It's taken me more time to accomplish milestones than others my age (career, romantic, educational, etc...).

Are there any procedures or methods to accomplish life's goals a little faster while not being reckless in terms of the execution?

Thanks.I am not that smart.  Probably somewhere around average intelligence.

But I do think things through and I can think critically and logically.

My immediate family is *also* not that smart.  *Also* somewhere around average intelligence. At least I'd like to think so, but sometimes they do seem really stupid.  They won't understand things that should be obvious. And they do not really seem have critical thinking skills.  They seem to belief things, not because they reached a logical conclusion, but because it "feels right" to them.

I find myself slowly getting frustrated by this.  I usually try to correct when they're wrong, because it is what I would want from someone else.  To correct someone who is wrong is to help them.  

But they don't seem to really receive what I'm saying.  I wonder if I just don't explain it well.  

I think the most frustrating part is that I feel like I am responsible to correct their incorrect beliefs. Not only because it is what I'd want from them if circumstances were reversed, but because it would feel wrong not to. Even disrespectful.  I don't want to just nod and smile and think to myself, "How nice to see my loved ones so charmingly naïve."  

If they did that to me I would feel like they kept something from me when they should have my back.  But is this exactly what I should do for myself? It does sound a lot easier and less irritating than trying to explain and correct everything.Advice: TIA .. Am I getting ahead of myself?

So…. 


I am  a male 29y.o turning 30 end of February 2022 

I am wondering if should make a career change.

I currently live in the Midwest and i am a inside sales supervisor at a small concrete supply store making $21.50/hr (basically capped out). There’s talks of me becoming an outside salesmen(commison , company truck, phone etc…)

I have basically worked up through this company for 5-6 years and have grown a relationship with the 14 total employees  ; reason 1 why I don’t want to just leave.

I started as a warehouse guy , to a delivery driver, to inside sales. The company is obviously doing great and I’m basically an outside sales guy already without being one.

I do like working here and deff like the people the guy I’m waiting to retire is basically a second father and deff a mentor to me in the industry And life. 

My question to you guys…. Should I start looking for other career opportunities since I feel kind of worn out and want to make more money? And this is not necessarily my dream job; or wait it out maybe wait til my mentor retires!

TIA: this is my first post so don’t grill me too bad  🤣✊🏽I threw my back out at work... not bad enough to not be able to walk, but it was rough for a week. That was like 3 weeks ago. I can get around, been over, etc. But it's sore as crap still. How long does that usually last? What are some tips on relieving/healing quicker? Thanks.I’m about to turn 33 this year, but I find myself constantly wondering if this is it to life? I feel like I was sold this false bill of goods about life, college, and career that has failed to live up to expectations. I constantly feel like I’m taking crazy pills while everyone seems to be pretty happy with working, pushing out a few kids, watching Netflix, retiring, and dying. Does anybody else feel like this or am I just super depressed? This can’t be it. Can it?My brother is still very much on a journey. He struggles to hold a job, and as of right now has been out of work almost two years. 

* He got prescribed Xanax when he was 18, and apparently was already a very heavy drinker at the time. 
* He sort of went to college for a couple years which ended with him taking out student and personal loans, not paying for school, and pocketing the money.
* Moved out of my parents' house after they got divorced (2011) and was semi-homeless for years.
* Moved in with my dad a few years ago to get off the street/couches.
* Heavy drinking and Xanax use have fried his brain to the point where he comes across as "slow" now. He's definitely sober from alcohol now, but 
* He can't really do manual labor right now because of knee problems. He was doing bike deliveries before the knee got really bad. 
* He can't be around his friends or he'll slip back into drinking/drugs (this has happened multiple times... he's one of those people who has one sip of alcohol and goes on an uncontrollable multi-day bender... last time about two years ago he disappeared for a week and my dad found him in a salvation army sobering center).

Needless to say, he has his demons. My dad's idea is to set up a trust and pay him a monthly stipend. He's worried that he'd burn through a lump sum of money. I'm not sure how I'd take that as him.

I'm just looking for general ideas I guess. My dad had a heart attack last year. He's in decent health, but it was a reminder that it could all just end at any time. My brother took my parents' divorce very hard and he will not talk to her at all.Either college, or high school countCan you guys speak some sense into me. I want to buy a BMW I8 and travel a lot. Probably a lease swap would end up costing maybe 15k for a year of owning a dream car. Its not really reliable so I wouldn't want it much longer than that anyways.I'm feeling a bit bored with my usual choice of websites, and frustration with too much coverage on topics I don't care about (e.g. NFTs, Wordle, etc.).

Outside of social media, my most visited sites are (in no particular order):
1. The Verge
2. The Guardian
3. New York Times
4. Doctor of Credit
5. My Money Blog
6. YouTube
7. Tech Meme
8. Some niche hobby related sites (kite stuff)

What are yours?Hi, I'm a class 12th student looking to take an undergrad course from india
My plan after undergrad is to move to Canada take a one year diploma, work for 2 years and take MBA from there
I'm confused as to what undergradcourse to take bba or bcom
and which college in India to take from as wellI unfortunately have to get a new couch. I purchased my current couch from HHGreg during a store closing sale 5 years ago for $500. It's a fake leather recliner sofa. Very comfortable and i often sleep in it instead of my bed and i love it.

Its starting to look very worn out. Who would have thought fake leather wouldn't last forever lol. I also am pretty sure getting new fabric (I can't spell the word i am looking for and my phone has no clue what i was trying to spell) will cost way more than what i spent on the couch.

The couch i want will be used daily, some days for hours at a time. The fabric must be durable enough to withstand my 50lbs dog jumping on and off, and easy to wipe my dogs fur off. It must be a straight couch. No sectional or L shapes and must comfortably seat 3 adults across.

Whats a reasonable price for a couch like this? I think my perception is skewed because i got my couch a long time ago on sale.Hi,

I'm a single man in his mid 30s. Apart from the pandemic and its lockdowns (I WFH since March 2020), the past 5 years have been rough: my dad was diagnosed with cancer and died after 18 months of chemotherapy, my grandmother (whom I loved very much) died of old age a year later and my girlfriend of 9 years (who I was engaged to) broke up with me a few months ago. Like many people, I have less and less friends as time flies by.

Recently, I have more and more difficulty accepting apartment life (neighbors playing their music too loudly and frequently to my taste and complaining that our (my pets and I) footsteps are too loud, etc.) and I'm considering buying a detached house to live in a peaceful and quiet place (and have a yard for the dog and a (vegetable) garden to take care of). However, it will take some time for me to save for a down payment and I won't be able to afford something close to the center of the large city I live in, but I'm unsure I'll be able to cope with staying that much longer in the place I'm renting now.

So I'm considering moving back with my mother in my small hometown (that I left 14 years ago) 1.5 hour away. I believe it would be a peaceful place to rebuild myself, I would be able to reconnect with my mother and it would allow me to save for a down payment. We'll still WFH for a while and once the pandemic is over we'll do hybrid work, so I wouldn't have to commute more than 2-3 days/week. In 1-2 years, I would buy a detached house between the large city I live in now and my hometown. Maybe I would have another job, but I expect it would either by fully remote or hybrid or close to the place I would buy. Obviously I don't expect to make a new girlfriend while I live with my mother, but it isn't something I'm ruling out later.

So, am I crazy to consider:

* Buying a detached house as a single childfree man in his mid 30s? Especially if I'm not ruling out having a significant other and children one day.
* Moving back with my mother while I'm in my mid 30s, to save for a down payment and rapidly find some peacefulness?
* Buying a place anywhere in a 150km corridor (as long as it's at least somewhat close to a medium sized town)?

I'm sorry if that was a long post, but I thank in advance anyone for its input!

Edit: This sub is a great community! I'm sorry if I won't reply to everyone (you're so numerous), but thank you to all the ones who replied!Hello guys,

I am planning to make quite substantial financial decisions in the upcoming years. Sacrifice now for a better endgame.

I am and will remain childfree.

I have a rather decent house for a young family in a very quiet suburb area. I am currently renovating the house to increase it's value (it really was a fixer-upper when I got it).

The house in itself is fine for us, however, the land is way too small; I would need at least 8 parking spaces and a garage with a lift.

We plan to wait out the covid house price BS and the morgage renewal to move out.

At this point, this would be quite a substantial investment for the land, which I will have to cut into my hobbies for a while. It would imply doing all the effort of buying a new place, renovating mine for sale (as opposed to renovate it for our likings) and find a new one.

The question I have at this point is coming from relatives that told me that my car passion is a pass that will stop over time. I would find it quite annoying if I put all that effort to make the perfect setup only to stop caring overtime. I have been pretty hardcore in the last decade, and it has only gotten stronger over time.

Thanks guys!

Edit: I meant 8 *parking spots*, to park cars and trailers outside. The garage isn't to park a car in, but to be used as a workshop to build one.24M but I like coming to this sub for the fatherly advice I never got. 

I’ll preface this by saying that I’m emotionally stunted and am seeing a therapist soon to deal with this.

My sister is planning on taking a trip abroad for her birthday; I found out while calling my brother who lives in another state and also from overhearing my sister and other brother talking about the trip. It hurts to be overlooked and not be invited on what seems to be a family trip, I was planning on talking to my sister and asking if I could go, but it still burns being forgotten about and having to ask I can go. 

I’m not popular or handsome similar to my brothers, and this has happened before in other situations so I assume this plays a factor in it. 

I plan on talking to my therapist about this and other issues, but I wanted to post this to see if any you have dealt with situations similar to this? In my mind I keep telling myself that I don’t care but deep down it is saddening to not be included by your own family. 

ThanksI have a habit of making jokes and trying to be funny every time I am having a conversation with friends or colleagues. If I am with a group of friends, I unintentionally make some joke about a friend. For example, one of my friends watches only classic movies like one by Bergman or Fellini and doesn't watch commercial hits like marvel movies or John Wick. My friend introduced me to many good movies. But during a recent meetup, I made a joke about how I go home and watch "Airplane movie" after watching classic movies with him to maintain sanity. That's a real dick move on my part. 

I don't know how to talk to people. I really would like to talk normally and respectfully with people but I don't know how.

Any advice will be most helpful.Just wondering how often you guys are shaving the dome during the week?  Working from home I don't have the need to do it as much as I use too but I feel so unkept when I don't do it often.  The thing is, my skin feels a lot better with limited shaving.  Maybe I need a new routine?Have you ever left a good paying job to start your own company? I did last year and I’ve been successful so far. But, I’m worried and uneasy most of the time. Can anyone here relate and give me advice?Hey Reddit.

I am living with my parents and have nothing going on. Its maddening. I have nightmares about this kind of thing happening to me and Im living them.

I have come a long way though. My life started out on the wrong foot. Some serious depression lead to drug use and nearly a decade (all of my 20s) in and out of rehab.

Ive been clean since 2016 but being such a late starter on life has been an emotional struggle all its own.

I have ambitions/dreams to get a masters in a field that has been a love of mine since childhood but because of covid and some other factors, my school career which is probably 40% complete is on hold.

I am living with my parents in my hometown. Things are very expensive in this part of the state. I am very lucky to have a father who built a construction business (pun not intended) and I haven always had that work to fall back on.

I appreciate parts of it but ultimately its not for me. Reconciling the dilemma of what is going to happen with the company when my dad is too old to continue with it... that still haunts me a bit. I have two other brothers who are also working in the company so I am relieved it can stay afloat and in our family.

I really loved being in school. Absolutely. I loved tutoring in English and exploring new subjects. I felt for the first time since childhood a sense of joy and pride and accomplishment. But Ive been out of school now after only completing my Associates degree because of covid. I would rather be in school in person, you know? I need that social interaction.

So, in my hometown, theres is nothing to do and I have no friends. Outside of the occasional Alcoholics Anon. meeting I am alone. I work most days about 8 hours. It takes a lot out of me. I try to plan to go on an adventure and check out a local music venue or coffee shop but after work I'm pooped.

Honestly things are kind of dark. Im turning 33 this week and I have shattering visions of becoming a shut in. Accomplishing nothing. Our elderly neighbors each have an unmarried adult son who never comes outside. Im so afraid of that happening to me.

So, Im reaching out to others because all this fear and depression is going to make me sick and returning to drinking or drugs is not an option.

I just need fresh perspectives and advice from peers.

I want to come to terms with reality or strengthen hope and effort to reach my dreams.I’m 30 yo and have been living abroad in three different countries for the past seven years (always with the same company). During the pandemic I found myself back in my hometown, working from home and enjoying the closeness to friends and family. While it’s been nice to have a life after work - something I didn’t have in the city I previously lived in due to the fact that I moved right before the pandemic started - I still feel like wandering the transit area at an airport, unsure whether to “leave the airport” or “take the next flight”. By “leaving the airport” I mean quitting my current job which I don’t enjoy anymore (which I’d need to do, as I soon need to return to the country of employment) and settling down. Maybe even taking one step back (e.g. lack of jobs, half the salary) to move two steps forward in the long run (finding a place where I belong, stopping the restlessness of moving every two years, forming a family, build a network for a lifetime). By “taking the next flight” I mean moving somewhere else. To be more specific, I just received an interesting job offer by a former manager to move overseas - in my case from Europe to the US. Most of my friends in my hometown are in long term relationships, starting to have families on their own and feel rooted here. I’m single and long for another change in life. I fear that if I decide to make the move, I’ll be back at square one in two years time again, wondering whether now’s the right time to move back home. Do any of you have advice?Remember playing on a team whether football/basketball/soccer and being super fit and hating practice? “You can’t play in the game unless you show for practice!” 

Now being 35 I’m in the Air Force and we do PT but it’s just push-ups sit ups and a 1.5 mile run.
I used to be fast and I used to love working out but I feel like I lost that “Alpha” feeling. Has anyone ever felt this and how have you Al turned it around to where you workout so often that missing a day makes you feel guilty?I've managed to screw up my neck, from my shoulder blade all the way up to my jaw. How do you stretch and loosing things up?I am from Louisiana and has called Colorado home for the past 8 years. I felt like moving back to my hometown would change my emotions about living here especially with children now, but now I’m regretting the decision heavily. The rationale was to be closer to family and to have my daughter around family, but we left a life back in Denver and loss is too overwhelming. This is twice now that we tried this move. Has anyone else experienced something like this? I feel like we’re on the verge of U-turning again. Not sure what to do!

Edit: thank you for all of the responses and experiences! I’m reading each one and I’m glad to know that a good life can be lived without family being right around the corner. I can’t help but feel that I made a backward move instead of staying forward.Hi,

I was wondering if any of y'all might share what going to law school was like in your 30s.

How did you study for the LSAT? Choose schools? Did you get on with other students? If you began working, what was the experience like?

I'm going to be 31 in a few months. Did well in undergrad but was depressed, isolated and aimless--unemployed for about a year after graduation before scrapping together an IT career and living in the big city for a while doing big city things. Abandoned that career when I was 28 when I realized it was taking me away from the life I wanted for myself (isolation from constantly working alone, not a "computer-y" kind of guy at my core, etc). I've been traveling for a while and got into forestry work. I think I have at least another 2-3 years of living and working in the mountains left in me and I don't want to end this lifestyle quite yet. But I'm planning for the future.

No kids, no woman, no house etc.My oldest brother has been struggling to find a solid career path. He recently bought a house with his girlfriend (her parents helped fund it) who works a normal 9-5. He keeps up the house, does some freelance work and plays music in a few local bands. Because of some trauma issues and a nasty divorce, he never really found a traditional career path. He's had many professional experiences and has a nice resume, but has been struggling with interviews, follow up and landing a solid job. It's starting to really weigh on his relationship, mental health, and self esteem. How can I encourage and support him? Thanks in advance for all help and advice.2 months ago my son was born and I am finding it very difficult to get attached to him. I also have a 3 year old daughter and she was my little princess from day one. I love her deeply and I'd do anything for her. As a newborn, I spent a lot of time with her and we developed a great relationship. However, with my son I just can't make that happen. I don't feel any attachment and at times I find myself resenting having a new child. I try and spend time with him and force myself to love him, but I just don't. It scares me because I had a dad that was never around and didn't participate in raising me, so I have always wanted to be a loving and dedicated father. I wish that I could have a great relationship with him like I do my daughter so I'm coming here for any tips. Have any of you been in a similar situation and what did you do to learn to love them?

Edit: I wasn’t expecting such a large response so thanks for everyone that did. I’m glad to see how common it is and even more glad to see that most people found that love in time as they continued to care for the kids. Thanks again!I'm 53m and have been an insurance adjuster for almost 30 years.  A few months ago I quit my financially secure but super stressful job and have been mired in anxiety and depression since. I recently got a new job in the same line of business but likely less stressful (fingers crossed) and less pay but I don't start back for another week. Positives: no debt, no wife or kids, about 50k in savings.  Negatives: no passion for the job, no real interests, will have to relocate to the big city and go back into the office.  I could hang out a while longer and look for other companies or I could just jump back into it and see it's a good fit.  Not sure I'm doing the right thing.  Would like to see any advice you guys would have.  Thanks!Hi Everyone, 

Relatively new to the sub and grateful that we have a platform like this to discuss the pressing issues. I have had a fear of confrontation with others for a while now, specifically strangers and every time something happens I go home kicking myself or feeling less than. I regret not standing up for myself and that I've disrespected myself for not facing something I fear. I also tend to hold onto to that memory for a long time afterwards and how it made me feel. My father was never really a "man's man" which for me is OK, I learnt so much from him but how to stand up for yourself with bigger men or more "loud" men was never something I had to do,

Every time I sense an impending situation my emotions bubble up, my heart beats faster and all I can think about is, will he punch me? will I get hurt? what do I say to prevent that from happening? While I don't care for violent confrontations and will always attempt to avoid them regardless I would like to know how to handle those situations without my methods being motivated predominantly by fear. 

&#x200B;

2 recent examples come to mind:

&#x200B;

1. My brother was visiting the new city I had moved to halfway across the world and we decided to do a full on guys night. Both headed to the old school barber for a straight edge shave and haircut and then put on our best suits and went to a bar/club. Walking in there was a table of men and I could hear one of them say "nice suit" and snigger together with the others. I shamefully said something to try and lighten the mood which was ineffective and I felt bad for not just saying something like "Fuck off" etc. Later that night when we were leaving one of them was in the lift and said "Nice cheap suit" and I remained quiet (hating myself). On of the other random patrons in the lift even suggested something I could have said which was nice of him but made me feel worse. I still think about that night. 

2.  Walking home from work the other day I was approached by a guy and a girl who asked "can we      walk with you?" Confused I said fine. So they start walking alongside nice enough and then the guy just asked weird questions like "Are you gay?" "Do you have a gun?" "Do you know where to buy cocaine" and other questions like where are you from etc. I could help but feel like it was some fun they were having at my expense but I couldn't tell and I didn't know how to call them on it. I ended up answering all the questions but again felt like I just let people walk all over me. 

TLDR: Normally a funny magnanimous guy and get along really well with people but when it comes to confrontations I think my insecurities of not being liked by everyone overshadow my ability to effectively handle confrontation and instead I try being friends with them, then I hate myself. 

Thanks for readingI don't think I can be. It's really a struggle to find things to talk about. My parents have very limited interests, and they have never been ones to offer advice or bounce around thoughtful ideas.  From my perspective they are a bit shallow.  And I don't mean that as an insult.  We just think about different things because we've had different lives and are wired differently.

We talk about once a month just to catch up, and I'm trying to accept this. We can be in contact. We can be kind and friendly to each other. But I don't think we'll ever be friends.I turned 31 this year, finished my bachelor's degree in geomatic engineering six months ago and I can't find a job in that field. I live in a country where finding job as a foreigner can be a real challenge. My question is how fucked up am I at this point?  Do I really have a chance to start my career at this age?Let me start of by saying I am grateful for my father and mother in law. They are the old school, work hard type of people. So this question is not directed at them. 

Just I dread the “real” questions they ask. 

Asking questions why I don’t have a house yet. I don’t know how to explain it to them that the housing market is not the same as back in their age. Houses here in the US is half a mil. If you want a cheap house you would have to live in nowhere. 

Im only 31 yrs old and I do not know anyone at my age that owns a house/apartment. No one from my highschool that I keep contact with. No close friend. 

The questions is not to target my in-laws, but is having a house in this day even possible? Men here who have a house, is it paying off real good as you are better off?I am 30 year old guy, recently married to a 27 year old woman. Both of us come from very conservative families and have little to no sexual experience. We've been trying to get intimate with each other lately, but whenever we kiss, my wife complains about my stubble causing irritation and rashes on her face. I have tried shaving just before we get intimate and though that apprently reduces the irritation, it's still quite inconvenient for her. How do you guys deal with this? Is there any oil or lubricant I could use that would reduce the friction? I'd appreciate your help in this regard.So my neighbor is having a Vasectomy next week. we are pretty close and share many marriage, military service and kid stories. I am trying to figure out if there is an appropriate gift to get while he... um ...recovers ? or should I just ignore it and not make it all weird?What is the nicest compliment you've received in your 30s?Has anyone noticed the prevalence of women in yoga pants over the last 1-2 years?? 
I know more people are working from home and all that but damn either they’re working doing squats all the time or these clothing companies have just really innovated the female physique!!!I’m (34m) feeling like I’m approaching a midlife crisis. I’m relentlessly evaluating my life before me and what’s ahead. I’m struggling at all odds to put this feeling from my head. 

How did you successfully overcome this? 

Serious replies appreciated.I'm a 37-year-old man, and I would say that I have ticked off most of the typical "doing ok"  things that would be expected of a guy at like a low level of successful in life. Got a solid job, wife, kid, and a house.
My problem, or I guess irritation is that while I've gotten here at this point in my life, I'm feeling like feeling like... I don't know, " this is it, I'm going to be working everyday until I die".  I'm equal parts of mad at the previous generation. Reassuring me that so long as I worked hard and kept my head down, I'd be cruising and retire early, and at the younger generation who's now into cryptocurrencies, platform trading, NFTs, and all sorts of other stuff they have the disposable income to invest in, learn through failure, then succeed at. 

Don't get me wrong, I know fully well how lucky I am to be in my current situation in life, where I'm not wanting for food, a roof over my head, or anything like that, and I can instead complain about not having the right opportunities for the future. But I still feel like I'm just...stuck in life,  in the 9:00 to 5:00 for however long I have left, and it seems really bleak. 
 Anyone else feel like that, or is it just me??I (31m) work at a public college and realize that a lot of my colleagues don’t have the basic skills to know how to use Office Word or Excel. It gets even more complicated for them when it’s done through Google.

Many of them don’t know how to create breakout rooms on Zoom, let alone know how to join Zoom rooms.

I’m not faulting them in any way, but wanted to know how I can avoid being technologically illiterate in my later years of my career.I have the opportunity to work at a prestigious institution far away (10hrs) or work at a decent institution in my hometown. Both are high paying.

We have a 2 year old with a lot of support and family here and my wife has a decent job she can keep if we stay. What is the right thing to do?Over the past 5 years, I managed to get promoted twice at my current company and now make close to 90K per year. I feel extremely lucky (I have worked my ass off and proved myself), but in the back of my head, I always think "What if you lose this job? What if you end up broke again without a degree? You'll be back to square one."

So here's my dilemma - a lot of it comes down to anxiety, but I also know that without a degree, if I ever lost my job, I'd have to rely on work experience alone to secure another well paying job and I'm sure that's not easy.

I want to have a backup plan and start working towards my education. My job pays for school, so if I go straight for my Bachelor's, that's about 4 years down the road with working full time and a family.

If I go for a certification, I can get one a lot quicker first just to pad my resume and then go for my Bachelor's after.

Without getting into too much detail on what my job is for privacy reasons, I basically deal with the legal side of things for a large corporation. My current role involves training new hires, has a lot to do with assessments, quality control, making sure records on our side can be complied with, and making sure new hires know what they're doing. It's a mix of legal and compliance.

For a certification, I'm thinking Project Management is probably the closest thing to what my job entails, although I'm not a manager. I'm pretty tech savvy but have no desire to get into coding. I've also looked into an IT certification but my job isn't really IT related.

Lastly, for a Bachelor's degree, I did start a class last year to obtain a degree in Organizational Leadership and Management but stopped when I had some health issues that have subsided.

So now I'm wondering, do I continue my Bachelor's or first get a certification and then go for my Bachelor's after?

The thought of losing my job is what scares me the most because I'm the main one bringing in income while my wife works part time to take care of the kids.

I just want to be prepared and have a backup plan so I never end up broke again.I'll go first.  That I, the man, am still visible.  That my efforts as a father are not in vein, that my shortcomings as a husband are forgiven, and that every once in a while, while I am not looking, someone is still looking admiringly at my wrinkled balding ass.  To all the dedicated ghosts in here.  I Love You Guys!

Never gotten an award. Thank you,  you kind stranger!Since I was young, I've sort of taught myself to often just keep quiet about my goals and plans. To just pursue what I want and tell people about it afterward. 

Some background: My mother, who I love very much, always had a tendency to be a bit protective and also downplay my enthusiasm because of it. For example, when I wanted to pursue a masters degree (which included a pretty tough year, combining it with a job, long commute) her very first reaction was pessimistic (I told her after I already finished the entry exam).

Next week I have a job interview for a job I'm interested in. Because of the above described tendency I was reluctant to tell my girlfriend about it. I still decided to tell her about it and her first two reactions were also negative (she's very supportive btw and our relationship is awesome). "oh but city X is quite far away.. You're probably gonna deal with difficult students in that job".

For me, a reaction like that makes me feel like I'm not wrong about keeping my plans to myself sometimes.. But I'm also ambivalent about just pursuing stuff without sharing it with my loved ones.

Anyone recognize this? How did you deal with it?
I don’t like it. But I can say that when I was young I was so funny, I was voted the funniest guy in my classes. I was always cracking jokes(and getting in trouble for it). Eventually I wised up around and got quieter to stay out of trouble, and became less silly and my funny bone slowly withered.

I can say that around 27-28 I got very serious and a lot less silly. I’m 31 now and I rarely ever truly laugh or think of anything funny. 

Now I feel so…stiff…so serious…just very stiff It’s like I have no sense of humor. No funny bone in my body. I can’t think of things quickly because I have so much on my mind.

Definitely I’m a lot more serious, more broody, very serious. Usually my mind is full of ideas and plans and what I should be doing next. I rarely find anything funny. Most content I watch is serious or informative or creative. I dislike dumb memes and typical content the masses enjoy. Last partner i met, after they got to know me, told me I was too serious and not as funny as they thought I was and I thought about it a little and they were right.

Anyway, have you felt changes in your sense of humor or silliness as you’ve gotten older? Are you more stiff and serious?To be clear, we have lots in common and they're good people who never act above others. And I'm also content in what I do (despite the lower pay) and am not looking to keep up with them. 

This is more about the self imposed discomfort that I'm putting on, ummm... myself. Maybe I'm looking for a new perspective to help me whenever I have these rather stupid intrusive thoughts.I want to attribute it to pandemic with these last two years flying bad (but not in a time flies kind of role) but I honestly feel like everything hobby-wise is a waste of time since I could be focused on a career or productivity? It's an odd feeling to think "oh you could do something else / better". Originally this feeling only came from watching television or playing video games.

And example would be how I sometimes think "oh instead of listening to music, I could listen to a podcast", or reading science fiction over something that could build some kind of set of skills or a better mindset.

I'm well aware that making yourself relaxed or enjoying yourself / decompressing is ideal but unless it helps to make me money or is healthy, part of me wonders why bother? I do realize it's sort of a workaholic feeling, as in while I don't enjoy working extra hard, it's a weird balance of feeling like what I do is actually making a difference beyond myself.Often time we see posts asking for advice for men in their 20s. I wanted to get a little more specific and was hoping if older men could give advice specifically for the following two age groups. Thanks !I'm not even sure where to ask. I cannot build a good fire in my new house that is worth anything.

The chimney was cleaned, the flue works, there is a basket for wood. 
I store the (store-bought) firewood inside my house. It looks clean and dry, and is a decent, fairly uniform size. I have commercial kindling, and I use a blowtorch and lint. 

My wood is charring on the outside and not burning in a nice, fireplace way. it's not overly smoky.

My old house had a coal insert with all these crazy controls, and that worked fine for me, (https://coalpail.com/coal-forum/download/file.php?id=68839)  with wood, which in retrospect, maybe wasn't safe.

 im just failing with the most straightforward fireplace I've lived with. 

Ideally, I could build a fire in a few minutes that lasts for a little while,  but I'm starting to contemplate gas.I am a (M21). My father passed on 4 months ago and he was the pillar of everything in my family. When he was alive my family lived a very comfortable life and had little to worry about but ever since he passed on it's been difficult. Everyone's eyes in my family shifted towards me and i have found myself dealing with so many new responsibilities as i try to fill the shoes my father left . I am still a student in my third year,i have a side hustle reselling products and i work 2 part-time jobs just to make ends meet. I do my very best to handle everything but at times it gets alittle overwhelming because i have no father figure to consult or look towards when i feel lost . 
I am seeking for advice on how to live or approach life as a young man. I will appreciate anyone kind enough to offer any advice .I know it's petty and irrational, but it's so hard not to hear about someone else's compensation or major promotion and just feel angry that I'm not getting the same. I hate the feeling. I wish I could just be happy for others and be happy with myself. I'm in my mid thirties and feel like most of my classmates, colleagues and friends have moved light years ahead of me. I should be happy for them, but I guess I'm just angry at myself.. Any one else feel this way or know how to get out of this?For context, I'm 33, married, with a 1-year-old baby. I feel like every book is either about young 20-somethings dealing with all the passion and pain of being young and stupid and in love, or about older people looking back on their life with longing, joy, or regret.

I'm wondering if there are any good books about getting older but not being old, getting married, working in a job you sort of like and sort of don't, having kids, etc. Maybe it's too dull a subject matter? Maybe there's just not enough emotion there to be worth writing about? But I feel there must be something worth reading, and I just haven't found it.

This was prompted by reading Normal People by Sally Rooney. I very much enjoyed being a witness to this little slice of younger life, and found the characters well rounded and engaging. But I could also really feel their youth. It made me nostalgic for that time in my life, and that's great, but now I'd love something that offers me perspective on the time I'm currently living through - not just navel-gazing for a time that was.My cousin is a high-end jeweler and is giving me a crazy deal on a very expensive engagement ring for my soon-to-be fiancé. 

It seems he is not going to make much, if any, profit on this business exchange. Him and his business partner, who has designed for celebrities, are currently designing the ring with the diamond my fiancé picked out from their store. 

What is a good gift for these two gentlemen, who are providing me an amazing experience and deal on an engagement ring?My whole life people talk to me with the upmost disrespect and I for some reason can’t muster up the energy/courage to say anything. And it always gets worst. The only factor I think that is inviting this behavior is my physical appearance. I have no facial hair with round cheeks and am only 5’7”. I’m also 30. I often wonder is there a biological reason why. Like I mean do certain physical appearances trigger the carnal reptilian part of the brain that says “attack”. Please any advice from anyone whose been in a similar situationI've been through some major life events in the last couple of years. I'm divorcing my wife after being lied, cheated, and betrayed. I'm really a single parent to 2 teenagers. My daughter has been diagnosed with borderline personality disorder because of the instability of her mother. I'm beyond burnout when it comes to my career but have stuck with it because it pays well enough to keep the lights on and our heads above water. I'm the one my family runs to when they need help even though I'm drowning. They're not much help other than moral support. So I'm left to my own devices. 

I'm trying to find a book recommendation to help give insight and help when life has shit on you and you are trying to find a way forward.For clarification, "stuff" is always inanimate objects, never living beings.Totally curious, and asking the over 30 crew because I feel your answers are more likely to be genuine.Hi everyone! PhD Student here. A fair amount of what I have read on this subreddit the past couple months (I'm still relatively new) has involved different people struggling with loneliness, relationship issues, burn out/feeling stuck, and other various mental health concerns. I am hoping to get a more clear understanding of men's friendships and men's mental health according to each individual's experience. The current social and cultural climate + the pandemic make it difficult for people to have real friendships at times. Thus, I'm hoping to get a better understanding of the positive impacts of friendships among men or lack thereof, to better support/understand men's mental health. Your participation would be greatly appreciated in order to more strongly advocate for men experiencing mental health issues.

**To that end:** The AMPP lab at the University of Kansas is looking for participants to complete a 15-20 minute series of research questionnaires about men’s friendships for the purpose of better understanding men’s mental health. If you are a man aged 18 and up within the United States, you are invited to complete the survey: [https://kusurvey.ca1.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV\_9Ff6r8CHUzXZ4BE](https://kusurvey.ca1.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_9Ff6r8CHUzXZ4BE)

If you have any questions feel free to comment or message me here. Thank you in advance!I (20m) just moved to a new city, not anything too big but a bigger size then where I was originally living, went from a town with 15k population to one with about 200k population. I’m not sure if it’s just part of getting older but I’ve been super stressed and anxious about my future. I’m working a fast food job and don’t get paid very well compared to my friends who work in offices, warehouses,etc. I don’t necessarily have any passions or goals at the moment except for music but that’s not something I can make a living off of. Any advice for me would be helpful as I’m completely lost and don’t know what to do to better my future, I know I don’t wanna work fast food for the rest of my life. I tried going to college but realized it would be impossible for me to work part time and go to college while still being able to pay bills. I just got a new opportunity to move to Houston where it’s more expensive to live but also means a lot of job opportunities, do you think it would be worth it to have a new fresh start?Despite me being 30 years old and having my own things going, my dad still belittles me and humiliated me on purspose. What’s worst is when I speak up he snaps even worst. The tone of how he talks to me has a tone that you can tell he has an urge to want to hit me really hard. The breaking point came this past Christmas when I was sitting minding my own business and he gets in my face with his hands up jumping around as if he wants to fight me. I just stared at him. I didn’t know what to do. I’ve asked him before that I don’t like it. Idk what it is that triggers him to treat me like shit. Tbh I know he’s struggling with depression(always struggling with money, has a stressful job as a prison corresctions officer, has a wife that walks all over him) but I’ve let that slide for years but it seems to be getting worst. 

He got picked on a lot growing up (he’s 55) so it mind boggles me how he could want to put his oldes son through this. Please any advice from anyone who’s been in a similar situation and I can post screenshots of conversations we’ve had to give examples. It’s driving me crazy to the point I’m losing sleep.I’m 47, 5’11” and 205. I recently lost over 35lbs and feel much better. I lost weight on keto but that is not doing it for me now that I’m in the gym. I’m trying to add more lean protein but not get crazy on my carbs and fat. What does anyone recommend I take supplement wise for my age to help with testosterone and/or muscle growth and how do I need to change my diet. I’m trying to lift 4 days a week at minimum. Thanks!I(30m) started doing fitness late in life (after 25) - as I age it will become less and less possible to build muscle etc 

I work a job that needs me to spend lot of time, but whats the use as I will
Miss out the “time” which will never come back which I could spend making myself fitter.

I could spend the time in job more after 35 when I wont get lot of benefits from
Fitness regimes anyways

Is it a good idea to move to some less paying job while getting time in exchange?Mostly a rant here but I’d appreciate other perspectives:

I have two toddlers - too young to be vaccinated right now.  As a result, any exposure to Covid shuts down their access to childcare for ten days under current law in my state.  In addition, if one of them has a Covid symptom - which is just a about anything (runny nose, cough, funny poop, sore throat, temperature of any kind) they get sent home and need to have a negative PCR test before they can return.  A simple runny nose can lead to a three day school absence.  

Between Covid closures, winter break, a teacher planning day, snow closures, and Covid symptoms that turned out to be mild illness, I have had exactly two full days and two partial days of all of my childcare since December 16.  And I paid for that childcare all at a rate of just under $3000 per month!

The year end is always very busy for my legal practice.  So, on top of having to work more than full time, and see and host family for the holidays, I have had to take care of one or both of my kids for several hours during the work day.  At times I have been waking up at 4 AM so I can work for a few hours before the kids wake up, and then working from 8-11 PM so I can fill in the gaps for having missed my work day.  On some level I recognize that I have the flexibility to do this and that I’m not, say, an hourly worker.  

But it’s driving me and my wife nuts.   It’s making me worse at my career and parenting than I ever wanted to be.  I’m taking poor care of my physical and mental health.  And yet, these kids need care and we need to have jobs.  

How is everybody dealing with this? I can’t be alone here.I'm turning 40 this year. I've spent the last 25 years working way too many hours and for too little pay, failed relationships, toxic family, and no end  in sight. I quit work and responsibilities over a year ago, spent the better part of 2021 hiking non-stop, and haven't had the slightest desire to return. I thought a year off from it all would help, but it has only made me realize how unhappy I was. I'm debating on taking the resources I've saved and traveling the world for the next 20 years. I'd buy property after to spend the remainder of my days quietly dying in peace. 

I am curious if anyone else is in the same boat (i.e., completely burnt out from chasing the "American Dream"), and what you're doing as a response to your well-being.Growing up, I never knew what I wanted to do for a living, and still don't. I didn't want to waste time and money going to school if I didn't know what degree I was going to want to use.

So I spent the last 20 years working in the restaurant industry. I enjoyed the work and made pretty good money. Then both of the places I worked at eventually closed due to covid. Luckily I found another full time customer service job that I like but it's only $16/hour (just above minimum wage here). I does include full benefits and free food though.

The problem is that its barely enough to cover all of my bills (rent/food/gas). I'm looking for other ways to make more money. What are some good certifications/programs I can do in my free time? Do you have any side hustles to make extra money?Please tell me :)As I get older maintaining friendships gets more difficult even with the best intentions.  I see some guys who have brothers that play the role of “close male friend” and feel a little short changed in life because I don’t have this option.   Do others ever feel this way?I teeter back and forth between the idea of coasting the next decade of my career. I make good money, low stress, reasonable hours and flexible. It allows me to focus on hobbies after work without being burnt out. I'm also able to do things during work like walking the doc, prepping meals and doing the laundry. I also have the thought with this flexibility that I could potentially monetize my hobbies in the future. This current job would allow me the time and mental capacity to do so. 

The other side of the coin is to take a gamble and look for jobs that I would potentially find truly fullfilling. I may take a pay cut, I'm not sure but I do know my work life balance would be shifted.. but if I'd find a truly interesting job I may not mind. 

With all that said, I'm still holding onto to the idea that I have a passion out there, that I'm willing to pour my heart into.. but I just haven't found it yet. I'm fairly confident in the idea that I haven't found what Im looking for yet.

Is this naive to think? Is anyone else holding onto this idea?I'm 32 and getting out of mental health issues. Slowly getting my life on track in terms of finances. But the progress in other areas is either very slow or non-existent.

I realized that I may have symptoms of CPTSD but I can't afford a therapist at the moment. 

The problem is that my brain still perceives the world when I was a kid - scared, worried, and too dependent on others to make choices for me. I'm not exactly a manchild but I live life like a scared cat. Too anxious all the time.

What steps can I take no matter how small to become self-reliant?I'm 24, going to college, have a part time job, workout regularly and eat healthy. I've never had sex or been in a relationship. I go through times of drinking more than I should and then not drinking at all. I like anime, climbing, programming and have recently picked up smoking cigars. I consider smoking cigars bad but I really like smoking itself. I procrastinate more than I think I should but I think everybody does that. I'm in therapy and it's been very helpful for dealing with my schizophrenia and ocd. I kicked a weed addiction a few years ago but think I have a bit of an addictive personality. I'm also not very good with saving. Any advice on what I just wrote or just in general?Hi all! M35 here.

Looking for some external words of wisdom before making a decision.

I recently moved to a small town without any pre-existing social network present. During the first months or so I was approached by a guy my age and asked if I wanted to join a local charity organization, mainly consisting of men below 45. I immediately thought that this would be a great opportunity to form new friendships with some like-minded folks my age as well as do good deeds in my new local community. I am an extroverted introvert and have a multitude of interests in both self-development and how to serve others to create a better society. I love getting to know new people and have a genuine love for social interactions.

My issue is this.

I have been part of this group(15+ people) for a little over 3yrs, and I still don\`t feel like I belong. Their interest lies mostly in partying/drinking beers and talking about women/hunting/drinking/sports/local news and blue-collar stuff. Whilst I am more interested in philosophy, tech, gaming, music, movies, human optimization, productivity, entrepreneurship, and so on. I am exaggerating/simplifying both them and me of course, but I hope you get the point. The guys are great, but our interests are different, our style of communicating is very different, and I don\`t really feel at home when we hang out. As individuals, there are a few that I could see as friends on a short/long term basis, but as a group, I feel as something important is "missing".

As I am "different", and not from the same area as them, I am also treated differently.

Examples of this are;

\- I am rarely asked for an opinion on a subject nor am I included in group discussions. To a large degree, these discussions are typical "small town chatter" about other people they know/have grown up with, and local former/current events.- I found out, almost by accident and only after a few months, that several of them meet once a week for beers outside of the normal meet-ups. I have been invited on some occasions but usually by the same 2-3 people.

\- I had to invite myself to their whatsapp channel, and almost every time I posted something, I would consistently get fewer(or worst case no) replies, than the other members. The latter has made me stop participating in this group at all as it suddenly felt "forced". My content was that of similar nature to the rest of the group.- I see pictures/snaps and hear chatter from meet-ups/parties/gatherings that some members of the group go to privately, but I am never invited to join.

\- At our meetings I feel like I don\`t belong, it seems like they don\`t know what to ask me, or don\`t care, and rarely anything that indicates forming of closer bond/friendship. As our interests don\`t match up well, and I don\`t feel "the vibes", I rarely make these efforts either.

\- On rare occasions where we were going to pair together to do charity work, no one reaches out, and when I told them openly that I wanted a partner(since I was new in town), no one replied. I shrugged it off since I am "the new kid in town", but it still felt lonely having to do it all by myself, while most of the others went in pairs. On my part, this was a conscious effort to see if anyone took the opportunity to form a closer bond.

It has now gotten to the point where I have stopped looking forward to our meetings, and see them more as "a chore", something "I have to do". I have tried to tell myself that these interactions are healthy as I get to contribute in a group setting, to be social with people that are different, and that it will help me to feel like a bigger part of the local community. Despite this, I still lack that feeling of belonging and I have yet to form a deeper friendship with anyone within the group(someone I can hang out with on a regular basis).

As I see it I have three options:

A) I resign and try to find another group/activity where I feel more "at home" and have a greater sense of belonging. All whilst I keep working on self-betterment, developing my business and overall skillset in the key areas of what we know as life.

B) I stay and try even harder to create a sense of belonging, I start posting more in our social channels, take initiative and invite different individual members to hang out 1on1 and so on. Seeing if there is hope for any improvement, all while trying to keep a positive attitude.

C) I stay on cruise control and wait for something to change within the group that will make these interactions more pleasant. Realizing that trying to change other people is a futile act and that the issue lies with me, not them.

I know that a social connection is important for growth, safety, and overall well-being, but I am also very comfortable in my own company, I love my time in solitude, and I don\`t need more than a couple of close friends to be happy. As a person, I am always smiling and treating people with kindness and respect and I seem to be well-liked in general and by several members of this particular group, some which have approached me directly and said that I am a breath of fresh air to the organization. I also recently got a position on the board, which also indicates a high level of trust.

One of my biggest concerns is that this group subconsciously may have become a "social cushion", and as long as I am a member, I am not doing the heavy lifting of making "real friends" in other arenas that might be more fitting. I am also concerned that I am adapting to a version of myself I don\`t like by hanging out with this particular group, as we don\`t share many common interests. Most of the members have strong social circles outside of the organization, whilst I only have them.

I appreciate any replies that could shed some light on my situation. If you have a similar experience when moving to a new town, please feel free to share! Any tips or tricks are also welcome.

Thank you!I hate my job as a manager. I've been there 20 years now and I don't want to do it any more.  I recently completed my bachelor's degree in IT management and I don't think that is the path I want to take.  I'm considering a master's degree, but I don't want to make the same mistake I did with the bachelor's degree and end up with an education I won't use.   At the same time I can't take much of a pay cut.
   
How do I figure out what I want to do for the rest of my life?   
   
If you were going to change career path or field, what process would you use to figure out a career you wouldn't hate?    
    
Feeling trapped, out of options, and loaded with responsibilities.  Thanks for any advice.In my current role I’m attending anywhere from 4-7 hours of meetings per day. Boss doesn’t seem phased by how ridiculous this schedule is and encourages me to book even more meetings for different projects, etc. And trust me , I skip as many meetings as possible. But I am really struggling to understand how anybody could have a sliver of productivity in this environment. It’s not like attending conference calls are my only job duty, I also have help desk tickets, IMs and emails that come in constantly all day long from approximately 200 colleagues I support.

Before I was laid off in 2020 due to company downsizing/COVID I might’ve had 5 hours of meetings PER WEEK. However this was before Working from home became more common. So as I’m searching for a new job I’m trying to understand: is being in constant meetings the new norm? Or am I just in a shitty job that’s overloading me?

I’m also afraid to make too much of a fuss to my boss about it because as far as I can tell the company proudly “runs lean”.

Appreciate the feedback.Anyone deal with seasonal depression? Any thoughts on how to combat it?  I despise winter. Love fishing in the spring/summer and hunting in the fall.  During the winter, all I do is look forward to those times.  Any ideas on what do to do pass the time in the winter?My partner and I got a letter in the mail from our bank we did the mortgage loan through and it says we qualify for benefits such as refund of escrow(?), $23k cash out, or lowering monthly mortgage. Is this a scam or something else besides actually lowering our mortgage?Got alot of free time inbetween jobs recently so need something to binge.

Preferably something light heartedI've had a few conversations with other men recently and am curious to compare notes about how different men over 30 (and women, if you'd like to comment as well) act when angry. So, a few questions to prime this, but feel free to answer however you'd like.

1. Would you say that you do get angry at least some times each year?
2. Do you ever get *very* angry? Enraged? If so, why?
3. When you're angry, do you ever do things such as shout, throw things, punch a wall or slam tables, and basically fly off the handle?

And please, folks: No judgments of anyone requested on this one.Hi, I'm 32 and live in Germany.
I have the desire to be self employed since my mid 20s but didn't take the action to really try this and would like to have some good advice on how to move on.

I work for a big machine manufacturer which builds machines for the maritime industry. I work in the offshore section. As the desire is there for a long time already and I didn't take serious action I'm meanwhile really unmotivated in my current job (hard to get up in the morning, don't want to fall asleep in the evening, procrastinate,..) and some lethargy has spread. I often really need to force myself to do something but when I started it's fine. In the past I was hyped and driven nearly every day. This has to come back again and I want to start with the self employment!
As side note: I'm currently single and it feels hard to start this without a partner in crime by my side. 

I have several Ideas but no very specific plans yet. As I work for the offshore field I have several contacts to oil/gas & renewable energies. I think about to check if I can work there project based as freelancer (well paid, interesting, and for manageable periods). I have a quite good equipped workshop with some friends where could build stuff I want to do (build a camper in the past, converted a motorbike,...). I work in my vacation as team leader on adventure tours but I just get 1k€ for the period (2-3 weeks).. this is more a passion thing. My brother is successfully self employed with some companies, there are most likely different things possible.

I talked about that with some people around me in the past already quite often but there was no serious action since then. I don't want to talk a lot about it anymore, I want to take action.

Any advice on how I start to move in the right direction and to get back the drive and hype I had in the past?

Thanks! :)My boy (11), has been acting up lately.  Not listening to his mom (We are divorced and share custody), arguing and not listening.    She also concerned about his abnormal long showers!  😂  I tell her he'll figure it out and if he is messing around in there, well that's normal 🤷‍♂️

I imagine myself trying to talk to him about puberty, and his member and what it does and becoming man and all that, but I'll either beat around the bush and make it cringy , or I'll be too direct and come at him like a biology teacher 😅 

Did your father  communicate with you about this? Mine sure didn't lol
How did you approach it?  

Thanks in advance! 😁T minus two days... I'm excited but to be honest, also terrified. Will be driving wife to hospital next week.How do you guys find happiness as small health problems and annoyances start to add up as you age? Bearing in mind that it will only get worse until you finally croak as more serious health problems arise.......how does once find a peace with it all and a joy despite the fact that they have a mortal body that is failing? All while meeting the demands of being a father, or leader for others? How does one avoid ending up a shmuck, an alcoholic, chronically depressed, or a neurotic mess?When I was growing up if you said something like "me and my wife" you would get instantly and forcefully corrected to say "My wife **and I**".

You were made to feel saying it the first way made you or anyone else *trash*.

Now I see writing all over reddit using phrases like "me and my wife".

Grammar nerds, which is correct, and correct according to whom?My older bro in his 50s has finally become fairly successful in life. I love him and and happy for him.

But,

He seems to have an attitude now of talking up his life/stuff and putting me down. Its become irritating. I never rebuttal because he is the type that will escalate as far as it takes to win, and I don't want to lose him as a brother. I do love him and he his awesome in so many other ways.

He can talk himself up all day, great, I am happy for him, but don't disrespect me and mine. I don't want to get in a pissing contest, but sometimes its hard. I have a lot of ammo if I did, my net worth is higher even if I don't have a nicer truck, I don't do fake things or try to make myself look younger because I don't value those things Mr wear a wig and dye your beard while driving your "pavement princess." Yeah I could lose a few pounds and need to, but so do you... Yeah its irritating me a lot.   


I  know rebuttal or counter banter would end what besides this fact, is a great relationship with a big brother I am proud and happy to have.Sorry if this is a dumb question, but I’m 16 and I’ve never really known what I wanted out of life. I know I have time to figure it out but I feel so lost. Only thing I’ve ever wanted to do was basically reaching for the highest like becoming a pro athlete or like a actor or something but I don’t have any reason to think I could achieve that since I don’t work toward that. I always just wanted to be a pro athlete but now I’m a junior and realize that I’m not that good and the odds aren’t in my favors. I don’t have the best grades (mid 70s) and don’t really have the classes to do anything that really interests me post secondary. I want to be financially free and successful and don’t want to live with any regrets but don’t know what I want to do but I just want to be great. Any advice?