At the school where I taught, we did a study and found that due to a subconscious bias boys were being called on twice as much as girls, and children of color were only called on 10% of the time. 

So we instituted a school wide program to randomize who got called on in class. When I changed schools, I took the program with me to my new school and convinced several other teachers to use it.
For me in a personal sense it has been education and empathy. Very consciously trying to drown out the bias that exists literally everywhere and educate myself in truth. Empathy, for me, is again very deliberately and consciously imagining myself in countless situations that POC have found themselves in and how I would feel if that were happening to me every single day, and then being denied or people gaslighting me and telling me it’s not really happening. I’d be fkn furious. 

I didn’t grow up around different races at all, and did not grow up in a racist environment. I went to college and realized that I was ignorant. Became friends with many people, and over the years I have learned. And I’m still learning. It’s stunning how insidious racism is, how it snakes into the smallest things with such devastating consequences. 

What else should I be doing? Open to any and all feedback

Edit: I think what I was really trying to say at the beginning about drowning out bias, is I think for myself instead of just taking whatever I’m being told by biased people or sources. No one asked but I wanted to elaborate.
[Reading.](http://www.chriscrass.org/uploads/1/7/7/9/17797213/towards-the-other-america-ebook.pdf?fbclid=IwAR2jw7RvXB0O280EJTyXa2294AOvUm3NJxrZkeg6w-DQnUG5_T0Wf7LZvWU) Calling out people who are saying/posting false things. Stop being afraid to upset the old white men in the family by challenging their racist remarks.
I personally dont do shit. I speak up about it on social media, I sign petitions, I call people out for racism online. I rarely ever hear racist remarks in real life but I speak up if I do. I just don't see what else I can do. I can't join protests, I can't stop cops, I can't discipline racists that I don't encounter. I try to consider racial issues when I vote for someone, but my country is overall so different from the US that... doing "something" is just difficult.
I wish someone can answer how we can resolve all of this because they shot Martin Luther King Jr. for his peaceful protests, they also shot Malcolm X for his militant views and actions sooooooooo now what? People keep complaining about rioting and looting and violence and this and that BUT NO ONE HAS GIVEN AN ANSWER or even the first step to end this vicious cycle once and for all! This diffusion of responsibility is ridiculous. And I believe everyone even myself is guilty of that! We say, "oh, the government needs to do something!" "Oh, it should be the politicians fixing this!" "It should be the black community fixing this!" "It should be the white community fixing this!" But look where we are! I am saddened by all of this believe me. I'm Latina but considered light skinned. I have checked my privilege has anyone else? I have suffered discrimination but definitely not as much as someone darker than me would have.  I promise you I wouldn't be where I am in life if not for my skin color and I am a minority saying this because sadly, this colorism also is very prevalent in our own Latin cultures! Shouldn't we be ashamed that this grave injustice has finally opened up everyone's eyes????
What Megan Carpenter says here really resonated with me:  


>Somehow, we’ve all evolved to underestimate the power of learning and  the power of seeking to understand. Knowing what things harm me is a  sign that you value me. We’ve come to expect we will just magically know  all of this without having to work at it, to think we have to act  immediately without first understanding, and to believe we can’t make  mistakes. This is the difference between an eager ally and an informed  ally.

[https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/get-wrong-me-what-i-need-from-allies-megan-carpenter/?trackingId=wbvXpBoKQZm4pNFmaPl8nw%3D%3D](https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/get-wrong-me-what-i-need-from-allies-megan-carpenter/?trackingId=wbvXpBoKQZm4pNFmaPl8nw%3D%3D)

So I am working towards being that informed ally. I am working towards educating myself and seeking to understand what things harm black people. I may get it wrong, but as Megan says "We are risking our lives; you can risk getting things wrong."
[removed]
Right out of law school, I turned down a much higher paying job to work for a civil rights not profit.

All through college, I volunteered at an after school program that specifically served students of color.

I call out racism when I hear it from friends and family.  

I donate to causes that help move society towards social equality.

I listen when POC talk.

Is it enough?...right now it sure doesn't feel like it.
[I used to be an active editor on Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/User:Moni3). I wrote articles on subjects that interested me, especially ones that were poorly written or too small for the scope of the subject. I had access to a great university library and a lot of time, so for five or six years, I did what I could. 

I wrote or significantly expanded the articles for Birmingham Campaign, Stonewall riots, Harvey Milk, Rosewood massacre, and Emmett Till, among others. Extremely depressing topics, and all of it got to me. I quit editing. But I'm not sorry I wrote what I did. People need to know though I've felt the past few years like I wrote all that for nothing.
This is a flag I've been waving for awhile already, but I've been in the beauty industry for 11 years and I still can't understand why the cosmetology curriculum is 99% European based. We only learn about a week's worth of theory on textured/black hair and no practical education at all.

How is it that nobody blinks am eye that hair salons are still basically segregated. I have 100% worked for salon owners who wouldn't have hired a Black stylist if one ever applied.


I am of mixed heritage and have the hair texture to prove it but my skin is white AF. So I'm white. As much have I have attempted to further my education into textured hair I got a wall because most POC don't trust that a white person will know what to do with their hair, and I don't blame them. 

This is systematic racism straight down from State legislation allowing state controlled licensing systems to totally ignore a huge chunk of the population. 

I'm sick off it.
It's bullshit
Black hair matters

Our education needs an overhaul.

Thanks for coming to my tedtalk /s
Doing a lot of listening, not talking or asking questions that I can do my own legwork on. Trying to amplify and not equivocate my own statements. 

Letting black friends know I'm here for whatever they need. Not sharing how I feel because that's not relevant right now. 

Not content to be considered 'non-racist'. That's lazy and complicit because it's silence. Trying to be actively anti-racist, trying to call folks out on their bullshit.
" **What are the white women in this group doing to end white supremacy in themselves,**"

If you mean racism, I rebuke racism and call it out. I do not personally feel responsible for other peoples racist actions because we share a color, gender, religion etc.  Just as I do not hold all Black, Hispanic, Asian person's accountable for what their racial contemporaries do.

If you mean what am I doing to promote people of color being in places of influence and receiving a better education. I am a teacher and teach predominately kids of color. I treat them with the same respect and love I treat all of my students. I work with a group of kids who have behavioral disabilities and who will hit, bite, tell me to go kill myself etc. I give them the support and guidance they need to be successful. However, I do not favor them as I would not favor my white, Asian (or any other qualifier) kids.
I challenge my family and friends every day to exercise empathy and acknowledge that their experience is not the same as the person they are speaking with and to try and consider that person’s experience when speaking with them. 


I participate and help organize quarterly events at my company that encourage sharing these differing experiences, discuss the challenges that come with them, and how to problem solve them in the work place.


I advocate and lobby for reform, particularly of the mental health, prison, and educational systems of which I am most familiar. 


I lecture for police departments on necessity adequate mental health treatment of their employees to avoid effects of implicit biases and trauma.


I remain open to criticism of my own biases and try to incorporate new information and experiences into my world view constantly.
A lot of great responses here that i agree with, so i'll add a small one: 

being conscious of consuming the voices and art of POC, but in a genuine way (rather than a novelty & virtue signaling way) and by that i mean: the podcasts I listen to, the books I read, the instagramers i follow, the art I look at, the theater I see, films and tv I watch, and the businesses I patronize.


But also being aware that I, as a white woman, may not be the target audience of this art, it may not be (and most likely isn't) made "for me" although I can still appreciate and learn from it, and being okay with that. Being okay with not all aspects of the world revolving around me.
I'm 45 years old, white, and a child of immigrants.

In the 25 years I spent in retail management I have worked incredibly hard to not only hire diverse teams but to advocate for this practice constantly behind closed doors and straight up the corporate ladder. In a world of white guy overload, I hired more African American women into my technology departments than I saw around me and I hired my major big box retailers first DACA employee. I've lectured at length on why we should hire not only racially diverse teams, but economically as well, because it's important to not only have infinite ideas from a broad spectrum of coworkers but also to have my employees interact daily with people who don't look, live, or even act like them. 

I was raised in a family that sponsored dozens, if not hundreds of immigrants of color, many from the Dominican Republic. All of those people lived with us for some length of time before they got on solid ground to move forward in their new home.

I was so into understanding the complexity of managing people from diverse backgrounds that when I was eventually laid off from my company, I went back to college and majored in Anthropology. Now, some of my work involves understanding intersectionality in the workplace and helping businesses better understand their diverse customer base. I am currently working on building a framework for training employees on loss prevention with a specific eye on ending racial profiling in retail establishments.

I want people to understand that race is not a biological construct, it's a social construct and we need to move toward ending systemic racism wherever we see it.
I love how this question was flipped.

I’ve never experienced racism but I have experienced sexism. Knowing what that is like, I realized that in much the same way I see the sexism men don’t see, POC see racism I don’t see either.

That’s the logic that really pushed away me from the arms of racist family and into the realm of seeing that what I didn’t see before. I can’t and won’t say that I now know racism, I don’t, but I do recognize it a hell of a lot more than I used to.

I feel like crap whenever my family says racist stuff. I try to call them out but honestly we end up in this big fights and it’s mentally exhausting to be around them now so I moved out earlier than they wanted me to because I can’t handle the racist rhetoric. My uncle is a Trump fanatic and my contact with him is minimal now. I can’t stand the “it’s not about racism!” thing when it’s... clearly about racism.

I’m broke af so I really can’t donate anything to anywhere but I am hoping that once I am standing on my own two feet that I can donate to organizations that combat racism. I don’t really know what else I *can* at this point in my life in between my lack of income and not-so-awesome mental health but I’m past the point of not noticing things and I’m pissed off at how things are.

I have friends who are POC and I make sure that I don’t discount their experiences and I want to be a safe person for them to talk to when things are difficult even when I myself don’t experience those things.

I just hope that my non-approval of racism makes people double check themselves, because the one thing I’ve definitely noticed about being white is that people feel comfortable sharing racist beliefs with me as if I’ll agree automatically. I don’t. And I do call people out on it when it’s safe to do so. And that’s the part I hate. There are repercussions when calling out certain people. I wish there wasn’t but sometimes I don’t feel safe doing that.

I no longer associate with any “friends” who are racist nor do I date anyone who has those beliefs. The same is extended to homophobia and other groups of marginalized people. I may not experience what they experience, but anyone can have empathy and believe their experiences.

I’ve drawn my own experiences with sexism to this sorta metaphor. Women walk around the world seeing all of these colors, while men are colorblind. Women can *see* sexism but men can look straight at it and simply not understand that there is something there that they cannot see. It’s not a great metaphor, but I think it’s apt enough. I do my best to see the colors that I didn’t used to see and I hope that’s enough based on what I can give at the moment.
THANK YOU. tired of being interviewed about racism.
I feel good about some of the very honest raw comments here and then I feel not so good about some of the virtue-signaling comments here.
I totally get it, OP. 

I’m tired of people assuming I can be a spokesperson for my race and gender as well. 

Wouldn’t hurt the majority to do some research themselves instead of relying on POC to educate them. 

For me, it’s exhausting. I do it, but why do I have to?
I think the first and most important thing to do is to recognize the ways in which I might have been part of the problem in the past, and to rectify those things. As a teenager, I was one of those "I don't see color! We're all the same!" people. I think my intentions were good albeit clearly ignorant and problematic AF. 

I also think that while racism has always disgusted me, I usually chalked it up to individuals who were just shitty people. I was completely oblivious to the ways in which racism operates on a systemic and institutionalized level - An indicator of my own white privilege.  

I like to think that I've come a long way since then, though I definitely still have so much to learn as well as unlearn. I think another way in which white women can help dismantle white supremacy is to know when to speak up and when to just shut up and listen. I've come to find that people who are racist, sexist, homophobic or xenophobic *never* think of themselves that way. We have a responsibility to call these people out. We have to have these uncomfortable conversations with our family members, neighbors, anyone in our circles who breeds white supremacy via microaggressions, problematic language or just because of their ignorant opinions. We can't make excuses for things like this ie. "Oh they're from a different generation", or "They just don't know better". As for when to be quiet, I'm talking about people who argue with POC about their own lived experiences. That needs to stop. Moreover, we do not get to tell people how they can and cannot protest, or we need to stop invalidating the way POC speak up about the horrible ways in which white supremacy has impacted them.

It makes me especially upset seeing white women get so defensive and try to shut down women of color speaking about their experiences. It reminds me of some men shouting "nOt aLl mEn" during the height of the me too movement. White women need to stop putting themselves at the center of everything - we're not the victims here. I think sometimes its difficult for white women to process the duality of being oppressed in some situations and being the oppressor in other situations.

I think a really big thing also, is to stop expecting POC to do all the emotional legwork and educating us on how *we* need to be better. While it's important to listen to their stories and give them the platform they need - It is our responsibility to break up the system that we have built to oppress others. We have infinite resources at our disposal to better ourselves as anti-racist activists. I was fortunate enough to have a handful of amazing profs who taught me about intersectionality and introduced me to the teachings of Audre Lorde, Alice Walker, bell hooks and so many more. I've tried to implement this into my own personal life by recognizing the ways in which all systems of oppression are interconnected. Racism, capitalism, neocolonialism, sexism, and speciesism all go hand in hand.
Great question!  I mean, I am a white woman, but POC are not the ones that need to educate white people about racism and the systems of oppression. There's a whole plethora of resources, including internet articles and books they can access. There's plenty of lists being circulated right now on what people can do to educate and help others.

Not an exhaustive list, but as of recent I've tried to:

* donate to bail funds and BLM and other organizations
* contacted my local representatives about the city budget that heavily funds the police department and has lowered funds for community programs, and encouraged others in my city to do the same
* talked to my friends about current events
* I have been working on a project about the how the lack of community mental health resources translates higher rates of incarceration for those with mental illness, especially in minority communities
* have put myself on the waiting list to read more relevant books from my local library, both non-fiction and fiction, about racism or the experiences of POC

And acknowledge, of course, that I can ALWAYS be improving, and to recognize when I have those prejudices to stop them and correct them.
Making my dad stoo saying racial slurrs. I am reposting and signing petitions for victims of racism. I have done this for years even but doing it more frequently
[deleted]
The reservation kids can use some help, all over the country too. Can we check on them too?
I'm evaluating my relationships with other white people. If they refuse to be educated and see why POC are so hurt, then they've gotta go. If the person is someone I see on a regular basis and something they're saying doesn't match up to the belief that POC aren't disposable, then I will 100% call them out. The looting is not worse than the murder and I will tell a family member that to their face. Businesses can be built up, things can be replaced, but lives cannot.

Luckily, I see my friends doing the same. And I work in mental health, so I'm sure that my coworkers feel the same. I see them on social media defending POC all day, which gives me hope. I'm on furlough right now, so I can't see them face to face, but I can't imagine working in this field and ignoring the situation.
I had a very strange and round about conversation with my coworker this morning that started with her talking about all the good cops in her family and not understanding why ppl invalidate their protests by rioting, and ended with her admitting that maybe she wasn't as educated on the topic as she should be. I suggested some further reading, and hung up on the most delicate and surreal conversation of my career. I happily and directly call out behavior in family, friends, and random people who say dumb shit to me. I try to stay educated and aware, donate openly to causes that support bipoc and other at risk groups, I write to my local, state, and federal officials and reps, I vote, and I try to maintain space where my friends can have a place to speak and feel vulnerable. 

I admit, it's not enough, and I fuck up sometimes, but half-assed is better than no-assed, and I'm doing what my bandwidth allows.

Edit: also, I am trying to push for a proper D&I program at work, but it's been incredibly difficult.
Here's the issue as I see it. White people are being (rightly) called out to pay attention, to actively fight against racism, and to be *better*. But how? What does that mean? As a white woman who actively treats everyone the same, but who also recognises her own white privilege, I've needed to ask those questions, to read the books, the articles, to try to *understand* so that I can empathise, and be a part of positive change. 

Knowing what people of colour experience across the world breaks my heart. It's disgusting that your children aren't safe, and that the liberties I take for granted aren't a given for you. 
But I don't *see* it. Here in Australia where things aren't as *in your face* as they are in America, I don't see it. Without asking those questions, I'd have little understanding of the lives people of colour lead, and how vastly that differs from my own.

I've been a part of a few forums where race became an issue, and a lot of the white members chose to leave, because even the most well intended comments were met with anger. They weren't intentionally hurtful comments, just uneducated ones from people who wanted to understand and do better but didn't really get it, or know where to even *start* to try to gain understanding. 
It has taken me a long time to realise that the definition of racism I was taught as a child is merely the tip of the iceberg.

It is not the job of any person of colour to educate anyone else on how to do better. But I am so absolutely appreciative of those who have helped me see where I have been an inadvertent participant in racism, merely by living the privileged life afforded to me by my skin colour. So thankful for those who chose to help me open my eyes to their plight, when they very well could have chosen anger instead. 

As to your question? I don't know (yet). Right now I'm paying attention. I'm watching, reading, engaging in conversations, learning how to be better, to recognise my own privilege and the way that in itself plays a part. I'm open to having the tough conversations, and to educating my kids so they better understand their part too.
[removed]
I’m struggling with how to be a real ally. A lot of white women are posting on social media and I find it a bit hollow. When I ask sincere questions about what to do, I get talked down to with vague broad principles rather than specific actionable steps or resources within my own community. I get the sense that many don’t have a clue what to do other than spam social media. 

I do not believe that I am doing enough but here’s what I am doing, while trying to increase my action. I’m trying to amplify voices of POC, particularly women, in my social media. I’m trying to find and read literature and commentary by POC, a work in progress. My work is in human rights law and I’m trying to listen more and give voice to the perspectives of marginalized people. I’m actively looking for ways to make financial contributions in my home community to organizations that specifically address issues of race but have not found anything yet. I am hoping to prepare a list of local organizations and leaders that I can share because I see a lack of knowledge about what is happening in my home community. 

It’s easy to point to Minneapolis and say “they” sure have work to do.  We have work to do everywhere. I’m interested in my local community and how we are failing POC here right now.
[removed]
Educating myself and calling out my family and friends when they say things that are wrong. Promising myself that my children will be more educated than me and know racism as a small pocket of people(knowing that we will not see completely racism gone and they probably won’t either), and spreading information on every social media I have.
I'm a tiny Native American female dating a tall, broad, and intimidating white male. He knows the difference between us going out together, and him going out alone. He's experienced it. 

He also has made more efforts than I expected from him to eliminate not only micro aggressors throughout his dialogue, but micro aggressive thought patterns, too. He'll ask me what the best way to say something is, he'll ask me what is racist, what sounds racist, and why that would be. He essentially "checks" himself where he can.

He also uses his demeanor to intimidate and call out racism and racist people. He's not a quiet man, we are not quiet people, we are confrontational in our own respects, and don't mind showing out in the name of respect. You will be a decent human being in our presence, plain and simple. Say something stupid in front of us and you'll get exactly the confrontation you wanted. And you'll loose. We are decent people. But we do not tolerate crap and filthy talk. Again, we are decent people, and you will be to.

I'm getting kind of startled at the amount of dissection of black mother's in this respect, it's not helpful, it's being invasive. If people want an open dialogue, let's talk about why the heck were all so excited for aliens when we can't even fathom the thought of another human being having different melanin. 

Peace and love.
For me it’s talking to my children openly about what’s happening now and what has been happening, and why. It’s also talking to them about diversity, culture, race, and teaching them that they are no better than anyone else because they are white. It’s teaching them to look past skin color and to question other people who don’t. It may not be making change at a systemic level but at 6 and 8 years old they need to be continuously taught this into their adult years.
To be honest, not much. I live in an extremely white area. Aside from not associating with known racists, I'm not sure what I can do to help the overall situation.
Correct me if I'm wrong, but here are my (super summarized) thoughts:

Empathy is an AMAZING tool. I truly think that empathy should be utilized and I know how much of a factor it plays in guiding my actions and thoughts. However, morality and empathy are a social and cultural construct -- therefore, we need to think critically as well. Use empathy when raising children, talking to neighbours, speaking out. But realize that where you are and where you came from highly influences your thoughts, opinions, and actions. This leads me to my next point.

Listen. I don't speak for BIPOC, I listen to what they have to say. By listening, I don't have to guess what I need to do as an ally. I also take it upon myself to educate myself by listening to podcasts, or reading articles. Again, this involves critical thinking -- y listen to multiple sources rather than one podcast. 

As an aside to this, If you think you're woke as fuck and you're put in your place, take it as a humbling experience and realize you have so much more to learn. I think it's better to speak up and say the wrong thing and be corrected than be too afraid to speak out in support and a) never correct ignorant thoughts b) be part of the problem. (Again, correct me if this is wrong!)

Right now, I'm consuming multiple media sources re: where to donate (and am donating but not making other people who care feel like shit for NOT donating if they can't afford to), signing petitions, LISTENING, reaching out to friends to see how they are doing.

Again, as a white woman, I know there are so many things I can learn and am actively trying to learn them.
I myself have worked to push back and shut down anyone, specifically people in my own family, that have had racist comments. Sometimes purely unintentionally, but that is the problem that a lot of very hurtful racist remarks are so ingrained in culture altogether that they aren't seen as racist or hurtful by many people. I haven't actually dealt with it at work, and all the black women I have worked with have been treated the same as everyone else from my perspective.

My only issue with what your saying is actually using the word "white supremacy" in this context toward all the white people that may be asking questions and actively trying to learn. That is not what you should be saying. White supremacy is an extremely powerful word, and that is only a subset of the population that are actual "white supremicists". 

I am truly not trying to be rude to you, but I don't think that is fair to use that statement and I think that is only fueling controversy on each side (which there shouldn't even be sides). 

I think that what needs to be targeted more than anything is the uproar for changes in policies systemically and institutionally, and then from there will be true change for POC. 

Both black and white people need to stop just pointing the fingers at who is doing more to be less of something. That just doesn't seem like it's actually being productive. It should be how are we all coming TOGETHER.
What are they doing? 
Rioting and getting arrested for you. Then you say you hate us. Don’t need us. Or our help. Which is it? We’re constantly hearing both mixed messages. So many are getting sick of fiercely loving and defending people who hate us, and insist on being enemies with us. Many are throwing their hands in the air, shrugging their shoulders and being like:

“Fine. You wanna be enemies? I don’t know what else to do”. 

I still love you and will defend you anyways, though. Even though I have no power. But start within your communities, as well. 

We are all in this together. All skin tones. Hate is never OK, from or to any race. What happened to George Floyd is vile beyond what can even be articulated.
I don’t know if my local police department had a policy of external or internal reviews when there is an officer involved shooting, so I am going to find out. 

I don’t know if they undergo training when interacting with women/minorities/non English speakers , so I am going to find out. 

I don’t know if my local police are taught de-escalation techniques, so I am going to find out.

I don’t know if officer misconduct reports are a matter of public record or not, so I am going to find out.
[removed]
I'm Asian -- aside from posting on social media/signing petitions/donating, I'm mainly just focusing on educating my immigrant parents on these issues. 

As "model minority" immigrants, they haven't had the same education on American history that I had (nor have they read the same books I had), and they tend to learn conservative politically and harbor racist thoughts towards POC who aren't Asian. 

I've been steering my mom away from reading Chinese news and to listen to unbiased podcasts instead and she's starting to understand why people are so angry over George Floyd.
I feel these questions come from a place of curiosity and not leering: a lot of people still don't grow up in diverse neighborhoods, schools, diverse colleges, workplaces. These questions are the hallmark of a want to be educated. You don't have to educate them, but then it's important to provide BIPOC sources for them. Books and movies often provide mirrors of extraordinary experiences, I think the strength of Reddit is that it reaches everyday people and that can really shed a light on the everyday struggles we might not see represented and yet that still exist. We can't stand on our side of the aisle, crossing our arms and waiting for the other to do something for us. Collaboration and empathy will help us in the long run, but we should remember that empathy is also given and not only received. To keep a tally is not a representation of a strong relationship and a lot of people do "optical" anti-racism, so it doesn't denote a particular engagement with BIPOC issues, unlike say, asking a potentially uncomfortable question on Reddit.


I hope you are safe and have support around you. It's a fucking terrible time for so many right now.
I have been reading literature by POC/Black authors and trying to signal boost these to my friends/family.  Donating and attending protests.  Working on knowing better and doing better.
white supremacy in themselves? what the actual fuck
[removed]
[deleted]
Shutting down racist comments from my bigoted family instead of staying silent to be “respectful”. They don’t deserve my respect, and I refuse to have my daughter around them.

I also work to be consciously aware of my own internal biases. We all have them, and I try to catch myself when I react a certain way or think a certain thought. Being self-aware of those reactive biases help me to more consciously change my thinking.
I've been donating to BLM and several of the bail funds that have gone around online. I'm trying to work on the people I know - whether friends or family - to talk to them about why we as white people don't get to decide how black people react to their own genocide. I'm listening to black advocates as much as I can to improve myself, and also amplify those voices in any way I can. I'm calling out racism where I see it on social media. I'm trying to educate myself further on how to be a better ally and on the history of black suppression that I'm ignorant to, because I know I have a long way to go. I'm also trying to get better at giving my patronage to black owned business right now and going forward.
I treat everyone the same and callout people when they are being assholes
By not living in America.

The depths of American racism is unlike anything I have ever experienced in my life.

I'm Irish. I've lived in Ireland my whole life, but I've been to 30+ countries (including America multiple times).

In Ireland, we were enslaved and oppressed for over 400 years. We were victims of a genocide that killed 1/3 of the population, and forced another 1/3 to emigrate (this was only 170 years ago, and our population to this day hasn't recovered). For much of it, our language and religion was illegal. It was illegal for us to own land. It was illegal for us to go to school. Up until 1998, Northern Ireland was a warzone. Up until then, we were oppressed by the government in the North. Even to this day, it's dangerous to be "caught" in some areas with a Southern accent or car. Yet, despite all this, some of our strongest voices were people born and raised on the other side that fought against what happened.

Despite all this, the situation here is nothing like the one in America. Irish and British people coexist here, and coexist happily and safely with our immigrant populations as well.

In America, if the media had their way, you would have a full blown race war. The American situation isn't just about a lack of rights/protections for black people (and other minorites) - it's about X race going, "fuck Y race!" And the cycle continues. You don't fix anything by standing apart - you need to all lay down your guns and pepper spray and protect and support each other. That includes comments like yours - you have allies, you have people who irregardless of race, nationality, or sexual orientation will stand by you and protect you🤷‍♀️
[removed]
I’ve made several old white people uncomfortable throughout my years and will continue to do so. Have probably hurt my grandparents feelings in the process, but I don’t condone it and I have to speak up so they know that and they should want to change.
Mine and my husband’s approach has been to treat all people equally and with respect.  We don’t allow racist talk and comments in our home.  We’ve taught our children that all people are individuals and have open conversations with them about the differing realities in America and across the world.  We conquer this one person at a time and it starts at home.
[removed]
I'm immunosuppressed and unable to physically be in protest spaces, but this week I've been working to provide support in other ways.

I'm giving to bail funds and Black-led advocacy groups working for systemic change. I'm having uncomfortable conversations with "BuT dEsTrUcTiOn Of PrOpErTy" family members and colleagues. I've been signing petitions, and I have a list of local government officials to call on Wednesday. I'm a teacher, so I'm making extra space in my (mostly white) classroom to talk about racism and institutional violence against Black people. I've made sure to provide my students with a list of local ways to get involved as well as community supports for students who are Black, Indigenous, or People of Color.

It's not enough, but I hope it contributes.
I had an exhausting conversation with my boss about the double standards he seemed to have for a woman entrepreneur. We often recommend people in our network and I questioned him thoroughly about the criteria for those who get recommended and why she didn't qualify. He kept saying she didn't have enough experience but that's a rationalization that white men in power have often used to keep women and POC out of their professional circles, so I didn't accept that.

I don't think either of us were satisfied with the conclusion of our conversation but I was clear that the opinion of a group of white men is not good criteria for evaluating entrepreneurs in our network.
Reading and listening when POC share what is happening to them and their experiences in the past. Spreading their message as much as I can via social media and word of mouth. Donating to organizations that support their causes and fund the fight. Calling out people when they voice racist ideology or perpetrate racist actions.

Being on the side of POC people even when I don't understand their feelings or their struggles, because I know not understanding those is part of my privilege.

I wish I could go to protests, but being a newer immigrant it's not something I can risk with the NYPD arresting people, which is a huge bummer. But I support my friends who are able to go out and protest as much as I can.
I’ve done a lot of research and had several conversations with POC’s in my social circles in order to educate myself better, and understand what I can do to help. I called myself out on my own social because I was able to learn something through this and I shared what I learned on social so that other people like me might also be educated.
Thanks
I grew up in the South with lots of racist family members and I’ve tried desperately since I was a kid to not let their views shape my own.  Luckily, my mother doesn’t share those views and made sure I had the space and ability to learn my own path without the influence of the racists in my family.  I try to educate myself as much as possible on the issues that POC face everyday in this country and others around the world.  I try to be as empathetic as I possibly can be while knowing I will never be able to truly understand what it feels like for POC to live in a society that values and treats them as less than.  I stand up to the people in my life who voice their wrong beliefs and try to educate them as much as I can.  I donate to organizations who fight for the rights of POC and other less privileged groups.  I try to constantly put positive energy into the world around me.  I talk to my friends who have to deal with this inequality and ask them to teach me about their experiences and what I can do to help.  I am so incredibly proud of every person who is protesting peacefully and passionately trying to finally put and end to this systemic problem that has lasted far too long.  I only wish I had the power to do even more to help. I try my best to be an ally and stand up for what’s right in any way I can. Thank you to everyone who is doing the right thing. If we all can continue to stand up together, people of all races and genders and religions and socioeconomic backgrounds, I truly believe we can finally implement the change that is so desperately needed both in the US and around the world.
Recently? Protesting. Providing aid to the people who are getting tear gassed. Videotaping arrests to catch violence. Yesterday my boyfriend and I were surrounded by riot cops while providing aid to a young man who was maced in the genitals. I've also been donating to bail funds and directly redistributing cash to homeless individuals. I'm proud of going but I wish I stayed later and I wish I wasn't as scared as I was. 

In myself, I work hard at it. Part of my anxiety already has me second guessing everything I do or say -- debilitating in other parts of my life but a good lesson in humility and self-examination. I do okay; I could do better. 

At my work? I work with adults with moderate to severe intellectual and developmental disabilities (the vast majority of whom are black or other POC due to a combination of the demographics of my city and healthcare access) to develop life skills and work readiness training, including identifying abuse, neglect and exploitation, and their rights. I just started, but as part of implementing this program, I'm going to be teaching a class on police brutality and the justice system and how this incredibly vulnerable community can protect themselves (aka how not to say anything and ask for a lawyer). I like my job. 

Not enough in my social life. I'm shy and a homebody; I cut people out of my life who are racist or sexist or homophobic. I argue with my parents and racist family. I stay silent more often than I would like; I'm a Marxist and police abolitionist and few people can find any common ground with my opinions at all. I'm insecure and let things slide that I shouldn't. 

It's not enough. I look outside and I know that it's not enough by miles.
Last night my grandmother thought black people were getting shot because they commit more robberies, so I googled it for her and we learned that for robberies, it's about 50/50 white/black. We also learned that black people are more likely to be shot while unarmed than white people. Then this morning instead of complaining about the riots, she was talking about how ridiculous it is for a cop to put his leg on someone's neck for 9 minutes. I wish I could pull out google in the middle of arguments with my dad, but he's not nearly as patient.
I challenge my personal biases every time I think them. I read that your first thought is what you're conditioned to think and your second is what you really think.
I live in a small country and there aren't as many poc as in other places. When I go on holiday I often find myself shocked at how often I get tiny bits of suprise when I see a poc. I have to remind myself that I'm being the weirdo by noticing it.
Other than calling people out on their racist comments or behaviors I'm trying to include more POC in my illustrations. I'm a working illustrator/graphic designer and I'm trying to get into writing and illustrating children books. Now I don't think I could do books on what its like being a POC justice, because I'm not, I'm white. So I'm not going to go there and pretend I can tell their story. But when I make a story about astronauts going to space, etc. I'm trying to be very aware that I don't need to default all the characters to being white. They can be any color and ethnicity. I think it's important to have more POC characters in books, specially at a young age.
I'm an elementary school teacher. I always thought my classroom was a welcoming environment for all. Wrong. My classroom library is full of classics ... But classics with white faced characters. I've been reading a bunch of websites with lists of books for children that talk about race and inclusion. Already looking on  Amazon to purchase them..I also believe my students see what is going on in America right now, it would be a shame not to discuss it. Next year, I hope to provide a safe environment for my POC students to share their experiences and thoughts about the issues going on and share their perspectives to help enlighten their classmates, especially the non POC classmates. This plan is not perfect, but I know it is a start and will continue each and every day. I want my POC students to know that their lives matter. Their families matter. Their communities matter.
In addition to introspection, education, and having all of the uncomfortable conversations with family members - I vote. 

I vote in my local elections and I research the candidates. If a candidate is not socially progressive, they don’t get my vote. And guess what? It’s really time consuming to look into your local elections, so most people don’t vote let alone do the homework. So I am happy to share my notes with friends, family and just about anybody which encourages participation and, hopefully, the selection of progressive candidates and policies.
This weekend I’ve just been trying to figure out how to check in on my black colleagues without being That Basic White Girl. 

Asking the one who did respond with workplace-related things how I can help our group be more inclusive, and assuring all of them that I adore working with them, and that they’re wonderful, and that I’m here to cover anything if they need to disconnect. 

As others have said - trying to listen, trying not to speak up about my own process or jump into conversations that I know others need to lead. Trying to offer love and light where I can.
I aid in the advocation for reconcilation (First Nations relations in Canada), have participated in workshops that help First Nations children reconnect with their culture, am currently working on a children's book that addresses toxic cultural norms from a kid's point of view, maintain friendships and professional relationships with people who are both POC as well as advocating for the rights and fair treatment of POC. 

I do my best to be an ally, however I still feel this is the tip of the iceberg of how much I really should be doing. I refuse to be complicit in the systematic racism that has plagued my continent well before the countries we know now existed.
(Serious) until I read your post I thought the acronym POC meant ‘piece of crap’ only to now realise it means ‘people of colour’. This is an eye opening week.
Treating them like any other person.
I wanted to start off by mentioning that I’m from a country where there’s not a lot of diversity so topics like racism etc are not really relevant, that’s why a lot of people (mostly older) are racist because they haven’t been educated. Because of the internet and learning English I’ve had the opportunity to educate myself about these kinds of topics and what is white privilege and racism etc. I personally call out my family members and friends if they are being offensive or don’t think much about saying racist slurs, so I try my best to educate others and not be silent on these topics. Also, I’ve been teaching my younger siblings about all these issues and why it’s wrong, so there’s not too much I can do but I certainly try my best!
I read a lot about it and believe people of color when they tell me about their experiences. I think white people tend to minimize and brush off people of colors’ experiences as random anomalies and then compare it to their own personal struggles like they’re the same thing.

The best way I’ve learned to combat racism is by talking about it. Try to extinguish ignorance. I love the South Park episode where Stan frustrates Token by repeatedly telling him he “gets it,” and by the end Stan has a realization and says “I don’t get it.” I think the moral of that story is to listen to people of color and really just quit thinking that you “get it.” I’m standing with you all.
I work as a teacher and I do my best to bring in literature from different points of view through out the year, not just in February. This includes short stories, songs, poems, spoken words, etc. For example Let America Be America Again by Langston Hughes instead of Snow-flakes poem by Longfellow. I keep track of how often I've had to discipline, call on, and praised children to make sure I am not subconsciously favoring any particular student or race. Among my student I refuse to allow racist names or stereotypes even as a "joke."

&#x200B;

Outside of my professional life I donate money to groups like Color of Change and went to a "Close the Camps" protest this summer. I haven't been able to join any recent protests because I live with an autoimmunity person. I refuse to patronize businesses that I know have ties to racism (with how many companies are actually owned by another company it's hard but I do my best).
I (cis female) grew up in a lower income community and had mostly minority friends I have never had white supremacy in myself I remember telling my father when i was 11 or 12 that i would disown him and never speak to him again if he used a racial slur again (he angrily said the N word during a fit of road rage) however my family is more conservative than liberal. Since i moved out ive been able to have peaceful conversations with my father about these issues and although he doesnt quite understand the problems yet he does have a problem with how our government responds and policies and brutality. I now live my boyfriend whos has a drastically higher income along with having a majority of white conservative friends. When i met him he was very close minded, he now is incredibly progressive and quite liberal and supports BLM where in the beginning (3 years ago) he didnt even believe that oppression existed in the US. Now both he and I open these conversations up with his friends in a healthy manner, theyre the dumb kind, however getting the facts of the US out there and putting these seeds in their mind is a big feat and good start.
What should be done? Seriously what do you think would be the first few items to put on a list? Sometimes you have to jump-start the conversation so it develops into something meaningful. edit: clearly OP has some ideas. People don't recognize things in themselves at many levels - that is how we can end up with bad jobs, relationships etc. A little push in the right direction is not a bad thing.
I'm reading and watching content created and shared by POC and working to process my reactions to what I read, because there's a lot that I knew bits and pieces of but didn't really have the full details for.  

I'm talking about all of what is going on and what I'm learning with my teenage son, and about how he and his peers see the situation.  

I'm signal boosting information about what can be done locally to support anti racist organisations (I'm in the UK) and figuring out where I can donate money.  I'm also sharing info about those organisations with my partner, who is looking for volunteering opportunities.

And until I'm asked, like in this thread, I'm otherwise keeping quiet and letting POC voices be heard.
Go out of your way to find and support black owned businesses.
I show up for as many of the protests as I can (If I don't go, it's either prior obligations or spoons level), I try to examine my own internal initial reactions to scenarios that could bring up implicit racism in myself or other ways I can unintentionally be racist. I do my best to check in with my friends who are POC especially during times like these. I give money to organizations when I have it (I gave to a local grassroots group that organized a protest regarding George Floyd/Briona Taylor/Ahmaud Arbery). I currently live in a diverse neighborhood and I'm having conflicting feelings on whether I'm contributing more to gentrification or not. 

Something I want to get better at-noticing and figuring out what to do if I notice police speaking in public with a POC.
I am 35 y/o white male. What can I do to help?
1. Constant racial bias examination of my self. I’m a teacher in an underserved, city setting. I had to confront an internal racist thought last week when I realized I was being harsher on some of my female black students and their work. I realized it came from me misinterpreting some of their personality traits as “attitude” which case from a deeply buried fear of “angry black women” and the racist root in my thought process/experiences. I have worked with the cohort of high schoolers for the last 4 years and it truly effected my relationships with certain students. That’s just one personal, recent example. 

2. Checking in with my black friends, family and colleagues. Understanding I might not be a safe space for them to confide in/process with right now. Buying them lunch from afar.

3. Donating directly to black people and black owned orgs. Any time I feel frustrated or powerless. 

4. Protesting. Attempting to use my white lady privilege to shield black protesters, or de-escalate situations. My mere presence has helped things diffuse. 

5. Actively working to decolonize my school and it’s power structures, including dress code, discipline system, and leadership. 

6. Connecting with my handful of white students. Having discussions with them to help them unpack their white privilege and how it can affect their classmates. 

7. Arguing with racist family members all damn day. Distancing myself from those who refuse to change. Cutting ambivalent white ppl from my life. 

8. Helping with post protest clean up efforts. 


I don’t want to ramble, this all sounds really back patty, cookie grubbing and I feel like I invaded this space even though the question welcomed it. It’s not enough. It’s not an event. It’s constant work to be anti racist. 

Stay safe. Thank a protester on the front lines, even if they are “violent” or “looting” it’s not white people’s place to judge how oppressed people are protesting. Yes there are lots of different groups instigating the violence and vandalism, and we can argue both ways, but DO NOT CONDEMN any Black people “rioting” don’t do it yourself (you can protest in many ways). 

Anyway, OP. I hope you have a lovely day. I hope you are hydrated and rested and safe! 


Black Lives Matter
Anytime my parents say something racist, I try my hardest to call them out on it. Often times though, they'll say that they wont say it in public/to someone's face, but that doesn't make it right! Ugh, it's sp disgusting. Thankfully, my little sibling doesnt have that behavior.
Last night I watched 13th and tonight I watched American Son. I’m gonna keep reading and watching as much as I can (starting with the Anti-Racist resources for white people list that’s been floating around). 

I teach black children. I try my best to give them an opportunity to talk about their trauma and experiences and I listen to them. I try to give them the skills to move forward in life as best as they can. I know that I have so much work to do to be an anti-racist white educator though. I started that work by going to NYCORE and TAG Philly conferences within the last few years though.
I'm from Europe. I wrote my master thesis about black and hispanic female intellectuals in US society. My professor had never heard of bell hooks before and I introduced her to hooks. The next semester she offered a class on hooks. 

I have taken a lot of classes about the black experience, on my last flight I watched the movie about Harriet and MLK, I try to be aware of discriminatory thoughts and actions. I explained to my parents why some US Americans are rioting. I try to read and learn and educate.
What I've been doing apart from listening to and amplifying BIPOC voices is calling out family members.

Oh you're concerned about the looting? What's worse Phil, the looting or the racism? 

"That's not the point though" 

I mean it kinda is, why are you so concerned about the looting, I've never seen your concern about racist killings. Before those are history I'm not too concerned with looting of (insured) property.

Had this conversation yesterday.
When I found out I was pregnant, one of the first things I did is buy my kiddo books that included authors and illustrations of people of all races and colors. As they say, start them young. Racism is not a natural intuition, it is taught. Be proactive rather than passive in teaching those morals you hope to pass down. I am 7 months pregnant and can’t wait to break into the mini library I have created.
Thank you for asking this! As POC it is so draining to have to constantly relive these events keeping up with the news, and then answer these questions and try to speak up and sway others opinions. I start to wonder... when is it someone else’s turn to start speaking up since we’re clearly not being listened to?
I live in an area with very few people of colour (lots of Caucasian and Asian people, very few other ethnicities). I can probably count how many POC people I have seen in my city in my life. However, I attend events in my area for Black History month (I was invited by my only POC client, who helped organize it). I was asked by my family why I bothered, as it isn’t an issue that affected me - I said I wanted my client to know I supported her, that she had support in her community.

If I do hear anyone making racist comments, I immediately call them out on it and how wrong what they are saying is, and/or try to bring awareness of the hurtful nature of their words (depending on whether I think they actually hold racist views, or just ignorant of language). If they will not change their view or apologize, I will not interact with them anymore. Although, where I am, it’s not a subject that comes up a lot locally. Racism here is mostly directed towards our local Native population, of which my husband is one.

I try to listen to the experience of others, and while I can never fully understand, I try as best I can to raise my own awareness, knowledge, and compassion. To take the first steps towards not being ignorant or turning a blind eye.

I know what I do is not nearly enough. It’s not a drop in the bucket of enough. If I learn how to do more, I will. If there were marches or protests in my city, I would attend. I will keep learning.
I'm trying to educate my direct family. My parents are both very conservative, born-again Christians who voted for Trump. I love them, but it's hard to love someone so much when they vote for someone like him. We are white people from the middle-class suburbs of the Midwest. We grew up surrounded by white people and only a handful of minorities. In fact, I remember only a few POC in my school (mostly Indian or Asian families, with very few Black people and I don't even remember Hispanic people). 

I try to discuss issues through exposure to situations with people they know or can relate to (especially my diverse group of friends). I also married a minority and have children that are half white, half not, and I'm the first in my whole family (mother's and father's side), so it is harder for my family members to make little comments without me asking them to clarify. 

Over the years they have changed their stance on the LGBTQ community and Planned Parenthood. I've been working on race with my dad, as he feels like one of the last White men, like he has been at all inconvenienced before. I told him that the way he is feeling now is how POC, women, and other disenfranchised people have felt their entire lives. It's hard, and takes a lot of time and patience, but every little bit helps.
Taking a minute to ask myself "why are you talking?" and "for who's benefit?" before I start. 

Elevating the voices of BIPOC rather than putting in my 2¢ (like I have anything more relevant or important to say).

Challenging others who are perpetuating white supremacist ideas, whether conscious or not.

Talking about race with other white people, sharing resources, books, articles, and trying to eliminate the reliance on BIPOC to explain.

It is apparent to me that silence is the worst thing I can do as a white body right now and I'm trying to step into the uncomfortable to speak up in the ways I am best equipped. I am figuring it out, I will make mistakes, and it won't be perfect. I am okay with that.
I'm a white woman who grew up in the southern United States. My schools practically drilled white guilt into me, and I'm honestly glad for it. Now I make sure to call out my friends and family when I think they're being racist. I harshly critique fiction that I think is racist. I continue to listen to people of color when they talk about their situations and how they feel about how they're presented in the media. I guess I could be doing more. I'm open to suggestions.
Listening. Amplifying black voices. Calling out racists. Not standing for people being abused. I've always been vocal when I see people being shitty about race/gender/sexual orientation. I will continue to do so.
I live by example and teach my kid to be human, for all humans. I donate to nonprofits whenever I can. I advocate publicly for equality, accessible health services and for transparent accountability of authority.
[removed]
[removed]
I read a lot, and look for other types of media made by and for people who have a different cultural and racial background from me.  Admittedly this has been focussed on indigenous writers in Canada, but it includes authors of colour in Canada, the US and other English speaking countries.  (Shout out to Nnedi Okorafor for kick ass science fiction and fantasy from a totally different cultural background). Hearing from other stories has deepened and enriched my understanding of many different people.

I teach management skills to tradespeople and I have learned (with difficulty) strategies to convince my students not to trust their own assumptions about people and to look at their underlying biases about people that aren’t like them.  I don’t bring up race, gender, class specifically, but try to create curiousity and openness.  With some success... guys that would normally be very argumentative and defensive end up being willing to discuss and admit maybe they might be able to change their position.

I witness and observe.  And when I witness and observe racism, I chose to intervene.  I am not good at confrontation so I’ve found some success at approaching people with gentle, tough, curiosity and love.  It throws aggressive people off balance and often diffuses the situation even if it doesn’t actually change their opinions-it changes their behaviour.

I look at my company practices with regards to staff and try to remove bias, usually by changing procedures to try to be fair and equitable.

Mostly I just keep trying to change myself by listening to others.  And look for ways I can act in accordance with my values.  And be open to when my actions don’t align with my value.  Which requires a lot of humility, swallowing of pride, and deep breaths.  I hate being wrong but I often am.
Personally, I’m trying to educate myself more on the issues I’m unaware of due to my privilege. Within my my friend group and family, I’m calling out racist shit they say and doing my best to educate them on why it’s hurtful and wrong. Currently not working because of COVID, but I wouldn’t work at a company that isn’t anti-racist. Please let me know if you think that there’s anything else I can do that I may not be aware of as I’m always trying to learn angle grow. I hope everyone is healthy and safe!
One of the small ways I try to do better is buy books written by POC, more specifically women. I want to hear more female voices and I want to hear the voices of WOC. It’s also a way to financially support those voices so they can continue to be heard.

I also choose to spend my money on films made by POC. Representation matters. 

I listen when POC share their lived experience. If I want to join in the discussion I stop and think “does this need to be said? Does this need to be said by me?”, because sometimes my input is not only not needed but it wouldn’t be wanted. Listening is so important. Being mindful is important. There is a difference between saying “well that never happened to me”, implying that because I never experienced it means it can’t be that much of a problem and saying “I have never had to deal with that”.  

I acknowledge my privilege, I acknowledge my bias and I acknowledge that I may not even be aware of it. I accept being corrected and I promise to do better when I am called out.

I don’t give traction to the “I don’t see colour” malarkey. I see colour. I SEE it and I hear you.
I’m sharing posts on Facebook with #blacklivesmatter, reading articles by black journalists, and educating myself of the struggles POC face, so I can use my voice to make their movement one person louder.
I call things out when I see things happening.

I work in education and help train educators and educational leadership across the US; I consistently present and train on equitability in the classroom and unconscious bias.

I support businesses owned by POC and encourage friends to support them as well. 

I vote for and donate to political officials who want criminal justice reform.
I've been doing my best to support my POC friends and their experiences. I am also making an effort to make a better environment for my younger siblings. My stepdad and siblings are biracial. I know that their upbringing will be different than mine because of how other people are bound to treat them. It makes me sick to imagine that anyone will ever see them as threatening or harmful because of the color of their skin. I make sure to encourage both my brother and sister in whatever they want to do and make sure they know that I will always be there for them with whatever they need. I know that I will never be able to understand the years and years of oppression that POC have faced but I know that I can at least learn and prevent it on my end.
[removed]
I am both a mother and I work at a daycare. I do my best to teach both my kids and the kids I am in charge of to just be decent people. I've rarely seen cases of racist remarks with any of them because they are all so young and don't see a difference in skin color (except for the bigass mole on the side of my face all the kids like to point out lol), but every now and then they might repeat something a parent or someone they know has said. I immediately shut that down and try to use it as an opportunity to have empathy for others. It may not be much, but it at least makes our little Texas town's future adults hopefully a little less awful.
First off, that's a more than fair question to ask. And although I don't think my efforts (past, present, or future) are enough, I will try to answer as honestly as I can.

As much as l can, as often as I can, I prioritize *listening* to the voices and experiences of Black women and other WOC in my life. Because the stories, opinions, and perspectives of WOC tend not to be centered (or often valued) in our culture, I think affirmatively remembering to listen and honor what they have to say is important. 


This past winter, I participated in a 5-part lecture series titled "None of Us is Free Until All of Us are Free: Interrupting White Supremacy," that was facilitated by a local Jewish organization I joined because its work focuses on social, racial, and economic justice issues in Baltimore and DC.

COVID has pushed back the timeline, but I am also hooked into a more comprehensive anti-racism direct action/praxis training that has now been rescheduled for 2021.

I have attended legislative strategy planning sessions and citizen lobby nights at the city and State level in order to organize and advocate for police reform, criminal justice reform, clean water, and a ban on housing discrimination based on funding source (such as Section 8 benefits), all of which are issues that disproportionately affect Black people in my area.

Within the past year, I have twice marched/protested to demand that a local jurisdiction sever its agreement with ICE/DHS to imprison detained migrants. Assuming further protests will be ongoing at/near the White House tomorrow, I'll be there.

And it doesn't really count in the same way, but a few dollars of each of my very modest state employee paychecks goes to nonprofit organizations that do direct service, as well as legislative and legal work, on a range of racial and economic justice issues.  

I'm happy to answer any questions or provide any clarification folx would like.
- Learning Spanish to better meet the needs of my students and their families. 

- Reading
I’m reading. Also purchased books for my kiddos and I to read together. 

My BIL is black. We have very racist extended family. My grandmas cousin said some things I won’t repeat about my mixed niece and nephew. We told him off. My grandma did too. And we haven’t spoken to him since.
I grew up in South Africa during apartheid and was a teenager when it was abolished. So I've heard and seen some pretty fucked up things in my formative years. Things that people told me were right and normal...




So, this means I question everything about my thought process and inherent bias as soon as I pick it up. The problem with racism is people assume it's a conscious choice. I don't think it is and I'm trying really hard to catch the thinking and emotional reactions that happen automatically and ask myself why I feel that way and who taught me that.





I also try to call racism out wherever I can, starting from when I was old enough to understand what it meant. A lot of people make the assumption that a white woman who's emigrated to the UK did so to 'escape' black rule in SA. Boy do they get a shock when I'm warmed up and ranting.
I’m fairly young and grew up in a very conservative area; I never liked politics because I always socially found myself liberal and was therefore belittled by family (except my mom who aligns with my beliefs also). I now refuse to give up an argument because someone older/“wiser” disagrees or attacks me because I seek social justice. I’m now in college and going into the medical field. Personally, I think trying to keep myself educated and acknowledging the bias I was raised in along with forcing myself to read/learn/be active in political issues especially those about social justice. Moreover, I’ve payed special attention to medical problems that affect POC(a lot are due to medical professions not believing POC, and of that mainly female POC). I make sure with all my patients I check any bias I any have and listen and care for each patients needs as I would have my own family. While in practice, I’ve notice how so many others do not do this. How skin tone, gender, and drug history, medical history, or others cause IMMEDIATE bias in their health care teams.
I have gotten into so many public fights on social media with old high school “friends” that keep pushing their racist tropes. 

I call out racism and sexism and homophobia and ableism whenever I see it. I don’t care if I make people uncomfortable, their BS makes me uncomfortable so they can kick rocks. 

Most importantly, I push hard to hire non-target kids from state schools into my field (finance) to give them REAL opportunities to level the playing field.
To be honest I can’t do that much as a high schooler. But I mostly try to learn as much about the underlying history and politics as I can to understand the struggles I don’t have. I try to speak out when someone says something racist. When I write I always consider making the characters different races/genders/sexualities before I go for the default straight cis white girl because that’s what I know the best. I try to support POC creators by telling people about them or reading/watching/listening to their works a lot. I’m generally the therapist friend but I’m always there for my POC friends and they know that I’ll listen even if I can’t empathize. I’d love to be able to do more but I don’t know what since I’m pretty young, if y’all have any advice I’d love that!
I’ve been reading a lot and sending readings to my family back home — Patricia Hill Collins has been a favourite. I donated money to the GoFundMe set up for the family of Regis Korchinski-Paquet, a black woman who died during an interaction with the Toronto police. I’ve been making the effort to amplify Black voices when posting about anti-racism instead of posting about /my/ feelings on the matter. I have encouraged protesting (I am unable to due to illness) and have been the emergency contact for several friends who attended protests today.

My whole heart aches and I am trying my best to be a good ally so that whiteness can be properly dismantled in our institutions.
Educating the older members of my family, getting in conversations with other white people about what we can do to lift POC up, teaching my son about systemic racism and what he can do to be a difference. In fact for MLK day I bought him a children's book called "I AM Martin Luther King Jr." and if goes into great detail the struggles he went through. What he grew up with, how cops and the government tried to uphold oppression, and how he was assassinated. Tonight we are going to read it again and talk about what is going on right now.

I'll be damned if my son sits and watches the world burn while he is holding a bucket of water.
Hi OP, I really like this question and I’m glad you brought it up! I can only imagine how exhausting it is to have to explain or justify your experiences to strangers, regardless of how well-intentioned the request is. 

To answer your question: 
Ending white supremacy in myself—
• recognizing where I’m benefitting from white supremacy in my life, and educating myself on the structures that keep systemic racism in place and taking action to dismantle them. 
• consuming BIPOC media, literature and theory with purpose (not just reading it for what it is, but actively trying to understand the experience of the creator). 
• thoughtful listening of the grievances and experiences of non-white people. Understanding the difference between systemic issues and localized/individual experiences. 
• using my privilege to make meaningful change for BIPOCs and other marginalized people in my community. This includes donating to groups and media that further racial equity, engaging with the community, supporting minority-owned businesses, voting for politicians that have actionable policies to address racial inequity, etc. 

Within family, social and work networks: 
• calling out racism wherever I see it (if it’s safe to engage) and educating the white people in my life on racial issues and micro aggressions. Justifying and validating actions and reactions from the BIPOC community to those who don’t understand them. 
• making sure ideas and comments from non-white coworkers are heard and addressed. 
• pushing the charity brach of my company to include more groups that serve BIPOC communities—especially in education and social justice equity.
I'm not white, but I try to point people in the direction of empathy. I also point them to various sources that aren't the news. People know that the news is totally one sides and people buy into it so easy. I think a lot of people just fight others and say they're closed-minded, but both sides need to understand empathy.

I like to point them to a Netflix episode of "Explained" called The Racial Wealth Gap. I also point them to that Youtube privileged videos, where some people get to a headstart to the race, even though it has nothing to do with them.
I always attempt to educate any time I can. I protest when I can, sign petitions when I can. I try to always raise a stink when I know others would just brush it off. I try to do what I can, when I can, never backing down.
I'm order to be an ally, we have to know what your perspective and experiences are. We, as women, understand some of the issues but not the women of color perspective.  It's uncomfortable to ask because for some of us, it is new. We want to help. I've never seen more of my peers get into meaningful conversation about what we can do. It's a first for many of us. Please guide us and don't make us feel stupid about it.
I have called out friends and family who post misinformation, I have spoken to my family members and friends about injustices and how we can be better. I have signed petitions and (once pay day comes around) will be donating. I have been educating my nephew about race and injustice and am buying him books to read so we can get started early. I vowed to him that his generation would be better and I will do anything in my power to help. Additionally, I have offered a listening ear and to my black friends and offered a safe place to stay to any protesters (I live downtown in a city that is protesting) if needed.
I’ve been reading, listening, and amplifying black voices on my social media platforms where I have a bit of a following. I also contacted my local police force today to demand they begin to require body cameras for all on duty officers.
One thing in my life that has been especially important is how I shape my education around social justice. I am currently in a doctoral program for clinical psychology. We have an ethical duty to be able to provide good, fair, and culturally sensitive treatment to everyone. However, academia is slow changing and many schools don't place a lot of value on diversity. There are too many racist, homophobic, transphobic, sexist, and ableist  practitioners and researchers. 

Part of what led me to my current program is the explicit focus on diversity. Our student clinic is a community clinic - we do serve students from the minority-majority campus, but we also treat community members, many of whom are POC, LGBTQ, or low income. In addition, our department has several grants dedicated to research and treatment for underserved groups. Professors are required to participate in diversity-focused research. There is a special student group dedicated to social justice advocacy that is largely created/led by queer students and students of color. My institution is in no way perfect when it comes to racial issues or any other diversity issues. However, I'm proud that the student body and many of the professors are actively having conversations around these topics, engaging in activism, incorporating social justice into both treatment and research, and calling out instances of injustice. 

Obviously, this work is not specific to me, but along with any everyday forms of activism I am trying to be better at (donations, contacting representatives, discussions with my social network, petitions, protests, etc.), I believe I can make an impact in my field. I don't think I would be able to do my job effectively if I was educated in a place where I only treated white clients and social justice was not included in the classroom. Too many people have been harmed by bad psychological research and practice. My first step in becoming an anti-racist practitioner/researcher is becoming educated.
Reading. Reading a lot. Reading books by Black authors - really reading, highlighting, making notes, going back and rereading. Acknowledging the racism I grew up with. Acknowledging the whitewashing I grew up with, the fundamental lack of perspective I had just growing up in a predominantly white area. Questioning why that is. Unpacking the resulting biases in myself. Calling out racism and colorism when I encounter it among my peers. Working for a small Black-owned business, alongside POC (as well as other non-Black immigrants and refugees) across all levels of the organization including management & executive roles. Celebrating their wins - promotions, successful projects, new initiatives. Not appropriating the culture. Half the office shows up in braids? My white ass is not. It's not for me, it's not about me, and it doesn't have to be. Not repeating the n-word where it appears in songs. Purchasing from other black-owned businesses, following them on social. 

It's not perfect. It's a lifetime of work, but I just keep learning and doing and educating myself when I fuck up. I mostly just try to do a bunch of small things in the hopes that they add up.
I live up in Canada and I have people asking me "why are you posting and sharing so much about America's problems? What does that have to do with you? What are you going to do about it?" And yeah, I've lost some 'friends' this past week but screw them. I've never been shy about vocalizing my disgust and anger, but I have realized this past week that no matter how much money I donate or Black podcasts I listen to or Black voices I retweet that I'm not doing enough. I'm saying so much but I can do more. So I've been reaching out to Black friends and asking them what they need. What can I do for them. I'm making meals. I'm babysitting. I''m painting protest signs. And I'm having hard conversations, calling out friends and family for racism. I'm learning and growing and I hope I can continue to do more. 

Recognizing the burdens Black people already carry I welcome suggestions from POC and white folks here on how I can improve my allyship.
I own a bookstore and 4 or 5 years ago I started instigating intra-white conversations about race with strangers in my store. Not all the time and not always perfectly but I have found ways to challenge people's views and still have a commercially viable shop.
Context:  I’m a white woman and your question is HUGELY important.  I’m only speaking for myself, so here goes...

What can I do?

If I ask questions about experiences, history from your eyes, how do I not come across as though I’m treating you like an alien from another planet?  Would my honest inquiry not fee like I’m being nosy?

I have developed into someone that has battled with friends, family, strangers to call out shitty racist comments.  I don’t care who I piss off, when it’s wrong, I say it.  The best thing I’ve done (IMO) is make sure my kids don’t have racist views, and encourage them to call out this BS just as loudly as they can.

But yes, I can do more.  If I go to local protests, or clean up after, am I not taking a huge change that I can run into someone that beats the shit out of me for just being there, and being perceived as where the problem starts?  Or do I stay home, and feel horrible because I didn’t help?
Above all else, please don’t take my comments as an attempt to say my struggle to understand is anywhere CLOSE to what POC have lived with for years.

Talk to me...what can I do?
Woman who is white here... we (husband and I) make a monthly donation to Planned Parenthood, and recently made a donation to the National Lawyers Guild, which provides legal defense for those arrested at protests, monitors protests for abuse by authorities, and disseminates information in real time. We read and listen to Black men and women's stories, perceptions, and experiences (for anyone interested, Trevor Noah just made a really well done video discussing the current protests and looting). I have physically put myself between a gay POC and the man who was taunting him, and we walked him away safely. 

I know I will never understand how it feels to be a POC in America, but I hope to always be seen as one of the helpers that Mr. Rogers spoke of. I appreciate OP for calling out the unbalanced number of questions in this sub directed at Women of Color.
Talking with family, trying to model being vulnerable and admitting that we benefit from a racist system and have been conditioned by this system to believe a lot of damaging things.

The older generations are so scared and intolerant of being called racist. I try to talk to them and say “hey, I’m racist too. I don’t want to be. Let’s talk about it” so they can stop living in a colorblind fantasy.
For me, I'm working on my own racist tendencies and checking myself constantly. I'm also staying as informed as I can. For others, I am checking my friends, family, and strangers if they say something or do something that is racist or has racist undertones.
I’m Latina and my husband and step children are white. We are discussing race with them, we are teaching them about racism, injustice, death by police, and (to the best of our abilities) what Black Lives Matter means. For a while there we wondered about what was age appropriate (5 and 8) but we ended up feeling strongly that sheltering them won’t help them and NOW is the time to show them the hate in the world so that they can grow up being strong and loving. 

We are reading diverse books and watching diverse movies and striking conversations whenever possible with these to help us. 

They saw that ALL FOUR of their parents (mom and step dad too) marched in protest and in solidarity with our black community. For George Floyd and so many others like him. 

Aside from in our one, I am doing the best I can to give the BPOC in my community the floor to speak their truths, without remaining silent against those who would silence them. I love in a very red state in a very red small town, and I have learned that it is my job to make sure they have that space. 

I am open to and asking for guidance. How can I best hold space for the black community right now? How can I be a better ally and a better support? How do you suggest I raise these tiny humans to be the generation that ends the hate? 

I am open, and I am listening. Teach me.
Listening to black people‘s experience, calling out friends and family for racist statements. Voting. Confronting my own blind spots because of my privilege. Doing my best to not just be a silent bystander, but to actively speak out against racism.
I realized the other day that I post a lot of stuff on social media but that I don't think I actually have any followers anymore who don't agree with me. 

I have called out and subsequently gone no contact with members of my family because of their racist behavior. 

My brother is half Mexican and I went to inner city schools my whole life, so I try to be aware that there are things that I am aware of but also things that I will never fully understand because I am white. I try to be open minded and listen to peoples' experiences so that I can learn as much as possible. 

I also vote democrat and donate to candidates at the city, state, and national level who can help make changes on a broader scope.
Thank you for asking this, as I've been asking myself lately what can I do more. I'm currently running a charity campaign to help the families who have been affected by police brutality. I have always stood up against injustice, even at the cost of losing a promotion. I've never been one to stand idly by and allow for bullying of any kind. 

May I ask: What would you have me do? What would matter the most? What organisations can I be part of and show solidarity? What businesses can I buy from?
Calling out my mom and old Republican family members on social media. Teaching my kids to love their friends of color. Being here for a listening ear for any of my friends of color. Read ing and watching as much as I can about the black experience so that I can get as close as possible to understanding.
I’m a teacher. I make sure I teach my students about racism, both in the past and present, famous POC (not just MLK and Obama), and ways they can stand up for others that are being discriminated against. I make sure that I teach these lessons year round and not just in February. While my students are young, they are eager to learn how to help and are quick to adapt their ways of thinking. I’m hoping the next generation will be better than we have, they’re my hope.
In re: the George Floyd protests, I haven't been able to go to any protests so far, but I've been doing my best to educate myself so that I can be a better ally. I've also been calling out family and friends who are spreading racist sentiments, or who are claiming that the violence of the protests is too intense (mostly by pointing out that they're the same people who complained about Colin Kaepernick's peaceful protest for years, pointing out other hypocrisies, and explaining that peaceful protests have been ignored for years, etc.), and I've been donating as much as I can to bail funds across the country.

In general, I've tried to be mindful that my voice is not the one that should be elevated in this conversation, so I mostly try to listen to organizers and leaders in communities of color, and do my best to support them. At the same time, I recognize that because of my white privilege, I'm sometimes in conversation with people who would not listen to or engage with POC, but because of my appearance, will at least hear me out, so I do my best to represent the reality of the situation when I speak to people like that (explain why the narrative surrounding police brutality of 'they feared for their lives' doesn't hold up when they're decked out in thousands of dollars of military-grade equipment, for example). 

In more direct-action ways, I have recently begun work with a law office, and am working especially closely with the criminal defense team. Although we don't focus specifically on civil rights issues, we very frequently find ourselves defending POC who were only charged because of searches based on racial targeting, or who are facing discriminatory courtroom proceedings. The case itself may not center on race, but it's not uncommon to have to file motions challenging the police officers, or even the DA, for the clear bias against our clients on the basis of race. Although I hope to someday help bring about an institutional change, after I get my degree; right now, fighting for these individual cases is what I'm able to do, so that's what I'm focusing my energy on.
I am extremely lucky because I was raised in a relatively wealthy family, but also a very open minded and accepting one. My immediate circle of close friends and family and all actively supporting the BLM movement by calling out racists and educating our other friends and neighbors who are misled by the false reports. I personally do as much research as possible on the facts, and the more I look into it, the angrier I get. 

As a white woman who has never personally been affected by racism and is still filled with rage at these terrible excuses for human beings, I can't even imagine the pain and suffering and anger people of color must be going through. I'm embarrassed that it took us as a race this long and some of us are still believing the lies and bullshit of racists and their propaganda. I hope soon there can be peace between everyone, but until then, I'd love any and all suggestions on other ways to help? Located in the baltimore area if that helps!!
I’m having some hard conversations with myself and my family/friends to challenge some of our long-held beliefs. I’ve done a LOT of learning in the last week, and there’s still so much to do, but the first step for me was looking inside at my privilege and starting the conversation with those close to me.
I am trying to educate myself with reading and listening - listening to POC friends and to podcasts like Code Switch. I am getting into arguments with friends and family who are not quite at the same stage of racial awareness and responsibility for their white privilege. I try to stay vigilant of my thoughts, words and actions because I know that my education and course of correction is and always will be a work in progress. Lastly, I try to maintain an attitude of humility in all of my discussions both when I'm listening and learning and when I am challenging and educating.
I asked for a promotion at work and insisted that if they gave me one, they also give one to my Mexican heritage coworker who started at the same time as me. 

It didn’t work out for unrelated reasons but it was a moment of recognition that coordinated efforts like those are going to be the most impactful longterm in corporate (read: traditionally white) America.
Personally, I believe pursing a career that is both personally meaningful and social justice oriented is key to rejecting racism and prejudice of all sorts. Reading the work of marginalized authors, listening to those who are oppressed, and applying those experiences to your own work is socially advantageous in any realm of work. By spending time volunteering at food banks, protesting environmental harms, or protecting women’s right to health will disproportionately benefit women and men of color. In short, doing good work for all will benefit those who need it most, or generally people of color in the US
[removed]
I’m introspective about ways I could be reinforcing white supremacy subconsciously and then I work to correct it. I try to put myself in other people’s shoes as much as possible and think about their perspective and how I’d feel. I think about how I’ll never have to experience certain things that other people have to experience and what that means
I’ve personally challenged every single racist white man in my family. Hard. For years. Including my own father.

I never mention it out loud to anyone black bc I don’t have anything to prove to them. And already know they wouldn’t accept my attempts anyway as an effort to help.
Mixed white/Native woman here, most of my family is raised white so there's some ingrained racism. Been calling it out and either showing people info about other people's experiences, or trying to teach the kids to be better. Depends on the person I'm talking to.

I may or may not be the person people avoid inviting to things because I keep calling out their bs. There's lots of racism and sexism and they don't like being told they're wrong. 

I'm pale af, but I'm also physically disabled, so I can't serve as a barrier in things like protests. All I can do really is try and support y'all and call people out on things. Sorry I can't do more. :/
I’m reading. Listening to the experiences of those around me with open ears, without questioning. 

As a teacher, continuing to diversify my classroom library to make sure that all cultures are represented. Purchasing new lessons and materials to make sure my students and I can have authentic conversations about race all year long, not just in February. This is something I’ve been working on for the last few years after taking multiple workshops and master’s classes on culture and diversity in the classroom, as well as listening and learning from many different educators who are POC and use their platforms to speak out about the inequality in education.

Personally, finally posting on Facebook about it. Using the words Black Lives Matter and not letting my fear of confrontation stop me. After years of staying quiet because of my very conservative (and let’s face it, racist) relatives shooting down every comment I make because I’m “uninformed,” I’m standing my ground. It should have happened a long time ago, quite honestly.
I'm in finance. I call old white men's entitled self-serving BS on a daily basis.

It's not tiring. It actually turns me on.
Reading. Ordering books for my early childhood classroom that center experiences of BIPOC. Talking with white parents about their responsibility to talk to their children about race. Gathering and sharing resources by BIPOC for those parents. Trying to stay in my lane as a teacher and not centralize my own voice. Working to shift emotional labor off of BIPOC by explaining to my white friends and family that they need to do their own learning and research - resources are out there for them to find. Making myself available as a check-in/point of contact for friends participating in protests. Striving to hold myself accountable and check myself in my daily life, interactions, and thoughts.


Reminding myself that this work is ongoing and doesn’t stop when the news quiets down or when parents stop asking  because Black lives matter every single day forever.
I've been trying to find podcasts to help educate me on how my white upbringing has influenced me in negative ways and what steps I can take to be anti-racist. It's been very interesting, and extremely informative!
I read or watch tv series to get a grasp of all the aspects of white supremacy. I’m not from America, so I feel like my family thinks white supremacy and racism aren’t an issue here, but they are. I also actively correct people around me regarding language.
I always always try to treat everyone the same. I stand by my friends who are POC when they need it. I encourage other friends to go to new experiences with me and I join in on cultural immersions when possible. I try to never exclude anyone.
[removed]
Taking a long hard look at myself to start. Realizing my own bias and reframing my mind. Reading, watching, listening to learn more and be better educated. Watching and realizing how I treat others and how they react to it, example one day I was in a terrible mood walking into work and didn’t smile at anyone. I happened to notice a black woman the next time she passed me cast her eyes down and it dawned on me she didn’t know if I was in a bad mood or it was her personally. I emailed a local group that deals with racial and economic issues to see about volunteering. I hope to keep doing and learning more.
What is a "Q" and a "POC" ?
I’m glad you shared this. I’m a white woman, I am a social worker, and the primary thing I try to always work on is making sure my actions reflect the best interest of POC, and do nothing to serve my ego or alleviate white guilt. Intention and integrity are what matter to me.

It’s important to me to always acknowledge that I will never fully understand. I will never genuinely know the trauma, the pain, the fear, or what it is like to be you. It’s important for me to acknowledge this because while I have the utmost empathy and compassion for what you have suffered, my feelings come second. 

Also—listening. Shutting the fuck up. Overcoming the discomfort in knowing that as a white person, you have done something in your life to harm black people, even if you didn’t realize it at the time—and not letting that discomfort become your reason for trying to help. Sitting with that discomfort and letting black people speak, about their experiences, about their feelings towards you, about whatever they need to, and not needing to validate my own ego in the process.

And of course, being sure to advocate for policies and actions that support the dismantlement of systemic racism.

That being said—please, let me know what I as a white woman can do to better support you.
I'm listening to podcasts (namely 1619 and the Scene on Radio season called Seeing White). I'm reading "African American and Latinx History of the United States" by Paul Ortiz. I'm checking in on Black friends and coworkers. I went to a protest (didn't go for very long and was in a car, but I went). I've donated to a bail fund in my city and the Southern Poverty Law Center. Called the police stations to demand people be released. I'm having conversations with friends (the few I have) and my husband and parents. 

I am mixed (white + NBPOC) and don't really feel like I have much influence since I don't have many friends and I don't think people care about my opinion. But doing what I can 🤷
I argue with my rents sometimes but I often get straight up punched in the eye. Got a bloody nose last Easter. I only start arguing if I know I can physically/emotionally take it from them all. It always turns into a horror show. It won’t work, they won’t ever change their mind, but I get so irritated sometimes I get combative anyway. 

I often donate to nonprofits for immigrant rights in my area as I know a lot of people involved.
I live in a predominantly white community so a lot of racists live here who think racism isn’t a problem anymore. I’m doing my level best to correct that view. 

I have regular “discussions” with my brother in law, who is a Trumper and thinks he somehow earned everything he has now. I’m pretty sure this will lead to him not wanting me around his kids anymore for fear I’ll indoctrinate them with my “liberal views”. He wouldn’t be wrong. I definitely would do that, because they won’t learn empathy from anyone else. 

I’m also reading Tears We Cannot Stop and How to be an Antiracist.

I’m being more forthright on social media and making it more uncomfortable for people to be enraged about the riots, but not the senseless murders.

I’m giving money to the challenger of any senator, congressman, governor or otherwise who advocates for violence against the protesters, not just in my state, but in any state I hear about it happening.

And in November, I will vote for a more equal US, because what hurts you, hurts all of us.

It’s not enough, but it’s a start.
Reading and listening. Having difficult conversations with family regarding racism and their own role in white supremacy.
I'm always trying to challenge misperceptions, internalized racism, and introduce the concept of systemic racism to those around me. It's important to me that I support people, and especially women, of color in their advancement, and also try to unburden their load whenever possible. I'm constantly trying to challenge my own biases and keep my mind open to new ideas, perspectives, and areas of growth. Professionally I ensure I'm considerate and try to never utilize my privilege as a stepping stone.
I’m a white woman - I wrote an email to my local sheriff advocating for law enforcement to wear body cameras and for a complaint threshold to find officers accountable and be fired. I can copy/paste it if anyone is interested. He actually got back to me and was interested in speaking in person. I feel super uncomfortable doing this, but I know black people feel more uncomfy getting assaulted and killed by the police so I can do this one thing for my community.
I visited some twitter threads hosting different Black businesses and Black creators and purchased some of their goods! I bought a lot of lip gloss, and I mean a LOT.
[removed]
Called out my dad on FB today after get got on a post of mine saying 'All Lives Matter.' Gave him an earful, so to speak.
What I’m doing is small but if every white person did this I believe there would be a lot less racism. I’m calling out racism around me. Publicly shaming anyone who says or does racist things out loud or or social media. Like I said, it’s small. Other than that, I have black family members and other POC in my family including my sister’s husband and his whole extended family whom I love dearly and my uncle and cousins. There are a lot of POC that I love dearly and would hate to see anything happen to them as well as any POC.
I know I'm not doing enough and I have a lot to learn. Reading this thread is helpful in giving me ideas. What I have been doing so far is

 - talking with my kids about what is going on, about institutionalized racism, police brutality, and the protests that are happening right now
- reading what I can find via social media and reddit and stopping to think about it
- talking with friends about the protests and what has led to them, in order to learn more about what I can do to be an ally

I will continue to try to read and learn more. I missed a local protest in my small city last night; I had a little nephew visiting and had only heard about it a few hours before. I hope there will be another one soon. 

Even though I really am not doing much, I have come a long way. There was a time just a few years ago when I was very uninformed and unaware of my own internalized racism. I believe I remember thinking that probably most of the time there was a good reason for the police to act the way they did. I understand now that that was wrong, and I'm grateful that I've learned more empathy since then.
Other than donating money, reading as much as I can about what is really happening, trying to educate myself and filling my YT and IG with more black content creators. 

The second hardest part was recognizing that I was wrong. I thought I had it all figured out but I really had so much to learn about privilege and the way society holds black people back. I thought it wasn’t “that bad” and the whole “few bad apples” thing but now I know. And I still feel the effects of taught racism but the habit is breaking and I’m getting more comfortable being wrong and calling myself out.

The first hardest part is growing a spine. I’m still working on that one. Most of my family is conservative and my bf is friends with a lot of close minded trashy people, somehow, he’s not, thank fucking god. I’m a pretty confrontational person, but not at all to my friends and family. The hardest thing is standing up to the people I love and pointing out when what they’re saying or doing is wrong and not okay. My bf would say the N word, R word and fa**ot when I met him (like I said, stupid friends who are ignorant and his parents weren’t peaches either) while joking around with friends or playing video games (heated gamer moment TM) but I put a stop to that immediately and I helped him understand it’s not just a word and it does have meaning and it hurts people. Ive overheard him saying “you shouldn’t say that” to his friends a few times for using racist and homophobic slurs. He’s grown a lot since we started dating several years ago and I think that has helped me be more confident in standing up to people and trying to educate because it shows me you can change people who are just ignorant and uninformed. Maybe one day I’ll be able to stand up to his mom when she says racist shit but that is still terrifying (and I have to be careful because what I say/do comes back on my bf and she’s abusive as shit).

TL;DR: educating myself and others, supporting black content creators, accepting that I’m wrong and it’s okay to say “I don’t understand,” learning to stand up to friends and family.
[removed]
I've been keeping updated, signing petitions, sharing information, and calling my officials. I'm immunocompromised and cant go out and protest, so advocating through any resource I have is my thing. I hope that I am doing good with what I have.

Edit: I forgot things I did beforehand. 

I mentor kids at my old elementary school, which is a mainly black school, teaching them art and of artist like Kehinde Wiley, Jacob Lawrence, and Faith Ringgold. 
I do free tutoring for the High school kids in math and science to help them pass standardized test and pass exams.
For me these recent events have really struck a cord. I honestly have not gotten involved in the past. Stayed silent. It’s not enough anymore. Not being racist and staying silent is still causing the problem. I’ve been very propelled to look into various organizations to give of my time. I may not have a lot of money to give, but I want to fight back and stand up for what is not only right, but what is deserved of every human being on this planet. To not be judged for the color of their skin. I am actively looking and would love any feedback as to how someone who is a white female can get involved in local and national organizations.
As a white mother and a cops wife I will tell you what we as a family have chosen to do. We speak to our son about racism and it’s implications ever chance we have!We make sure, when we have the opportunity, we speak about racism and that we instill in our child an enforced understanding that we as a family will not tolerate it at all, and when we see it, we do not turn a blind eye!!! 
We use resources such as sensitivity training, and an accurate history lesson of the USA.
 I believe it is our work as mothers to teach our sons and daughters that racism must end now!! It begins with the language we use every day and at the dinner table. 
If there are other suggestions that will enable me as mother to teach my child how to put an end to discrimination please suggest them. 
My husband made sure to explain to our child the disgusting acts that have been committed by ( so called) cops, and since my son wants to be a co,  we have asked that he make sure to fight against such deplorable acts. 
I have also lobbied our town government to make sure the PD is given better training so that cops themselves are given tools to de-escalate situations. Draconian tactical responses have no business in today’s world. 
Mothers of white children: we have a job to do, and we should take an oath to do it! Teach our kids we are not entitled, and we are not better, and we have to make up for the actions of our race. Together we mothers can save each others children for a better tomorrow.
Posting online. Donating to bail funds. Signing petitions. I live in upstate NY where racism/complacency/ignorance runs ramped. I’ve been commenting to others that aren’t educated and showing my republican family  what is really going on in America.
I am encouraging white women to listen to the people who are talking. To really look with open eyes and heart at our history. To learn about things like the Tulsa massacre of 1921. To read the books that are available. To STOP talking. And, to really understand that they'll NEVER understand what it's like. No, their (mine) Irish ancestors' indentured servitude was NOT the same as slavery. No, their Italian ancestors DIDN'T face greater discrimination than blacks. That their ability to turn off the tv and return to their "normal lives" IS privilege. That their biggest fear of their son doing something stupid and getting in trouble is nothing compared to the fear that black mothers face that their son could be doing literally nothing wrong and not come home. That these deaths, especially at the hands of police, only further reinforce that fear. 
I also tell them about my grandparents. My bio grandfather died years before I was born. My grandmother met the man I know as my grandfather. She's white. He's black. They owned a convenience store. This store was repeatedly robbed, vandalized, and they were threatened. And this was in the late 1980s into the 1990s. Finally, someone tried to set fire to the store after destroying everything inside. The person spraypainted "go away ni****", among other things, on the walls. And they threatened to kill them and their families. They never rebuilt the store. 
My grandmother is a strong woman who put herself through college as a single mom of 6 kids after her husband died unexpectedly. My grandfather is an Air Force Veteran who served honorably. All they wanted was to provide for their family. Instead they were terrorized. 
I have a unique perspective as a white woman who is also the granddaughter of an interracial couple. So, when white people won't listen to POCs, I tell them my story.
I mentor students of color in their first career because that's what I'm good at. We all have something to offer-- this is mine. I am fortunate to work for a company that values diversity and focuses a lot of our college hiring around BIPOC  and LGBT individuals. A hire by us is their ticket to 6 figures by 23 and $250k before they are 30.

Many of these kids are first generation college graduates, let alone first generation white collar Fortune 500 employees.  I volunteer to mentor them because the rules, customs and language of elite white corporate America may as well be Mandarin to most of them. They are so smart and so resourceful, but they are unpracticed on everything from a professional tone in email to what to wear to client meeting to exactly how much or little it is acceptable to drink at a work offsite.  Many of them don't know how to do basic things like book hotels for business trips. So, I teach them so that the wrong joke in front of a client or too much wine at dinner doesn't sink their career. And, I teach them things like what a 401k is and why now is the time to start. They are \*so close\* and yet that tribal knowledge is so far for them. 

I know it's not a lot, but for a lot of these kids, $100k a year is more than both their parents make combined in their 50's. This is not only their chance, but their family's. I help them not to blow it.
I’m only scratching on the surface but I try to ensure I do the following:

• make sure I can say and spell someone’s name correctly.
• believe them when they tell me a bad experience, not try and play devil’s advocate and see the other side.
• donate to advocacy causes.
• campaign for better healthcare access and rights (I have experience in this area from previous career and it pains and disgusts me that in the UK and US, women of colour are at far higher risk of maternal death. How is this possible?)
• I volunteer for a charity and work with a lot of refugees, mostly POC.
• I once lost a job for agreeing to sit as a witness for someone complaining against our manager. I had no idea what the complaint was about, but agreed to be a moral support and neutral witness. It was a complaint about racism and sexism. I was not allowed to speak at all during the meeting which was at the end of the day. In my head I was trying to work out my next career move as I didn’t not want to support this company who let this idiot do what he did. However he cornered me on the way out and chatted to me as everyone left for the day. I get back to my desk and my manager is telling me I failed probation (which I had passed 3 months before). So I took action. I became great friends with that colleague. We both took legal action and left. It was a rough time as it nearly made me homeless but I would do the same again. She deserved to be heard. I have a pile of literature printed out that I give to people who feel unsafe at work.
• I don’t ask for people to educate me, I have a disability and it’s freaking exhausting have to explain to people over and over again. I can do my own research. Plenty of people share their stories on the internet, I just need to do a search.
• if a colleague of colour is ignored in a meeting, I will ask them to repeat themselves or try to draw attention to what they said (same for women being ignored).

I’m open to further ideas and suggestions.
I am reflecting and continuing an internal dialogue to challenge my own thoughts of racism or privilege. I’d like to consider myself an ally, but I’m taking the time to think of times when I’ve taken up space, when I’ve used my privilege, when I’ve been surprised at a gut reaction and I’m processing it. Times when I have heard something obscurely racist and bit my tongue. 

I support my black friends and family, and have for a long time but I am not perfect. So I am working on me.  I am working on my racism, and I am listening so that I can better fight it in others.
I wrote a blog about accepting my racial bias and sharing memories of growing up in a racist society.  And how I try to be aware of it and manage my bias today to stop it creeping into racist behaviours.  Shared it with friends and we're having a discussion group about it this week. Had recommende reading by POC authors at the end. I also donated money to BLM
Educating myself. Taking a very critical look at the role I'm playing, and how I'm inadvertently perpetuating the system. I've had the luxury of choosing when, and to what degree I want to check in on my relationship with rage and privilege, and for the most part I've been surrounded by people who would echo or support me if I simply said "I'm not racist.", as if that were somehow enough. I've been trying to take a really hard look at my own biases, and perceptions, and how I've benefited from, and encouraged this system by being complacent.

Being pro-active. Like I said earlier, I've had the luxury of having a passive relationship with social injustice. I've always cared, and wished it was different, but I've been too lazy/indifferent to act. I've been building resources to learn how I can help enact change on the long term. Sure, I can donate now, but what will I be doing in 6 months? I'm putting myself on a career path to have an active say in the development, land use, and future built environment of my city. How can I use that platform to enact meaningful change? 9 months ago a friend of mine got me to read a book about Social Infrastructure, and it vastly shifted my perspective on urban planning. I've been thinking in my head about the impacts that social infrastructure can have on social issues in my community. Recent events have fueled me to stop having those thoughts in my head, and put them into action.
I tried to raise my children without prejudice, but in some ways I failed. They sometimes don't understand why a particular term or action is or could be perceived as being racist because of the belief that we are all the same. I admit I don't have the courage to march but my daughter has.
I will say that I’m always learning and always reevaluating my thoughts and behavior. I’ve been trying to listen and read more from POC. 
I’m calling out racist behavior and speech whenever I spot it, this includes inner dialogue or conversations with other white folks. 
Something I’ve always had the privilege to decide was how i outwardly showed my support of POC. I realized that the only reason I haven’t had a BLM sign or similar signs in my yard, was because I worried about what sort of backlash our property might face. But I realized this is a privilege I’m afforded by my whiteness, whereas POC can’t decide when to be black/black supporting/and safe. So Ive spoke with my husband and after some back and forth we’ve decided to put a sign in our front yard that says “White silence = Compliance! White people 4Black Lives”

I know it’s not enough, I know there’s lots of work for whites to do, but I can no longer be quiet and safe while my black brothers and sisters are being murdered.
I live in Minneapolis where a lot is happening. This weekend I’ve gone to the protests, donated, and helped with community clean up. What I’ve been doing the last few years is constantly seek to educate myself- books, articles, and trainings. I’ve also tried to increase my exposure in the social media platforms so I can hear a more diverse set up voices. Being intentional at making sure on twitter and reddit, that I see and have exposure when I scroll. Implicit bias is tough, and I work hard to notice when I have a thought or judgement. Like, when someone cuts me off in traffic and I assume something about their identity or I find myself feeling uncomfortable walking in the city and someone is walking behind me and I find myself assuming Their identity. Research shows that ignoring Implicit bias only increases. I’m not proud of these moment or judgements but it’s not going to change if I ignore it and pretend I don’t have them. I have conversations with my friends and family. I do my best to have a dialogue. It’s not up to BIPOC to do the educational piece. I can give people in my life resources and educate them. I also let myself be corrected and educated. I don’t know nearly enough and I practice listening. That’s what I spend a lot of time telling people. Listen and get more exposure. You can’t know it all or be perfect- we need to be comfortable being uncomfortable.
I live in a country that's very different from the US, and  like 95% of the  population is white. Contextually this is important, because even tho my sibling and I are at least ¾white  (¼  is a mystery due a grandparent being auctioned to another family as a child, and said grandparent is much darker than average here) my darker silblings would get some of the same treatment as poc, like the constant 'are you really from here'/'where are you from' questions and always being searched at an airport. I only would get that treatment if I was with my darker siblings or parent, because I am very light compared to everyone else. We were the darkest family in the area we lived in. I can count the poc classmates I have had over my life with one hand, and I had none before my late teens when I started traveling to a city for school. So the situation here is very different than in a more diverse country.

Non the less, I try to educate myself on issues both here and around the world. I am doing a minor on gender studies/feminism, and I am making sure I am taking all the special courses when offered, like one on american women's history course (focused heavily on differences between white women and women of colour, taught by a visiting professor) and read on what I can't find courses on online. For me I try to learn a lot on disability rights and queer rights as well, as intersectionality is important to me. I research who I vote for, and only choose people who care for minority  rights, including immigration rights. I have had serious talks about the differences of treatment with a black friend who grew up in a city while I was a literal villager for most of my life to better understand what I can do to help. Call put racism when I see it, and check my own biases if I notice myself thinking something negative. Share eays to digest educational material to friends who do not have a lot of time or understanding on issues so they will read up on it (works better than asking them to read an entire book). Share donation posts - I would love to donate to organisations, but I am dirt poor so I can't. I want to, once I can. I love books, so I make sure I also buy and read fiction from authors of colour. Lastly, on a very small scale, I also draw diverse characters, so more people can see themselves in my art, because I know how bad it feels to not see yourself in media. 

Do I feel like I do enough? No. I think I still have a lot to learn and not enough time nor mental health to learn it all, so at this point I need to prioritise learning about the minorities of my local area. I can't learn everything at once, and I can do much more good locally than internationally. It saddens me. I want to help, but I am so fucking powerless from this distance with my empty bank account. But my bad feeling about not helping enough doesn't matter - what matters more is that I try to share the words of bipoc right now, keep my mouth shut when needed and try to educate myself and those around me further,  because I am not the one suffering here. It's your communities.
Reading, reflecting, donating, calling the folks in charge of places that have had recent murders committed by police, talking to my mom and friends about what’s happening and trying to open the dialogue. 

I’m currently in college training to be a teacher, and I’m especially reading up on/thinking about how to talk about race in the classroom and how to design an antiracist curriculum, both in the sense of discussing race openly and in the sense of ensuring that students of color do not have disproportionately negative outcomes in my classroom. 

I also am the president of a student organization at my college and helped put together a statement for members with resources specifically geared at racism in the community of our shared interest.

It’s a start. And it’s definitely not all there is to be done.
I actively listen to POC friends, donate to organizations and campaigns that tackle racism when I can, accept correction in a spirit of humility because I put my foot in my mouth sometimes, and call out bigotry when I see it. I try to be led by my heart in all things. Without compassion and empathy, we are nothing. I used to feel a lot of guilt and shame when asked questions like this; I'm trying to learn to see them as motivational instead. I don't think the average Woman of Color is really sitting around saying 'haha, today I made a white woman uncomfortable'. That's not productive. It seems to me that my shame is not required but my engagement is.

I don't always get it right, but I've always been treated with kindness by POC and if my privilege can be useful to you, it's at your disposal.
I need to do more. But I've started getting more confident about using my voice, even if it makes others around me uncomfortable.

Today I got on the Nextdoor app to find that last night at an outdoor restaurant downtown there was a man who stood up and started saying things like (Heil Hitler) and doing the hand signals towards the peaceful protesters. The woman who posted about it posted a picture and linked to a video on Twitter. He says he's drunk and blah blah but I didn't stay quiet even though the women posting it was getting slammed by people saying "he was just drunk" and that we were all "morons" for being so disgusted with his actions.

I stand with my sisters and brothers because we are all people who deserve respect and to be protected. I really am doing my best to show that even though it's not in my nature to get involved in things or speak out about things. I'm done watching my family suffer because I'm too afraid to step up.
As a white woman, I will always be an ally of POC, especially black women. In college I learned about intersectionality and how the issues a woman faces is compounded exponentially when you’re a woman of color. I used what I learned to be more empathetic, to be a better listener, to be a better friend. I shut down any negative statements and turn it around on them, especially if it’s a white man. They can reek of privilege and I don’t stand for it. My workplace was very diverse, and I’m so fortunate for that. We all got to hear others’ perspectives, and the more you interact with the “unknown,” the more you realize the struggles they face. By keeping black women faceless and powerless, we’re going backwards. We need to keep the dialogue coming. Black women are not shoved into one category. They are mothers, sisters, educators, educated, military, delivery drivers, office workers, and, yes, can be the wife of a president. They can achieve.
I protested against white supremacists who came down from Washington to Portland to stir shit up. I ran from concussion grenades when the police turned on us and protected them.

I protested in El Paso against the children's prison there. I helped cook huge dinners and served them to people who'd just been released. People from Haiti and Somalia were in that group along with South Americans.

I protested at the local federal prison where people who lawfully entered and begged for asylum were imprisoned until their hearings.

I got a group together and flew to Puerto Rico to repair people's roofs after Trump insulted and betrayed them following Hurricane Maria.

I have a sign that reads, BLACK IS BEAUTIFUL in my car's back window.

I donated to and volunteered for the ACLU. I donated to the SPLC.

I volunteered for food banks, Meals on Wheels and Habitat for Humanity.

All since the day Trump was elected, to fight my own sense of powerlessness, and to foster *community* and *shared humanity.*

I'm a fat, single, 51 year old white woman. I have a comfortable, secure job with paid leave. I volunteer, donate and protest because I can. Not everybody can.

https://action.aclu.org/give/now
https://donate.splcenter.org/
Personally, I haven't done much. But what I have done is the one thing all white women/people should be doing. I've been supporting my friends and family in the black community as much as possible. And constantly checking on them in this awful time. My entire life has been about supporting those around me, no matter the race, belifs, or color. -quick side note, I hate the phase "I don't see color" because I do, and I respect every hardship said lineage has brought.- that's all from your favorite silent activist. 💞
I endeavour to continue pointing out and educating baby-boomer relatives when their bigotry is showing.     I reflect on myself and blind spots in my own prejudice.  I listen and am open to reevaluating my world-view based on new perspectives that differ from my own.  I defer and pass the microphone when someone's lived experience is more relevant than my personal opinion on the topic.
I'm listening to Black people and educating myself more. I call out racism in my family, which doesn't go over well with them. I used to be so ignorant when it came to the BLM movement and didn't understand white privilege and implicit bias. I'm really embarrassed and ashamed I used to think this way. Finding and learning about Feminism made me realize just how systemic racism is, and that I will never being able to understand the experiences and prejudices they face. I've also been learning about the inequality and discrimination Black/other POC face in the criminal justice system, from police brutality the the media giving no attention to disappearances of Black/POC children. I read a lot of material from Black women to try to understand their perspectives and challenges. I know this is hardly enough.
As a teacher of small children, I’m reading stories that involve people of color in a positive light especially because there are very few children of color in my class and school. Also teaching students how to stand up to people when they’re being bullies. 

It’s not enough though.
I’m normally one who’s shy to speak up sometimes about politics but sexism and racism and two things I can not and will not ever tolerate. I’m more than willing to call someone out for comments that are not only false, but rude and damaging to women and the black culture. I also love showing my presence and support when they organize events, letting women in my community know I have their back. On top of that, I love asking about their experience through life and about their culture and where they’re from (I have several black female friends who were not born in the US so I always hear fascinating stories)
[removed]
Continuing to have conversations with people that are rooted in love, understanding, and empathy. 

Denouncing racist remarks, even when “it’s a joke.” 

Continuing to educate myself on our nation’s history of disenfranchisement and oppression.

Doing whatever I can to empower my black students. 

Listening.
As a latina: continuously getting into arguments and debates, highlighting how much of hispanic culture is racist towards black people, skin, hair, etc. Especially so in my own family.

&nbsp;

Supporting and complimenting my black girlfriends and guyfriends for styling, supporting their business, being onboard with attending the events that matter to them, and listening to them when they speak up.

&nbsp;

Staying informed on minority issues by reading articles/books and watching docs, donating when and how I can, signing petitions, protesting, etc.

&nbsp;

Calling out racist bullshit when I see it, even in the workplace. Even among friends. Even among strangers.

&nbsp;

Influencing the younger generation in my family to stand up, go out, and not be afraid to be politically active in support of others.
Continuing to do my research and deprogram myself. I am an educator and go to anti-racist work shops to learn about my own biases and then help educate my young white students about theirs. 

I live in a primarily white state where most young people have a hard time believing racism is real.  My students are very poor, rural and white.  In my US History class we study our country analyzing systemic racism throughout its “founding” to now.

In my personal life I open up conversations with my friends and family about systemic racism and oppression. Read and share books written by people of color about their experiences.  

Honestly it still doesn’t seem like enough and I appreciate this call out.  I generally hesitate to comment on reddit but wanted to be a voice that might help you feel a thread of encouragement from the white lady camp.
Teach our children to be loving and kind individuals instead of hateful entitled assholes.
For context: I'm a youth librarian in Australia.

In my time with my service I have updated our collection maintenance policy to ensure that diversity in purchasing is a priority and have moved away from mainstream publish lists primarily in youth acquisitions to more independent publishers, particularly First Nations publishers. 

I ensure that our author events are diverse and any Indigenous events we hold are not a white or any other non-relevant cultural identity librarian reading stories from other states, but are (for our area) Boon Wurrung storytellers.

This is probably not going to make much sense outside of Australian literary context, and now is not the time to get deeply into it, but I'm the Alibrandi generation, I saw my culture represented in media for the first time in my youth, I've experienced how important that is and I know that what I can do is try my hardest to have that experience available for every child and teen in my community. I want every child that walks through my door to be able to find not one, but many resources that represent them positively and I want it to be normal for white children to read stories about families not like theirs, because everyone else does it, every single child of colour has read or had read to them countless books b about white children. It has to go both ways.
I mourn for the suffering and part of my soul dies. The only way I feel like I can fight this is through empathy and connection. I am just one person and this fight is bigger than me. I am also fighting other battles. Pain and suffering does not discriminate; just humans and maybe some other mammals do. I feel like I am fighting ignorance from all sides and slowly losing the fight.
Learning to recognize when I am benefitting from situations because of the color of my skin and calling out the system that favors me. Or using my advantage to offer protections and defend those it oppresses (even though I know it is wrong that anyone would need a white person to protect or defend them in order to be treated fairly, I cannot always change the system). 

Maintaing relationships with people whose race and culture differ from mine, for in friendships, love, empathy and a better understanding of the other person's perspective grow naturally and subconscious biases are challenged and undermined.

Challenging the gaslighters who defend oppressive policies, try to make it about them and promote white "victimhood” as equivalent. Trying to expose the flaws in their logic, which seldom results in them changing their minds, but can cause bystanders who may be following the conversation to question the validity of their message or the popularity of their ideas. 

But mostly, I have given up on today. I am just trying to raise my children to be better, treat people fairly, and hopefully work with all people to build the world of justice, equality and dignity we long for. 

But I sympathize with the rioters who are trying to affect change TODAY. After decades of calls for equality and at least 5 years of peaceful protests have fallen on deaf ears and failed to bring about the desired change, while white dudes with AK-47s, who are upset they can't get haircuts, recieve the audience and accomodations they demand, I can understand feeling like it might be time to sharpen the pitchforks and raise hell. 

Unfortunately, I think it the riotting only makes the oppressors feel more justified in their oppression. The irony of responding to an anti- "police brutality"  protest with a show of militant police force has not gone unoticed. I have no idea what it would take to empower the oppressed in a system so corrupted by moneyed interests and evil outdated ideologies. But I think the concept that "no one should feel safe untill the oppressed feel safe" is a valid one. 

Really, I think we have to figure out a way to unite the "underclasses", the "essentials", the "hardworking masses", to see that we have all been taught to direct our discontentment downward so we may never look up and unite against the real oppressive powers that trickle adversity down on the many, while the few profit from our labors. 

I am a cynic and sadned by the state of humanity. It is 2020. We should be better than this racism, hatred, divisiveness and injustice. But... I have to keep reminding myself that the truth is... through ALL of human history, thousands and thousands of years, the rise and fall of hundreds of civilizations and the revelation of several major religions, the concept that it is WRONG to own another human being is ONLY about 150 years old! We are a slow and evil species.
One of the many reasons I don't speak to my mother anymore is due to how much like Trump she is, and a few episodes of blatant racism where I shouted her down. She thought it was acceptable to tell someone to go back to their own country and to speak English, when of course the other person knows more languages. Racists can rot.
I mixed. But only barely. My cultural background isn't what's important to me. It's something that I come from, but not something I find definitive of my personality or potential. I too have experienced the jokes nonetheless. It's easy to laugh of, but it still pulls on something within me. It shouldn't matter where or what we come from. Be it culture or circumstance. I do my best everyday to make it a point that I will not be held back by anything or anybody's opinions of where I should be.
I'm a white woman and I admit I'm not doing enough. I wanted to join the protests in my city, but my husband would have completely freaked out and I have to live with him so I didn't go. Instead, I donated to the bail fund for the protestors. I follow brown skin matters on Instagram. I try to keep my trap shut and listen to lived experience of my POC friends. I'm trying to consume more non-white media, but honestly that's about it.
Owning up to my mistakes and learning to recognize subtle judgements in my head and others. Calling out the racist remarks I hear. I'm getting into the tech field so supporting the women I am around. I haven't heard a questionable remark about race from my friends in years, which is to say if they say racist things I cut contact. I donate money to really really awesome local orgs because I don't really know what the right thing to do is, but they sure seem to have a clue and money helps their goals. I volunteer with things related to unfucking the prison system. My city is... bad.

I seldom have to be a speaker for an entire group of people due to my membership in a minority. When I have, it was exhausting. Which stereotype should I avoid being? Am I hurting the cause if I do x? I sat and thought about that for hours after it happened for the first time. 0After that, I started listening more and shutting up more.
This is what I have been posting everywhere.  It’s time we step up white people.  

Today is the day that you can start actually changing things.  I’m so tired of people (yes most of you are white and/or privileged) saying you are tired of the racism, sexism and homophobia yet you do nothing.  You complain on Facebook etc.  

Stop doing nothing...... Stand the Fuck up.  

Easy way for all of us to start today....

When someone says something racist, sexist or homophobic and then say they are just kidding (joking). 
No they are not.  They are testing the waters to see if you will agree with them.  

Call them out and tell them what they said was racist, sexist or homophobic.  Stop allowing the hate right in front of you.  

Now go do the kind thing.
I'm in hr, and I have worked hard to hire people of color, women, minorities, and LGBT. I have spoken up and made a safe work environment by hearing micro aggressions and reminding people that it won't be tolerated. I learned basic French at a company that had a lot of Congolese people. I used to volunteer at a pro Bono law office fighting for those seeking asylum. I'm now in a position where I get visas for people from all over the world. I am the office's go to IT because I'm the youngest one, and competent - so everyone in my (half black, half white or Asian office) feels safe asking for help. 

In my personal life, my friends group is all different colors. There are about 20 of us that all hang out together that are white, black, Hispanic, Asian, middle eastern, and South Asian. I have called out friends, and family for saying racist shit, and learned myself (my dad was firmly old school not racist, but he used "wet-back" all the time, and I didn't realize what it really meant, until I was called out. I have cut the word from my vocabulary, and have since called him out.) I have really bad asthma and covid could easily kill me, so I'm not going to in person protests, but I am actively posting love to social media and donating to bail funds. I am checking in on friends and family, and I am calling out racists. I am calling out those who are more worried over some looting than people's lives. I am sharing information on how to register to vote. I do my best to order from small businesses, especially minority owned small businesses. 

I still don't feel like it's enough. I see what is happening and I just feel sick. I don't understand how black lives matter is a political statement, or how "don't murder black people" is a political statement. Is our country really so racist that cops murdering  people in the street is really okay? I'm horrified and disgusted. I don't know where to even begin to make the societal change that we so badly need, but I promise I love every one of you. Every person reading this. Every person has inherent worth and dignity, and I intend to fight alongside you, every step of the way. In places where I can use my priveldge to help, I have and I will.
I’m Australian so I have had to find alternate ways to help.

I’ve been retweeting any bail funds or helpful links for protesters. Last night I signed as many petitions as I could find. When I get paid in a couple days I’ll be donating where international funds can go. 

I’ve been posting things to socials that I feel would be informative to anyone on my feed who might be ignorant or clueless. Thankfully I think I choose my friends well and I’m not someone who keeps idiots I don’t agree with on friends list just to keep my numbers up. All my friends know where I stand by now and if they even hinted at racism or excusing it the friendship would be over. (note: I posted this kind of thing prior to the current events, I’ve always looked at socials as a platform to be used wisely) 

The family I’m quarantined with, I make sure to inform them of things that don’t make our nightly news reel. Thankfully the stuff I’ve brought to them so far isn’t new (they say I know or I saw that) which means they’re doing their research too. 

There is a protest in my city on Saturday but I am hesitant to go ONLY because of covid. I live with a high risk relative and I have asthma. I cannot afford to get covid and I cannot afford to pass it onto who I live with. Also if things happened to get out of control (Melbourne is quite intense with protests already) I can’t afford to inhale tear gas or anything similar because I really don’t know if I’d survive that. I still want to go though....
Call out racism when I see it (not when with black friends so they stay safe. Just in case) check up on my black/brown friends when this shit happens to make sure they’re doing okay physically and mentally. If they feel unsafe going into places like Walmart or walking to a place they can always text/call and I’ll come with them. 
I’ll sign the petitions from change.org to get justice. Spread awareness about these situations when it happens. Make it clear that if you don’t believe in the existence of white supremacy in our culture then you’re part of the problem and I will not be in contact with you.
Do research on trustworthy sites to gather data and information and use those sources to have a discussion with people who are misguided and help them see the problem.
Use any platform I can to help boost the voice of black people and help them be heard, even when some disgusting people don’t want to hear them.
I can’t do this one specifically right now due to having no job but donating to organizations that will help the black community and help them to get a good education, jobs, housing, food. 

It angers me to see that we have to do these things just in an attempt to keep people of color safe. I’m happy to help but it’s enraging to know that we have to protect them against racists simply because of the ideal that their lives don’t matter as much. I will support in any way I can, but it disgusts me that these hardships even exist for the black community in the first place. I understand that change takes time but there has already been so much time given for the change to happen, but the people who white supremacy benefits try their damn best to keep this system running. I don’t know. I’m just tired and angry.

Make sure to check up on all of your black friends especially right now. As a white person I know how this affects me but we will never understand what it’s like to walk in their shoes. To face this shit every day by simply waking up different and being seen as something less. There always being a chance that their life could be ended for just daring to exist. Please make sure they’re okay. 

I hope we can fucking end this shit soon.
I work as a civil servant with a large majority of black children. I listen to them and give them a safe, loving space to be during their time spent with me and my staff. I also encourage their success in school. I hire mostly young black men and women, actively training them in hopes that they will be interested in moving up the ranks one day or just assisting them with their college courses if needed. We have open and honest conversations about race and our differences and our similarities. Some days it doesn’t feel like enough and some days I question if a white woman is the right one for the job and if I can even make a difference in my staff’s or the children’s lives.
Speaking up when I recognize racism/bigotry and listening when BIPOC people talk about their experiences. I’m not in a position to effect any substantial change but I do what I can to be an ally and am continuously learning and growing.
listening to POC and trusting their experiences, educating myself, directing others to resources so they can do the same, being mindful of my privilege and the racism I learned growing up surrounded by whiteness, trying my best to challenge those built-in reactions in myself. I wish I could do more.
White woman here

I’m just trying to be the best person I can be....I try not to keep quiet when I hear the wrong things. I try to educate myself and ask appropriate questions when I need to - in a sensitive way. 
I guess I am lucky that I was raised in a mixed community and from the outset it was a good community though I am sure there were issues in our community that as a child I was oblivious to. 
My parents raised us to be kind people - my beliefs are simple - everyone should be happy and healthy and live a good life.

Saying that, I’m still not educated and whilst I am trying continuously to rectify this I suffer very badly from anxiety so part of my learning has been learning how to find my own voice to speak up and also finding my voice to ask questions so I can learn and understand.

Certainly my POC friends have experienced some heavy things, their strength inspires me to keep growing my mind.
their strength also in turn helps my anxiety - I see strong people standing up for their believes and in turn gives me the bravery to do the same.
I hope that in turn them inspiring me to be braves also inspires them!!

Overall, aside from education I think if people just dedicate themselves to being nice and kind members of our community maybe things will be better

But I don’t know what I am talking about - this thread is really helpful. Thanks for posting
I'm donating to various causes, I try to call out privilege and racism when I see it. If we weren't in a pandemic I'd have attended the protest, but I'm still pretty concerned about that so we stayed home. Our family discusses current events openly, and our 12 year old daughter wants to be a lawyer for the ACLU and I'm happy to do what I can to make that happen. 

Our town is having a local election next week and I've gone to every candidate's page/site/interviews to find their stances, and all of the people I'm voting for are either people of color, women, or both. Representation matters. 

I try to consume media from POC (shows, books, music). One of our local town FB pages just published a list of POC-owned restaurants and business so we're going to be ordering takeout from those places this weekend. 

If you have any suggestions on how to improve, including places to donate, please let me know. I'm trying, but I'm only one person, and I'm trying to raise another good person.
I had a convo with my 5 yro on the weekend about what privilege is and how not everyone can safely ask the police for help and why that is. 

I’ve been posting and sharing lots about what’s going on

I called out the BS in a group I’m in where they said they will not allow discussions of current events. I reminded them that to not allow discussion is to support the status quo and the oppression. The mods gave in and will be allowing discussions. I also told them that they need some diversity as all the mods are white. 

And our whole fam is going to try to attend a peaceful protest on Friday assuming it’s safe to do so. 

It’s not much but it’s what I can safely do right now.
I have major depression and anxiety. I’m in treatment but life style changes are as important as medication and therapy. 

When I can’t do the bigger things (attend protests for example), I still focus on my circle. Family, friends, coworkers. I majored in philosophy so for all my other mental health hurdles I’m very (sometimes overly comfortable) engaging in confrontational conversation as I can sidebar my emotions to make a good point or at least challenge others to think differently. When I don’t have money to donate, I try to buy my necessities from minority owned local business. Etc. 
 
It’s kind of the adage where everyone wants to change the world but no one will change themselves. People care about keeping the planet clean but won’t care for their yard, go vegan, or use clean green products. Some people will post rampantly on social media but will you confront mom, dad, sister, brother, cousin, friend, partner, or coworker when they say or do something racist? It’s not always about making intermittent big gestures but living a lifestyle that supports your beliefs IMO.

Edit: To add:

I also think it’s very VERY important to confront and learn from my own bias if it every subconsciously shows it’s face. We all have biases and to deny that would be ignorant. We are conditioned by society from the day we are born to do so. Racism isn’t necessarily a binary trait where you are or are not. We all have biases and tendencies we’ve learned from our environments. We need to be conscious of that if we want to change. 

Source: that sociology minor I picked up on the way to the philosophy (medical-ethics focused) degree I completed.
This is a question I ask myself all the time. I donate to the ACLU regularly and vote blue always but I grew up  in a very diverse area. I played sports my entire life and had black men as coaches from a young age, all kind and respectful. I hardly see or encounter racism. My heart wants to reach out and hug POC right now but I don’t know if that’s ok. 

I am verbally endorsing the protests when they get brought up (I am out of the country at the moment so not protesting myself). 
I stay educated on the facts of these cases and the history of systemic racism to correct misinformation (podcasts: Scene on Radio- Seeing White is a great place to start, Code Switch, On Being to name just a couple) 
I remind foreigners of the struggle of POC in America (and in many places around the world). 

But I ask myself if there is more I could be doing. I dream of a post-racial world and think is it fucking embarrassing and tragic we are still dealing with this. Thank you for bringing this up.
Personally, I’m always educating myself and standing up to overt and covert racism when I see it. I donate when I can, I support black owned business, and I work to dismantle racism within myself and my family. I teach my daughter about these issues and to treat everyone with respect. I uplift black voices. I march in protest against police. And this summer I’ll be reading books about white supremacy and black history. I’m also making protest art calling out police brutality and systemic white supremacy within this country. It’s not much but it’s what’s within my power.
fight the system that my people created, fight the white personality shorfallings, neuroses, and behaviors that disgrace us and perpetuate the status quo.
I have spent time educating myself and reading accounts from POC. My stepfather was a black man, and I feel like that gave me a sense of empathy and understanding other White people lacked. When we were alone together when I was a little girl, he would get pulled over, and I would be questioned if I was safe or kidnapped. When we’d go bike riding or get ice cream together, people always seemed suspicious of him, or white women would approach me and ask if I knew him. One day at school, he came to pick me up and the other girls were incredulous I had a “black dad” (I explained that he was my step father and with my mom, but they still didn’t “get it”). I was aware of the racism that POC face, even though I never personally was racially harassed. As an adult, I can now understand the nuances and hardships that POC face. I have never donated before (I am a student, but I wasn’t really aware enough of who to donate to or that I should) but I have donated money to various POC organizations that have been highlighted recently. I talk about it with my family. They seem to understand, but it’s now my mom and her new husband (a white man). I post to Facebook about it, which is never enough. Today after lunch I’m going to put together a list of resources for donations and message each of my friends directly asking them to donate what they can if they haven’t already. I wanted to go to a protest today, but I was strongly discouraged because my mental health is fragile, and I suffered a very bad panic attack yesterday. If I went alone to the protest there was a strong possibility I could’ve had another melt down. But even then, my heart aches because I still feel like I’m not doing enough to help.
I educate those around me (my children, elderly family, etc) about what institutional racism is, and that while they may not think they are racist, they still benefit from racism. 

I am actively anti-racist. I call people out. Over, and over, and over. 

I support the BLM movement by going to protests and donating money to assist with bail for protestors. 

I am sorry that in the middle of fighting for your rights you are also called upon to educate others.
I give my time (protests, workshops, volunteer) when I can. If I can't give my time, I give my money. If I am at a point where I can't give my money, I give my minor sphere of influence and share my support and empathy for BIPOC. 

The (luckily rare) times I feel uneasy about anything regarding POC, I take a moment to ask myself why. I follow that line of thought until I hit something that might be prejudiced, or it might not be. We have so many reactions and feelings that we never take the time to ask *why*. If more people did this, they would understand what POC are battling every day. Trevor Noah's segment about the violation of the social contract was very poignant and I recommend anyone watch it.

I'm a Latina that passes for white. That is a complex privilege in of itself - and I speak out a lot against the way we handle immigration. I feel powerless and helpless, even though I am so privileged. I wish I was richer and more powerful so that I could so some actual good.

But for the time being, I'll do my best to support POC and iterate on that as needs and times change. I do not support a social contract that is nullified by the color of someone's skin, and I will devote my best to put my votes, voice, and business to see that lie burn.
Refusing to validate my father's broken ideas right now, among other things. 

I used to parrot everything his former LAPD ass spoke. I won't do it anymore. Not in private, not in my own head, not to his face. He's on the wrong side of the current issue, and I will not back him up, and i will not refuse to argue for his feelings sake. 

I am not a very strong or brave person, unfortunately, so most of my fight is within myself to be sure I do not add to the problem, and that I do not allow myself to be used as a shield or a friendly support by the people who are part of the problem. I won't stand by them. I won't "avoid conflict". I won't "just be nice". I won't do shit. If you're going to be supportive of the suffering of innocent people and children,  I am not going to support you in any way shape or form.
As a white woman my wake up call came from having a bi-racial best friend. At the mall she was profiled and talked down to. We must have been 13 or so (this was 5 years ago) and I realized how ignorant I had been to the struggles that POC have to face. 

Since then, I have been very vocal about my views and I call out anyone who is acting like a bigot. I go to protests, sign petitions, read literature written by POC and always listen and acknowledge POC’s experiences.

It sucks that for a lot of white women it takes a first hand look into the reaches that white supremacy has, like it did for me.
I discuss this at work. I have noticed a lot of people at my job are racist and trump supporters, but I’m tolerable because I’m white. (I’m half Mexican but I’m basically white) I have received racism by white people for being half Mexican, by family members, friends who found out later I was half Mexican. I have spent my whole life immersed in cultures and different races also religions. And even then, I was ignorant to the level of racism that existed in the American system.

I live in the south and work around white southern pride trump supporters. A lot of them don’t even know themselves, they are just following what they hear their whole lives and one of those things is anything Poc do or say is bad. Because of this, anytime Poc express a concern, it’s automatically out the other ear.

I bring the discussion to work. While some see it as frowned upon, these people will not be exposed to other views any other way or more so, won’t even bother listening.

So as a white woman, I have been using my platform and privilege of being listened to as a way to dismantle racism at the core. This is a big company btw with influential people. If I can change just one person here, there’s a chance I changed his kids too. Maybe he will even speak out to his own family. (I say his because 99% of the company are males). Maybe that’s a vote towards a president whose actually worthy. Maybe that’s a vote on a local level, towards people who strive to make our communities better but also take into account the inequality that exists.

I have actually changed one man in particular and I can tell over the past 6 months, his stance on many things had changed drastically. I even saw him arguing with *his* friends fb. It was amazing to see the change.

It is difficult not wanting to attack ignorance or drop kick them when I hear literal shit leave their mouths, but I hold my anger and just ask them why they think that way. Asking them why really hits them with a mini crisis because they don’t want to sound racist, and then it’s kinda like “oh..if I sound racist, maybe I am” especially if it’s something that was learned and not fact-backed or correct in anyway. 

I bring facts, understanding and a calm behavior and I’m usually able to keep the conversation light, but serious enough they take it to heart.

This is not grand, but I think if more people weren’t so afraid to push the envelope, especially those who have the power behind the voice to do so, and talk to peers, coworkers and colleague, we may be able to get somewhere. 

We have a voice that is less likely to be ignored because of our skin color, and we need to be using it. IMO, there is no excuse not to.
Listening and reading, via Reddit and instagram, to black voices. Going to read some of the recommended books (between the world and me, white fragility). 

Donating to bail funds & Reclaim the Block. 

Questioning of my friends who criticize looting and rioting. 

Questioning my dad who is a republican and thought it was a biased portrayal of protests that the media was criticizing the stay home protests for spreading the virus, but the media isn’t (or isn’t as much) criticizing the current protests for spreading the virus. To be fair he asked me what I thought, so we luckily have a healthy dialogue about these issues despite our differences in the voting booth. 

I’m in a position of privilege because I’m white passing and because I have a job where I’ve been minimally impacted by COVID-19 (I work from home and get paid the same as I always have been, which is a very good salary). I am going to go through my finances more carefully so I know exactly how much is responsible for me to donate and set up recurring monthly payments to one or more of these organizations.
Well, since high school at least I've gotten into arguments with older family members about race. The most recent time it happened was last year with my boyfriend's mother. I have had the benefit of going to high schools and colleges that were relatively diverse racially, and living in a diverse city, and having close friends of all different races. And yeah, these old white people I reference like to stereotype, and tend toward eugenics type thinking where they really believe genetics, not a history of structuralized racism, result in the worse outcomes for POC when it comes to education, income, crime, etc. So I try and challenge that. But unfortunately, old people also tend to be pretty stubborn bout changing their beliefs.

The other day I did see a white lady yell at an Asian lady in a whole foods about standing too close to other customers, and I'd heard stories about Asians being targeted over COVID-19, so I went over and confronted the white lady. Especially because from what I could see the Asian lady was basically following the marks on the ground set by the whole foods staff and the white lady had been on her phone not paying attention to things, for the most part.

On a more individual level though most of the time, I just try and treat people like people. Not making assumptions, trying to get to know people as individuals, that sort of thing. I work in an industry where a lot of employers are really big on affirmative action also, which while not perfect I understand to be one of the imperfect solutions people have come up with for tangible difference on societal inequalities.
I’m a young white 22F with almost 2 year old white son and a 22M white fiancé.

We’ve been reading, signing and sharing petitions, and trying to have conversations with each other and learn what we need to do.

I’ve learned more about our white privilege during this time than any time before. We live in the South so we have some very opposing views from a lot of people in our family. 

We’ve tried calling out their racist remarks on social media, in person, during conversations over the phone, etc. Some of our family members are really willing to listen.

Some of it gets complicated for us. For example, we are both laid off due to Covid (Why we aren’t donating right now.) and when I was pregnant my Ob/gyn told me they didn’t accept the Medicaid plan I was on when I was 36 weeks and I have to pay my 3000 deductible full before I delivered. We are young and broke so we turned to family. They helped us out but now we are in debt to them. So, when we call them out or anger them they make our lives harder because we owe them money. 

I feel extremely bad that my family cannot separate personal issues from a conversation and use it to kind of shut us up about our views. I want to help though. 

Also the only reason we haven’t been protesting is because of our child. We’ve both seen the horrific stories of innocent people being shot with rubber bullets in the face and it is horrifying. A woman walking home from the grocery store here in Dallas was shot above her eye. 

In short, I want to support more people of color in my community. There are a lot here where I live (close to Houston.) and I do want to speak out more for them.
There was an MTV show kind of like this called Room Raiders! Someone toured three bedrooms and then based on what they found, they picked which of the three contestants they wanted to go on a date with.
Picture of the kitchen or the bathroom
I'd say fridge or pantry. I want to know their attitude towards food.
Going by OP's comment this dating app sounds like it will be a recipe for extreme flexing and become riddled with keeping up with the joneses disease.
Browser history
Bookshelf.
[removed]
A dating app based on music playlists/music collections would be interesting.
Their children’s bedroom (if younger than 8), or something to do with their pets - like bowls, litter box, crate, etc. 

This shows how capable someone is of caring for another living thing with feelings, which relates to empathy and care. 

One guy I knew left his young dog in a cage 24/7, full of urine. We got the dog out of the situation, but you’d never know he’s that type of person. Otherwise likable guy. 

The other person was a roommate. He never taught his children how to wash their hands or brush their teeth, he’d swear at them and beat them, and their room was an absolute disaster with no sheets on the AIR BED they shared. He didn’t even put them in school, they were illiterate and extremely bad behaved (not their fault). There was just shit everywhere, shit all over the walls. CPS was called and he moved out, not sure how they are now.
Bedroom, I just went home with a guy and he just had a mattress on the floor. No bed frame. No box spring. Just a mattress.
Their closet. Too organized and structured, it's a person who is too uptight for me. There is a level of messy that indicates someone who lives a full, busy life, but isn't nasty. You'll also get hints about their job and their hobbies.
The nails on her dominant hand 🤣

But in seriousness... probably a picture showing whatever she's passionate about. 

My gf and I are in the longest, most committed relationship I've ever had. We just moved in together recently, right after which we had our first anniversary. 

I ***adore*** it when she gets passionate about her writing, or one of her games! When she shares her personal thoughts about the studies she's been working on since high school. I'll listen for hours while she talks about a story she's working on while I snuggle her and stroke her hair. 

Passion is one of the essences of living, and I think being able to appreciate your partner's passions leads to forming new ones together. 

Also it's lowkey kinda hot when she gets all animated and worked up about something she cares about a lot lol
Bedroom. 

Can I also get a counter on how many days since the sheets were washed? Like they do on construction sites with days since last injury.
Definitely bathroom, I need to know if someone can keep things clean
This is a great interesting question. 

As others have said bookshelf, their pantry, inside their shower, how they leave their kitchen at night.
Their friends. The company you keep says a whole lot about who you are.
Peoples pets. Honestly idk if itll tell me anything about em i just wanna see pics of ppls pets and share pics of mine. Its why i follow so many animal subs. 

Actually can there be an app where its not a dating app but like where u can share pics of ur pets and talk about them with ppl? Would be much interested in that than dating tbh.
Inside the microwave. If you're really clean,  not just trying to impress someone, the microwave will be clean.
Out of personal interest, their computer setup, but to answer your question, probably their trash.
I would want to see the photo of what they wanted to show me - people's decisions on what they're willing to show or tell (or what they \*enjoy\* showing or telling) tell you a lot about them.
Hey, OP, have you been to queer dating apps? What you described is basically standard in my area - beach, trees, their cat, whatever else but actual photo of themselves
That’s a great app to show robbers the lay out of your home and where you keep your valuables
Idgaf if he’s a bit messy, or if his fridge is filled with junk food, personally, though I get why some people care a lot about that.  I can deal with a little mess.  You know people are going to clean like their mother in laws are coming over before those pics anyway.  I don’t understand why the way someone likes their coffee could possibly tell you anything about them.  What would shoes, clothes, or bed frames tell you besides income?  

I would want to see how many women who aren’t family members like him.  What his friends are like.  Give me a detailed snapshot of that somehow.
A lot of these answers sound like OkCupid back in the day, only those were text questions and not photos.
Kitchen sink or closet. 

I hate letting dirty dishes stack up, and the area where food is preserved should be taken care of so it's clean.

Seeing someone's clothes can be a great indicator of personality as well as their level of tidiness.
I’m a fucking slob... no one would date me
Their computer desktop
On repeat playlist on spotify
Plants. My 7,483 plants.
Spice cabinet and kitchen knife collection.
Sounds like a place that would be extremely hard to find out how a person genuinely is. 

Everything would be cleaned and perfectly decorated for the picture, not representing how it actually is. Fridges filled with health food just for the picture. Bookshelves stocked with books they never read, etc. I feel like it would breed flexing and fakery
I'd say bookshelf, but tbh I'd really want to see their Continue Watching on Netflix
What’s inside their fridge/freezer/pantry. I’m into fitness and healthy foods. It’s very important that my partner is as well.
Sports equipment actually used in the last year
Screenshot of your internet history. Do you also go into 2am deep dives about what happened to minor Canadian celebrities who were on teen sitcoms? What YouTube rabbitholes are you travelling down? What song did you play 300 times last year and why was it Lizzo?
Their bathroom... more so their towel collection. Never trust someone with dark towels.
Their bedroom, bathroom, pantry and fridge..
Living room. It would have alot of personality clues and show the cleanliness level.
Cleanliness, order, and plenty of self made art and / or instruments around and about. Show me your clean and put together yet also artistic and thoughtful!
It might would be interesting if the person had to choose an image to represent themselves and it could be anything except a photo of themselves. What they chose would say a lot about who they were as person imo.
I wanna see reviews of how they treat waiters and fast food workers
The inside of their car.
Bedside table. I paint, I've always thought it'd be fascinating to do a bunch of still-lives of people's bedside tables. Just as they are, no clean up first. Dm me your bedside table.
Kitchen. I'd want to be able to set all their equipment and what food that have in the cupboards/fridge/freezer.

So many men claim they "can't" cook which says to me that they want any woman in their life to act like mummy and feed them. I have a bachelor friend who claims he can't cook even though my husband and I have him a slow cooker and a recipe book. I went through the book with some sticky notes and marked out some nice easy recipes... So fucking easy. SO FUCKING EASY. And he still says he can't cook.

No. You're telling my you're incapable of following simple instructions. You're 29 years old FFS.
A certificate of a vasectomy.
A check from an affordable restaurant or coffee shop to see how they tip as a reflection of how they treat people.
Their bedroom. I dont want to be with someone who is comfortable living in disarray, with a bare mattress on the floor and one blanket
Their pets!
Bathroom, inside their car!!!
Not dating, am married. But a persons kitchen and bathroom is very telling.
Teeth because brushing is essential. They don't have to be perfect just healthy. 

Ears. Something about dirty ears just tells me they don't pay attention to details and irks me.

Shoes by the door. If they don't, they clearly never had to clean floors.
Not gonna lie, if there place is TOO CLEAN I would lose interest. I cannot handle a neat freak.
I would love to see what kind of art they have in their home or if they have any musical instruments. They get points if the art is their own creation too.
I'd say their bag. I want to know how they organize their things and what kind of person they are by the items they bring.
App usage
Record Collection / Spotify Account
What little things they have around, video game consoles, show merch. Shows their intrests
Bookshelf and pets. But ONLY someone’s actual pets, and no guys posing with their friends’ pets just to get swipes.
Picture of their bedroom and contents of it will tell me all i need to know 

-cleanliness
-interests
I agree with those saying bookshelves, but I'd also be interested to see how clean/tidy everything is in general. I've no interest in dating a man who lives like a slob.
I hear catfish
Her closet/wardrobe. Not in a vain way or anything, but I just think someone's clothes tell a lot about their lives and personalities if you know how to look - I know that mine does.
A picture of my Appletv whats next cue
Definitely the bedroom. It tells you SO MUCH about a person. I could go on and on.
How well kept their feet are.

If they’re crusty and gross, that says enough.
I'm sitting here reading several of these and I can't help but think "almost nothing mentioned here would actually tell anybody anything about me" except for clothes, sports equipment, bathroom/kitchen/living room cleanliness, and Spotify/music playlists. I came to read just to see what people thought, but now I can't help but feel a little depressed. Jeez...
I’d simply join to look at home decor like a voyeruristic Pinterest. (I am a woman myself)
Actually having a bed frame is the first thing that came to my mind. A guy I datedlived in another state with his mattress on the floor for a year and half. It's one of my immediate turn offs now.
Shoes is actually a shockingly good one - they say multitudes about the wearer. Are they supportive and durable, or cheap and disposable? Are they clean enough to walk on a carpet without leaving dirt, or are they best left outside? It even shows how much emphasis the person puts on form versus function. And if they just make each picture a photo of different shoes they own, you can truly see every facet of who they are. Oh my goodness, I would love this dating app!
Show me that bathroom.
This is a really interesting question. I agree with seeing what's on their bookshelf
Their trash, a window into everything
Probably kitchen to see what kinds of food they eat. It tells a lot about how someone takes care of their bodies, also relationship to food. 

I'd date someone with a well maintained garden and lots of books.
Kitchen. Are there dirty dishes everywhere? Is there basic seasonings? Is there only cereal?
Kitchen. My BFs kitchen told me a ton about him. He's a gadget guy.
Calendar. 

Show me how they spend their time. Are they organized? What events do they attend? What does their job look like? Holidays? Family-time? Charity work? What do they make time for?
Show me a snapshot of how well organized they are (calendar or to do lists)
Camping photos, how is their set up? Is their fridge/kitchen a mess? Fave drink/food? Are they well read?
Idk how to capture it in a photo, but how much they talk/how loud they are
How they cook and eat their steak.
This whole thread is reminding me of College Humor’s [Stop Living in a “Sad Boy House”](https://m.youtube.com/watch?v=B1cekoDCF74) video.

(But for me, it’d be bookshelves! OOH or bathroom counter/sink.)
Their favourite fictional characters or their idols/role models. If a guy looks up to Hugh Hefner or Walter White, imma head out.
Also his Netflix watchlist. I’d wanna know how many of the things he watches lack female characters or ones that aren’t portrayed in a sexist light.
I'd be interested in how clean the place is lol, but that's easy to stage so this whole concept wouldn't work for me.
Can make this app force a new photo every day? That way they can see if someone is lazy or not
Probably the bathroom, bedroom and music /dvd/ gaming collection
Cat and dog photos.
Their real internet search history lol
Nothing, because everyone would be curating it to the point that it was a caricature, or complete obfuscation of their real self, much like any other dating profile (not a woman but I thought this was r/lightbulb)
Locked for moderation clean-up

&#x200B;

Edit: Due to a large amount of rule-breaking content, this post will remained closed at this time. Please feel free to report any rule-breaking comments that we missed in our review so far.
It is not uncommon to rip a big fart in the men's room. My wife tells me this would be a serious breach of etiquette for women. I don't get it. If you are not allowed to fart in a bathroom where the hell are you supposed to do it?
Taking your shirt off in public. 
Chest bumping.
Wearing the same outfit to a number of formal events in a row without anyone noticing/commenting.

Me and my ex went to three weddings in one summer a couple of years ago. He wore the exact same suit/shirt/tie to all of them...no one said anything. I wore the same dress twice (I wasn’t spending money on 3 dresses!) and a couple of people not only noticed, but made comments about it.
A heavy object needing to be moved from one place to another and everyone just standing around looking at you like some kind of idiot until you do it for them.
Joking in a mean/funny way with one another. My male colleagues joke all the time calling each other fat, short, weak, etc... If I said something like that to another woman I think she would be shocked and hurt.
Urinals...extra special for the communal trough urinal  
Jokes about sleeping with your friend’s parents. I always noticed my male friends joking about nailing so-and-so’s mom but if my female friends ever made a crack about sexing someone’s dad (or mom for that matter), I’d be immediately horrified. 
Only spending any substantial amount of time with their kid on the weekends. 
Idk if anyone's mentioned camping.
I know many women enjoy camping, including me, and I think this example is bs. But every time I go alone, or with another female (both of us under 30), someone inevitably voices concern, or pleasant surprise, or our "bravery" or "outdoorsy-ness" and wonders if I need help pitching my tent. Sometimes it's common neighborly (camperly?) good will, but often it's due to simply assuming we're less capable, or not naturally suited to it, or wondering why the terrors of the world don't keep us from being independent sans male escort.
Adjusting your genitalia in public. 
Walking around in public with visible leg or armpit hair.

I wish the stigma wasn’t so strong, but whenever I see an article trying to celebrate a woman for bucking the pressure to shave, 99.99% of the comments are about how “gross” and “nasty” she is for daring to wear a tank top without shaving her pits.
I work with mostly all men in a production setting. They joke about farting all of the time, like constantly. But if I do they all think it’s gross.
An erection.
[removed]
Getting your ass slapped when you're going out to play in the big game that will determine if that talent scout is going to pick you up for a big team.
Eating out alone. Women are expected to be so collective and fearful, that many of my friends wouldn't dare go to a restaurant alone, and I get weird looks when I do. 

I bring this up because just today, I forgot to pack my lunch for work and I was craving Chinese food. Went over to the local Chinese place and asked for a table for one. Immediately the Chinese man says "You're eating alone?!!! So independent! That's good." Like, what do I say to that? "Thanks pal, I'm trying to eat lunch like every other regular human." There were tons of men eating alone on their lunch break, same as me, but no one makes awkward ass comments to them. 

Another time I was studying for finals. Went to the local Mexican restaurant alone so I could hide out in a booth with my textbook and some chips and salsa. The entire waitstaff starting talking about  me in Spanish, not knowing that I understood. They were like "Doesn't she have a man??? How weird, who does she think she is?"

Then there's the issue of guys thinking that because you're out alone, you're looking to pick up a date. No. I try to bring a book with me usually to clue everyone in that I'm just there to eat and read in peace. Nope. Immediately getting hit on. Should I sit at the bar? Men would interpret that as me being thirsty. Should I get a table for one? Get weird looks from waitstaff and judgmental moms with families. Waitstaff gets mad I'm using up a table for just myself. Can't win, because single women are supposed to never go out, sit at home and be terrified of judgement or rape. 
Those shirts with pinup-type women, women barely dressed and/or the stupid sticker usually seen on giant trucks of a woman’s big tit silhouette. That’s normal, or “a brand”. If a woman wore a shirt with a nearly-naked dude on it, or had a sticker on her car of a naked guy’s silhouette, that would be weird. 

In essence: “appreciating” the female form is widely accepted, whereas the opposite does not apply. 
When talking about how he should conduct himself with the new female "friends" he wants to make (after cheating in my just weeks ago), I asked him if he'd make it a point to tell her he was married. His response "that's weird to tell someone".

Maybe this isn't strictly a gender issue, maybe it's just a cheating douche bag issue.. But I personally feel like there's a *lot* of pressure on me to immediately tell a man that I'm married...regardless of whether or not he notices my wedding ring. 
Not saying this only applies to my gender as I haven’t spoken to anyone about it.

But when I walk up a flight of stairs and there’s a girl there as well I always look straight down at the floor just in case they thought I was checking them out.

Might just be an anxious thing but idk /:
Seeing each other pee.
Peeing standing up. 
Being accusatory or entitled if a sexual encounter doesn't end with, or include, your own orgasm. 

Opting out of events like baby showers and birthdays with fewer social repercussions.

Wanting bio. kids without as much consideration to the tolls, risks, damage, and irreversible effects of pregnancy and childbirth.

IME, having firearms solely as a hobby and relaxing way to spend a weekend, and thinking less about the safety and home defense implications of them. 
Invite someone on a date and pay the full tab.
dating someone significantly younger than you.
From what i can tell from having male roommates over the last 5 years... leaving poo streaks in the toilet bowl for months!! What is that? When I share a bathroom its only with women and I never see any streaks. 

How could anyone be comfortable going to the bathroom over poo streaks day in and day out? I'd be worried that going to the bathroom would disturb the water and poo particles from someone else's poo streaks will end up on me somehow. Infecting me with their pooness!!!

Edit: it's quite possible I've just had the shittiest roommates though...
At work the other day my boss slapped me on the ass in a "football player" kind of way. I couldn't help but think if I were a woman I could probably have him arrested for sexual assault.
Scratching their balls
Getting drafted
Going multiple years without a single person showing romantic or sexual interest in you.
Walking down a street at night, alone, without worry. 
Giving each other a lot of shit all the time, often masking it behind witty humor but occasionally veering into embarrassing/bullying territory. 
Prostate exam
Having a boner in public i guess
their SO not letting them go to an event, if a guy cant do something its considered her bueng overly bossy/possessive if a dude does it, its abuse
Using a urinal
[removed]
Having your nipples visible in public, according to patriarchy.
Peeing while standing up
Talkin' 'bout jock itch
Boob discussion, proud of that fart / turd, smell my finger, open adjustment of the junk, "I'll give you a dollar if you _______", "here hold this".  "Dutch oven" with heater on full blast in the car.  To name a few.  
Urinals
Insisting on holding the door/letting ladies go first to the point of absurdity. I'm not going to argue with someone about who holds the door when I'm too far away for it to make sense, but don't expect me to be the first on on *and* the last one off a crowded elevator.
[deleted]
Talking to strangers whilst taking a poop 
Shaving your face
At sports events, men spank other men (on the butt) when one of them has scored a touchdown or hit a home run,etc. It normally goes: high five and then spank when they’re receiving congrats from other team mates. I’ve mentioned this to my husband repeatedly because I’ve never seen women do that to each other in a sports setting or even in general. 
Working in a mostly male environment and have unfair standards put on you just because you're a woman
Peeing standing up
Being treated with actual respect as equal human beings by Trump et. al.
Walk alone down the street at night and walk pass one or two dudes without a second thought. 
Peeing against a wall beside other women without a full stall for privacy. 
Pee standing up
Boners
Status: **Locked for now, until we have the mod-bodies to take care of the debates happening in the comments. Reminder that this is not a sub for debates or necessarily for discussing politics**
God, I notice men do this a lot to me. I loved how outwardly irritated she looked because he was totally talking over her and the moderator.
[deleted]
As a woman in a male dominated field, it really resonated with me.  I always have men speaking over me or interrupting me at work but I'm really not in a role yet in my career where I can speak up and back at them like that.  It really gives me hope for the future of women in male dominated careers.
Familiar exhaustion.
That she is real and she gets it.  

She knows the frustration of being talked at or conversing with another who is simply waiting for their turn to speak, and not truly listening to you.  

Her frustrated but short burst of laughter after she said it the first time, is what truly spoke to me.  She almost broke and was able to pull herself back, knowing what her truth would have cost her.  If she had snapped as she SO WANTED TO DO, then she would have been labelled ‘that hot headed bitch’ by people who have already written her off as the token woman in the race.
I didn't watch the debate but reading "I am speaking" reminds me of Judge Judy.
I was surprised Pence actually stopped talking when she said it at times.  I thought he'd just keep running her over.
Everyone’s talking about how this happens to women all the time and that is true. But in this particular case, I don’t think it had anything to do with her gender and *everything* to do with the fact that she was participating in a political debate. I mean look at the presidential debate where both candidates were men.
I cheered.
Men do that a lot to me as well. And I screamed at my laptop, in the middle of the night.
I’m very shy and reluctant to speak up. When she said that I cheered for her. But I am still scared and it would be very hard for me to say this to anyone.
I don’t know. There were a few times when she also spoke over him. So I want to cheer her on but at the same time I don’t want to be a hypocrite?
Was truly great
I may or may not have pumped my arm and said "YES TELL HIM!"
To be honest, it came off as too rehearsed and planned.

Compared to many past political debates, I actually think Mike Pence was being reasonably respectful. It's common other politicians may briefly interject (I'm not only talking about Trump). I think Mike Pence was just acting in a manner consistent with other political debates (even pre-Trump).

I don't think he was coming off as being wildly inappropriate, so I think her rehearsed reactions were excessive. I just felt she had clearly rehearsed that line and was unnaturally saying it solely for political purposes.
It’s a political debate. Nobody brought up sex and gender when the the other baboons kept interrupting each other. I think pretending like Kamala was being “mansplained to” or interrupted because she’s a woman is actually causing more harm to women.
It happens a lot. Especially in social settings. Sometimes, I do a Kamala and say I am speaking, sometimes I let it go.
I got chills tbh. I was so proud and felt so empowered. She stood her ground, and didn’t allow him to speak over her. She was amazing. I aspire to be like her.
Every time I was talked over, or made to feel like my voice didn't matter.... like I didn't matter... That was her getting her momma tone and standing up for me.
It was annoying and self-distracting, it's not how you deal with being interrupted during a debate and she hardly gave any real answers because she rolled over going "um I'm speaking, I'm speaking, I'm speaking" instead of taking control.
Nearly every damn day. And I call ‘em out. Excuse me I was talking.
It's too familiar. I hate being interrupted the most no matter who did it. So disrespectful of the VP but I'm not surprised.
Mod Note: Locked for rampant rule-breaking. Far too many of you are derailing, invalidating, and debating.

Please feel free to report rule breaking. There's an awful lot of it.
Do not apply for jobs you can already do.  Apply for jobs you can learn. Every single job requires training, they just want you to have some background skill to apply to it. If you can learn it and have some knowledge in the area or skills that apply (even if you only have 70% skills). APPLY!

You can get a job you don't try for.
My thoughts are this - I recently read this and decided to throw my name in for a job that I clearly am qualified for, but not 100%.  I got the offer yesterday!  So I say go for it!!  You are likely selling yourself short.
It's so real. 

Speaking as a mod here, we get an unbelievable amount of questions like "how do you deal with impostor syndrome?" nearly every day.

Speaking as a professional, I have three interns, two guys and a girl. The guys sometimes ask for help, but will usually just do their thing, and get a lot wrong. The girl will come to me almost every day, asking questions saying "I'm not sure how to do this" even when she was doing it right, and usually ending with "sorry for asking so many questions!"

We're raised to second-guess ourselves. It sucks.
I apply to jobs I want and jobs i think i can get and hope for the ones i want but have the security of the ones i think i can get. For example, when I was 18 I applied to be a preschool teacher and I didnt qualify because I didnt have any college education yet but I applied anyway. At the same time I applied to restaurants and grocery stores because I knew it was more likely for me to get those jobs and I was mostly trying to get money but if i could get money from being a preschool teacher then i would also be getting experience in the feild i was going to pursue. I got the preschool teaching job as a floater in the school and I took classes while I worked so when a teaching position became available I could move up into that position.
When applying for jobs, when I see a job that I don’t meet every single criteria of the job description I stop and think ‘would this stop a man? No’ and then apply. It’s a really good motivating tactic to force you to be brave and bold and recognise your potential!
I think males traditionally have a more fake it till you make it attitude. Women are definitely just as capable but I think they have to chase it as soon as possible because they are qualified.
I was actually told in University to always apply for jobs even if you don't have the exact qualifications, so thankfully I followed that rule. My SO would always say this to me as well. I do find however that when I get the job, I never negotiate salary, that's a whole other matter though...
Slightly unrelated, but I am currently involved with a conservation research project on a large outdoor item in a national park. My work is visible from walking paths, and I have a poster explaining the basics and welcoming questions. I’ve noticed an unexpected trend lately. When kids walk by with a male figure and ask a question about what I’m doing, the man almost always answers the question. The answer is often wrong, but this never stops them from answering with full confidence. If a kid walks by accompanied by a female adult figure and asks a question the woman is more likely to say something like: “I don’t know. Let’s read the sign or ask the researcher herself.” 

I imagine the world would be on average a little smarter if more people admitted when they didn’t know something and made the effort to learn it instead of assuming…
It’s completely real. I’ve had to fight this thinking in my own life and have seen female friends succumb to this same self doubt and imposter syndrome. 

Meanwhile, my guy friends and boyfriends would just shoot their shot with minimal qualifications and take on huge risks which paid off. We have to force ourselves to do this too. 

Though tbf, I’ve also heard many first hand accounts of men landing jobs with minimal qualifications or when the company finds out that the guy lied his way through the interview and can’t actually perform the job. A lot of times they were hired over female candidates with better resumes or actual qualifications. 

If you go in with enough confidence and perceived authority, you can accomplish some wild things, and I think most people naturally view men as having more authority.

It’s proven that tall, white men especially get that added bonus
Yep I definitely only apply if I meet 100% of the requirements.

For me though, I feel like this is mainly about not wanting to waste my time. I am careful when sending out a CV and cover letter and put work into it, so I don't want it to be wasted.
After hearing this stat, it totally changed my way of thinking about applying for jobs. After all, what do I have to lose? Would a man be as insecure as me? I see how much confidence my male SO has and I just think fuck it, I'll go for it.
This is definitely true for me. If there's one item on the list that I don't fully meet, I won't apply for it. 

I mentioned this to my BIL once and he laughed at me. He believes the criteria is their best case scenario, but they're not really expecting you to have more than about half of what they're asking.

Guess who is doing really well in their career, and who is stuck in a rut?
Generally true, though I don't know if those statistics are totally accurate. Perhaps that women apply if they meet a greater percentage of requirements overall than men. But I think the other factor is that most women are aware of the types of issues they may have to contend with as a woman in the workplace. 

I commented elsewhere in one of the fitness subreddits something to the effect of this: For women to get the same level of results or respect, they have to put in 10x the effort. 

That was in the context of strength training specifically, but I think it applies here as well. And we know it, too. There's definitely a feeling that you can't just be "good enough" for a competitive role, but instead, the very best for it. ESPECIALLY in male-dominated workplaces or fields where you know you're going to be facing much more scrutiny. 

And honestly, even in female-dominated spaces this seems to be an issue. Because then you're also competing with several other potential applicants in a similar headspace, who also think they have to be "the best."
Not only is this true when applying for jobs, but I’d say it applies to everyday life, most women have a strong tendency to question whether or not we’re qualified to speak on something, take part in x event, etc., whereas for most men it’s not even a consideration. 

This sub is a perfect example, it’s supposed to be “Ask Women,” but there are always plenty of top level comments made by men, as if the “women” part was just a suggestion.
I applied for a job I was about 75% qualified (wanted more years experience) and got the job. My mentor later said that part of the reason I got the job was I clearly was prepared and gave a shit
I actually just had a conversation with a friend where she told me this and encouraged me to send my cv everywhere.

My problem is that I'm not sure I want to do those jobs. In my line of work (scientific research) everything is super specific. If I do what my friend suggested, I might end up with a position on a subject that I don't like or I may end up having to learn a bunch of new skills all of the sudden.

And right now I'm not in a desperate situation (thank God) so I can't afford to spend a bit more time looking around and sending my cv only to positions I'm super confident that I'm a good fit for or that I fancy.

Edit to add a bit more meat: impostor syndrome is not impossible to overcome. It's difficult for sure, but it's not an immovable object. I think it's always best to look at your situation and yourself in particular. And what you want to achieve and try to make the best decision for yourself, regardless what other would or would not do in your place.
I don’t get hired either way
Men also apply in dating sites when they meet 0% of the qualifications so I am not surprised.
I once saw a post that read "Carry yourself with the confidence of a mediocre white guy." and I haven't been the same since. Guess who got into professional art and character design this way?
I applied for my current job when I only had about half what they wanted, on the advice of a male friend. In the interview it turned out most of the technologies were in closed beta and *no-one* has experience in them! Job adverts are ridiculous
I once had an interesting conversation with an economics professor who used basically this to justify why he was convinced there needed to be a forced quota of women in high management positions. 

He said it killed him to see his wife second-guessing the reality of her promotion in her dream job when he knew for a fact she was absolutely crushing it. 

"This change will not happen by itself if we don't force it, and until then, the quality of decisions in mostly-male-run companies will continue to suffer."
I feel like the imposter syndrome is true but at the same time it’s still difficult to get jobs. I’ve heard some crazy survey that showed pretty women are close to never taken seriously. They’re more likely to be hired for low paying assistant jobs as decoration, but will be overlooked for roles in management, IT, etc., unless they have stellar experience or know someone at the company because pretty women are considered to be not that smart. I’ve even heard some men say they don’t want women to ruin their “guy space”, like we’d be party poopers.
I work in IT right now and the older women have told me all kinds of stories of not being taken seriously or people straight up being mad that we sent a “girl” to set up a computer.
I take all surveys like that with a LARGE grain of salt, and part of my career is interpreting and analyzing statistics and data. 

As far as the statement goes on it’s own, I haven’t found it to be accurate at all. I have been on multiple search committees and plenty of women apply for positions where they don’t meet all of the requirements but were still qualified. It doesn’t hurt to at least apply. The worst that can happen is that you don’t get an interview.
Personally no, I was desperate to get out of office jobs so applied for everything and anything to do with animals.

Don't even have any animal experience or qualifications, just love em.

Now I work in a vets!

My boyfriend on the other hand will be over qualified and still not apply.
It is absolutely real and I beat my coworkers over the head with it every time we write a job description.

"We require 7+ years of project managing a software engineering team."

"So if we find somebody who is absolutely amazing and fulfills all our other requirements, but spent 2 years project managing a software engineering team, and 10 years project managing electrical engineers, would we not want to hire them?"

"Of course not, but..."

"What's stopping us from saying 'we would love an applicant with extensive experience managing software engineering teams, we require 3+ years of experience in project management."

&#x200B;

At my office, I've described this as the "no fat chicks" rule.  When I was on OKCupid, I'd frequently get dudes messaging me wanting to go out with me, I'd click on their profiles, and I'd see that they'd written "No fat chicks" on their profile.  And I'd message them back and I'd be like "Dude, you realize I'm obese, right?" and they'd be like "Oh you're fine, I just don't want to date REALLY fat chicks, you know, like the \*insert extremely offensive description of fat women here\*."  And how fucking stupid do you have to be?  Just look at people's profiles, and don't date anybody who you're not attracted to.  

When you set a requirement that excludes a group of people, you tell anyone who fears they might be in that group that they're not wanted there.  So you'll only get people who either don't feel that they're ever close to being in that group, or people who don't care if they're not wanted.

I think that part of being a company that cares about gender equality requires you to carefully consider what's a "requirement" and what's a "nice to have".  And to only label something a requirement if you *actually* wouldn't want to hire somebody who didn't fulfill it.  Because chicks are socialized to not be imposing on others where they're not wanted in a way that men aren't.
Accurate. I don't do that anymore though. If I get an interview, I'll just brush up on any bullet points beforehand and talk my way around it.
It's true. In my career, until my last job I had slow growth because I basically only applied for jobs I was fully qualified for.

My current job, I took a chance and applied for a job that I had about 20% of the skills needed, but in a hard to fill role. I got a decent pay increase and they paid an attorney to train me the rest of the way. Now, I know it so I can apply to higher positions in the field that pay more. I highly recommend this method.

The worst they can say is no (or silence, which is most common), but it took me a while to learn that.
Absolutely. And now that I've gotten the position i have now, which I really, really wanted, am 100% qualified for,  and love, I still have so many days where I wonder what my boss was thinking putting me here. Like, my brain tells me there's no possible way I can do this. Surely they're going to figure that out and put me back in my old position and my professonal future will be limited.
I like to reverse this. I think I'm a woman with a reasonable level of confidence in my own abilities. I think I am still generally held to a higher standard by my bosses than are my male colleagues. Is it that women are insecure, or that they're more readily criticized? I suspect it's some of both...
I don't find it personally true anymore, but when I was in school/just out of college for sure. The job I have now was an absolute crapshoot.
This is hella real. Personally I won't apply for a job i'm not 85-90% qualified for (i'm not applying to jobs i'm 100% qualified for b/c i don't want to not learn new skills but maybe that will be my downfall, TBD).

I also think it's hella apparent as a manager--i have 2 direct reports, both women, and they really stay asking questions every day, even if they're completing the task correctly or if they know the answer. I do this myself! 

the self doubt is really hammered in hard.
As someone who worked backwards from experience first then college, seeing the college requirements usually scares me off from a lot of positions, even if I have almost every other qualification listed.
I think after I realized this I also started applying for jobs I was maybe a little under qualified for and its gone amazingly! I’ve gotten so many call backs for positions paying 5-10k more than the other jobs I was applying for.
Men tend to take more risks. This sometimes works and sometimes provides them with jobs they aren’t qualified for.
I don't apply if I don't meet all of the qualifications, I just don't want to waste people's time.
Interesting, but any HR article will tell you to just go ahead and apply
Very real. I’ve thought about this a lot and finally decided to say “ fuck it”. I applied to jobs where I was maaaaaybe 60% and got them.

In one year I increased my salary by $50,000. If you ask me THIS is the way women increase the wage.
And what sucks is that you can meet 100% of the qualifications, plus some and they will still chose a man who doesn't meet those qualifications over you.
Based on the men who DM me, yeah this is accurate.
I mean, my best friend (24M) got accepted into a high paying govt job straight out of college despite him not even having studied for said job, just a similar field.

Meanwhile I can't even get a teaching internship because I don't have enough experience in the work field. A FREE UNPAID INTERNSHIP.

Is it impostor syndrome, or is the work environment actually working against us?
I'm a recruiter. Purely anecdotal based on my experience but it does generally hold true from people I talk to. Often women will pull out one single bullet point in a long job description and say they aren't a fit because they don't meet that one. It almost feels like they are talking themselves out of it and they'll ask if it will be a problem, etc. Men often won't do that at all or they'll talk about why they don't have X but they Y and it's transferable.
I brought this up in a women’s round table with my director during women’s history month. He had never heard of it! And he took the action to now take that statistic into consideration as part of mentoring. I definitely sold myself short before I started applying for the next level and missed a few years of earning potential.
I'd encourage everyone to listen to this podcast episode about Imposter Syndrome. The guest and host are psychiatrists. The guest is one of the founders of modern CBT. I think it will help a lot of us women who feel like this.
https://open.spotify.com/episode/52FvE5feaZ7uXNAyq0MeM3?si=VgZUiKfrQw6GHi121tnHHA&dl_branch=1
I'm so glad I'm not the only one dealing with imposter syndrome! 😔

I remember reading [this article](https://www.verywellmind.com/imposter-syndrome-and-social-anxiety-disorder-4156469) and thinking, "I don't remember sitting down for this interview!"
Depends on the woman.  I have applied for jobs that I had 0% experience in….and got them too.
When I was job searching I basically just spammed every listing on Indeed whether I was qualified or not. I figured I'll let the employer decide if I'm qualified rather than disqualifying myself before I even apply. The worst thing that'll happen is they'll say no or not reply at all, idgaf 🤷🏼‍♀️
Apply for the job. It is very rare that anyone can meet 100% of the job requirements. They are describing the ‘in a perfect world candidate.’ If they waited for the perfect candidate, they’d take too long to fill the position and be wasting their time interviewing when they should be doing their own job. 

Apply for the job, and highlight your skills and background so that they are as applicable as possible to the requirements listed, even if only partially. Study up as much as possible on what the role entails, what product or service you’d be working on/with, and build a pitch describing why you think you’d be a good candidate. Come prepared with a plan outlining how you plan on getting up to speed within 90 days.

Apply for the job. There is an element of ‘fake it till you make it’ - that does not mean you should lie though. It means absorb all you can, study/read/prepare after hours, take the training available to you, etc. Don’t be afraid to ask questions - but also use the resources on hand (manuals, training guides, help pages, Google etc.) to try to figure it out yourself first.

Apply for the job. You can do it!
Even when you meet 95% of the requirements they find some way to say you’re not the right fit. Ah well.
Along with that I think expectations of others may contribute as well?  Like me you've probably herd some stories where a seasoned women in her field gets micromanage/questioned often/whatever a lot more compared to her male coworker or how this lady who's been working there for 7yrs and still hasn't been able to receive a promotion while the new guy gets it only after 3yrs or, another example, they have the same job, background, experience, but he gets payed more.

P.s. I totally have i.s.
[removed]
[removed]
As a woman that gets the job by being 100% qualified I find I get 100% grilled on my first day. Don't notice men getting grilled as much.
Currently in the hiring process for a position that has 3-5 years of experience criteria when I only have just under 2 years. I've done the pre-interview, skills test and my actual interview is next week. 

&#x200B;

I would have never seen myself doing something like this 10 or even 5 years ago (I changed careers 2 years ago).
After graduation, I applied any way. They told us this during our exit class. 

Annnd I totally have imposter syndrome during interviews.
I can definitely believe it. Men are more fearless when it comes to applying to positions they might not be ready for, because 'a real man will just figure it out'. Women tend to feel out of place from the very get-go so they only want to apply to positions where they'll have the backup knowledge and experience to validate what they say/do.

As a 20 year old girl, my first job was with Microsoft. I was severely under-qualified for the position, literally didn't have a single qualification, but I had a lot of bravado and fake-it-to-make-it attitude back then. I had nothing to lose. So I BS'd my way through the interview and got the job. THIS is what many men do, and THIS is what companies expect.

If you're 5+ years deep into a career and you're worried about image or reputation, maaaaybe don't be as bold as this. But if it's a new venture? Absolutely.
Lately, I’ve been applying to nearly every job within a 25 mile radius of my city.
I can only speak for myself, but yes, I would not apply unless I met every criteria.
It checks with something I remember reading about Start Wars.

When Star Wars 7 was made, they were grumbles that it was a men that was directors, and not a women.

The woman producter (can't remember her name), put if not an end at least a good muffer on it quite easily.

She couldn't have hired a women simple because no women applied.

Basically, when they announced that they were going to make SW7, her phone and mails were spammed by men directors who wanted to make that movie, from highly qualified one, to beginners that would clearly never get the job.

No women director called her.

Granted, she could have seek out a woman herself. So I didn't feel like her justification was that valid. BUT it is very telling on the diffence between men and women when seeking an opportunity.
Totally agree with this. And it's a habit we need to break in ourselves (as women) 

I was just recently in the market for a new job. And while looking at postings in my field i noticed i saved heaps but would actually only apply to those where I 90-100% met the "about you" section listing the qualifications. And the 90% refers to me applying when i don't meet 'highly regarded' qualifications. 

When my partner looked at my process (i asked for his opinion) he was shocked I didn't apply for those jobs where I didn't meet 100% of the 'required' qualifications. He was so confused, and he said "what can they do? Not hire you? Then you're in the same place as you are now anyway" 

And that clicked for me so I kind of roll with that mentality now. Ended up getting a job I thought was out of my reach too!
It's rediculous. As a man I apply even if I only meet 10% of the requirements. Fake it till ya make it!
I have read this article before and now I’m a big proponent of the phrase “Have the confidence of a mediocre white man”.
I don't think you can paint all of one gender with the same brush. We aren't monolithic.
I haven't heard the statistic before but I bet there's a lot of truth in that. I know that I don't like to apply to a job if I don't meet all the requirements. I take an employer at their word when they say they need those skills and I try not to waste either of our times if I don't have them. Sometimes if I'm a little iffy on just one skill they're asking for but am good on the rest then I'll apply anyways and just dedicate time to learn that skill.
As someone finishing her mechanical engeneering degree, I've seen that man don't usually worry about making a mistake or breaking anything, they just try it and if it doesn't work they try something else. For me ir i try something I have to be sure it is correct or often times I don't try it because I am afraid of breaking the machine. (Sorry for the broken English).
60%??!
Yes, because they get the jobs over the more qualified people. Unearned confidence does that to you.
This is 100% me. I’ve been job searching for the past few months and saw a position where I fit maybe 60% of the must-haves but was missing some key education and experience so I didn’t apply. 

Instead I submitted my resume to the company for general future opportunities. They contacted me about the role, I interviewed and now I start on Monday! It was a real eye opener. 

As long as you’re honest on your resume and in your interview, it’s up to them if 60% is good enough. Don’t count yourself out before they do. 

Having said that, I am kind of terrified because I feel so under qualified for this, and I’ll be leading a team where everyone has more experience than me 😬
Another way to phrase the second half of this statement is "women only ever apply for jobs they meet all of the listed qualifications for," which is an absolutist statement, not a statistical one, so it worries me that the inclusion of percentages and a comparison against men in this statement is an attempt to be intentionally misleading. The opening statement of this article calls that sentence in itself a "statistic," so even if the internal report it came from was not attempting to be misleading, the author of the article has unfortunately already been misleading by making this claim.

I find the graph of the article author's personal survey to be the most valuable part of this article, not only because it's the only place where a statistical survey was performed, but because the possible responses to the prompt “If you decided not to apply for a job because you didn’t meet all the qualifications, why didn’t you apply?” are based around which feeling of inadequacy was most invoked from the applicant (e.g., "didn't want to waste my time and energy," "being respectful," "likely to fail"). But overall, since this survey has "you didn't apply to a job you were qualified for" as a presupposition, I think it's important to be clear that is not a survey of how often men and women apply to jobs they are underqualified for but of which emotional responses tend to be invoked from which gender because of their perceived inadequacy, which is the only sort of premise the author has positioned themself to be qualified to comment on. I really wish that enough information had been provided here to perform hypothesis tests, because several of the percent differences between the responses between men and women are rather close, and I think that would be interesting to investigate further exactly which types of emotional responses had a gendered divide.

As someone who has previously worked in academia and gone through the process of publishing peer-reviewed papers, it's really hard for me to put a lot of faith in an "internal report" from a private company (this isn't to say that private companies can't publish good work like this, but they are more prone to biases and still have to go through the same peer-review processes as academic work from universities in order to be published and widely accepted). Since this is reddit, I really don't want people to read my comment as me being hyper-contrarian or just shitting on the article; it's absolutely true that a lack of confidence in the workplace is a shared experience of many women. However, this article has too many bad smells overall for me to take anything away from it on its own merit.

Here are a few peer-reviewed articles I found related to the subject. The first one is fortunately open-access, and I've linked a PDF! The second one is unfortunately behind a paywall. If someone here has university access, maybe they can grab a copy and link it here?

* [When Job Ads Turn You Down: How Requirements in Job Ads May Stop Instead of Attract Highly Qualified Women](https://biblio.ugent.be/publication/8545104/file/8545105.pdf) Investigates how job requirements that contain personality-related adjectives have a gendered impact on applicants.
* [Presenting Their Gendered Selves? How Women and Men Describe Who They Are, What They Have Done, and Why They Want the Job in Their Written Applications](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11199-019-1016-y) (paywall, fuck Springer Media)
I was totally like this, and most of the guys I know are like this. I used to freak out if someone asked me to do something new with no one to teach me/ or that I was « supposed » to know how to do and make a mistake or mess it up.

And then I heard this sentence and i was like « f**k this, I’m done ». And now I apply to whatever job I want, telling myself I’m giving myself space to grow and improve. And for now it has always worked. And I make mistakes because I’m human and the world doesn’t stop, people help me out and then I don’t make the twice (my job is not life-saving/dangerous job though, so small risk of needing anything other than pointers and explanations to solves the issue). And people still look up to me, respect me and hiring me. So now, whenever in doubt : « how would a man react ? ».
I prey for the confidence of a mediocre white dude.
My motto is to carry myself with the confidence of a mediocre white man.

But in all honesty, that statistic is on the whole true in my experience. I know a lot of talented women who don’t put themselves out there, and so the mediocre man gets the job. It definitely sucks, but can’t blame him, per se.
This is definitely something women struggle with more than men. I recently read a book called the Confidence Code that talks about why women are more likely to second guess themselves and how to help build confidence in yourself. The authors discuss this exact topic, and have some great insight and advice.

[https://fourminutebooks.com/the-confidence-code-summary/](https://fourminutebooks.com/the-confidence-code-summary/)
My thoughts are that we should encourage women to apply for jobs that they aren’t fully qualified for.
Yes
Very true for me and I struggle with it.
My therapist said to me today, "You are very confident and you know what you want and how to express it That's a gift." and I thought, "Is this lady serious???"... imposter syndrome. I can't even take a compliment. I'm constantly waiting for the other shoe to drop.
why does this not surprise me
I apply to jobs where i don't always meet the criteria, and it usually doesn't work for me. Maybe i should just change my name to John Smith. I'm in the middle of a search now
If the last US president showed us anything 60% of the qualifications seems like a reach.
Knowing this, I started applying for jobs I didn’t qualify for and decided to “fake it until I make it.” One place was impressed with my resume and hired me into a lower level position. Within two years, I was promoted into the spot I had originally applied for.  It’s made a huge difference in my career trajectory.
Very true. Until I worked with a mentor to job search it had never occurred to me to apply to anything that didn’t match me word for word.
Makes sense. Society tends to push men more than women to be risk takers, so it makes sense that they would apply for jobs there not qualified for more often.
100% true for me. I pass up a lot of jobs because I don’t have one out of 5 requirements. So stupid!! Thanks for posting this. I’ll apply anyway, now.
I have absolutely seen this happen. Right after I graduated with a degree in b&p, I applied at a bakery that wasn't open yet. I applied to be the "baker's assistant" and at the interview, they offered me the role of Baker. I had the experience for it - working in restaurants for over 10 years by then, three degrees in my field, and two years as a baker's apprentice - but I still thought I wasn't good enough to be running a kitchen myself. Meanwhile the guy who ended up being my assistant had no experience in the culinary industry at all, had only just barely graduated high school, and he applied to be the Baker.   


It was actually shortly after learning that we'd applied for each other's jobs that I came across this article. After that, I started applying for places I didn't think I was fully qualified for and just interviewing like I was. It worked.
being a woman is great but in the professional world, it's f\*\*\*ing shit
I think you should hire more women.
Yes this sounds legitimate
This is not new news lol
Pretty broad generalization...sounds like a BS premise
I’ve been applying to jobs, and now negotiating, with the confidence of a straight, cis, white man. That’s been my philosophy, and it has worked for me as a woman in STEM. I radically changed careers (from the arts) only 10 months ago, finished school 2.5 months ago, and I’m sitting on two offers now. It’s difficult for a junior software engineer to fit 100% of each posting’s qualifications, so I’ve been applying as long as I meet at least 30%-50% of the listed requirements. Imposter syndrome is real, but men suffer from it as well and still manage to come out with higher salaries than women on average. Negotiating is scary, but it’s absolutely important for all non-men/non-cis men to do it so that our gender no longer is associated with meekness in the hiring process.

LADY POWER
Dunning-Krueger
Black men and black women apply for a job and they were told that they are overqualified as an excuse and the employer then hire another ethnic with way less qualifications for the job with a better pay.
I applied for jobs where I had like, one relevant qualification and ended up getting a better, new role at the company i was perfect for.
I've finally gotten over my discomfort in applying if I don't meet every little request an employer puts in their ad, but I fully believe most women still have this issue.  I'd rather just be fully sure that I'm prepared for whatever my future employer might throw at me.
Unfortunately very true.
I (F) just applied for a job I don't qualify for at 3 different companies, one of which asked me to apply after they saw my resume on indeed. Not sure if that's promising at all, but I'm hopeful. It was the first time for me to apply for a position I don't fully qualify for.
I saw this sentiment last year.. ish. It really struck a chord with me. When I got laid off I remembered this and applied to anything I could be remotely qualified for.

I got my dream job working in the space industry.

I feel like the reason this happens is because men are told from a young age they are the best, if they are capable, they can do it.  Not saying this isn’t true but they are given and allowed to have massive confidence early on where as girls are seen as being “fast”, superficial or unlikeable  if they have that same “cockiness” 


I also feel like this means woman will more harshly judge themselves or their capabilities, where as men will not. Allowing them to look at Job descriptions and honestly believing they are capable
I'm a woman & I'd say if I meet 60%-70% of the qualifications - I apply. I've always thought, the worst they can tell me is "no". But it has resulted* in me being hired a few times.
i have thought about this before and indeed it is true  i have noticed it especially during my primary school years although thanks to my mom i 'grew' out of it during my teen years and especially when she got me signed up for self-defense classes which managed to help me a few years later in my teenhood.she's spoken to me about things like that plus also

i definetly do ensure that i support and encourage other girls and women around me to be more confident in their abilities without having to be perfectionists nor meeting all requirements heck my best job i got i must have met about 70/80% of the criteria
I see this happening to me right now as I apply for jobs...

Guess I should really change tactics... I kind of chalked it up to Dunning Kruger effect, but guess it's just me being a woman.
I applied for a promotion in my workplace where I only have 1/4 of the required experience. Fingers crossed.
My husband won't apply to stuff he's not qualified completely for. I'm like..  I'll apply to everything. I'll see who wants me
I guess, yes. In my opinion men seem to be more headstrong and determined even if they are in the wrong.  
That's probably why they statistically die younger, and in accidents more, than women.
Funny thing is I found out about it 2 years ago and since then started applying to whatever jobs I was interested in if I met some of the requirements (60-70%). I guess fake it till you make it works. Also, make sure to negotiate your salary ALWAYS. Men do, women don’t and they should.
So so real, at least for me. And worse, I see myself do this with things like voicing my opinions on various syntax standards or framework patterns/anti patterns. If someone asks a question I HAVE to be sure I’m 100% correct before I answer. Usually by the time I’m ready to talk the question’s been answered 😑  

ETA: I think it was a TED talk though I forget which one that correlated this to how little girls are discouraged from taking the kinds of risks little boys do all the time for the sake of not getting scars or not ruining clothes. Running, jumping, leaping off of jungle gums and bloodying hands and knees etc. Risk taking is just inherently taught at a young age for boys and discouraged for girls. Idk how TRUE that actually is but additional food for thought
I think it’s true for a lot of women. It used to be true for me until I learned about this trend (thanks husband!) and I’ve applied for jobs above my qualifications ever since. I make 3x as much money as I did 7 years ago.
Isn't that smarter though???
Most people can do their jobs by learning on the job.
As long as you don't lie in your interview and you get hired, it's good and you have much better scope to learn new things from the job.
I recently read something that you shouldn’t apply for a job if you think it’s 100% a fit for you.
For context, I'm an engineer.  I'll apply if I'm not the exact experience level (i.e. recent grad when they want 2-5 years).  On hard skills, it depends on what level of competency they expect and if I have other relevant skills or the means to get there.  For example, I don't have a U.S. security clearance or Six Sigma certification, but I would be willing to pursue them with my employer's support.  I know certain CAD/FEA software and would be able to learn other modeling/simulation programs.  Alternatively I do not know enough coding languages to be a software developer.
Not really I will apply for anything if I want it. I will find ways to tweak my resume to make me sound like I might have some experience with something related to what they are looking for. There are very few jobs I have been interested in that I feel under qualified for skills wise, my biggest issue is that a lot of my education is informal.
It motivates me to apply anyway.  Sometimes they catch you by asking things like "how many years of experience do you have with X Program?" on the application.

The thing about this stat is at least I can be empowered to change it.  I can't control others' unconscious biases (especially in STEM), how they evaluate me, or if they respond to my request for feedback.  I can only apply and do my best in the interview.
Lmao only mediocre performers worry about statistics
Disagree. My wife supplies for stretch jobs and had to push her ex husband to sorry for stretch jobs that he would never have applied for, and he was successful every time
I can tell you I did not meet the requirements for my current job, I just had a good well written resume and I aced the interview (according to the two people that interviewed me). I just showed up in a suit, death stared them throughout the entire interview, and used my past work experiences, which weren’t relevant at all, to help explain why I felt like I could thrive in the position. If you want to hear something crazy: I applied for change of position in the company and my branch manager blocked it and offered me something better for $10k- this is within 3 months of hiring me. I got paid $10k extra by just asking if anything was available.
I apply if I meet 50% 🥴
This is so true. I am now returning to the workforce after 5 years off and I am really struggling on what to apply for. There are jobs I know I can do with my eyes shut but I don't have the "qualifications" so I don't bother applying. I can't sell myself very well in writing, I'm better in person but I don't think I'd even get the chance if I don't fit on paper.
It baffles me that any people apply for jobs they aren't qualified for.
For me, accurate.
I feel this *a lot* right now. I'm currently in the process of looking for and applying to jobs and when reading over the qualifications I'll think "ok I don't meet this or that qualification so I guess this one won't work out for me" and skip over it.

My fiance has told me I should apply for jobs even if I don't meet all of the qualifications, and I've also been working on telling myself to apply anyway because the worst that would happen is that they read over my application, see I'm not as qualified as the want, and throw it away and that's that, but it's hard to fix a mindset that's already so ingrained.
Male here. I don’t apply unless I fulfill more than 90%. The rest I tell them I’m eager to learn. Otherwise, I’ll feel like I’m in over my head.
Very very real. If a job lists experience with Excel as a requirement, I don’t apply. Do I have experience with Excel? Yes. Do I know how to find guides and tutorials if I come across something I don’t know how to do? Yes. Did I take a whole class in college on Microsoft Office? Sure did. But am I 100% confident in my abilities with it? No, so obviously I’m not qualified 🤷‍♀️
I think women are just more analytical. They see those as something they need, guys just say “yeah, I can learn that”.
Guys are versatile in absence of knowledge.
Sounds like women are not shooting high enough! What could they develop into if they reach for a job that they need to learn for? 

All leads to personal development.
I read this a few months ago so I stopped doing that. I realized the second I didn't have a qualification I was exiting out of the offer. So instead I've just been applying for anything regardless, and I've gotten some interviews despite not being entirely qualified. I always just tell myself that the worst they can say is no.
We're always blaming the victim. How about, "Men who are 1 year out of college get promoted over women with decades of experience, so women \*accurately assess\* the situation and know they have to be stellar just to be considered for a job."
This drives me crazy with my friends. I am constantly telling them to apply for better jobs and/or fight for raises and they won't do either.

I channel my imposter syndrome. I'm basically never not looking for a new job. Gotta keep switching so they don't have time you find out you suck and that means apply to everything.
Welp, being told all your life that you couldn't even meet half the qualifications that a man can in over half of the job market, you better make damn sure you meet all the qualifications for few jobs you can do.

But who am I kidding? Our periods make us "hormonal" and potential pregnancy make us a liability. s/

Interesting anecdote that probably doesn't have much to do with this but when I started taking anabolic steroids, I did become a little more "aggressive" (not just assertive) and confident in my own judgement about things. So I stopped taking shit from my retail managers and eventually applied for a job I had no business applying for.

My husband says it's because I got a taste of what it was like to be man (I was using the minimal dosage of Test E). I think it was just a matter of growing up and it was around the time I had to start standing up for myself or be ruined by people walking all over me.

But.. his perspective is that I was behaving more manly. If that tells you anything.
I read it was 20% for men and 75% for women in a different study a few years ago. I always use that statistic when trying to convince my other female colleagues to apply for jobs or management positions.
It's 100% true in my observation. I work with a man who only has a high school diploma who told a woman WITH A DEGREE and 13 years experience that she "wasn't an expert" on a piece of software she'd been using for the last year. As if he would know the fucking first thing about it.
Personally, I cast my net wide because I need a job. I applied for a job I didn't think I could do and got it - still there almost two years later.
Lol literally an hour ago had a former coworker reach out to me and ask how I like my new company. I told him I love it. He said “there’s a sales position open in my area.” I explained what he would be selling in a way that kindly indicated “you don’t have the experience the company would want” because he a) has no experience in sales or even a related function and b) has no knowledge of what we sell or the chemistry experience that would help him learn. None of this is insurmountable if he had an education in sales, but he literally meets none of the qualifications and I helped him realize that. 

And he responded “I’m going to apply anyway. You never know.”

But I do know. And you don’t. And you’re wasting everybody’s time. But sure. Go ahead.
If all else fails, mimic the audacity that some men have. Who knows, it might work out haha
Men and women function differently in almost every aspect of life, it’s not surprising that carries over to work. However, in my years of recruiting, I’ve found everyone applies to everything, experience or not. 

All of my male bosses were very emotional and feared confrontation and my women bosses were some of the nastiest people on earth. 

I’ve worked in a few different industries, with a lot of different personalities - Both genders are just as crazy and dysfunctional. 

How you work comes down to ego and work ethic which isn’t gender specific.
If you meet every qualification you're overqualified (and there's a good chance you're not getting a call back because you're likely to be bored and quit as soon as you figure it out)
I hate it so much. We are raised to defer and question our own abilities. I've seen many men climbing the ranks who have no clue what they are doing (I also know many who do, but this is about being less qualified). Even if they are doing awful and everyone hates them, they have innate confidence. It can lead to big blunders but most of the time I see them being able to pull one over on higher management that doesnt know what their job should  entail. I've had a few bosses like that myself once. A few of them I actually really liked but they just weren't ready to be bosses. But because they could play pretend really well and schmooze their superiors they moved up. 

With new employees I saw more guys charging ahead without asking clarification questions, even if it was very obvious they were missing something crucial (as in they just make up a way to fill something out, which can be problematic for rearch data). I've seen more women asking questions even if they are 95% sure of the answer (I often do this, and sometimes its warranted but sometimes I'm just paranoid of fucking up)

Personally I feel the number should be more like 80% when its possible, and I reminded myself of this with my recent job hunt. For some jobs, 60% is just too low. I'm in research, there are a lot of rules/regs and skills that only come with experience. It was catastrophic when management was unable to be a resource on these things for employees.
I’ve watched this play out way too many times.  I had a woman who I’d *already hired* (but hadn’t started yet) tell me she was worried she wasn’t qualified because there was one item on the job description she didn’t know how to do. I told her she had the job and jokingly told her that she needed to start having the confidence of a mediocre dude.

I definitely challenge everyone who works with me on how they know something (I am alllll about the references in my technical work).  I’ve more often caught out men who are faking it. 

In mentoring I see there are usually two types of people: those who will focus on the one negative thing and not hear all the positive and those who will ignore the negative and only focus on the positive.  Women tend to be more self critical, but there are a good chunk of men who are as well. I love mentoring the first type because I get to focus on building them up. I don’t love mentoring the second type because it’s harder for them to course correct and sometimes they need a (verbal) kick in the ass.  I’ve yet to meet a woman who’s the second type, but I’m sure she’s out there.
Peter Principle is also a thing. I've worked under many executives who were unqualified but were put into a position because they have been in an org for a while constantly being promoted for favoritism.  These folks stay until enough errors are made costing companies revenue, and move onto another org based on title to repeat the cycle.
My advisor in college told me this. She printed out job applications to try for, and even ones that clearly said you needed 2 years of experience, when I had 0. She said men will still apply anyway and get the job, and women won't even try to. 

I decided after college to apply for a job that insisted you needed a specific certification (that takes a year of work/internship to get). I applied anyway and got the job, where the year of work would count and I'd get certified after that.
Yeppp. Goes along with “men are rewarded based on potential, and women are rewarded based on achievement”.
The best advice my brother ever gave me was to start applying for jobs like a man would. Last year I applied for a job I felt 10% qualified for. I got it and grew into the position. It nearly doubled my salary and my skillset.
If it’s listed under entry level, everything else is irrelevant as long as it’s in my field
That's...good to know and explains a lot.
I started applying to jobs I wasn’t fully qualified for last year and ended up landing my highest paying, “easiest” job that came with free health care benefits. Within 9 months, I was promoted to a senior position. Ladies, please do not undersell yourselves. So much can be taught on the job, just be confident that you’ll grasp it because you will.
Well we do live in a world where men are hired more easily than women, I’m not surprised that men or half assing it and women are full assing it when it comes to job applications
I dont know... Im sure women in the past thought they might have hysteria too. I dont think it is something that is women's fault, I think it is more like a byproduct of different forms of prejudice against women..
People apply to jobs if they don’t meet the qualifications 100% ? 
I’m 25m and tbh this has me floored. I figured the qualifications meant that those were things you have to have to get the job, I guess I start considering more options next time I job search. I guess it doesn’t hurt to try right? 🤷🏻‍♂️
Yes. I've had to force myself to apply for positions I felt I was "unqualified" for. I love the Tina Fey quote about this, basically "say yes first, then figure it out later"
I am currently job hunting and took this statistic in my mind as I applied and said, "Fuck it. They can tell me I'm not a fit and I'm not about to second guess a team of people if I'm open and honest in my interviews when they say I'm the best candidate."

I'm getting called back on applications I historically wouldn't even have submitted. It feels so good.
This is accurate, my workplace ended up hiring a specialist to write a job description, just so they would get more women to apply to encourage equal opportunity.
This doesn’t stop me. The “requirements” for tech jobs is so overboard. Entry level positions somehow require 2+ years of experience? Yeah, nope. Still applying.
When I learned this I started putting in for more and got a few more interviews. It's definitely a good thing to remember.
My boyfriend and I are both job searching lately, and I feel like this is so true!  He has no problem applying to anything and asking for more money than the posting says it will pay.  I have more education than him and and still feel nervous to apply to things that ask for too many expectations and I worry if I ask for too high of a salary that I'll get dropped through a hole in the floor haha
It looks like I am a bit against the grain on this one. I have never had this issue. I have applied for jobs I was completely unqualified for and gotten some. I thought everyone did that.

I will say, I think about why some requirements are present. Is is for a legal/liability reason? If so, it's probably a waste of time to apply. Is it because that is their dream candidate? If so, why not apply? If I can be confident in my ability to perform the tasks asked of me, I am confident I am qualified enough to apply. There will be a training period, there always is. What I don't know now, I will learn then. 

This is probably the reason I have had a slew of random jobs: pet groomer, cook, vp's assistant, art gallery sales, etc.
Not a girl but I have two sister, the other parts of a triplet. This is so true.
I believe it 100%. So many of my guy friends have applied to jobs that I know they weren't qualified for. It always shocked me at how comfortable they were doing it. Women are used to men always second guessing us. I can't imagine a woman wanting to risk looking inept.
I think I needed this today. I've been casually looking for a new job. I keep telling myself I will apply after I finish two more certifications I am working on. Maybe I should just go for it.
I GOT THE JOB!!!!!!!!!


I literally applied for a job where this is probably technically true. The description was a little vague but understanding how my field works.... it might be a bit outside my range. It definitely "technically" is for my age, but I'm also advanced for my age (26)

I wrote a kick ass, authentic, honest cover letter where I pictured Peter Campbell from Mad Men, scoffed, thought about how much better I am than him, and wrote about why I wanted the job and what I bring to the table. Continued to show what I bring to the table and what I've learned about them and their needs in my interview. 

They agreed with me, I guess :)
Whelp, where do I fall if I apply and  I'm only 30% qualified?  *Sheesh*, brings back memories of '08.

Kidding aside, I think, unfortunately, many women aren't taught the golden rule, "Don't ask for permission. Ask for forgiveness."
I apply for jobs I'm not qualified for. Idgaf. Worst they can do is fire me later. Might as well shoot the moon
I haven't had to apply to a job for years (thankfully, because I really hate it), but when I last did I applied to a lot of jobs that said they preferred a master's degree, which I don't have. I was moving to a new area and was just applying to anything I vaguely felt qualified for. It worked out and I got a job that said it preferred a master's degree without a master's degree.

It was more desperation than confidence in my case, but let's let yesterday's diffidence become tomorrow's self-esteem. We're amazing and capable ladies!
reading these comments makes me realize I am really not alone.
This is so true and I needed to read this today.....I’m procrastinating writing an application because I only meet 95% of the requirements. I’ll get it done, due 21 June!
That doesn’t mean they get it
This is interesting in my relationship I (the women) apply for every job I want and some that I think may just be fun even if I don't meet all the criteria. My boyfriend on the other hand after ONLY applies for jobs that he meets 100% of the critica. 

I say go for it apply for those jobs because worst case scenario you don't get an interview, best case you do get an interview and have a chance for your personality to shine bright and explain the assets you do have to bring to the table!
Hiding manager here. Apply for everything you’re at least 50% qualified. The qualifications describe our ideal candidate not our minimum requirement. 

We’ve hired people who were less qualified than other candidates just because we thought they had potential. We’ve hired our 2nd, 3rd, 4th choices because other candidates pulled out, failed a drug test, or seemed rude/ unpleasant.
Imposter syndrome is very real.  However, I find as I get older, I can find similarities in my experience to the job duties listed.  Unless it's a license or certification that I don't have, of course.
Rather the opposite for my wife and I. She is always telling me to apply no matter what, and I am always hesitant. When she is looking for a job she applies even though she doesn’t fulfill all the requirements.
My current job I met only some of the criteria. I hadn’t even considered applying because it required 5-7 years of industry experience. A friend who worked for their client recommended I apply since he knew the hiring manager and knew that they were hard up for decent candidates. I still almost didn’t apply since I had 0 years of industry experience, and had maybe 70% of the skills. The only reason I even bothered tossing my resume in was because my friend and the hiring manger were getting dinner, and the hiring manager literally asked for my resume. 

2 years in I’ve been promoted and rated a top performer. I know I’m excellent at my job. I still get worried an anxious whenever I need to include a bio in a presentation because I know I don’t have the professional pedigree some of my coworkers have, even though they frequently come to me with questions. Even after this experience I still have a hard time applying to any job that I don’t meet the qualifications if something amazing comes across my notice.
That women aren’t doing it right? So any jobs. Don’t even need you to have all the quals. Every single woman in my family would say the same too.
I'm looking for jobs right now, and it didn't even occur to me to consider a job where I didn't meet 100% of the qualifications unless they said "preferred" rather than required. Wow.
When you have gone the extra mile or several and you end up getting dressed down by an authority figure that has final say anyway (principal, parent, boss as a teenager...) you question everything.  Hell, we get told that what we wear is distracting when we're fully covered. Men wear the exact same coverage and get ignored.
I think this also indicates that companies should not have job requirements that aren't actual requirements. I like when places break it into must haves and nice to haves. 

Fundamentally their are a lot of easy fixes to get a more equal gender distribution of canidates and this seems like an easy one
I mean- anecdotally- I read this stat somewhere years back and took it to heart. I applied for three dream job and career advancement where I met 60% of the qualifications... and I got all three. 

It’s definitely proven true for me! Moral of the story is GO FOR IT GIRL!
I, a woman, will apply if I have 0% requirements. I meet stupid people everyday in high power positions.
I didn’t think I would get my current job. And now that I’ve been in it for 3 weeks, every night I lay in bed wondering if I fucked something up, analyzing my every word and move, and feeling like I’m going to get fired the next day.
Personally for me this is bullshit. I apply to every single job I WANT regardless of their list of qualifications. End result: I got the job I wanted despite not having all of their listed qualifications.
I try so hard to fight against this. When I got my current awesome job, I was not qualified for it on paper. I'm a writer and project manager. Tons of writing experience, ten years. No project management. None of any kind in the field, I was switching fields.

Sometimes you gotta just have the confidence a dude would have in that situation.
This is real. But to me, behind this statistic there is an underlying problem coming from subliminal messages from childhood. 
Research has shown that on average girls are socialized to be careful and to avoid big risks. One experiment counted the number of times parents helped their child or encouraged them to try things on their own on a playground. Boys were almost always encouraged to try things, and not given help, while the girls were physically helped or the parents gave warnings like "are you sure you can do that?" "Be careful". The numbers remained the same even when the boy and girl children had the same parents.

Not that surprising that women don't apply for jobs unless they know they are qualified when you think most have been told since childhood to "be careful". 
Might be good to watch what we say to the next generations...
I used to do this, but after a while learned this fact and decided that worst case, I don’t get the job that I wouldn’t have gotten if I hadn’t applied to anyways. This past year, I received 6 job offers. I learned that most employers don’t care if you meet 100%, if you can prove you’re smart and motivated. I’m now at a new company, loving everyday of work and getting paid way more than I used to earn :)
I don't know about the men, but for a female myself, yes it is.

Before I realized that we could apply the job even we are not 100% meeting the qualification, I tend to not apply the job. However, after reading article wrote by headhunter or HR, I thought that maybe apply is not as bad as not applying the job. Here ya go.
I read that statistic and started hyping myself up before job searching:
ok, look at a job and ask “do I meet over 50% of the qualifications?” If yes and the job sounds interesting, APPLY!!  
What would a mediocre white guy with your skills think about his odds of getting this job? Pretty good? APPLY!!! 

I started applying for a way wider variety of jobs, and ended up being invited to positions with much higher pay and way more interesting duties than I saw myself as “fully” skilled for.
I've always been treaded, in all aspects of life, whatever I am, do or say just isn't enough.
This is true, when i got a call for a graphic design job, i just said, Of course I have experience ( I dont) and googled that shit
I meam girls... Fake it till you make it. Worst thing that can happen is you getting fired, boo hoo, fuck them right? If thats the worst thing, then theres really nothing to worry about and no point in asking so many questions.

And btw, guys often wont ask questions coz we also have anxiety and dont wanna look stupid and/or incapable even though its perfectly normal to so.
Yes. But I never thought men would apply with only 60%. It recently started applying to everything and didn't receive a single call.
So true. And didn’t realize this until I was in my thirties. Now I push my women friends to apply for stuff. I have a feeling something similar happens for other minorities as well.
Source? Seems odd to me. I'm a man and even if I have all the qualifications I'm reticent because I've been told I'm overqualified.
Last time I was looking for a job I read this job description that after two lines I had already decided not to apply because I felt like I wasn't qualified, but the last bullet point in the list of requirements was "psst... you don't need to check all boxes" so I applied, interviewed and they liked me so much I was hired in a few days, so when I joined the company I asked the tech recruiter about that line, and she said she would always add this to her job posts in order to remind people, specially women, that nobody is already fully prepared for a job, and training/learning curve is usually accounted and paid for when they open a role in any company.
[removed]
For men, as a man, it's usually throw a bunch of shit at the wall and see what sticks. 

For women, as a man that's coached confidence to many women, its a battle of self-doubt vs rejection anxiety. 

Unfortunately society failed our women as they are fostered in a culture that breeds this train of thought. 

If you have daughters, tell them they can do anything anywhere anytime anyplace and kill that shit.
I’ve been told job postings are often “wish lists.” In other words, fulfilling all of the responsibilities on any given job listing is an unrealistic premise because at the end of the day, HRs job is to find the best possible hire for the company. So  if course they’re going to require 15 years of expertise and proficiency in anything and everything. Given those shenanigans, I think 60% is actually a good benchmark to aim for.
I'm a chemist (this matters later) and I applied for a management position at work. The management position was for the group I currently work in and have worked in for the past 3 years. Turn around time for people being hired and then leaving is crazy so I'm actually one of the most experienced chemist's in my group. I run all our testing and train new hires in our group. They didn't give me the management position because "I hadn't been with the company long enough." Okay, that could have been a legit reason. They hired a man from a different group that started with the company literally a week before me. He has never run our testing before and knows nothing about our instruments. I TRAINED HIM WHEN HE BECAME MY MANAGER. So yeah, currently looking for a new job.
Well think about how when we express interest anything men might be interested in, we get asked 20 questions to prove our legit interest. 

You like rock prove it by answering obscure questions!

You game? List all the games you play that a superior gamer like me would respect you for playing!

You watch sports? Name all the players on your favorite team! 

If our hobby world is like that, why wouldn’t we assume that our professional world would be the same?
As somebody who's been on the hiring end, know this:

The job description is a wish list. Most of the time you get many but not all of the bullet points hit. Literally the worst thing that happens is you get told no, and you have to move on.

There are legitimate fears: sexism in hiring, pay disparities, rooms full of mostly guys looking for mistakes. Clear those hurdles when you get there, though, because you won't find out if you don't apply in the first place.

Bonus tip: A positive attitude, friendly demeanor, effective communication style, and visible curiosity with a drive to learn can often supercede a bunch of the less important qualifications. In my experience, anyway.

Signed,

Somebody who would love to see you on her team some day
[removed]
I always tell people that it’s the Employer’s job to decide if you’re a good fit for them but they can’t decide if they want you if they never see your resume!
There are also mixed versions I'd say?

I apply for jobs even though I don't meet all criteria, but I am very stressed while doing so and I have a lot of imposter syndrome even after getting the job.

It's mostly just how we're raised I think. There's nothing inherent to gender, just to how certain gender is treated by society. I'm sure with time it will shift heavily.
From my perspective (F), I don't apply unless I meet 100% of the requirements because I'm in a male dominated industry.  I know that as a woman I'll have to work 2x as hard for less money for a long time before anyone notices I Might have value.  So unless I can go in knowing I can do everything they claim they need, I won't go for it because I can't afford to learn the base requirements while I'm learning to pick up all the stuff that isn't even on the description.
The woman who runs the company I work for told us this exact same thing. She said she would absolutely hire someone who was less than qualified. If they had real life experience, or just had potential. Said it bothers her that men are the ones bold enough to walk in with nothing. Women don't realize how much they have going for them.
Nope,  I always apply lots of jobs and don't care if I'm 100% qualified, I persuade the interviewer why I'm qualified.
Most of people no matter men or women would have self- doubt ,  but that doesn't stop you from getting what you want. So is getting a job.
I read this a few years ago and since then if I’m looking or applying for jobs I go through the spec and if I fulfil around 50% I then look at the rest and consider if I have transferable skills that could be adapted, anything I then don’t have I will simply say something in the interview like ‘that’s one area I’m looking forward to learning more about, I’m particularly interested to see how X works...’ and I’ll Google beforehand to see what it involves so I can talk about it as though it’s something I have a genuine interest in.
So far it’s worked well.
This explains A LOT
I believe I struggled with this during my first job, incessantly asking questions and worrying about my work, every little thing was treated as a huge deal, I chased all my mentors asking them so many questions, relied on them a lot even though(I know this now), I picked up easily everything that I had to learn. I needed lots of assurance that I was right, everything I did was me telling them I'm not good at this, I'm new to this,I might be wrong, etc,...But now, with experience and more success, I am far more confident and I have gotten into a job where others have far more qualifying credentials than me, I am very confident I can learn and pick up anything new thrown my way, and I am doing great.  Even when it comes to salary, I applied and got into my job, I am getting paid( even more than male colleagues with more experience/better qualified than me) for what I am working in this company than based on what I received in my previous job.  But yes, I think most men are far more confident even when they can be wrong, having said this, my male mentors were the ones who encouraged me to be confident and put me on the line,  made me work my way through from the very beginning instead of holding me back, it helped a lot when they blindly expected me to do more than what I thought I could do, helped to put me ahead of my fellow trainees. Women must learn to be more demanding/ confident and ask for me.
Nope,  I always apply lots of jobs and don't care if I'm 100% qualified, I persuade the interviewer why I'm qualified.
Most of people no matter men or women would have self- doubt ,  but that doesn't stop you from getting what you want. So is getting a job.
[removed]
100% true for myself
As a fairly underconfident woman...I must say I have occasionally applied to jobs when I did not have 100% of qualifications.

I don't think my thought has every been 'but I'm so great of course it doesn't matter!' My thought is usually sometime more like 'what the heck' or 'why not roll the dice'?
it is real
My struggle is I apply for jobs where I have 110% and I still don't get an interview! So it feels like why waste my time applying for jobs where I have only 60%.
[removed]
My mother always told me to apply for a job even if I didn't meet any of the qualifications. It never hurts to try.
[removed]
I was always told to apply even if I don't think I fit the criteria. Maybe it's an upbringing thing?

It likely also varies a lot depending on the field of the position.
Very much. I think that’s also a reason why we tend to stick with the same jobs that are usually taken up by women even though we might be interested in male dominated jobs. However for men I feel like they have this notion that the jobs that are female dominated are much more easier to do because of the belief that we’re weaker and shit. That makes it easier for them to take up those jobs. The male dominated jobs don’t have enough female role models to make us really believe in ourselves and know that we can make it. On top of that, most of us get shitted on for taking up those jobs. Anyways, I don’t think we should let that hold us back. Life is all about uncertainty.
[removed]
I would agree due to women also having a larger impostor syndrome than guys.

Although at this point I'm applying when I'm at 30-40%. It's the companies job to train you and I can learn.
As a woman who has been offered every single position I've ever interviewed for, I've often wondered if I set my sights too low. Maybe if I reached a little more I would face more rejection but the successes would be greater? Maybe I could be more than I am if I was willing to take more of a risk and bet on myself a little more
Anyone who organises speaker events & is trying to avoid "manels" knows how true this is.

When asked to do an event, most (not all) women tend to play down their experiences, doubt whether they are qualified to speak, or even recommend "more senior" speakers who are inevitably their male supervisors or colleagues. Or, they feel they can only speak narrowly on "proven" published work, instead of just expressing themselves openly & confidently.

Whereas many (not all) men will be happy to speak so long as you give them a microphone. Many will say "Heck, it's not exactly my field, but I'll comment on anything!"

There are already a smaller pool of female speakers to choose from, given the larger gender imbalance among business leaders. So this is tough.

BTW not ALL women. Some are very confident speakers. But I do feel like there's more hesitance in general.
[removed]
This is pretty accurate. So now me and my sister just apply like a man. We have nothing to lose.

I applied to my new job even though I didn’t have all the qualifications.
I got the job and I really love it.
In medicine when applying for specialties you’re ranked on points which are awarded for various academic achievements (degrees, publications, etc). You need to score yourself and then send in the scores with all your evidence for each point. Generally every year the women underscore themselves and the men over-score.
So true. My dad always told me that I should just apply and he was correct I applied for jobs I thought I could not get and quit my retail job next to my studies. Now I am doing internships as a student in companies which actually help me grow and build my CV thanks to my dad. Set your goals high, aim for the best, you are worth it. The only thing we have to do is to sell our skills and work on how we present ourselves, confidence is key!!
I hope I am not breaking any rules here. Please remove if so. I never apply for jobs unless I am 100% qualified and even then I feel like I'm a fraud. I'm overqualified for my current job and perform well and I feel like I'm cheating my boss out of someone who is supposed to be doing my role. Every shift I'm terrified they are going to see through this facade that I'm putting up despite that not being necessary or even relevant.  I was born male hence the concern of this not being within the rules of this sub but I wanted to offer my view in case it was of any use to anyone here.
[removed]
Omgosh this really does feel like the case. My husband is an engineer who is really great with people. I'm a lab tech who is a lot more on the cautious side. Whenever I went job hunting, he would keep saying I should apply to all of these different jobs while I'm like, "but I don't have any experience in this field" and he says to basically shoot my shot and try anyways.

I'm not afraid of being rejected. I'm more afraid of getting the job and showing I was never qualified to be hired in the first place *anxiety reaching the stars*. My old boss (also a man) was constantly telling me to be more confident in myself. I rose up from a part-time assistant to the lead tech within just a few years and I was still second guessing whether I deserved it because everyone else in my field had been doing it for like 10+ years
Thank you for asking this question! I think this might be my all-time biggest pet peeve. You’re so grossed out by public toilet seats that you need to hover, but then *you leave your own fucking pee there and contribute to the grossness of the thing you’re too fucking good for?!* Seriously? Seriously.
Seems like no one is actually answering so here:

I’m not actually sure how it happens, but every once in a while after I stand up, I notice one little dribble on the seat. No idea how it gets there, but when I see it, I wipe it. So there may be instances where I don’t notice it, therefore I don’t see it. 
I walked into a stall recently and was disgusted at what I assumed was pee on the seat. After wiping it with 6 inch wad of paper and finishing my business, I flushed. Only to turn around and see the force of the clean water rushing in sprayed all over the toilet. So now the person after me thinks I peed on the seat. 
I blame those that hover. Sit down or else lift the seat like a man. I don't like having to clean other peoples' pee before I can sit :(
no one is going to own up to it. But seems pretty obvious why. They are lazy and don't give a fuck about other people. There's no good reason to not wipe the seat if you're one to hover.
Follow up question: what do you think happens when you leave your period marks on the toilet seat? 
Came here hoping for an answer, but it appears no one is fessing up. Lol
Perversion. Sick, dirty pleasure. I get off on the knowledge that someone else is touching my crotch juices! 


No, seriously though: it happens every once in a while when I don’t wipe well enough. I stand up, and drip, apparently. 9/10 times, I see it and wipe it. But sometimes I’m distracted, tired, stressed, or spaced out, and don’t see it. 
This is one of those code violations I just don't understand. It's from *your* body. You clean it up. The worst offenders are the ones that leave period blood and/or used sanitary products on the seats, floor, etc. 

You are not a wild animal. Clean up after yourself. 
Thank. This annoys the shit out of me. People talk about how gross men are but I'm like dude I've seen some things in the women's bathrooms
[deleted]
Also, why not flush your poop?
My wife's friend, Cicpea, cheerfully admits that she will never sit on, or even touch, a public toilet. Never flushes either
I too often wonder wtf women believe they’re going to catch if their ass (which also expels excrement) touches a mostly clean/dry toilet seat.  I guess the seat pissers think their piss is fine but all other piss is vile? 

I wipe up pre existing piss, sit my happy ass down, leave a dry seat, WASH MY FUCKING HANDS, go about day. My ass has yet to develop gangrene. 

Unisex restroom at work-many of the dudes won’t lift the seat and piss everywhere. It’s when one of the seat lifting dudes goes to take a shit and realizes they’ve sat in another dudes piss that an email goes out. 
No consideration for others I guess?!? 
That’s what I wanna know. I do agree, sometimes the flush is very splashy, but you can usually tell what was dropped and what was splashed. 
It’s so gross!!! 
We have to deal with men’s piss on the seat enough, let’s look out for each other!
If you sprinkle when you tinkle,
Be neat and wipe the f****** seat!!!! :)

[removed]
[deleted]
I don’t get the hover. Generally, you’re just sitting your thighs down where other people have also sat their thighs (and some potty particles that you’d also get on your home toilet)

Toilets get cleaned way more often than a lot of commonly touched items. 

Washing your hands in a public bathroom is usually way more germ infested (all the hand germs on the handles/soap dispenser/paper towel dispenser). And those air blowing driers? That’s just blowing all the floating potty particles directly on your hands.

Getting some germs on your thighs seems like such a non issue in the big scheme of things 
Doesn’t anyone look after? It takes two seconds to grab some tp and clean up for the next person. Yuck.
I'm a woman and it pisses me off. Like pls keep ur bodily fluids cleaned off public areas 
I've only done that once. I was pregnant, I pissed all over myself and the seat and when I finished and got up to clean it the sight made my pregnant stomach want to vomit so I washed and ran. It's shameful but it happened. 
You should also ask why people leave unflushed pee. At first I used to believe the toilet was broken. But after several times noticing it was perfectly functional, I really don't get it. For those who don't like touching the flushing thing, you could always use a piece of toilet paper to cover it, like I do. 
i really wish a single hoverer who doesn’t bother to clean would fess up but we know they won’t, sigh 

but if you’re reading 

if you sprinkle when you tinkle, be anything other than a piece of shit ingrate and remove your waste from the public toilet

(it baffles me the most somehow when they flush, but don’t clean the seat. like, really? you had to look behind you, and make a clear, informed decision)
This phenomenon has been well documented by social scientists. It's called the Tragedy of the Commons.

https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tragedy_of_the_commons
None of the excuses listed (children do it, it's water splashing from flushing) holds up because this is way worse in the US than almost anywhere else. It's the hoverers.

If you are going to hover/squat, please have the decency to lift up the seat.
Im gonna be honest, i hover and dont clean up the toilet seat. I try my best to aim into the toilet and 70% of the time, im ok. I just assumed everyone hovered. When i see pee on the toilet seat, i dont care cause im gonna hover. Sorry, guys. Will clean up my pee 100% of the time from now on. 

I saw some people asking why women hover, so i thought id answer. Why would i wanna sit my ass on a public toilet when i could... not?
To hoverers from a fellow hoverer: just put a toilet seat cover down before you go. That way you have nothing to clean up even if you’re messy. Just flush and it’s all gucci. 
Thank you for this. I've considering making a similar post in the post, but I get the feeling the women that should read this won't.

&#x200B;

The seat lifts up for a reason. That reason very specifically being if you are peeing while not actually sitting on the seat- that way you don't get piss all over the seat. I've heard the argument that they're afraid they'll fall into the toilet bowl, but really, when hovering, have you ever fallen and landed on the seat? No? Then why would you fall just because the seat is up?

&#x200B;

I've seriously considered posting a flowchart on the inside of cubicle doors in the washroom at my office. Hover? Yes-> Wipe the seat off afterward? No -> Lift the seat beforehand? No -> Take particular pleasure from leaving piss all over a seat someone will be using in the near future? No -> Please examine your life choices.
yall think people who piss on toilet seats actually browse reddit lmao
I'm old, I have arthritis now, and my leg strength is not what it once was.  I was always a sitter, but now I have less of a choice.  I sit because I must.  I understand what flushing splashback looks like, or one errant drop, but there are most assuredly squatting hoverers who miss the mark and do not care.  They're usually self-righteous about it too.  "It was like that when I got there".  So?  Wipe the seat.  Or better yet, lift it.  You can't fuck up a seat which is lifted.  If you do, you may have a condition...

Anyway, the average cellphone has more germs than the average public toilet seat.  It goes near your mouth, whereas sitting on a toilet is just the backs of your thighs and ass cheeks, which are not mucous membranes, and hence not likely areas for disease transmission.  Have fun with that.

http://time.com/4908654/cell-phone-bacteria/
Follow-up question: what is the point of “hovering”?

You cannot contract STDs from the toilet seat. 

Sitting on the seat does not increase your chances of picking up any sort of sickness because you very rarely physically use your hands to subsequently touch the skin that was in contact with the rim. If you do while you’re in the bathroom, that’s another reason to make sure you wash your hands when done. If you get freaked out about it, maybe carry some pocket wipes that you can toss in the bin or “lady products” trash in the stall.

If you get freaked out by warmth from another person, please stop and consider: everyone with normal kidney and bladder function has to pee. Everyone has to poop. Conditioning yourself to be freaked out by that does nothing to contribute to a healthy psyche or rational mindset. You are literally just making things more difficult for yourself, and if you’re not conscientious about cleaning up a “spray mess” then you’re making it more difficult for other people.

I’m speaking as a nurse who is regularly up to her eyeballs in stool and urine with how often I clean up patients. I do not get sick when I’m dealing with other peoples’ processes up close, you will not get sick from a toilet seat if you just make sure you wash your hands.
Pee? I lift the seats with my foot now because I've found blood underneath.
I don’t understand the whole hover thing. You won’t rest your thighs on a toilet seat but will sit on a public bench, seat in a cafe or mall ect while wearing shorts or a skirt ?
Because they can get away with it & don't care enough about other people to clean it up.
This is why we in the West need to embrace squat toilets in public places. 

Then the hoverers can hover all they want since they are supposed to. 
I'm always suspicious of the little boy that mom let's go pee by himself. Feels like mom rarely checks the toilet seat for spray afterwards
This problem used to be so common at my workplace, I'm talking multiple times a day pee would have to be cleaned off the seats. Finally, I had enough and decided to print and laminate signs to hang up in each women's bathroom stall with the same rhyme I'd tell my brothers when they were being potty trained. "If you sprinkle when you tinkle, be sweet and wipe the seat." Haven't had that problem since. 
Why do some of you hover? Are you afraid of catching butt cancer from the toilet?
I don't intentionally pee on the toilet seat. When I stand up to wipe my vulva, some pee might drip from my labia and land on the seat. Or when I flush, the flushing is so strong that the toilet water gets on toilet seat.

Sometimes I don't see my pee, though most of the time I do see it. If I see it, I clean it.
Sometimes I've seen toilets that spray when they flush that appears to be a tinkle sprinkle. Not saying that's always the case, but it exists 
Heres one for you, A place I worked had a serious problem with this. To the point where it came up during a all-hands meeting with the entire factory staff, because the toilets were pretty much all unusable in the womens' bathrooms. Pee all over the seats, as well as footprints. Turns out half of the ladies were just standing on top of the toilets and squatting, and the other half just used the restrooms in the office and not the ones on the shop floor

&#x200B;

Our janitors HATED coming to our building every Tues/Thurs
I didn’t know this was a problem for women holy shit 
I have always wondered why?!!!!
The ultimate selfish/self centered person I presumed... The other reason that crossed my mind was perhaps someone from another country that uses those floor hole kind of bathrooms that really don't understand the Andy Gump/portable toilet etiquette. 
My mom always taught me “If you sprinkle when you tinkle, be a sweetie wipe the seatie”
I don't think I've ever "hovered." Not even in a really disgusting bathroom... Whenever I'm in a public bathroom, I always grab a wad of toilet paper and wipe the toilet seat, before I go. (Something my mum taught me to do, I think she thought you could get crabs from toilet seats but wiping them moves them away...? Who knows) In doing this as well, you also know for sure that there is toilet paper for you to wipe with.
Sometimes in poorly lit bathrooms, it's possible that i've "dribbled"(That sounds so gross) on the seat and not noticed, but if I notice, I always wipe it up.
It’s really bothering me now that I’m pregnant and have pee bursting out my body but have to flipping do cross legged dance while I disgustingly clean that shit up! Not cool ladies cut the crap!!! If I can clean it while peeing my damn pants SO CAN YOU!!! 
I worked at a campus bar for about a month.

I thought cleaning the guys’ bathroom would be bad.  It didn’t hold a candle to the womens’.

The womens’ bathroom looked like someone sprayed it with a fire house.  Everything was wet.  It looked like someone came in, pissed all over the toilets, shoved paper towels in all of them, then flushed - flooding the whole place.  The counter was constantly just a puddle.

I still don’t understand it.  We’d rock/paper/scissors to see who got the womens’.  I quit after one of the “senior” bar backs (he had a little bit of an inferiority complex), tried to force me to do it every night.

Four Kegs (O Patio), I’m glad you got torn down so that no one could do to that bathroom what happened to it every single busy night.
Hmm.. I don’t do it, but I’m guessing maybe it’s elderly women with poor eyesight perhaps? Or they just don’t turn back to look at the seat, or they’re in a hurry. 
How do some women get pee on the floor is my question lol (based on what female friends have told me of course) 
I honestly think women pee on seats more than men. I grew up with four brothers, every once and while, fine whatever, it happens. Okay, but like almost. every. time. there’s pee on the seat in a public restroom. I get that water from the bowl can splash up during a flush and leave water drops on the seat, but you can tell the difference between that and pee, and it’s usually pee. 
This thread is basically everyone denying they sometimes dribble on the seat. More likely that not it’s left because either A they don’t notice or B they’re lazy. 

I’ll admit it. I’ve been lazy. 
I feel the same way about period blood. Stumbled into this situation while inside my restroom at work. All over the toilet seat rim. WHY
Dominance.

/s
Wait, ladies you pee on the seat, hold on really wtf I’m so lost 
I always wonder that. Like whenever I see the state of some public bathrooms, I think, "is this what you do to your bathroom at home???" 
I have asked this question in this thread and it was removed for being a rant. I have called out women in bathrooms who do this. I understand some people have a harder time in there than others, but even if there is a valid reason CLEAN IT UP. 
I’m a hover-er. I pee and I I won’t lie, I sprinkle all up on that seat. But you know what? I wipe it up, because I’m not a pee
pee villain. 

What I do notice, is after I pee, I flush, and it sprays up water all over the toilet seat. That I’m not wiping up. I did my part and I cleaned up after myself. If the toilet wants to revolt well so be it. 
For reals. Why does anyone do that?
Because people are hecking rude and inconsiderate. We know this.
I don't understand why, if you want to hover, you don't lift the seat cover?
I keep reminding myself to check the seat before I sit because I have sat in what I presume to be someone else's urine before.. quite a few times actually because I'm a dumbass.... 🤢🤮
If you find out you should ask how pubes magically jump off of bodies and land onto the toilet seats and are left there also! I work with older woman who clearly do not do any maintenance downstairs and the amount of pubes on the toilet seat after they are done in there is fucking disgusting. 
Used to share a restroom with female coworkers, also worked as a busser for a while and had to clean the restrooms.

You people are *monsters*
If you sprinkle when you tinkle, be a sweetie and wipe the seatie.
   -anonymous 
I see your question, and raise you one higher: Why do you leave the toilet unflushed and walk away?
They are selfish and self-centered.
Sit your Prissy ass on the seat you squatting ostrich
Normally if I see them leave the stall and then see pee on the seat, I loudly say “excuse me miss, would you mind coming back to clean the toilet seat?” :-) - Hope that’s enough to scare them out of the habit. 
[deleted]
Whew, being a guy, this makes me a little at ease lol. 
I always check to see if I dribble. If I do, I wipe it up. Never understood why some women don't check. It happens. Clean it up! Same goes for if you have pubes. Don't leave those on the damn seat!
Please respect the next person who doesn't want to sit on your per seat. It literally take 5 seconds to wipe. I went to an all girl school and lived on all female floor in college... Girls bathrooms can be so gross! 
I peed on the seat one time for good reason! I normally am a sitter so when I wiped the seat of the previous pee I looked at the tissue and it was NASTY! I was left with a dirty and sticky wad of paper so I hovered and left it there so some other poor sitter didn’t get sticky and gross. This was a single bathroom for all genders. 

On that note hovering is very uncomfortable for me thinking about how close my pants are to the front part of the toilet that is gross and pubey 
It’s an accident and I try to fix it when I notice it
If I’m next in line for a bathroom stall, I always make brief eye contact with whomever comes out the stall first.  If she keeps her head down and doesn’t look at me at all, she most likely peed on the seat.
It’s even worse for men who use a stall when there is a urinal in the bathroom and piss on the seat, floor, wall, and/or handle. Yes it’s a real thing. Most common is the seat/floor. Every men’s bathroom literally has a stain/puddle in front of the toilet because of how vile some people are. Then they don’t wash their hands. I’d say at least 50% of men are guilty of this. Just. Sit. Down. If after years of daily practice you still can’t piss like a respectable human being.
How does this even happen?? I understand guys not hitting the target but really? Women are directly over the target. 
I’ve noticed that a lot of public toilets have a really strong flush and can splash up and land on the seat. I’m sure that some (though not all) of the issue is that happening. I’m 
Cause it would be weird to walk out of there carry a pee covered toilet seat. 
When I see a seat with pee on it already I still usually lift it up if there’s tp. If there’s no tp and the seat is covered in pee I would hover and then shake it off with a little shake. It’s only in the most dire of situations. 

I usually lift up the seat with tp. 
I'm pretty sure they hit turbulence or something.
Huh, and I thought this was just a guy/men's room issue.
Wtf? I've only experienced guys doing this. I hover but i clear everything if need be. Never experienced this from other women!
Unrelated but I like your username OP
You should watch Alex Borstein’s emmy speech. The whole thing is wonderful. 

But yeah, I don’t understand why they don’t look at the whole situation before skedaddling on out of there. Some of the toilets at my university are intense and flush so hard that water will come up and splash on the seat. And I don’t want people thinking someone peed on the seat so I wipe it down. Sometimes they flush so quickly it farts. It’s strange. 
I honestly don't think they look back once they pull their undies up.  They don't see it.
I see this every day in my workplace bathroom. Ladies. There is no excuse. Stop this. I expect this from men. If you’re so afraid of the toilet, lift it and pee standing up. Wash your hands after. 
I have an asshole friend that always pees on the toiled paper in public restrooms/porta potties. Fucked up part is he will do it at raves, festivals, woman’s and men’s bathrooms, and wherever else he thinks is funny w/ no discrimination. 
Not a woman, but i just wanna say....theres men who piss all over the toilet seat even though they can use a urinal, lift the lid...or sit down....
 
truly the lowest class individual
Have you ever been in a situation where the toilet flushes so powerfully it sprays everywhere, so you're like "oh shit don't want the next lady to think I'm a slob" and you wipe it down, but the motion of wiping it down triggers the sensor and it flushes again?

...I feel like that's one of the most apt metaphors for life I'll ever encounter.

Anyway, I don't hover so this question doesn't really apply to me. Just wanted to add that. If I get a drop on the seat while standing up I wipe it, although I'm sure there are times I didn't notice and for that I am sorry. It's really gross to sit in someone's cold pee.
if you ever done this, you're digusting
As a guy, I had no idea this was a thing. I find it hilarious.
Don’t confuse apathy with lack of aptitude. 
It’s disgusting! Damn it! Clean up after urself! Makes me want to vomit a little every time I see that. I’m a woman, there’s no point in peeing on the toilet seat. It is 100% avoidable! Nasty asses!
I work at a mall and I've noticed a lot of people have the attitude of "it's their job to clean up" when it comes to janitors. So what I've concluded is that people are assholes and think they can be as nasty as they want because someone's going to clean up after them. I would enjoy going to their place of employment and making their job harder than it has to be...
Guys. So often do I flush with the lid up AND THEN the spot of water appears!

But if it's yellow it's definitely pee.
As a man I sympathize with the women peeing on the seat. Tragedy of the commons, people. Fact of life.
Every toilet should have a disinfectant spray dispenser (discovered it at my gym) then everyone would disinfect + sit and then we wouldn’t have this god damn problem 
I used to live in a duplex with two other girls. One of them always left one strand of pube on the toilet seat. I don't think it was on purpose but I don't fucking get it. Why are your pubes falling out??
my aunt came over recently and she used the restroom. after, she berated me for leaving pee on the seat, which i absolutely never do.

after some sleuthing, i figured out that it was my dog, who sloppily drinks out of the toilet, dripped slobber all over the seat
My 4yo often does. That's because she doesn't do a good job of drying herself before standing and her legs don't reach the floor, so she hits the front on her way down. I clean it up when I see it, but I am not always with her, especially at home or school. 

I'm not saying all places you see urine on the seat is a child, but at home it 100% is, so it's quite likely that's also the case in a lot of public places.
I'm adding my 2 cent's because I don't believe that this many toilets have that strong of a toilet flushing system to have toilet water splashing back onto the seat.

My Solution: take 2 or 3 strips of toilet paper and cover every inch of that seat and sit. 
No hovering. And, if I need to poop, I'm good.
How you all pooping while hovering, idk.

confession though. I did pee the bathroom on accident once. I have an extreme fear of causing a scene anywhere I go and of having people staring at me. I waited and waited until then church service was over, but there didn't seem to be an end in sight before I would burst. I hurried, crossing over people's legs, head bowed, I rushed to the bathroom, it was a dark bathroom. (I guess the lights were off to save electric). I was in a rush it was an emergency  and I figured, the hell with turning the lights on,a I have to pee. With reckless abandonment, I peed. I was feeling relief from finally having peed that I didn't notice, until too late, that my leg was getting wet. Someone had left the toilet seat cover down. I was peeing on the cover and it was splashing to the floor. There was no way I was going to be able to clean up that much pee (don't forget, I was holding for awhile) with the little that was left of tp. I looked for paper towels. I even went to the kitchen area. Nothing.
Yes, I left it. And have felt guilty every time I think about it.

Let me add. 
That I read somewhere that toilets splash their nasty germs everywhere everytime you flush. This is why I don't leave my tooth brush out where toilet water sprinkles can hit it. I always, cover the toilet with the lid and then flush, so no germs get all over the bathroom floor or counters or even toilet roll sitting right there next to the toilet. Before you all think that I'm nuts. There was an incident on TV where a girl took a guys toothbrush, scrubbed the toilet with it and put it back, so that the guy who didn't know any better would have brushed his teeth with it. The production staff stopped filming and made her confess to the guy what she did. Oh, and she had to clean the toilet.

Lastly, wasn't there a "Doctors" episode where they said it was ok to sit, even if you're in a public restroom?

TL;DR: cover the seat with to before you go and sit. 
I did it when I was a kid so people at least knew I peed there. I figured if I wiped it away then they are going to sit in it not know that it was there. 
I notice drops sometimes and have no clue how they got there and clean them up. There have definitely been times I didn't look and left. 
And honestly I will admit to seeing it, weighing how much I cared to clean it up (depending on a rush to be somewhere or lack of soberness...) and just didn't. Sorry. I am disgusting and selfish.
Burn me.
I'm at the age where every woman realizes that control of your bladder isn't as easy. Your day is coming. When my body tells me I need to go, the trickle already started. When I go to sit it lands on the seat, sometimes without me noticing. I always wear panty liners, and try to remember to check the seat, but sometimes I don't see it. Vision goes as well. I don't hover over seats, my knees refuse, so it is when I go to sit that it falls. I'm also to the point where I don't go far from home so I don't have to use a public toilet
Also, why are so many women being so nasty in here... Sheesh.
If someone elses pee is already there in significant droplet amounts then fuck, I don't wanna touch that. So if I happen to leave a droplet of my own I gotta weigh it up - how much of someone else's pee would i have to clean up vs my own. And thus decide if it's worth it. You can judge me all you want, but the thread asked for an answer and I think that's it for at least some of the perpetrators.

The real question imo is how you people can sit on a public toilet seats? You know that shits nasty.
one time i went to use a toilet that had pee all over the toilet seat. i'm like so do you just say "fuck it" and spider man up the stall and pee or something?
I HAVE  the same question for other guys who I assume are aiming for the seat because why else would it be covered in piss
Marking my territory
Of all advantages that a penis brings a person, this one is the most profound 
I've seen a woman holding her little boy over the toilet spraying it down like an unholy fire hose. Lady didn't even close the door. 
Hey, think we can also tackle the boogers wiped on the stall wall phenomenon while we’re at it? There’s a roll of toilet paper RIGHT THERE!!!!  (most times) So gross!!!! C’mon!!
Sometimes it's not pee.  Some toilets flush so hard that water will splash up and get the seat wet.
I never realised women did this. My day, nay week is much much brighter now. 
I always wipes the seat before I use it, even if I can't see anything. Does no one else do that? 
If you sprinkle when you tinkle, please be sweet and wipe the seat!

Seriously though. I get if you get a little bit that decides to run against your skin and hit the seat but why is it so hard to clean up after yourself? I frequently find it in the floor in my office building. Like, wipe better, and clean up your mess already.
I used to (but not anymore so don't murder me, thanks.) 
I just assumed everyone hovered so it didn't really matter. Growing up I was taught to never ever ever touch the seat, and for a long time I thought everyone followed that rule. I just didn't pay attention if it got on the seat, because I assumed it was always just as gross as the inside of the bowl. 
Too bad they don’t make something like covers for the seat. One time use maybe? They could even make them out of something that flushes easily. (No, I don’t know why people hover and don’t clean up their own. Neanderthals.)
I just put two pieces of toilet paper in a v-shape on the seat before I use it. It's faster and hovering is calling for a disaster. Plus, I'm not that grossed out at work. 
So, I'm a hover-er that actively tries to not splash and *always* wipes the seat if I do. 

That being said, I started to wipe the seat after flushing because very often I would have to wipe it twice. SO MANY of those public/workplace/industrial toilets splash when they flush and I would be *mortified* if a coworker/friend/fellow human came in after me and saw drips on the seat. I don't think many non-hover-ers know about the splashing because they flush and walk away. I'm not saying that all toilets are splashy toilets and that all hover-ers wipe, I just encourage you to stay after toilets flush and see the percentage for yourself :) that way you won't be as grossed out or angry at your fellow women. I can only imagine how angry I would get if I was a sitter and if I was, I would definitely want to not be angry every other time I pee lol so I hope this helps.

Cheers!
Okay so I used to clean bathrooms at work all the time, and sometimes it's not pee. The flush in most mall toilets are so intense that they spray on the seat. 
The real question is why don't you flush when you poop ? I have seen way too many poops from other women in public bathrooms. It's so gross. 
I feel weird AF that after wiping the seat down, I just sit down anyway instead of hover. I rarely get sick. Idk why the fuck people leave pee on the seats. Maybe I need to start carrying like a mini pack of lysol wipes...
Im not a woman, but i work at a restaurant where i often am responsible for keeping the bathrooms clean, i spend most of the time cleaning the womans toilet. Yeah, sometimes there is is piss on the mens toitlet but not as often as on the woman one.

This pisses me off! Even after i clean it the next lady is too good to sit on the thing and pisses all over it, fucking pigs.
To claim it as my own
Ugh I definitely do this when I'm very drunk. I'M SO SORRY LADIES, especially all my drunk non-squatter sisters. The tequila is no excuse...but I'm blamin the tequila lol
Wait how does a woman piss on the seat when they are sitting? That's easy mode tf
Because they are disgusting selfish monsters who should be banned from all public washrooms!! 

Toilets that do not belong to you are a privilege not a right, if you can't keep things hygienic you shouldn't be allowed to you them! 
I’m pretty sure for some people it’s a droplet they missed somehow that falls when they stand.
Sometimes the toilet throws water onto the seat when it flushes.  My parent's "low flow" toilet did it not long ago, which threw me since I had never seen that happen in the 20 yrs I lived there. I cleaned it up and then flushed the tp I used down because I didn't want anyone to think I did it. The toilets at work also do it sometimes.  Not every time though. I like to pretend that it's always the water and not pee when I go in and see it. I realize it's often not the case, but sometimes has to be. I hope the person before me just didn't realize it happened.  
As a dude, I always lift the toilet seat when peeing and make sure I wipe up the toilet rim after myself if necessary. But it does bother me when others leave such a bad mess that it might be blamed on me if someone come into the work bathroom after me. 

Yesterday there was a nasty amount of yellow urine and long curly pubes on the rim. ...I cleaned it. 

Today there was menstrual blood on the underside of the toilet seat. I didn’t touch that shit. 
I’ve been dying to catch someone in the act so I can call their shit out. Them and the people who leave the toilets unflushed.
Yeah that and period blood gross!!
Well since no one is answering here, I would think that one hovers because they are grossed out by touching the toilet seat. With that said, they may be too grossed out to touch the seat to clean up their own pee. 

Source: have OCD and Germaphobia (I don’t use public bathrooms but that would be my train of thought)  
I have hover peed over particularly disgusting toilets. When ya gotta go, ya gotta go. Perhaps my pee got on the seat and made it a little worse,  but damn that toilet was wrecked before me.
No one is answering so: the times I've done it was because there was already foreign pee on the toilet, so I couldn't sit down and had to hover, therefore leaving more pee.
So men can sit on it and get pregnant?
Anyone male or female who does that does it for the same reason: They are a disgusting, nasty, gross person with no respect for the person whose job it becomes to clean up after them.
do women just stand up before they’re totally done peeing? ill never understand it and i don’t actually understand how you can get/contract any sort of infection when you don’t have any open skin on the back of your legs? confused all around...
I have a theory that it's usually splash from the flush. 
[deleted]
It’s women who leave blood on the seats who get to me. Why?!
Wow. I never knew women "hover pee". And they have to deal with period blood messes. All this time I imagined a women's bathroom would be cleaner than men since they have to sit down. I have been wrong. 
The golden rule: If you sprinkle when you tinkle, be a sweetie and wipe the seatie.
Disclaimer: I’m a dude from /r/popular 

As annoying as that would be, it could be much much worse. 

For a while the women at my work suffered from a routine rogue turd being left on the toilet seats. It went on for the better part of a year. 

In other news it was so gross but so funny we all scream laughed regularly about it. They never found out who did it in the end, but I believe it finally stopped bc it’s not happened in a long time. 
Because fuck you that’s why
If you pee on the seat, put it up to drain. Like a man!
Same morals, same life goals, good communication and enough common ground that we can find easy comprises on everything. Also, he makes me so happy!
Instead of catering to his needs, my now husband has stimulated me to be more in touch with what I want in life (in a big or small sense). I'm a pleaser, and find it difficult to find out what I want, let alone act upon it. Being in a 6 year relationship and 1 year marriage, has actually made me more vocal, independent, and has improved all other relationships I have in life (parents, friends, colleagues).
My weird fit his weird, like long lost puzzle pieces. We could fill in the blanks for each other. 31 charmed years of a remarkable relationship. He died at age 58, too young, and now I'm lopsided, with a broken identity.  I miss him, our life, what should have been our old age together. I'm not even remotely interested in anyone else.  
I'm happy for being "better than single" for that long, but damn, the aftermath SUCKS.
I haven’t found my person yet but to me it means that you both don’t have to change anything about yourselves in order to be together. Yes you’ll probably have to make compromises at some point but you both can fundamentally be yourselves and bring happiness to each other.
One hint that we could work out really well: we liked going to the grocery store together. Lots of life and partnerships, and "making it" is really mundane, boring stuff. Going to the grocery store is boring, but it has to be done, and going with him is better.
I often find being around people quite exhausting, but being with my husband feels just as relaxing as being alone. I think having someone who complements you by fitting into your life and you don’t have to put much effort into being around is important.

Also, differences in small opinions like food or films are fun, but lining up on big issues like children, religion, finances etc is important to ensure you both are happy with the life you live together.
When that someone makes you a better person, and you make them a better person too.
It sounds over used but my boyfriend and I are actually the perfect yin and yang were opposites but we have enough in common that we get along. We even eachother out perfectly. For instance:

- I'm loud and social, he's quiet and independent 

- he likes the crunchy parts of vegetables and I like the soft parts so we split everything (salad, asparagus, broccoli) 

- I'm super frugal to the point of being no fun, hes a spender so we even it out and I get fun things and he saves his money

- he's a people pleaser and I'm combative so now we both have better temperaments because he helps me calm down and I help him stand up for himself 

- I like red and blue candy, he likes yellow and green

- he likes washing the cutlery, I like washing the glasses 

- I come from and overtly affectionate family, he comes from people who are a little cold.
I've actually thought about this a lot. I'm almost 30 I really haven't been in a serious relationship for various reasons. People that I like don't like me back, I'm not interested in people that like me, etc. 

And of course I "want to be in a relationship" because who doesn't? But when I really think about it, I'm unsure that *I* actually want that. I'm embarrassed that I'm not, and I feel like I'm "behind" in life since most people my age are married with kids. Most of my friends are either already married or getting married. 

But is another person really going to add value to my life? Do I really want to share my life like that? Do I want to have another person to consider before I make plans and decisions? Do I actually want to live with someone?
Someone who adds to your life not just takes. 

Like my life was fine when I was single but with my fiance there's more love, more comfort, more fun, even more room for me to be me. I've never talked to anyone about the stuff I've talked to him about. My world feels bigger when I'm with him, not smaller.
Personally it's stuff like:

• not having to change your personality to please them, but being a better person because of them

• them making you feel safe and comfortable, so you know you can come to them for any reason and get good advice or just a shoulder to cry on

• them calmly and maturely pointing out when you do something toxic or hurtful to help you be better

• someone who encourages (NOT pressures) you to leave your comfort zone, try new things, see new perspectives 

• someone that helps you feel confident and secure in who you are

• a person that understands mental illness and personal demons, and instead of trying to make you 'shut up' about them or trying to change behaviors they accept you as you are while being an advocate for your health and tries to support you 

• someone who balances things out, for instance: 
   - if you pay for this meal they pay for that one, but if you are tight on money they pick up the slack 
   - conversations, hangouts and dates are initiated by both parties, not one sided, and both people put in effort and thought into what you'll be doing 
   
• they check in on you, ask about your day and actually care to hear about it not because they feel obligated to
Someone who fits into my life. I don’t have to stop doing things or change my opinion on something because it doesn’t “work for them”. Everything should feel natural and if it doesn’t, it’s not right
He eats the legs of chicken wings and lets me eat the flats.
They add value to my life. They make life more interesting than it would be if I was by myself. They challenge me intellectually, they expand my horizons in the realms of pleasure and joy. A beautiful quote by Warsan Shire sums it up "I'll only have you if you are sweeter than my solitude".
Someone who fits into my life as easily as I fit into their's. In previous relationships I was making significant changes to my life to make things work. Like they'd live over an hour away from me so I'd adjust my life to work around their availability. Or they had interests completely separate from mine and I'd integrate it into my life to make things easier.

I was doing a lot of changing and adjusting to make things work but not getting that in return at all. Granted I had such a fear of being an inconvenience to my partners that I wouldn't ask for that in return and they were all more than happy to not have to put in the effort.

I'm still figuring it out but now I'm looking for people with a lot of overlapping interests, someone who lives close by, and is willing to me meet at least halfway. 

For some people long distance and stuff like that works, but it only works when all parties involved give the same amount equally. If not you end up like me: tired, without having touched a hobby in months, not being able to spend time with friends, and honestly feeling pretty resentful towards them.
Let me try to quickly sum up what 20 years of marriage have taught me that both partners need:


Doesn't have to be rich, but must be financially responsible: someone who hides or doesn't care about their finances in a responsible, adult way is someone you'll be constantly fretting over in paying regular bills or any kind of future aspirational planning. This kind of marriage is genuine torture and servitude to another's childish whim. Bad financial decisions will hurt you and limit your options and choices in life. Be sure there's a FULL info sharing of finances and debt before getting married... but you don't have to combine accounts, just make sure there is equitable and fair sharing of expense. If one simply wants to but can't, they should relinquish that power to the other partner - but keeping a healthy attention and participation. (Marriage only, never give your money away when you can't get back legally.)

Likewise, someone who is hugely secretive is someone who has a secret that will break your heart.


Be willing to work and actively seeks job stability or improvement. You don't have to be a CEO, just someone willing to adult even if it is stocking shelves with an eye towards betterment. You'd be surprised how often this is an issue. Unless one partner agrees to take the home helm, and honestly that's a great thing if there is freedom to do so. Still not an easy life though, so don't assume. The year i spent as a SAHM was the hardest and worst year of my life... even as much as I love love love my baby. Likewise, if this is the setup, a working partner must be positive about this setup, supportive and still pitch in to the family... and does not get abusive, entitled, or jealous. 


General ethics and morals should be in line: there will be issues you disagree upon, but basic human guidelines of shared morality or bias such as liberal or conservative will cause serious longterm strife, no matter how much you love each other.  A deeply bigoted or misogynistic person will not be a happily ever after with someone who us humanist and prochoice.


The desire to make one's partner's life happy, loving, and easy. This is no joke: I have known a ton of failed marriages entered into to make ones OWN life easy in some way... with no reciprocal thought of their partner. A living, loving, mostly happy marriage is one entered into to live and cherish the OTHER person, and vice versa. Also: one sided is usually doomed and miserable for the "giver."

Zazazou: sex comes and goes but try to keep it on the table and enjoyable. Petting, flirting, being a bit naughty even at 20 years makes both partners appreciate the marriage and feel wanted. Also a few harmless kinks here and there may be fun.


Marriage is hard. It is work. It doesn't always live up to the fantasy of boyfriend/girlfriend status. If a bit of lifelong work scares you, don't break another's heart... likewise be sure your partner is up to it. No one really changes... they just acquiesce.


I'm sure there is more but I'm finishing up dinner for the offspring. Please feel free to add.
A certain intangible quality in which they make up for things you lack, and you make up for things they lack. You balance each other out. I think there's people that challenge you to be better. There's people that bring you down as well, of course that's something you want to avoid. 

Your values and goals and thought processes should align.
A near equal match in communication, morals, attitude and effort; where differences make you learn/grow together and not apart.
You want to be better for them and they want to be better for you. You also want them to have success and happiness and they want the same for you. I had just started dating my husband when I told him I wanted to get my masters and he was 100% supportive and did whatever he could to help me because it was a dream that was important to me. He’s been considering a slight career change into something that he would enjoy more (same field but a different job in it) and I’ve been completely behind whatever he’s comfortable with doing to achieve it. A good relationship is being part of a team that is working towards what’s best for both people.
For me it's not trying to talk me out of my careers goals or something I like that's for sure. Or invalidating my feelings by saying I'm being dramatic. If I hear you can do it, I support you, and I see your upset and still respect you I'll be a nice open book and act super enthusiastic around you. 

Which is how I am around my partner. I dont mind realistic answer but if I like something I better not hear the words like give up, it's not for you, or dont try. I'll stop talking lol.
When someone tells me they stay in a bad relationship because they don’t think they can do better.  My response is always yes you can. Alone has to be better than what you are going through. I know some people have a hard time being alone, but it can’t be worse than being with someone who doesn’t treat you the way someone who loves you does.
My best friend used to always tell me that my perfect partner would be the person who could get away with annoying the fuck out of me. I’m a naturally grumpy person, and can be very anti social, but she told me when she knew we were best friends was when she could get away with the things no one else could. So she said when the right person came along, he’d be able to annoy me for hours on end and I’d still adore him and not be mad. And to balance, he’d be able to handle my grumpy side, and would help me relax more. All is true with my current partner, so I guess we’ll see what happens, haha.
Someone who makes my life easier rather than harder.
For me that meant finding a partner. Someone who is my equal. Somebody who picks up the slack when I can't give my share, somebody who lets me pick up the slack when they can't give theirs. A partner will prioritize your partnership. It's as important to them as it is to you.  It wasn't about opposites attracting or anything like that. We have a lot in common, sometimes we just enjoy those things in different ways. It doesn't just stop with hobbies and interests though. We share common life goals, parenting tactics, world views, etc.   


Think of it like putting together a favorite outfit. You have this great pair of jeans, they always make you feel awesome and confident and comfortable. They are amazing by themselves. They're perfectly fine with whatever else you pair them with. Then you find a shirt that is really awesome. It's just a really stellar shirt. You look great in it, you feel great in it. It works alright with whatever you want to pair it with. Then you put the two together. They look amazing together. The fit of the shirt compliments the fit of the jeans. They'd be okay with other pieces, but together they look best. That's what you're looking for in a partner. You're fine on your own, they're fine on their own, but together you're awesome.
Mine is simple but I can’t wait to get home to her.
I’ll give you the ending of our vows: 


I come to you as a whole person - elevated by your love, support, and insight. I vow to grow with you and love you truly. As your partner, I promise to collaborate with you to overcome any hardship by always attacking the problem and never you. I am your friend, partner, and equal 24/7.
What someone else brings to the table that you cannot. I'm high strung, so someone with patience would be an example.
Someone who balances out your strengths and weaknesses. Someone who shares the same values and sense of humour as you.
For me my boyfriend has matched my energy from day one. Without even knowing my boundaries he respected them from day one. He always checked in with me. We barley knew each other and we could read each other absolutely perfectly. Over a year later I can confidently say I have never met someone who I am more in-tune with. Even my mother had noticed this and pointed it out. He’s my absolute best friend. He understands my strengths and weaknesses. I understand his. We both have become better more responsible people since we met. We have learned so much about ourselves by learning about one another. He’s amazing.
My husband makes it easy for me to be me, and the same for him. He doesn’t complete me, he complements me. I’m a better me with him. He helps me to be more patient and I help him to relax. We’ve known each other long enough to be aware of each other’s weirdness and oddities and accept them fully. We  work so well together and it’s such an amazing thing. We’ve both had horrific previous relationships which make us appreciate how well we fit together, as well. Communication is the key with everything between us though, and I can’t stress that enough.
Someone who wakes up earlier than me so they can bring me coffee in bed. That way I don’t have to wake up to make the coffee that I need to wake up.
They read books I like but that I wouldn't have thought of reading if they hadn't bought it.
Having gotten out of a 4.5 year SHIT relationship, where I ended up hating who I had become and my life, I now know what "complement" my life means lol. My fiance and I actually work as a team to make both of our lives better and build each other up/inspire one another to "do better."
I think it goes back to the whole "be a whole person, don't look for an 'other half'" thing, you find someone who's another whole human and with who you could, as bad as it sounds, "live without", but living with them and having them in your life makes it better. My boyfriend and I were best friends for years before this so we never met and hung out with the intention of dating, and even as friends I just loved having him around and now that I get to date him there's just even more activities and life experiences to share! I think someone who complements your life should be someone you look forward to seeing and are excited about the prospect of them staying in your life, because they bring you joy, but not in the sense that without them you wouldn't have any, period?
Someone who balances you. My boyfriend is my opposite in so many ways, politics, problem solving, temperament etc. It brings up so many conversations and learning between us. We have learned so much from each other, for example he has helped me tame my anger, while I've helped him stand up for himself more. In my opinion, it isn't about having someone who agrees all the time, its about having someone who encourages learning and confidence, and who isn't afraid to say when you're wrong. I've never been in a better relationship than I'm in now. 2 years on and I still have such a crush on the guy
Someone who can be as giving, loving, patient, and fun loving as me
This is so true for me and my husband. He’s a super logical thinker, he processes everything. Sometimes it takes him a few MINUTES to respond to a question I’ve asked because he thinks so hard about what he wants to say and how he can say it accurately. 

I, on the other hand, speak often without thinking. I’m impulsive and I want decisions and answers right away. I’m impatient and, quite honestly, pretty selfish. 

He’s made me SO much more patient and thoughtful. I’m an angry person that keeps things pent up. He’s made me comfortable with expressing anger in words in the moment rather than letting myself build up anger over several days. 

It’s annoying sometimes how calm he is and how anxious I am, but it’s so good for me. He balances me out and keeps me trying to think rationally when I don’t want to, which is always. Anger used to be what fueled me, my favorite release. He’s shown me how to let go of anger, even if it’s been a slow process.
I've dated a few best friends and still remain friends after the breakup, but the cause of our relationship not working out was always one of two things:

1. They were not ready to commit
2. They were not in the mental state to be in a relationship

I'm now in a relationship that I see lasting for a long time because we communicate healthily (hearing each other out is important), treat each other as equals, and try to be better for each other.

I don't believe in "opposites attract" although my current partner and I are opposites. Being with someone that's similar to you is just as good as long as you both make an effort to be healthy for each other. Just my take though.
We both found a travel buddy that we won’t murder
I don’t know how to describe it, but my life is better with my wife in it. Just knowing that she exists and is my partner, apart from her even doing anything, makes my life better- and that’s really saying something, because she does a lot for me. She represents pure love, commitment, the security of real trust, joy, eroticism, all of it. It’s indescribable, I honestly wish I could put it into words, but it’s beyond that. My world is inherently brighter because she is in it. I hope that makes sense.
Different personalities but same interests, rational vs emotional, ok with everything vs picky, with both attuned to each other’s specific needs :)
Not having to change who you are as a person just to be happy in a relationship. But, simultaneously, wanting to be better or do better for that person.
I have this with my fiancé! He balances my life in specific ways that make life better for me. For example:

He helps me figure out what is really a problem vs what is just my anxiety. He helps me think of strategies for the problems and distractions for the anxieties.

He has a heart condition. It makes me want to learn healthy recipes, become more active, and get generally healthier myself so I can make sure it’s a priority in our lives and he’s taking care of himself, too.

He’s supportive, encouraging, and enthusiastic about my dreams. My happiness is important to him; my dreams become his dreams and vice versa.

We have a true partnership. We are always trying to make the other person’s life happier, less stressful, easier. 

I live my life the way I did when I was single for the most part. I have the same friends, the same hobbies, the same dedication to work and side projects. Now I just also have someone awesome who makes me feel even better about myself and who makes me happy and giggly all the time! 

Feel really grateful for him. :)
The thing is, someone who makes your life better at first may be a cause of stress to you at a later time. At those times you have to ask yourself bigger questions. You have to look forward several years and see if you imagine things getting better easily, and you have to set boundaries and thresholds as to how much you can handle. For example, my spouse and I were a great young couple and a happy newlywed couple. We genuinely found enjoyment in each other's company alone without any form of entertainment. A couple years down the road and the constraints of lack of a degree in this country is catching up to us but we are working towards fixing that. There have been some family issues on both sides that cause strain in the relationship,  with his requiring a lot of him and mine being quite controlling, but we work on that too. We have gone through a pregnancy and childbirth and the new parent stage and long distance as well- none of it easy, and sometimes I wondered if we'd make it out as in love as we went into it. So far we are sticking it out...But I do wonder sometimes about how much we can go through.

My point is, don't just live in the now. Look at how you will fit together in different situations and how you will handle life's stressors.
Someone who accepts my love of robotics and doesn’t want me to give it up for them, and encourages me to keep doing it.
1.  I laugh SO much more when he’s around.
2.  He helps with bills, housework etc etc
3.  He cooks, I cook, we cook together 
4. Sex and affection on tap
5.  Good conversation... all the time.  Sharing of ideas, beliefs, curiosity... all the time.
6. He motivates me and fills me with confidence.  He is my pep man.  With him I’m stronger and (ironically) more independent.  I try, everyday, to be just as good for him.  Which is hard: he is pretty special.

We’ve been together 10 years and have 2 kids.  
I am so lucky.  I even sit on the bathroom floor when he’s in the bath or read my book in his office whilst he’s working.  Life’s always better when he’s there.
I’d settle for lack of abuse/manipulation/use and discard mentality
I once met someone that genuinely made me want to be better. And I know it stuck because after things didn’t work out, I still wanted to be better, in all aspects. And I still do... idk what she did to me but I’m grateful, hope she’s doing well
Newly single from my partner of 9 years. We were high school sweethearts. This gives me the big sad.
You know all those things you as a woman are expected to do for a partner?  Find someone who does that shit for you.  Find someone who pays attention to your needs and preferences and surprises you with little things and actions without congratulating themselves or making it into a big deal.  Find a partner in every sense of the word.  Someone who has your back.  Someone who at the very minimum is completely self-sufficient and is grateful when you help them out.
My perfect complement is a man who is just like me. Not having to explain my thought process in how I do things is amazing. Not having to discuss and compromise on things constantly is wonderful. I get the opposites attract thing but for me having someone of truly a like mind is perfect.
When they accept who you are at your core and at the same time influence you to be a better person and be happier!
Support and trust. Finding those in a person you love brings such a richness to daily life.
There’s this co-worker who I have chemistry with. I had to go away to college & when I came back he said he wanted to quit, which made me want to quit. He said he wouldn’t do long distance, bc he had before with his ex, but I’d wait for him. Haven’t seen him at work bc he’s quarantining. Even though we have chemistry, I can’t tell if he likes me like that, bc we are both the type to make the first move. I feel like he tries to impress me, but I can’t tell. :/ 

    He has a big heart, but you wouldn’t know from the exterior & I feel like I can tell him anything. He’s honest and patient.
i have great friends and i wouldn't complain about them for a second, it's not their fault, but i've always had trouble opening up; even after years of friendship, i barely talked about what really was going on with me, i usually even avoided directly asked questions because i felt like what i would say is not as relevant as what others might say. (found out later that they were really upset because of this and wished i could have talked to them. but i made progress so yey)

my boyfriend? i've known him for 5 years but we were never close, actually it was more like i disliked him for quite a time, then mostly just didn't give a shit. then, for some reason, we ended up together at a party, outside, talking under the stars for 4 hours and then going to sleep, just the two of us in a tent. i poured my heart out to him that day and for the following 6 months, i continued to do so on our occasional heart to heart talks. i was head over heals for him, he was everything i've ever wanted and some of what i've always wanted to be. then he asked me out on a date after two weeks of being this close to just randomly saying i love you so much during one of our talks. so yeah, he is the first person i can actually share almost anything and vica versa. never been happier.
Same life goals, for me this is end goal of having some land, a small house a 2 bed would be all we'd need (don't want any kids) and using the land try and be somewhat self sustainable food wise. The newest car or latest tech doesn't do it for me so I don't think I could be with someone who would spend all their money on these things. 

But I still want to be challenged to want to be better, and experience things I wouldn't have done otherwise, or would have dragged my heels at doing. If they don't add something along with complimenting my life, I'd rather just do me.
Someone who likes me despite my flaws. He has to value my presence, and makes me feel like I have added something to his life. He has to like planning things as a couple. I love team work, I crave this type of relationship.
Me and one of my friends have started crushing on eachother and its developing into a romantic thing. I have been abstinent and single for about a year now and I was planning on staying that way longer, but she just makes me feel so safe and happy. For me, what made me feel comfortable getting involved with her is that shes so compassionate and understanding and I feel like I can be completely genuine with her. I have a history of trauma, particularly with other women, and she is so good at respecting my boundaries and checking in with me about them. It's my first time dating since I realized I was a lesbian and not bisexual, and I was a little nervous because all my prior relationships with women have been very toxic. But with her honestly shes just so supportive and understanding and she helps me work towards the goals I was already focused on. 

Instead of feeling like two parts of a whole which was how all my other relationship were and was really codependent and unhealthy, me and her are like two complete people who enjoy being around eachother. I don't need to be with her, but I want to and choose to be with her. And that feels amazing!
Hmmmm. I've always liked this: "I can do this by myself, I'd just prefer to do it with you." which I think ties into this. 

With my SO, the obvious is that everything is more fun. What I didn't expect is how much he makes me a better person. No, we make each other better people. I don't think we talk about this enough. I've learned so much from him, and I know he'd say the same. He keeps me on track with my life, where and who I want to be, challenged me and doesn't take my bullshit. This is a really key way having a real partner is better than being single.
Well I just love that quote and it’s enough 🤗
I'm quite shy and a bit of a worrier. But I have a taste for adventure and a longing to be more impulsive, experience more things, and see more places. For me, a complementary person would be someone more adventurous and confident who pushes me out of my comfort zone without being overbearing. A partner that I can finally do all the things I've been too nervous to do alone.
I have been with my husband 42 years married by started dating him in the 8th grade.  He is my rock and he always compliments me
Helps you. Mentally, emotionally, and physically.  You dont get stressed being with that person. They make you calm when everything else is stressful.  Even the mundane life shit is good with them.
Generally the people who I have seen say this aren’t willing to compromise on things at all. They just expect a person to fit in with whatever they got going on. It isn’t like that person also has a life and preferences as well. /s

The best partner is one that aligns with your morals (and aligns with the real dealbreakers like kids, etc), you can live with, communicate with (about hard things), you are attracted to and happy with the sex, and is going in a direction where your future goals are compatible.

Other things like, height, friend circles, music taste, food preferences, style, are all just fluff that doesn’t matter.
Inspiring each other to be the best version of yourselves. 

We definitely started with a friendship, lived a long enough distance that we spent a lot of time talking between visits, and got to know each other really well. He accepted that I was a package deal with my kids from my first marriage.

I graduated with my Associate's in teacher prep about 6 months into the relationship. I was content (but not happy) to keep working at Target for the time being but he pushed me to apply at the county schools bc he saw how miserable I was. He told me to aim high and get my foot in the door somewhere. So I did. Then he convinced me to roll right into a university for my bachelor's in education. He supported me when I was working as an aide and not making much. Supported me through my homework and virtual lectures and exams. 

I graduated with my bachelor's and he pushed me to go ahead and apply for a teaching position so I did! Then I turned the tables and pushed him to finish his Associate's. And to get an intro level IT position for the county I was teaching in. Then when I decided to get my Master's after my first year of teaching, he has supported me through that. He's now enrolled in his Bachelor's program for IT, I'm graduating this semester with my Master's in SpEd and teaching at the perfect school. 

We own a home, have had another child, and always have each other's backs. My older two kids have said that they think of our house as "home" and my SO is the best step-parent bc he loves them. I got to listen to them play smash, smack talk, and nerd out about Pokemon last night. 

I never thought that I'd find someone like him but he's exactly what I was looking for. He's my best friend and he truly is a partner.
Someone that makes me feel secure and content enough to enjoy doing things without them (versus feeling codependent)
I took me so long to find a partner who truly complements my life and now that I have that, I truly couldn’t imagine settling for anything less. He’s the ying to my yang. When someone complements you, their whole personality, value system and their overall vibe just meshes with yours.
EVERY single morning, after opening my eyes and realizing I'm in the pits of stress induced hell, I quickly realize I have this great guy who makes me smile and eases my fears!  I can't wait for him to wake up!!  I used to be very (actively) suicidal and he's been a beacon of light in my darkness! I'm instantly in a great mood. His humor and kindness, and many things, makes my days easier to face. I've never loved a man this way!! 🥰
I remember it hitting me at work one day, that I was no longer single and alone, that I had someone to share my life with.

I guess to me, it’s that I can continue *my* life with *my* goals and friends and hobbies ***and*** I also have a partner in life.  Someone to share all that good stuff with.  I felt like I didn’t have to give up anything to be with him and he just added so much happiness and love into my life.  I’m pretty sure it’s the same for him.  We met when we were both happy with our single lives and wanted someone to share it with.  So we’re both happy independently of each other so together it’s a great combo.  We can each do our own thing but when wet come together it’s amazing in terms of love, caring, sex, attitudes, and general life stuff like chores.
From my perspective (20yr-guy) I think it's just important to have someone that respects you not someone who is obedient. Someone who can help you when you're down in a hole or call you out when your being ridiculous. This is obviously a two-way street, respect also needs to be given. That would be the thing I would say is important.
I found someone (the only person *so far*) who really does compliment my life in a way that makes it better than being single, but I knew from the beginning that he's very dedicated to his very demanding career and is the kind of person that has to go all-in in any commitment he makes... so he's married to his career and is self-aware and communicative enough to be honest from the beginning about how he can't offer more than being an extremely thoughtful, generous, dedicated, and affectionate friend/lover.
(EG: he helped me buy parts for and put up curtains yesterday, he really listens to me and doesn't get freaked out about *any* of the anxiety/depression feelings I have, and I have a lot of intense feelings, he gets me little gifts that he chose based on things he has remembered from our conversations, we have take-out dates since there aren't many options, and he was very patient with my grandma's unbelievable behaviors/demands before I had moved out with another friend)

Yesterday we more concretely established that the "relationship-like" thing we have is temporary (1 year until he leaves for grad school across the country), and that its kinder to not entertain ideas of going farther in the future, but he is more than happy to only be friends (as in no sex), now or in the future if that is what I want or is something that would be better for me. And he means it, we have a mutual friend who he is strictly just friends with who they used to be FWB.

It broke my heart to have to hear that, but it helped with my anxiety (I tend to over-think about the distant future too much). Now I'm just taking my time mourning the possibility of a committed relationship with him, while also celebrating how wonderful it is to have a friend who is so understanding and supportive and really *sees* me for who I am and enjoys spending what little free time he has with me. (He works 11hour days at a small mom-and-pop place that he's worked at on and off for years while going to school).

He's treated me better than any other man in my life (family, friends, partners). I'm glad to have felt this kind of love so I know what it is supposed to feel more like in the future. I can stop wasting my time with partners who actually aren't compatible with me or don't really care and only want things from me while keeping me at an arms length. I had already learned this lesson the hard way in friendship and family, but I've finally had this good experience/example in romance.
Not a woman, but my idea of a complimenting partner is someone you feel SO strongly about, you become horror movie, nightmare about drowning scared to let them see you fail... or not try hard for ANYTHING.
i'm such a "do-er" and love to be active and make new memories. i love traveling, trying new foods, having new adventures, and dreaming big dreams. so for me, someone that complements me would be someone that i actually want to do these things with. i'm more than comfortable making things happen for myself solo, so if i actually want to make new memories with you and grow with you in these ways, that's huge for me.

and also as someone that had an upbringing with a rather big culture that may seem like a lot to others that aren't used to it, someone that either is from my culture or understands/gets it and isn't scared off by it would be complementary for me.
My husband makes me s better person and we even each other out. He's a homebody, I'm a social butterfly so I encourage him to get out when I can tell he needs a break and he reminds me we don't always have to be around others. Many other ways, too but that's a good example.
He brings fun and optimism into my life, which I desperately needed. Truly enriches my life.
Someone who adds to it. Makes it brighter, more fun, more enjoyable. Not the other way around. Dont let someone one weigh you down, prevent you from living your best life or hold you back.  If they bring more drama, complications, etc to your life if isnt a good fit.
Patience and understanding. No hot tempers and silly easy going good times with an essence of adventure. 
I think i found her a month ago. I'll probably marry her one day.
I feel like I've grown up for once.
Someone who I can sit in total silence with doing my own thing while they’re also doing their own thing without any anxiety or pressure. All the perks of being alone with none of negative aspects.
For me, it’s the fact that my husband and I feel like 2 puzzle pieces that fit together perfectly to complete the picture. My weaknesses are his strengths, and vice versa
Someone who empowers me to take care of my weaknesses.

Some people interpret complementary as like math, x + y = 180. If I'm a 50 at social skills, he'll need to be a 130. 

But I personally am not fond of that. My 130 in social skills real life reference is talkative, loud, requires constant socialization... no thank you!

I think about it with a pragmatic, if utilitarian, approach. What does he offer for me, emotionally, spiritually, physically? What am I offering for him? What can we achieve together that wouldn't be possible alone?

If the answers are nothing, nothing, and children, I don't need to have that relationship. But if he can empower my life and I empower his, then that's a good start.
Same values, and helps me grow as a person instead of regress. I could probably go rambling on but those seem to be the main things for me
When I think about how the world is a better place when we are a team living on it.
I think someone who makes me feel encouraged, who’s supportive and who I genuinely want to learn from.
When I prefer to be around that person rather than being alone (I’m a very social person, but I very much enjoy my alone time when I’m at home). I also think it’s important to find someone whom you trust and you’re not afraid to tell things to. (I have a friend who kept many secrets from her SO because she was so worried about how he’d react. I don’t think that’s healthy at all.)
Complementing does NOT mean that they are exactly the same as you, but that they have strengths and weaknesses that play well off of yours. This is everything from views on important things like politics, religion, children, finances, etc.

It also applies largely to temperament, but it must be in a healthy way. You must be somewhat equal, just different. Like, she can be much more intelligent and he is much more gentle, or something along those lines.
It’s like you’re on the same team. Better together than apart
I think it would be a combination of being the opposite of me yet having some things in common. I am more hands on and would rather work out and come home knowing that supper is already planned, the place is picked up and there is not a pile of laundry to do. Yet I would help around the house in return. Me most recent ex preferred to do the inside work and let me do the outside work yet we both enjoyed doing somethings outside. She liked taking care of flowers and I am fine with building gardens and cutting the grass. Yet both comfortable to try something new tougher yet enjoyed simple things for date nights.
I know what it's not. Had a lot of experience sorting through that, so far.
They don’t get in the way of your plans/goals and instead they introduce you to new things that you didn’t know you liked. So instead of taking away they add to your quality of life and you do the same for them with those plans/interests mentioned previously. It might be something new to them and they’re happy to learn about it, support it and they even find joy in telling those around them what they’ve learned about you. And vice versa
Someone that can push me to do things I'd be afraid to do.  Not force me, but encourage me and support me. 

In addition... I'm fiery.  I would want someone to be a calming force to my fire.  

Someone that can expand my horizons, essentially, and challenge me intellectually.
Seriously just don’t settle for someone you’re not entirely happy with. It’s fine to be picky even if you end up single your whole life. Because ain’t nobody got time for mediocre.
I'm very unwilling to make time and space for someone in my life. They'd have to make my life better and easier, and I'm still figuring out what that means. I know I want there to be more balance in the emotional labor compared to past relationships I've had. I don't want to feel like I'm doing all the work to keep things running. I probably need someone who can talk me down but also know when to encourage me, and can keep from judging and shaming me.
When their differences are positives is a good sign.
My husband and I are similar enough to click extremely well and out of our differences, probably 95% of them are complimentary and actually make our lives easier.
A big example - our sleep schedules are very different, we share anywhere from 2-5 hours a night together. Some couples would find that a deal breaker, but we've managed to use it as the alone time we both need being introverts.
I have several hobbies I love doing. I’d do them with or without a partner, but I LOVE getting to share them with my partner. It makes it so much more fun for me, especially when they get excited.
I’m an introvert so for me it’s someone I enjoy spending time with more than I enjoy being alone. I fucking *love* being alone but you best believe the mornings I wake up with my boyfriend with a whole weekend ahead of us and nothing to do are my favourite times. 

There’s lots of stuff that makes him that person, but that’s how I know he’s it
My boyfriend and I bonded over our taste in music. He made fun of me because I’m the kind of person who has maybe 200 songs in my library that I’ll listen to over and over again, while he has THOUSANDS and is constantly on the prowl for new jams. Since we met, he‘s sent me countless unique playlists because he knows I want to get into new music. He even made me one specifically full of instrumentals because I once mentioned in passing that I care more about melodies than lyrics. I could not imagine what I (or my library!) would do without him. <3
My love language is Acts of Service. Feed me, tell me I'm pretty, put the dishes in the dishwasher, play video games while I watch/yell at the screen. I don't want a turn, I wanna tell at the screen and point at things you missed. And play Co-Ops of 7 Days to Die.
"Oh you're life is so pretty! And so slimming!"

Too literal? I hate bleu cheese, but I love pickles. My husband hates pickles but he loves bleu cheese. We trade! He will eat all of my sour apple gummies, and I'll eat all of his watermelon ones. He gets hot when he sleeps, I get freezing - we snuggle and find the perfect temperature. I'm great at remembering important things about people, but I'm horribly shy and bad at making friends. He has the memory of a goldfish, but he's super outgoing. We make one great friend.

On a more personal level, he was raised always worrying about money and never dreaming about what life could be. If he was miserable, that's just human existence. I was raised a loopy dreamer, if I was miserable - I left and never really went anywhere. He's taught me to be more responsible. I've taught him that it's okay to want more and have boundaries.

But also

*that's a damn snazzy life you've got there! ;)*
Someone who makes me smile almost every time I think about them. Sure, the bar is low, but no guy I’ve ever liked has been able to step over it.
He pushes me to have the courage to be myself
I followed that motto for 2 years! Didn’t date or go on dates with anyone unless they showed me from the start that they added something good to my life. Someone who truly makes you feel valued and loved without having to push them to. Makes effort, expresses feelings. My boyfriend is a perfect example of what a perfect boyfriend is and I’m glad I didn’t waste time on loser guys.
He's just been able to bring me a peace I've never obtained before.
For me, I knew my bf complemented my life when he helped me with getting my diabetes under better control. I was having some complications that were scaring me and I was afraid to talk to him about it because our relationship was so new. But he was there right away, wasn’t scared away at all, and worked with me to set up medication schedules, reminders on my phone, and eating schedules to help. It’s true that I could’ve done all that on my own, but I see it as complementing my life because it’s someone who cares about me to the point that they help me be better not just for them but for myself too.
It' pretty simple in fact. If you are truly happy and you feel like wanting to share that hapiness with someone else, then the right one is someone who is truly happy as well and has the same set of values and goals as you. "True love" doesn't exist in a way that you feel butterflies in your stomach or whatsoever, but in the way you find someone you feel comfortable with, and with whom you can WORK to keep the relationship walking. 

In the other hand, if you feel you won't ever be happy until you find the "right one" trust me, you will never find anybody that could make you happy, but toxic instead.

The right way to analize it is simple: if I want to share my happiness with someone else, but no one shows up, do i still visualize myself as a happy individual? if the answer is yes, then either of these will happen: (1) you will find someone that complements you at some point being just a matter of time or (2) you will stay happilly single forever. But if the answer is no, then you will never find someone that complements you.
Someone who allows me the independence I need... most guys are pretty clingy and need someone to entertain them and that drives me crazy! I ain’t dating a kindergartner that needs things laid out for them... my current SO is pretty independent too and it works for both of us. :)
I made sure I was happy being single before I started looking for anyone to share my life with. 
Then I met someone that is my equal and opposite in all the best ways.
My husband is calm and steady, I’m expressive and proud.  He helps me chill, and I help him stand up for himself.

I’m big-picture oriented, he’s very detail-focused.  Together, we each get to see the forest *and* the trees!

He will call me on my bullshit, but gently.  As far as I am concerned, we all need to be called on our bullshit kindly, for growth.  He holds me to the better version of myself.

We teach each other about the subjects we’re passionate about.  I am a data tech lawyer and he is a hardware guy.  I write screenplays for fun and he loves video games.  I have learned to love playing video games with him and he loves watching movies with me because we get to break it down together and talk about how the movie and plot was constructed, how the characters evolved and whatnot.  I have come to learn a lot through playing video games (about autonomy, independence, strategic thinking — if we ever have kids I’ll be happy for them to pick up games as one of their hobbies); he says he’s learned a lot about human nature by paying attention to how characters develop and are written in shows/films.

I’m a family person and I make sure we talk to him family/arrange VCs for our families during shelter in place.  He makes sure we give ourselves enough time for ourselves (both alone and together) to pursue other aspects of our lives with balance.

He’s learned to love cooking from me.  I’ve learned to love figuring out which cables go with which electronics and optimizing our work environments with what he lovingly calls his “fiddling” habit.

Above all I think the thing is that we focus on and bring out the good in each other, without letting each other off the hook when we let down each other or ourselves.
Simply helping you be the best you that you can be.

Which is trying to be better each day.
Someone who brings to the table more than they take from it.
I love this advice!! When I was 16 I realized very quickly that having a bf did not improve my life and decided to stay single til someone was marriage worthy (I am proud of how smart I was) 😂😂. I found that I could discover this just by being friends with guys. And there were many. I even had a physical connection with some of them but kept my standards and never crossed the friend zone. I made a list of things that I valued at 16 ...met my husband and 18 and married him at 19 (2003) - my list was specific and secret things were negotiable, some were not. 
My list from memory:
Red head (didn't happen)
Tall
Thin
Physically active
A Christian (non negotiable)
Wanted to have several kids (non negotiable and we happily have 4)
Funny
Not too old 😂 (4yrs older)

That's all I can remember. 

When I was 16 I had a huge crush on him. He was 20 and naturally had no idea I existed. 2 yrs later we had mutual friends. Earlier that year I prayed that if it was God's will that we would cross paths. And even more specific that it would be in such a way I knew it was his will. I was fit, attractive and had a lot of guys interested. I knew if I pursued him he would show some sort of interest. 
10 months later I got on instant messenger (2001) and messaged my friend Kelly.  Except it wasn't Kelly. It was Eddy on her screen name hanging out with her husband. We talked for 3 hours. We kept talking that week. Told him a week after I met that I thought I might love him. He felt the same. At week 2 we told our parents we were getting married. Week 5 he proposed. Married 18 months later and somehow by the grace of God made it to my wedding night a virgin. Not him though thank God bc what a mess that would have been 😂

Needless to say, my faith is strong and I have a lifetime of testimonies. God is good and will bring you the perfect man/woman on his timeline. 

My cousin who was a missionary and gorgeous didn't meet her husband until almost 30. I couldn't make sense of it. Her personality was infectious. She is the kindest human ever. Won teacher of the year for SC. A real gem. 

But the truth is, you could be flawless but God won't bring you that perfect person until it's the perfect time.

If you are not religious or believe in God that's fine too. Just my story 😊
Time together, but not necessarily together. My bf is SUPER passionate about his hobbies: RC cars and LEGO (and also real cars but he doesn’t do that stuff inside lol). I’ve struggled with finding a hobby I consistently want to be into, but recently started painting. Many of our evenings are him fiddling with his RC cars or building a LEGO diorama, while I sit and paint something (usually a cat). We still interact and show progress and get excited, and we are still together, just doing our own thing. It’s brought me more joy than I could’ve imagined
Just living with him gives me the motivation and drive to invest in and enjoy cooking, something I never really put much effort into because I was lazy. But having someone to cook for, someone who enjoys cooking and trying new recipes with you, complements me and gives me the boost I need. 

God only knows how often I’d cook proper meals if I was single...
Pushing me out of my comfort zone, in a good way
They make things easier, rather than more complicated. I don't like doing something? Doing it with my SO is 100x better. I like doing something? Doing it with my SO is also 100x better. There is nothing that is made worse by them being around.
My fiance does alllll the chores when I'm sick or sad or just in a funk. He supports me emotionally and in everything I do. He's fun and good company and makes me laugh more than everything else combined. He fixes my computers and phones when I break them and hugs me when I'm down. Def makes my life better ☺️
Someone who lifts you up encourages your dreams, asks *why not*, instead of why. Someone who nudges you (respectfully) out of your comfort zone, but also understanding when you need a little safe space.
I’m just looking for someone to eat all the pretzels in the chex mix bag while I eat the cheddar peices
I feel like I have finally found my person. For my entire life, and in my marriage, it felt as if I was looking for the person who could be the strengths to my weaknesses. I’ve found someone who knows both of my strengths and weaknesses and tells me that this is what makes me the truly unique individual I am. Someone who tells me that I inspire him to be a better in life for himself and for no one else. We live for ourselves and we have respect for each other in a way I have never experienced before.
Bring lots of money, lots of property, and skills I don't have or am having to pay professionals a boat load for.
Someone who encourages me to be better and has similar values and work ethic to me. It’s really simple. I just want a teammate who’s for the team and not the individual glory.
Someone that quotes Tommy Boy and Cable Guy on a daily basis to make me laugh.
When I met my husband all the things I’d been wanting to occur in my life but hadn’t been able to accomplish cane to fruition: new home, kids, new job, back to school, even tough stuff like working on my mental health. That’s how I knew; he was the catalyst - the wind in my sails.
I tell my husband a goal I have and he helps me achieve it. I'm a dreamer and he's a doer. He's content at where he is in life and is not very proactive with things, but any time I say I want to do something or I wish *blank* would happen, he helps me get it done.
My husband is the only person that I've ever known (outside of my family) that I could completely be "myself" with. He just made me feel accepted, I guess, for lack of a better term. He loves me for who I am, flaws and all. That is important to me because I'm socially very awkward. 

He has also made me a much happier person in general. We laugh A LOT.
Someone whose strengths are my weaknesses. For example, I’m always full of ideas— things I wanna do, places I wanna go, trips I wanna take... but I don’t enjoy planning. I get overwhelmed by details, I just know I wanna go and have fun. My husband fills in for me and executes. He loves to plan and helps bring my ideas to life. Another example... I’ll go off the Pinterest deep end of decor ideas... and then I can’t follow through.  My husband? He’s a saint that steps in and executes on my manic planning. I love it cuz it goes both ways. In fact, I knew my husband was the one when like I could reach my final form partnered with him. Being with him has helped me find true self. I don’t have to juggle or play a balancing act in life. He complements my weaknesses and vice versa. 

He’s simply the best.
Significant others are not commodities - they don’t come with stipulations or conditions. They make an effort to understand you, but also continue to understand themselves. They acknowledge that your personal growth is important, but also focus on bettering themselves. They fulfill your needs, but also express their desires. They praise you for your successes, but also receive validation for their accomplishments. They support you in your endeavors, but also set realistic goals for themselves to achieve. 

Relationships are built on unconditional love and support - it’s a bit cliché, but they complement your life if they help you be the best, most content, unfiltered version of yourself.
That's what I did.. I never dated anyone serious before my now husband. But then I met him, and though we were young, I just knew. He was grounded and my head was in the clouds. He helped me find structure and I've helped him go with the flow.
Just vibin’ but theyre also cute
I like to cook, and he likes to clean the dishes. He does the grocery shopping because he is super efficient while if I go I'd end up buying tons of sweets and wine 😃.

 I'd say the vast majority of cleaning chores falls under him because he finds it therapeutic. The only place he doesn't clean is the bathroom which I'm totally fine cleaning. 

I don't feel judged watching soccer on the weekend while he is cleaning. He totally understand where I'm coming from and what the game means to me. 

If I don't have time to have breakfast in the morning because I'm stuck in meetings, he would bring it to me along with a laté. Sometimes it's those little things that just make your world. 

Even when we don't see eye to eye, we value and respect each other's opinions

There are a lot of things we don't see eye to eye but we share the same morals and values.

I feel grateful to have him in my life
That I actually want to come home to them, after work/bad day/instead of a bar
I was born on 8/7/1996, my girlfriend was born on 8/7/1996. I met her on Tinder. We think almost exactly the same and communication is like smooth peanut butter most of the time. She's motivated me to clean my room, take care of myself, eat better, cook more, and many other things.
We’re both still ourselves and feel comfortable with one another, even if we disagree. And because we are very different people in some ways, we do disagree, but there’s a shared respect for one another’s opinions. Plus we enjoy some lively debate. 

I think there has to be total honesty in who each person is, trust and acceptance without judgment, and an understanding respect for when there are different perspectives on a particular issue.
I don’t think you have to be a perfect yin and yang to complement one another’s lives (someone who likes the other part of the trail mix doesn’t necessarily mean they are your person). Don’t get me wrong, I think it’s lovely to have that but not a requirement. I spent most of my 20’s in and out of relationships, trying to ask other people how they knew when they found the right person. Then I met my boyfriend and everything clicked. I think he complements my life by making me laugh when I take shit too seriously, I’m a planner, he’s a fly by the seat of his pants kind of person. I’m highly emotionally intelligent and he’s highly intellectually intelligent, so we can teach each other and be curious about one another. But also we share the same quality that we can pretty much laugh about anything and use that to help each other break out of daily stresses. Honestly, I think these are less things I had my sights on and more just things I started to recognize worked well, well after I already realized I was in love. :) 
I kind of think you are drawn to someone who will naturally help to counterbalance you, so this will likely happen when you feel excited about someone. I also think if someone isn’t your total opposite that’s okay too! There are other more important factors to connect on in addition to this in my opinion. Hope that helps!
Sounds straight to me
You shouldnt need the compliment to have a reason not to be single. Testing relationships, dating, etc should really make you a better person and help you find what you want, and what you want to give back to your future partner. Being single is up to that person for their own reasons.
I think that I've discovered the true meaning of this in my current relationship. To me it means we are both in a happy and healthy relationship where we trust each other and can have our own independent lifes and interests apart from one another. It means that we support each other in every way possible and sometimes simply agree to disagree in certain subjects or views while still respecting each other and not trying to convince that the other person is wrong. That even though we're both hard headed people we both often compromise to make each other happy. That we put the same effort at the end of the day even though some days one of us needs to put more than the other to help them if they are feeling bad/angry/sad/etc. But I think most importantly is having someone at the end of the day you can tell your problems and accomplishments to and that a future with them doesn't seem scary or unsure. I mean sure anything can happen, but for the most part you two are thrilled about talking about your future and helping each other grow throughout the rest of your lives.
We are both very independent people and both enjoy doing our own things. In all previous relationships I end up feeling ‘smothered’ when somebody wants to spend all of their time with me and it’s an instant turn off. But with my partner we pretty much lived together after a month of meeting and got married 14 months later. I couldn’t imagine being with anybody else. We both enjoy the outdoors, have an image of what our future will look like - but still do plenty of things by ourselves. Including solo trips away and such. 
You need to have similar interests but don’t go through life without finding out who you are as a person/INDIVIDUAL.
That’s what I think anyway, somebody else might be completely different! :)
When they not only have their own goals and aspirations, but also encourage you and push you to achieve your own. 

When they understand you at your worst, have the tools to help you overcome your worst times and you can do the same for them. 

When you can have open conversations about anything and can come to compromises together when something isn't working as well as it should. 

And this one is important as I spent my childhood living in fear- that you should never have to feel as though you are walking on eggshells or living terrified in their company, and especially within your own home. You should always feel safe.
My mom always told me, “a partner should add to your life, not create the happiness in it.” You have to create your own happiness. Otherwise, even if you meet your perfect partner, you will be co-dependent, not know how to spend your time alone, and constantly be waiting for enjoyment to come only from that individual.
My husband challenges me in a ways that empower me and make me more self-sufficient. He's 100% supportive of whatever choices I make, but he always pushes me to aim higher. It's through his encouragement that I got a master's degree from a school that I would have thought was too prestigious to bother applying to. Because of him, I left a career I was good at but wasn't challenging me intellectually to pursue more rigorous and rewarding work.

The ways he complements my life are to benefit *me*, not to benefit him, which is what sets him apart from my other relationship experiences.
Just enjoying each other's company?

People are too picky these days. Just pick someone and love them damnit
When I'm in a downswing, he picks up the slack. When he's in a downswing, I get to use my energy to make his life easier. And hey, if we're both down we get takeaway, and if we're both feeling great, life is fantastic.
I wasn’t looking for anyone when I met my partner, I was very fulfilled with my life and had been single for about a year. When I met them, I couldn’t believe how at ease I felt, and we hung out quite often, each time was wonderful. Our senses of humor meshed well, our values were very similar, it was just easy to be around them. I go about my life as I would have as a  single person, but now I have someone there who I can share my life with, find humor in things with, go places with, try new things with, and always confide in about things that are troubling me. They just make my life even more of a joy, and I think the best way I can sum up all these feelings is to say that my partner complements my life wonderfully.
For me, complementing my life and personality and just me isn’t just an “opposites attracting” scenario. It more about finding that person that enhances/encourages each other’s strengths, too. Like when you add a little salt to a dish to bring out more of the flavor. 

My husband and I amplify each other’s senses of humor. We have the ability to engage in both deep, serious and light, stupid conversations. We finish each other’s sentences and understand each other when we’re having trouble coming up with the right words to say. We both love hosting and taking care of our friends who refer to us as their surrogate parents. We also understand and protect each other’s needs, like my husband is an introvert and forgets that he needs alone time to decompress, so I help make that space for him and remind him to go for a bike ride or play his guitar. 

We’ve only been together for a little over 3 years and married a year but he was and continues to be that pinch of salt that makes this life really delightful.
I was told when I was younger “don’t find someone who likes the pink starburst just like you, find someone who likes orange just as much so you can both share the bag and benefit from it”.
My partner encouraged me to be bolder and explore more. He engages me in ways that make me push my limits in the best way possible, all the while standing behind me and reaffirming that I am safe to do so.
When they stay through all the boring parts of life. When even doing work seems a bit better because of a smile.
He challenges me, motivates me, calls me out when I’m wrong or too hard on myself. He handles my anxiety so well and doesn’t make me feel bad for it or when I’m having a terrible day. I could go on, but he makes my life better and has helped me grow as a person. 

Another telling thing is how someone reacts with horrible news/a bad situation. My grandma was in the hospital about 2 weeks after we started dating and he never left my side. His dad passed away unexpectedly this year. I was there for him. We helped ease each other’s burdens and pain during those difficult times.
When arguments involve discussions and not yelling and not holding a grudge but instead being able to understand and work towards a solution
I tend to have tunnel vision when working towards a goal and don’t take a break or stop till I achieve it. My partner helps me check in with myself and often helps me solve any problems I encounter by giving me a different perspective. 

I love that man for so many more reasons, but this is one trait of his that has been extremely helpful in multiple circumstances.
Life is just sweeter and more fun with him. I have my friends & my work, I have my hobbies... And now I also have someone to adventure with and someone I want to come home to.

He's also a lot more rational and easygoing than I am, and I really want that to rub off on me xD
I don’t have to change my personality in order for them to accept me. They challenge me to be the best version of myself and support me through life’s adventures. We try our best to communicate with complete transparency, whether it’s good or bad to avoid sweeping things under the rug.

My boyfriend and I have been together for two years now and he’s my best friend. We are the absolute weirdest souls when we’re alone together and it feels completely natural. Since day one, nothing has been forced between us and the chemistry has always been there. We broke up for a period of time and from my side of things, I couldn’t find the same spark or connection with other people and it felt like I was missing a piece of myself. I would literally vent to people in my life and say, “How did things feel so organic with him, but it feels like I need to pull teeth with the new people I come across?” We get excited to grocery shop and do nothing together; as long as we’re in each other’s presence, we are happy. When you know, you know. They add value to your life.
When they make living life feel easier!
His values match my values (similar world view, same level of value for money, family, work, health) and our hobbies/interests are just different enough that we can learn from and enjoy doing our individual favourite things together.
Heck I dont even know what that means
Someone that helps you up your ability to communicate. The power to express oneself is invaluable. Having someone improve that skill by shared experience is priceless.
Wanna have some biriyani together ?
Nudging each other to evolve and become better, while staying loving and supportive
I am such a softie and my SO is really tough. We tone down each other’s extremes.
My (34F) boyfriend (36M) smells really good, I can't explain it, and he's the sweetest and kindest person I've ever met. He's supportive of everything I do, he loves it when I knit or crochet him anything, and actually wears it! 

He takes an interest in things I do, my hobbies and my job, even my nail art. His interests are quite different to mine - Dutch football, indie video games, post-punk, and his support of my stuff makes me want to be interested in his things too. I follow a few subreddits just so I can send him memes.

I had some unexpected health issues when we first met and, tbh, I assumed he was just gonna be a fuckboi (he's super hot) but he stuck around, looked after me. We just had our 2y anniversary and I want to spend the rest of my life with him. 

Sometimes I tease him that he's so good to me it's made me physically dependent on him. 

TL:DR - I'm the exact same person I am when I'm single, but now I have someone cool and supportive that I'm excited to share my life with
My husband and I are similar in many ways: we don’t like loud gatherings as we usually get talked over or ignored. We love to learn about anything and read, listen to podcasts. We like to cook together, him more so the technical skills and me focused on the taste haha. My husband is a steady head, is not bothered by people’s criticism or negative talk etc. His boss yelling at him (military, yay) doesn’t phase him. I on the other hand am more sensitive, I care (too much?) what others think. We balance each other in that he shows me that the only opinion I should value about myself is my own, and I show him that negative feed back at work can help you tune in to something unsaid. 

We’re both independent, yet always talk with each other before making a decision. We support each other’s decisions, even if we don’t agree with them
"Hey man, nice life"!
To me it means finding someone that balances you, someone that puts as much into the relationship as their partner, and someone that makes your life overall better instead of worse.
Not me, but my parents are a perfect example of this in an opposites attract kind of way.    
My mum is the eccentric, emotionally charged type who loves to take one too many risks while my dad is the calm, meticulous and witty type who thinks through his actions every step of the way.    
Together they have ambitious fun plans from my mum which get grounded in reality and planned out by my dad; my mum all the while making sure we're still moving instead of sitting and thinking too long.    
We like to think of my mum as the accelerator and my dad as the steering wheel/brake :)
Someone who loves me for who I am, as I am, but at the same time inspires me to be the best version of myself. And I do the same for him.
He is my perfect half, we yin yang in similar ways with food, likes and interests but everyday and through all our journeys so far he helps me achieve greater things. Without him by my side I would have struggled with so many of life's obstacles but he pulls me through and keeps me grounded. I love him ♡
I guess for me it would be someone who could enjoy things with me? 

Honestly I don't even know. It's not something I've ever thought about since I've been with my fiancé since I was 14. We were each others first love and now we're in our twenties and planning on getting married within the next couple of years.

It always felt natural for us to just stay together, even at a young age. We never once questioned it. We share a lot of interests and just generally enjoy being around eachother. Even after being together for so many years. I always see people who drift apart as they get older and end up doing more of their own things rather than sticking together. They become more independent.

But we've never understood that. Perhaps we're odd for being so closely-knit, but it works for us. I mean, don't get me wrong, we have our own hobbies, (for me it's ice skating, and for him it's creating music) but most of them we just so happen to share, so we do them together. 

All in all, I guess what I'm trying to say is find somebody who makes you happy and perhaps shares quite a few interests and hobbies. That way you have somebody to share things with. If you enjoy swimming - find somebody who also enjoys swimming. You know, something like that. 

I've always believed that doing fun things with friends or a partner is far better than doing fun things alone.
He makes me want to be the best person I can be,  not *for* him,  but because he is my biggest cheerleader and since I've been with him by self esteem and confidence has skyrocketed. 

He is an extrovert and I am an introvert so we both compromise and have a great time.

We have separate interests that the other encourages and we have plenty of interests that are the same and a few more we found together. 

He is 100% my other half and my soulmate and I do not want to spend any part of my life without him.
They help you to be a better person generally just through being around them.

I've got way more sporty, healthy and driven in the 5 years I've been with my current partner, but equally my passion for helping people has softened him too.

You don't have to be perfect jigsaw pieces for each other but as long as you both help each other grow into better people whatever that may be, it's a pretty good match.

I'd also say someone who is willing and happy to be there for you makes your life better. Knowing you have that support after a bad day at work / when grieving / when going through hard times is the definition of better than single. That unquestioning support is the best feeling in the world.
Someone who works with me like a team. We work together on our goals, push each other to be better, and know each other completely.
Someone who pushes and inspires you to grow.
In our case we just clicked from the first day. I found I was the best version of me and I was 25 and didn’t want to lose that. It’s now 45 years, three kids and a couple mortgages later and it’s still true. My goals became clearer, I surprise myself as a husband and father and we’re still tied at the hip. I know some really fine people who thought the same thing, but didn’t make it. Lucky, I guess. Never once had that “this isn’t gonna work out” feeling I had with other relationships. A 20 month old grandchild is icing on the cake. Yes, God plays a role, too.
Someone I’d consider to complement my life is someone who is different enough to challenge me, and help me see things with a different outlook, and yet similar enough that we can relate to one another and understand. 

My partner and I always use the saying “opposites attract” to describe us because we are quite different people. However the right things are similar, such as understanding, tastes, openness to try new things etc. Any differences in opinion are accepted or challenged respectfully, and all my weak areas are his strengths and vice versa. 

You can’t be everything. You can’t be both outgoing and timid. Of course there is always a balance, but no one person has the right balance between two extremes. You will have someone who is more introverted and someone more extroverted. Someone who is too nice and someone who is “mean”. Your SO should be able to teach you the other half of that, in order to complement your life.

Too much similarity, imo, is boring and does not help to promote growth. People out of your comfort zone will always be better for you than those who you simply settle for.
My bf is the opposite of me so creates a necessary balance, but he also has an independence & maturity I haven’t seen in many men so he just makes my life so much easier.

• I’m loud & social, he’s chill and reserved
• He’s extremely introspective and plans internally, but I need to talk and plan and make decisions aloud
•He cooks, cleans, washes dishes and his own clothes- you would think this is like a regular thing, but sooooo many men don’t or think it’s the woman’s job (my dad) so I’ve never actually wanted to marry a man cause I didn’t want to be anyone’s second mother. These simple things reassure me that I won’t be stressed picking up after him, myself & kids. I see a lot of married women complain about that.

• He likes to save money the way I do so I never have to stress about him coming up short (previous bf’s were either just bad at keeping money in their pocket in general and needed to leech or they were so insecure that they’d sped all their money tryna seem like a big shot in front of me even tho we both know the truth)
• He has his own friends, life & boundaries so I don’t feel emotionally responsible for him or like he always has to tag along with me. Even in quarantine we could be in 2 diff rooms having our own lives. It was heaven.

•He likes to do whatever is necessary to make something nice & good again whether that means he’s vacuuming out my car or communicating his feelings so we can get back on track.
•He doesn’t yell & isn’t mean. I come from a verbally & emotionally abusive home so this was the icing on the cake for me. He doesn’t even catch a temper with strangers, even tho he may be frustrated, so I know it’s not a selective thing that will one day make its way to me when he gets mad enough.
• I hate driving unless it’s long road trips & he likes driving all the time so he drives us around

Having that man around makes my life so easy I cry lol he is definitely what I would consider complimentary.
Firm believer in this! My partner motivates, inspires, supports, encourages, understands. A complete compliment to my life. The fact that our paths crossed made me believe in the universe "having a plan".
He supports me in my endeavors and I support him in his. My life would be similar without my partner in terms of daily activities, hobbies, friends, but it would be more empty. 

I get to be myself and he gets to be himself, we have our own goals and ambitions but one of those goals is that we would like to live together and have a relatively stress-free life. 

He comforts me when I'm sad, gets protective when I am upset and calms me down when I am being unreasonable. When I don't have the motivation to do the dishes or laundry, I do them anyway because I don't want him to have to do it. 

&#x200B;

TLDR: we make each other better people
I was never serious with anyone or quick to have crushes exactly because of this. When I met my now husband, it was through mutual friends and once I got to know him one of the key things was that our values aligned and my personality and quirks complements his. It was hard to find with other guys (friends or not) before this. For example I’m more jittery and he was more calm which made me relaxed, or I found out he’s a light sleeper which helps because I sleep like a log. Also when we planned a trip he was more organised and detail oriented with lists of things to do whereas I just go with the flow. But our core values were aligned so we didn’t have to compromise our beliefs or way of life too much. 

The more I realised how compatible we were the more attracted and excited I was for the relationship and next month is our first year anniversary- it’s going great so far! All this analysis before marriage has done me good hahahha
Someone who pushes you to be better, someone who can make a bad day better, just by being there, someone who looks out for you, even when you don’t know it, someone who is easy to be with. All relationships have struggles, but the good needs to outweigh the bad. 

Small example: My bf and I don’t live together yet, but he checks my trash before he leaves my apartment and takes it out, if it’s full.
i think everyone who only get into relationships with people they love think they’re perfect for each other at first until they start seeing flaws?
my personal opinion, i feel like this one day you’d feel like you guys don’t complement each other and the other day you’d feel like the strongest couple ever. guess that’s just how it works?
My life is so much of a mess that I'd need to fix it up before someone else could compliment it with they're presence.
Someone who enhances your life instead of makes it! I'm just fine on my own and don't need anyone, but having my boyfriend with me on the just makes things more fun and enjoyable. I'm happy with him and we don't even have to be doing anything. First time in a VERY long time that that's happened...which is why I was the one to make the first move! We were friends for about 10 years before I changed things up a bit.
I’m the artsy one but tend to be too focused on the past and present   I’m the person who gets caught in the minutiae of daily life. I get all the little things done to make life easier. He’s highly analytical big picture and future vision oriented. We are opposites personality wise but have the same sense of humor and taste in books and film. Together we work really well.  He keeps me optimistic and keeps us moving ahead with goals. We are each other’s cheerleaders.  It’s funny too how we have introduced each other to new things that we now enjoy together.
Someone who is as independent as I am and is willing to communicate through issues
I was in a really good palce in life when I met my now husband (except I was going to move abroad and then we fell in love a week before I left. I came back home soon). I enjoyed my own company and being alone before I met him, but he made everything better. I am still content on my own, but always wish he was with me, as he makes difficult things easyer, boring things more bearable and good things much better. We have so much fun together.

The funniest thing, at OUR wedding, I felt so happy he was there during this big thing in my life. It was our wedding, of course he was there. But he gives me such support just by being present.
Enjoying everyday life - like cooking new stuff together, shopping together, taking walks together, watching movies together, giving each other little surprise gifts and communicating issues and values
I’ll give a man’s perspective. Couple things that are great in my current relationship:

- we both are comfortable and even encourage/laugh about normal bodily functions (burping, farting, etc)

- mundane tasks are more fun with her. We enjoy going shopping, getting groceries, etc

- we travel super well together and both have a hunger to see the world. I think this is super important to align on

- we are both intelligent so it makes discussing things like BLM and other political things interesting. Although we are both liberals, we do have some differences of opinion that’s fun to discuss together 

- we are comfortable being together physically while still doing our own thing. I might play video games and she might read during a boring evening and we are just happy to be next to each other on the couch when we do this.
Complementing your life: add to it in a positive or enriching way. Say you love to travel. Do you want to travel alone, or do you want a travel buddy to share the adventure? A complementing spouse would support your preference here instead of grudgingly going along with your preference. Its someone who respects your needs (for down time, for dressing up at Renaissance festivals, for gently reminding you when you have had enough wine and are about to behave foolishly, who accompanies you to a loved ones deathbed and is there for you in your grief, introduces you to Ethiopian food, and so many other things. Its not 100% perfect. There never is. But it is a pretty damn incredible ride!

Remember, this is a two way street. Are you complementing his/her/their life?
My girlfriend has had anxiety most of her life, so in her late teens/early twenties she developed a yoga, mediation, and generally spiritual practice to combat that. 

I have always had a ton of energy, and used sports and other physical activities as a release.

She encouraged and led me to developed a spiritual practice of my own (which has been a godsend as I got older and stress piled up), and she has started lifting weights and running sprints with me. We also hold each other accountable to healthy eating and sleep practices. 

I am a much more functional human for having been with her, and I know she feels the same way for having known me.
Shared values
Sense of humor 
Shared trust
Communication
I don't think anyone should ever be such a part of you that you can't live without it, to the extreme version that this quote can take. I was pretty positive I was going to be single forever and ever, amen before I met my husband. I was good at it, I liked it, and I think I'd be perfectly fine if I were to be single again depending on the circumstances.

That said, what my husband has done to help me as a person, is be better. He's kinder and more giving than I am, he's quick to think of others first instead of himself, and he's so very generous and fast to forgive. Because of these traits and living with them daily, I have started to become the same. Simply put, he's made me a better person with good boundaries and priorities. For my part, I helped him recognize his ADHD and seek treatment, I've seen him through a few career moves, and have helped structure our life together in a way he didn't have before. We're a good team.
My boyfriend and I have different personalities and it works really well. He's very loud and extroverted, I am much less so. He grew up in a religious home, I grew up in a pagan hippy home that was sometimes a commune, he's good at math and bad at language arts and I'm good at language arts and bad at math. We make one another's lives easier all the time, like he'll run errands for me if I'm not up for it and I'll do random secretary like stuff for him. Our senses of logic work differently so issues that one of us can't solve the other can. We just make each other's lives better and it's great. He's my best friend
I feel like he gives me the confidence and support I needed to go and do things I’ve always wanted to do. Before I sort of floated around not sure of anything and not much planning but after being with him for some years I have started to think of things differently. I also love that we can grow and learn as a couple and work towards a common goal and shared future together.
We both wake up happy. Of course there are many other things,many mentioned by others on this thread, but this is the #1 reason we’re better as a couple vs single. Waking up happy makes it easier to enjoy each other, maybe tackle problems later in the day...it’s how I changed career paths with full support, it’s how we paid down some serious debt, and dealt with family drama. Waking up happy everyday, similar to how I did single, but with another person supercharges our life.
I wouldn't say complement, as if I wasn't complete without him, but he just makes my life better. If you have someone you feel that way about, they're worth it. Even the smallest things are beautiful now, like getting up in the morning next to him, coming home from work knowing I will see him, go on walks together or just watch Netflix. I used to love being alone but now I don't anymore. I'm just happier when he is around.
Someone who builds you up. Someone who is supportive and enthusiastic about your dreams. Someone who makes you LAUGH (not cry). Someone who can be trusted with your secrets and who will stand by you no matter what.
Guess I really have gone past that phase. Truly I don’t need people to complement me, but I would not resist the companies of people who respect and maintain their own individuality and authenticity.
My husband made my life better than it would be if I was alone. Before I met him I was a very independent single mom. I had a life I loved and worked hard for the things I provided my son an I, we were happy. My husband came along when my son was 2 and he just made our lives even better. He says the same thing about us, and constantly tells me I make everything worth it. He is a great dad to my son and he does everything he can to make me happy. Our careers complement each other and we are definitely stronger in everything together wether it’s friends, family, or work. We have been together 5 years and are expecting a baby in a few months. I think being happy individuals and then choosing to commit to each other was the best decision we ever made. I love him and enjoy every moment we have together with our growing family.
Just came here to say hello ! I am single
I came up with this term for myself that I think works well: Compatible Wrongness

We all have flaws, and finding a good match is about finding someone who has flaws that compliment your own and as a result: things are improved for both of you, and these characteristics are no longer “problems.” 

For example, my boyfriend and I just moved in together and moving is great stressful situation to bring out any character flaws you might have. Like:

I have an issue with being sort of wasteful. My  boyfriend is very frugal and keeps everything and just doesn’t know HOW to clean out his stuff. When we combined our belongings, I was able to help him get rid of a lot and he was able to help me be more logical about what items we might need or be able to use when I would’ve just thrown my hands up and gotten rid of it all. 

I love decorating and can be aesthetics-focused to a fault when it comes to home decor. I also get a bit controlling about how space should be because my environment influences my mood a lot. My boyfriend is very practical and all about functional with complete disregard for style. Obviously, both of us are annoying as heck in this way but it works because mixed: we create a very cute, functional home. 

I think relationships fail when we see them as opportunities to fix ourselves. I think they are valuable and succeed when they provide the help, support, and benefit that allows us to understand and embrace what we see as wrong about ourselves. Because I often think that “flaws” are just a result of trying to force ourselves into spaces where we don’t fit until it bothers the heck out of us.
My wedding vows say at the end "...knowing that together we will build a life far better than either of us could imagine alone."

This is what it means to me. It means we support each other and push each other and give each other space when we need it. It means we actively improve our relationship and our communication. It means I can imagine life without him but it isn't as good as the life I have with him.
Life has to be better with you than without you.  If they dont add to your life why are you together?
Life only improves and enriches. Hard times exist but now you have a partner to ensure such obstacles.
I have a boyfriend who is basically that. He doesn't make my life harder with fights and unnecessary worrying, where I would think it would be easier if I was single. 

He's like a best friend, just with really good sex and a lot more love to give. He makes me laugh when I'm sad, we spend time with each other, but we also manage to spend the entire day in the same room doing our own thing. We make each other better and happier.

I feel like it's hard to say if you're better off single  when you didn't date that person yet. Obviously if you feel like that before already, you know it's a bad choice. But if you feel like it could be worth it, you should try it, and if you ever have the feeling you would be better of single *right now*, then ask yourself why, and if you can fix that feeling, and if not he's not the one...
For me, it'd mean finding a teammate, someone I'd feel stronger facing the world with. I'm not very romantic as you can see, but I envision it more as being a team, a couple. The partner being the person with whom you'd want to be paired with, in any circumstance.
Being down to do whatever, whenever. Sometimes I just want someone to share my memories with. To feel loved and given plenty of hugs and affection. Likes to drink, smoke and other stuff like that. Down to try whatever. So far my boyfriend is all of those things so I definitely feel like it’s better than being single
I’m a conscientious person who likes to plan and be productive to the point where I get debilitating anxiety. My partner reminds me to go easy on myself and I learn how to do it by watching him. He has a such a patient, loving nature that I feel like my best self when I’m with him. He’s remarkable at handling stressful moments on the fly and just bulldozes through life. Together we both share the same intellect, big dreams and values but we have different approaches that make us a better team.
for me its like theyd be ok if i forgot to take my adhd meds for a day, because i know i can be annoying when i do. someone who can put up with my idiocies and just time when i want to go to target for hours, someone whos christian preferably but if not respects me waiting til marriage and not being able to go on lunch dates on wednesday and breakfast dates on sundays, someone who understands me as a human and doesnt care about my flaws, someone who just knows how to make me feel better no matter how sad i am. as im typing this i think ive figured out who it is.
For me it's that he literally matches my crazy. I have BPD and he is bipolar 2. I don't have to explain what an episode or a crisis is. We can both identify quickly when the other person is having one, we understand how hard it can be, there's no judgement or resentment. We give each other space when we need it. It's just easy. With other people I have to be walking on eggshells so they don't take my mood swings the wrong way and just explaining what's going on with me gets exhausting.
If you’re more proud of who you (two) are than you ever could be of yourself, you may have found the one.
**Two incredible individuals taking on life as a kickass team of two**

... while maintaining the best parts of their individuality. I’ve seen too many couples who were two interesting individuals who averaged out into one boring person.

**Speaking love into each other’s deepest fears.**

If you listen to the voice that loves you, those internal voices of fear, doubt, or hurt become quieter and slowly lose their power over you. Sometimes that's because you feel safe enough to reveal your most vulnerable parts, and sometimes it's because the other person figures it out because they know you so well.

**Taking turns sharing the burdens of life.**

Sometimes you split the load 50/50 together, other times one person carries a bigger share while the other one is struggling or feeling weak. This can be any kind of burden, from emotional support to daily chores.
I met my SO 3 years ago, just as I was about to finish uni, so I was moving back home and he lived in a town close by.

Id say he compliments my life because he fits right in, time wise, I don't need to make time for him I just have it already.

He's helped me become a much better person, he's helped me out when I needed it.

We can have a range of conversations, from stupid ones to in-depth ones. We've started to communicate a lot better when we fall out, which results in us not falling out for as long as we used to.

We both enjoy playing video games together, and the one that is definitely a literal compliment is the fact that he's into sound design and music and I'm into animation and art, so he can do the sound for my animations 😂

Idk there's so much I could say, he just makes me super happy and I don't want my life to be without him yknow? I was always scared that I'd get bored of someone after a while, it happened with my ex 1.5 years into the relationship, but I'm not worried with this one.

We share future plans, almost, we have stupid in jokes, and he's not picky with food and I am so he always let's me choose take out 😂
I realize this is old-ish, but I found some screenshots of this post on ig just now and felt compelled to get something off my chest:

I (31f, single all my life) realized yesterday that I'm in love with my friend. A heart to heart (the night before) revealed our intentions are mutual. We've been friends 3 yrs, and he is my complement. Reading these comments feel validating af and I'm crying happy tears right now and I can't stop.
For me it would be someone who gives me room and support to grow and I can do the same for them. Someone inspiring and has the same open mind as me about sex. Someone whose goals and values are aligned with mine that can also open me up to new experiences.
that’s dumb I just want some dude who is also there and who’s my friend and smells nice
A stable man. I tend to be to childish (I'm 20). 
I don't mean making tantrums, being jelous or dependent, but a very dreamy person and I want someone to put my feet on the ground when it's needed. 

Sometimes I can be rude without wanting it, I swear. I don't have tact, so a guy who can point that when I'm making mistakes would be amazing. 

Basically a man who makes me be a better person, but I'd try my best without his help. He must to be a sweet. That's all I want.
Sex. Lots of sex.
Fucking.

Lots and lots of fucking.
This post has been locked for moderation clean up due to vast amounts of rule-breaking content. If your comment is breaking the rules, it will be modded. If you see comments that break the rules, please report them for moderator review.

Edit: Based on the amount of rule-breaking content involved, this post will remain locked. If you see any rule-breaking content we missed in the clean-up, please let us know.
The fact that any woman who is  interested in (insert sport here) can only be:
A) an expert with every player, stat, etc. memorized
OR
B) a ditz pretending that she's interested so that she can impress the boys

I'M ONLY MILDLY INTERESTED IN HOCKEY. LET ME LIVE MY LIFE. 
Lately the whole “women can never decide where they want to eat” stereotype has really been grinding my gears. My BF would say “lol that’s totally you” when I would always give at least 3 suggestions as to where to eat and he would go “idk it’s up to you”. I’m ASKING FOR YOUR INPUT  not “indecisive”, if I was eating by myself I would have already chosen by now. 
That a thing majority women are interested in is inherently empty and meaningless and *silly*, but something like sports or video games or cars is just a normal interest and even if you get really emotional or obsessed or worked up over it, that's totally normal and regular.

But god forbid women or anyone really get invested in or obsessed with or worked up about any kinds of activities mostly women find interesting. Women in general, but teenage girls especially.

On that note, 'teenage girls' being used by everyone as a shorthand for a stupid and empty and shallow person. Teenage girls are half of all teenagers, half of all children become them and they in turn become half of all adults, thank you very much.
[removed]
Suggesting that because of my skincare routine I'm high maintenance. I am, for myself, but not for others. I'm super chill in my relationships, I just spend a lot of time taking care of my skin cause I'm 32. The opposite is the 'oh she let herself go' bs, or "she wears too much makeup"....so it's pretty lose/lose once you can no longer rely on your youth to be 'presentable". 
That if a woman lifts weights it’ll make her too bulky. Lost 80lbs weight lifting and it’s giving me a lot more curves than bulky muscles. 
I’m sure we have all heard this before

If I dress “down” I’m tired, lazy, not “put together, etc. 

If I put on makeup and “dress up.” I have a special occasion. 

No I do this randomly depending how I feel. 

I feel like everywhere you turn it’s some comment about something. 
That women can't get along in the workplace (or in MMOs, or anywhere I guess) and are constant drama. All of the women where I work get along just fine. Men (and the women who repeat this nonsense) just think their disagreements and gossip are important and see every conflict between women as frivolous. 
The concept of "trying too hard".

Listen, if I want to get dressed up it's because I freakin' feel like it. It's not always for you / about you, and it doesn't make a person stuck-up. Life can be monotonous and stressful, sometimes getting ready for it is the most you can control. I was once asked "why I dress so nice / formal" sometimes and honestly, my answer is "*because it's fun and it's how I like to dress sometimes*". I'm not trying to seem self-important or get attention, I'm not walking through downtown alleys at night in a ballgown, but a crisp or creative external expression makes things interesting and helps me feel put-together in more than one sense. Plus you really shouldn't assume a person's income by their dress.
The idea that a period is just an excuse to get out if doing work. Like listen buddy I can't stand up straight without immediately doubling over, I think that's a good enough excuse. 
There's so much criticism around how women spend their money! Anything that involves clothing, makeup or physical appearance is deemed as shallow and frivolous, ignoring the ways women get criticised for not doing those things. 

It intersects with enjoying things that are also popular with other women - it's not acceptable to spend X amount a day on lattes (or to get your nails done regularly,) but it's okay to drop a few hundred dollars for a sporting event that's widely televised and easily accessible? One of those things is seen as frivolous and a poor financial decision and the other is just accepted. 
She’s moody today, I bet it’s that time of the month...
„Oh she’s wearing makeup she must be so insecure!“

*not wearing makeup* „Are you sick?“
I actually got instructed by a colleague at work to take over a delicate situation with someone in distress because I was the only female on duty and I could use my "maternal instinct." Fucker, I do not have a maternal bone in my body, I was the youngest officer on duty, surrounded by guys in their 40s who all had kids. Told them to dig deep and tap in to "whatever paternal instincts" they could find. Don't get me wrong, I step up to the plate regularly in work situations, I just resent having these situations passed my way regularly FOR THAT reason. 
I'm nauseated.

You must be pregnant.

*groan* Yep that's it, that's the reason. 
Excessive criticism of pop culture marketed toward women versus that which is marketed toward men. 

The stereotype of the "mean girl."
I hate being judged for liking things such as video games or comics casually. So often men (and sometimes other women) see me wearing a shirt with a character on it or hear me mention something in normal conversation, and I am instantly met with a game of 20 questions about the topic to prove I'm not just pretending to like the franchise to seem more appealing to the male gaze as a "fake gamer girl" or whatever. I truly do not understand why others think women need their approval just to have an interest in things they find enjoyable. Do they REALLY think I went out and spent hundreds of dollars on a gaming console just because I thought it would make me more attractive to others? Would I seriously waste that much of my money and time on things I don't actually care about purely for men's attention? I can't help but wonder if they even realize what they're accusing me of, or if it's just been so normalized that they never took the time to think about what they're actually saying.
I’m really good with kids and children tend to love me but I get so nervous when I consciously know people are watching me when I’m either playing or taking care of them. I will get the usual “You’d make such a great mom”  and "When are you planning on having your own?" and I just grimace internally because I’ve never really wanted to have kids and I hate feeling like everyone expects me to. Why can’t I just be cool with kids and not have that weight hanging over my head? Like, if I ever actually say that I just get the whole "You'll change your mind." or "That's a waste." and that just pisses me off to all hell. If I want kids in the future, fine. If I don't, fine. How the fuck is that your business?
When people say a childless (by circumstance or choice) woman is a waste of womanhood. We're all worthy women whether we procreate or not.
I really hate how there are so many products made to make us "smell fresh down there". 

Like, WTF? For one, they are usually not even good for you, and two, why the fuck do we *always* insinuate cuckoos are smelly? Do they think ball sacks smell like roses?
If someone dresses really feminine and spends a lot of time on their looks somehow they are vapid and an airhead.  I hear blondes get it the worst but I know it happens to the redheads and brunettes and others as well. 

As if one has anything to do with the other.


The whole if you like how you look somehow that's bad because you're full of yourself, but if you don't like how you look you have low self-esteem and that's just as bad.  Can't win.
[deleted]
I hate how women are criticised for enjoying things that happen to be popular with other women. Pumpkin spice lattes, for instance. People act like any woman who drinks them must be some vapid drain on society, when it's literally just a sugary beverage, and the only reason they get criticism is because they're considered a "girl" drink. Let women enjoy things! 
The stereotype that women are nurturing. I’m pursuing the title of physician and I just want one week to go by without someone asking me if I would be happier as a nurse.

Believe it or not, each woman is actually a human being. With separate personalities, interests, and goals! Just like regular people wow
For me it is definitely that women should be soft or gentle always. I’m allowed to have every feeling my human condition presses upon me. Be that anger or rage, it’s no more insidious than a man’s. It’s not feminist rage or any other derogatory label! My delivery may be lacking but I deserve empathy and compassion the same as any man who is wounded. Rolling over and just taking it creates a bitter woman I think. 
[deleted]
That women can’t have any sort of standards when it comes to men. Women grow up believing they have to look *perfect* at all moments of the day and that our appearance is the center of our self-worth. So we try and try to make ourselves look as beautiful as possible and we listen to men ramble on and on about their criticisms on women’s appearance but if a woman dare rejects a man on the basis of appearance, men go into crazy, bitter meltdowns and start writing essays on why women are evil for having sex with men they find attractive. 

Men really think that they’re entitled to women when they go around looking homeless. Especially when most of these men only want women who look like models 
Women being less logical or having "inherent" thinking styles, that sort of bullshit
Had one the other day that made my blood boil. 

Talking to a friend about a night out where two women kissed him (he has a long term girlfriend who he lives with). He said he almost took it too far with one of them but meh, who cares, it’s “just what guys do” and he’s entitled to “have a bit of fun”. When I told him what I thought of that (and tried/failed to make him see it from the point of view of his girlfriend), he replied with “nah, she’s really cool about this stuff, but damn I bet you’re a high maintenance girlfriend”. 

... so I’m high maintenance for wanting my partner to stay faithful to me? For wanting the one thing you could reasonably expect from a monogamous relationship? Had a guy said he wouldn’t want his girlfriend out licking all and sundry’s tonsils, it would have been met with “yeah that’s totally fair dude”.  For fuck’s sake. 

Apparently expecting loyalty in a relationship is such a boring girl thing?! 
"You should smile more"

"Why aren't you smiling?"

"You would be so much more attractive if you smiled"

This happened again a few days ago after I had just completed a clear and brilliant laser facial so my skin was super tight while healing. I kept a neutral face position as best I could which was the most comfortable but dude came up and not only told me to smile more but also said I should not try to hide my smile either "because it makes women the most beautiful". 

I figure he added that last bit because he was clearly watching me switch between my book and phone. I was texting my bf between pages so I cannot help but smile when I text him but had to try and ignore the reaction at that time. 

I had to really fight the urge to not tear this guy a new one since I was at work. Even when dressed professionally in scrubs and a lab coat while working in a very prestigious hospital I find some people have a low threshold for common sense, respect and personal space.

As I watched him approached me, I assumed he was a patient looking for directions or to ask some ridiculous question that was out of my scope of practice so as I lifted my head up I managed as much of a smile as I comfortably could while waiting for him to speak. I even tried to 'smile with my eyes' but clearly that was not enough.
It's not a criticism, but it's the context in which it occurs. 

So many men think that telling me (a woman) that I'm "not like other women." is a compliment. It's not. 

I get messages like "All the other women on this site creep me out." and I'm supposed to be all like "Thank you! Here are my panties!" But that's not how it works. My reaction is more "Oh. So you have a problem with women. Yeahbye." 

"You're so much smarter than most women." 

No. Fuck you. If you want to tell me I'm smarter than most people, I might take it as a compliment. "Most women" and I think you're just a sexist asshat. 

"You're so laid back. Not like most women."

What are you doing to make most women act uptight? 

It always shows me much more about the man making the comment than the women he's exposed to. 
The dismissal or women's arguments as too emotional or shrill, or having something to do with their biology.
Because I’m a mom, I have to give up everything I love. Fuck no. I want my kids to see me enjoying life and having hobbies. It always made me sad when I asked my mom what her favorite book was and she would say “If I have time to read for pleasure, there’s something I’m ignoring” my mom worked (and still works) so hard and never does anything for herself. 
That we should change the way we speak. 
"Don't use uptalk."
"Don't use vocal fry"
"Don't say sorry so often"
"Don't use words that make it appear as though you're unsure of yourself"
"Your voice is too high. Speak with a lower voice at the office."
"Your voice is too deep. You sound like a man. You should try to sound more friendly."
"You're too polite, you should have been more direct. You're giving him mixed signals."
"You sounded mean. How did you expect him to react when you sound like a bitch?"
 "Your voice is shrill."
 There is an endless list of reasons why we are to blame for other people not taking us seriously or reacting negatively toward what we say. 
"Girls can't do math/men are better at math than women". Fortunately, it seems to be less and less of a wide-held belief, but as a woman currently majoring in math, I hear it from time to time and it pisses me off. For example, my Calc prof from high school - who offered to write me letters of recommendation on the condition that I major in math in uni - believed this, as did my father (who has been my #1 supporter throughout my time as a math major). Both of them believed that differences in male and female brains meant that women were worse at math than men, and both of them believed that I was just the exception to the rule. And while I appreciated (and continue to appreciate) their support as I pursue a career in math, the cognitive dissonance (? not sure that's the right word) is kind of funny and kind of sad. 

TL;DR: Girls are just as good as guys at math despite what some people may believe. Also, no matter what your gender is, please don't dismiss math because it's too hard, or too boring, or not useful. It can truly be a wonderful, interesting subject to study. Popular belief states that you're either good at math or you aren't, but please don't believe that. Like anything, you have to work at it, but if you do, you'll discover a fascinating way of describing the world around us. 

TL;DR for my TL;DR: Girls are good at math; math is amazing.
Friend zoning is bullshit. If someone actually cherishes you as a friend, better keep them around. Or you will regret it by your late 20s and realize friendships are pretty fucking important.

If you think someone isn't interested because you're "nice" then you should probably seek a therapist or priest. 



Why does it feel like platonic relationships are getting harder and harder?
Black women consistently having to fit a stereotype or being over fetishized
That women can't be girly/wear make up/watch the Kardashians/like the colour pink/read gossip magazines/love rom coms and still be intelligent or feminists or both.

Guess what? We can have many interests and they don't need to fit into a specific box.


Labeling an outspoken, stern, strong woman a bitch, while a man exhibiting the same behavior is usually revered. 
When little girls are called “bossy” for asserting themselves. That adjective isn’t used on little boys. 
"I don't want daughters because I don't want to deal with hair, makeup, and oh they can become pregnant. Boys are just so easy"
Even my female doctor challenges me  and pushes to make sure I'm sure about my decision to not have children of my own.

No one ever asks a mother if they regret having children but they'll always double check on me to make sure I'm not making a decision I might regret later.
[deleted]
"You must always be bubbly and have a smile on your face!" Fuck you. I have resting bitch face and am NOT bubbly in any way. I'll be nice, but NOT bubbly.
"You are too forward."  
"Your answers are too yes/no, black & white."  
"Can you make your responses fluffier?"  
"You do not need to list the negative outcomes of each attempt. Keep things cheery."  
"You need to approach people softer."  
"You need to smile more."  


All criticisms I have received in the past 7 days at work.   


How dare any female approach men in the work space they same way they speak to others. Directly, in a forward manner, with confidence and succinct answers.
That if women don't shave, they're somehow dirty or gross... even though most men don't shave and no one cares about that. 
The assumption that an attractive women *must* be stupid. Not calling myself a goddess or a model but I'm just above average when I wear makeup and put on the right clothes. I used to be hounded and talked down to by men because beauty means you are unintelligent somehow. I hate how the worms come out of the woodwork first. I had to wait a while until I found someone who enjoys my sloppy morning hair and careless swearing habit. 
I hate when women are criticized for having a strong personality or a strong opinion on a topic 
The comment"real women have curves"
So skinny chicks arent women?
I hate it when people make jokes about women talking too much. Especially since there have been many studies that suggest that women actually talk less than men on average in terms of percentage of a conversation. In conversations where men dominate or if the give and take is more equal, when men are asked afterwards who they think spoke more they perceive that women dominated the conversation and spoke too much. Men are also far, *far* more likely to interrupt women than vice versa. 
I’ve always found it cute that grown men who wear other people’s sports jerseys have such a problem with the uggs/northface/leggings combo. 
[removed]
Anything with "but you're a girl/boy",  " girls/boys shouldn't do that"  or " it's because you're a girl/boy". 
I hate how men think it’s gross for women to do things men themselves do. For example, fart, burp, have hair in places other than our head, smell when we sweat, etc.
I'm not very feminine at all besides for my overly girly voice and looks- a male friend once described me as "a man with a vagina". I'm praised for "being original" yet I'm also harshly criticized at times and looked down upon for not being feminine. If I let out a girly giggle over something cute or silly or if I do something kind or nurturing (like baking cookies for friends) or if I act typically feminine at all, it "scares people" because they're "not used to me acting like a girl". But then I also get some "You should act like that more often". I've noticed things like this for other not traditionally feminine women. Can people make their minds up already on what they want us to be?
When you have nice legs and wear shorts you are 
- trying to seduce men
- slut

But when other people wear shorts and their legs arent as nice as yours
- the weather is warm
broad shouldered women are inherently unattractive because of their “man shoulders”. as if having wide shoulders makes them less of a woman and defines their femininity. every modern women’s fashion media outlet i’ve seen tells women to dress to conceal and diminish the size of their shoulders. why instill shame in these women about something that makes them stronger? 
I hate when people (women and men) are talking about either being pregnant or wanting kids, and someone inevitably asks if they’re hoping for one sex over the other. The answer is often, “Oh a boy! I don’t like drama” implying that girls are somehow inherently dramatic. 

I also don’t like the answer, “Not a girl, too much money for weddings!” Like, seriously? First, she’s not even born yet and her only value is in getting married? Also, you’re planning to have to pay for it because she won’t be independent? Also, enjoy paying way more money for your boys to drive (auto insurance) and paying for all the shit they break, etc 🤮

Kids grow up to reflect the values you instill and surround them with. You don’t want drama (what the hell is that anyway?), don’t condone it. You don’t want to pay for a wedding (🙄), make that clear up front. What a lame reason to dismiss the joys of having a girl. 
My biggest is the idea that not wearing make-up to work makes you unprofessional. Unless my job involves the wearing of make-up, my professional behavior has nothing to do with whatever pigments and creams I choose to slather on my skin.
Last summer, I was working with one of my least favorite people I've ever met on a job. We got lunch at Dairy Queen. Some 15 year old girl came out and brought us our food, I told her thanks. 

As soon as she turned to walk away this jackass says, "She ain't got no tits!" Loud enough for everyone to hear it. She was visibly taken back by this and I was as pissed off as I was embarrassed. I got up and ate outside by myself. He thought it was hilarious. 

I grew up with three sisters, all very close in age to myself. I know how comments like this can stick with a person, especially a young girl. Made me sick. I took it upon myself to tell management about it and nothing ever happened.

I, thankfully, quit that job about 2 weeks afterwards.
When someone mentions that a woman “let herself go” after getting married or having a child. As if a woman’s value is based mostly on her physical appearance. I’ve never heard anyone say that their husband “let themselves go” by having a dad bod or going bald, why just women? I feel like there’s this societal pressure to hurry up and lose the baby weight as quick as possible. As if you didn’t have enough to worry about after having to eat for 2 and then popping a human out of your body and then breast feeding and caring for it around the clock. 
"why does the law favor the women in North American and European countries? Why do women hold "ALL THE POWER""" - Recent Immigrant Men 
When I was heavier, I was constantly put down for my weight. Now that I'm slender, I get shade from other women for being skinny. A coworker gave me crap for exercising because "you don't even understand being overweight", and my husband's coworker called me a "skinny b*tch" jokingly after a few beers... I barely know her!
That a women who is empowered and knows what she wants is instantly labeled as a “bitch.” More specifically, “a stuck up bitch.” 
"Bossy" is almost exclusively used on girls, and is seen as negative, whereas "assertive" is typically used on guys and is seen as a positive trait. It's almost like they don't want women to be in a position of power or something.
That we cannot be friends. Most of my close friends are women, and just like regular people, we can run the gambit from catty to smart to thoughtful to mean to lazy to drunk to annoying to amazing to perceptive. It astonishes me how many women think that "I am not friends with women because I don't like pedicures and gossip" - I'm in 3 Fantasy Football leagues, have a grouping with pistols and rifles that would make a marksman blush, AND have well-manicured fingernails. 

E: Also, that because I am thin and fit that I am somehow "shaming" fat people or overly into my looks. Nope, I just value my own health and appearance, and that's not shallow or self-absorbed, and yet, if I don't admit that, I'm playing dumb. 
"Women only want guys who treat them like shit," which is the scared sad boy way of saying "I can't deal with my flaws so I'm projecting them onto women and expecting them to suck my cock even while I criticize them."
that short women should wear high heels and tall women shouldnt.Let people wear what they want for fucks sake
I've heard the whole "PMS is just an excuse for women to be moody and eat more"...umm you think women want to feel this way? And everyone experiences different things when their hormones fluctuate. This bothers me.
Yesterday at work our web designer told us he wasn't going to use the photos we spent hundreds or dollars and many hours taking on the website they were taken for, because they were of women doing yoga, so that's not fitness. He conceded to use them for the health section, but a woman literally standing on her head doesn't exactly fit that section. I'd like to see him attempt half the shit our professional did and say it's "not real fitness, like weight lifting."
If you’re feminine, you must be stupid and vapid and you probably have daddy issues. If you’re not feminine, you must be aggressive and mean and you probably have daddy issues.

Actually, accusing women of having “daddy issues” at every turn is also cringey.
Men can wear the same outfit to work every day, women always have to have something different. 

Women are far more likely to criticize other women for what they wear. Men have to stop being blamed for that misconception, that is on women. 
[deleted]
When this was said a few weeks ago by Grassley:
https://www.google.com/amp/s/www.vox.com/platform/amp/policy-and-politics/2018/10/6/17945182/grassley-republican-women-senators-judiciary-committee

It was my birthday week, I was in the middle of yet another surprise 7 day work week (nonstop since mid July), and I had just overheard my male coworker (same title, rarely works weekends, he's younger and less experienced than me but gets paid more) making phone reservations for Saturday (my birthday) to go play fucking frisbee golf. 

As if the entire hearing wasn't enough of a reminder of women's place in this country, hearing a bullshit excuse about women just not wanting to put in the hours really got under my skin. 
Men get the "dad bod" excuse but women who are over size eight are "lazy" "unhealthy" "ugly" "gross" and so on. 
Pretty girls don’t do .....

I was having a debate last week with someone online and after proving my point with sources, they obviously couldn’t concede they might have been misinformed- so instead said “pretty girls aren’t so arrogant”

1) Proving a point and disagreeing with you is not arrogance 

2) beauty has nothing to do with it

3) I don’t care whether I am “pretty” to you at all
That women have to have shaved legs when wearing anything shorter than ankle length. If I don’t feel like shaving my legs today, then I’m not shaving my fucking legs. I don’t care if you’re standing behind me in line at the store and get grossed out. We all grow hair on our legs. Get over it. 
The implication that feminine women can't love things like science or math.
That the things teenage girls like aren't EVER cool. All of those male Hollywood stars who started as teen idols but hate that image can go fuck themselves; without those teenage girls they wouldn't have their careers. 

&#x200B;

&#x200B;

&#x200B;
Only the erasure of my traditional femininity.


*edit:* As a clarifying example, there's a user on here who posted they down vote anyone who says anything identifying with the expected gender roles. If they like makeup, keeping a home, raising children. Not political stances, just how they live or things they like that fit with the stereotypes. I of course understand people wanting to define themselves and not be boxed into someone's definition of your existence but the notion of then hating someone for naturally being who *they* are.. is boxing that person into your definition lol.
That a woman isn't doing her duty by having children.

That a woman with long hair after 30 is irresponsible. 

That an unmarried woman means she is selfish, difficult, etc....

That a woman wearing makeup is too high maintenance and a woman not wearing makeup has low self worth.

That a woman older than 30 is past her prime and is ugly.






I am older, so I remember men at work saying that women were mere 'decorations', and being objectified/sexually harassed was 'normal'.  Only pretty and slim women were valued in the workplace.  I am so glad that is (mostly) done with.  There is still mansplaining going on, women being told we are not as smart, or not having our opinions valued - but I see that changing with my generation and the younger generation.   The "good old boys club" makes me cringe.  I may be labeled as a 'bra burner' but who cares?!
How a woman can't ever really be into comic books, sports, or video games. She's always doing it to impress guys. When did women enjoying anything remotely male automatically become a tool to impress men? 
When I express a thought and the response is "does your husband know you feel this way?"

This is a political debate, Kevin, not marriage counseling.
"Haven't we basically solved equality, I mean" some dude in my poetry class. Over the teach bringing up the concept of patriarchy, when we were analyzing a old poem by a female writer.

I'm a guy. Just wanted to share this reccent story.
Just because I don’t want to wear a dress or revealing clothes... doesn’t mean I’m insecure about my body... 
When women say they have more male friends than female like it's a badge of honor.
When men says that women only dress from women and men don't care how you look/dress or your body type. Yep, men definitely care. 
My biggest one is generally (at least in my experience) only a judgement made by other women. 
That because I never went into to labor, both my children were delivered by c-section and then i chose not to breast feed, that this somehow makes me less of a women and certainly less of a mother. It really grinds my gear when I hear women hating on women for doing things differently then they did! I am a woman and very much their mother, my choices were made for a variety of reasons (personal, medical, etc) and I dont feel like I should have to defend them to anyone.
Anytime I hear 'cry like a girl' or 'run like a girl' or basically anything '...like a girl' that's said to imply that the way a girl or woman does something is inferior, or because it's seen as weak (crying) it's feminine. I mean, I've heard some pretty good crying and wailing from boys!

Probably the whole thing is a reflection more on toxic masculinity than anything else, but the entire culture of anything that women likes or does is inferior reeeeally pisses me off. Pisses me off 'like a woman scorned'. Yeah I can keep going....but you get the point.
That girls only get haircuts if they're heartbroken. I've seen girls do some drastic stuff with their hair and too many people make some offkiltered remark about how "her man must've just left her." 
Not smiling enough. Growing up my dad always said, "A woman's most beautiful feature is her smile." (He honestly did this innocently, we had a good conversation about it a year ago). That coupled with my sister constantly telling me I look angry and that all her friends think I'm angry and upset all the time because I don't smile led to a lot of problems. 

There's a lot of things that went into my inability to interact with people without hardcore overthinking but this was a big one. The idea that women constantly have to be smiling or they have resting bitch face is ridiculous! If I'm not smiling, it's for a reason. Women don't have to be happy or look happy all the time! It's exhausting!
Women "don't need to be (physically) strong".
Being asked whether are you PMSing for no reason
When people assume that a woman who doesn't wear makeup/dresses/skirts/heels and/or who doesn't shave must be suffering from internalized misogyny
That you are worthless/unhappy/sad without a boyfriend or husband when you are close to 30 of age.

"Don't you want to be happy like X? Having husband and children?" A asked B, who thinks the idea of marriage is being tied down and won't make her being free, she's happy and loves her freedom. And this kind of question is what makes her unhappy and she kept asking me if she's really unhappy. To the point she went into breakdown when someone showed her picture to a man, and then told her that the man said, 'she is not bad' but blah blah blah blah about her physical appearance.

My country is almost fully conservative (LGBTQ is almost forbidden and even punished), and this kind of question/criticism of being single in your late 20s when you are a woman isn't rare at all. Being older than 25 years old and not marry yet, is frowned upon, making people think you are an 'old virgin' no men wanted. And that's sad.

EDIT: making my sentence better. bad English.

&#x200B;
Everything people assume about me because of the way i look. I'm barbie pretty, basic af and like makeup, so apparently i can't like casually playing games like gta or saints row, drive tractors or even have male friends because they're acting all weird about it. JEEZ. MAYBE I WOULDN'T IGNORE YOU IF YOU TREATED ME LIKE A PERSON.
Not a criticism, but when I drink beer and men are  like "whaaat, a woman liking beer?! But that's a man's drink?! How can such a tiny feeble human drink a whole pint of something?" Obviously that isn't said, but there's so often a clear element of surprise when I go out for work drinks and order a pint. Worse is the far more common response of congratulating me on my excellent choice, making a way bigger deal of it than they've made about say other women who chose gin, or men who chose beer. I recently went to a restaurant with a man and a woman; those two ordered wine, and I ordered a pint. Obviously the waiter comes over, and without asking plonks the beer in front of the man, and the two wines in front of the two women. I just stared at the waiter while swapping them over. Is it too hard to just ask who's having what? 

I could go on with beer based rants, and booze in general. A bloke at my work recently got told off by a *colleague* for having a 'gay' drink of a gin and tonic. So many issues here... Can we not just all enjoy our booze in peace?! 
It makes me cringe when women are told to be more classy. I see it a lot online about female celebrities who are Tomboyish, dress unusually or enjoy dressing sexily. As if the only correct way to be a woman is to dress like Kate Middleton or Audrey Hepburn! Urgh!
“You don’t need to workout, you already look amazing. You wouldn’t want to gain ugly muscle.” Okay, great buddy. It just so happens that I like to workout for the endorphins and strength. Also, you know, GTFO with your stupid opinion.
“You’d look nicer if you smiled more”  

How about go fuck yourself. You’d sound like less of a creep if you heard yourself speak.
If you aren’t smiling, going out of your way to make everyone feel welcome and comfortable, you’re a stuck up woman. 

I kid you not an old man said that about me last Friday at a bar because my friend and I didn’t talk to him or smile as often as he would have liked. 
Single women (especially when they’re older) are seen as lonely, insecure, crazy, or desperate to get into a relationship. If a man doesn’t want to settle down it’s not a big deal. Unless he’s creepy 
As a woman I shouldn't be drinking beer.  "Wine" is more appropriate. TF it's a damn drink!
There would be the ONE girl who is loud, a liar, or a terrible person. Suddenly we are all (insert gendered insult slur here.)
That we are too emotional or drama seekers. 
Criticism of breast feeding/feeding in public. It was really stressful because I took public transit while my daughter was a newborn and we had trouble with latching, so I couldn't just pop her on.   No one ever said anything to my face, but I was always trying way too hard to be discreet. I've heard enough people give their shitty opinions about this though, so I know my discomfort and sadly, shame, wasn't without reason. People for sure criticise. 

I'm pregnant again though, and you better bet I won't give 2 shits this time. Your attitude really is different with a 2nd kid. Lol. 
Someone once told me this :

You gained weight, you are one huge woman. You better off losing weight.

And again someone once told me this:

You are skinny, why. Do you have family issue, or what. You better off gaining weight. 


Basically the idea that traditionally feminine frivolous hobbies and interests are silly, while men's are to be respected.

Think about how people perceive: romance movies vs action, enjoying crafting vs. sports, makeup channels vs. gaming channels, spending money on clothes/makeup/skincare vs spending money on tech. Look at Pinterest- and entire social media platform dedicated to DIY but it's been reduced to a punchline about mason jars because it's userbase is overwhelmingly female. 
Common criticisms? Literally every single one of them. There is no need to criticize a woman for enjoying something harmless, that makes her happy. LIVE YA DAMN LIFE.  
Criticism & resentment for being anything that exceeds *moderate*, *average*, *usual* or *normal*
“You should smile more.” 
All of them, really. 
Women don't like *insert culturally masculine activity* they just like to *insert culturally feminine activity*. It's in almost every comedy show and it's gotten really dull at this point.

Just because your culture doesn't promote, that women like these things, that doesn't mean they can't enjoy them. 
I once won a pull-up contest and my dad didn't believe me and said "what?? You can't do pull-ups!" yet I can do more than my brothers but if either of them said that he would have easily believed them 
I’m not sure if, as a male (bisexual if that gets me brownie points?) I’m allowed to comment here, but the biggest one I loathe is other women telling my wife to “just smile more”. 

Back the fuck up. She smiles plenty at home, and at the comic book shop, and anywhere she’s fucking happy. She doesn’t need to smile for you, or any other person. 
I hate the way the colour pink has become something bad. Or only to be associated with cancer charities. I can like pink and still be a feminist. And sparkles!! 
Calling an athletic girl manly yet also still using the phrase “throws like a girl”... why isn’t there a positive in-between? 
Wearing make up = easy party , brat, dumb girl.
No make up=dirty,lazy,stinky no self steem girl
Why she is wearing that. 
When people criticize us for wearing fuzzy sweaters and uggs because we are only following a social trend and not wearing what we like/think is comfy. Dumbest thing ever. I'm sure there are some girls out there that only wear it to be cool but damn. For me they just comfy. 

And one more thing. When women like to be there and raise up other women we get called a feminist. There's absolutely nothing wrong with being a feminist but if you aren't one and you constantly get called one for being supportive to other women it's stupid. Real feminists could take offense to that as well 
‘You throw/ catch like a girl’. Unless you’re using your vagina to throw the ball how exactly does a girl throw differently 😡
That I'm somehow succeptable ( or not smart enough) to pick up on the BS you're trying to feed me while hitting on me. Cat calling included. 
Wanting kids/family by a certain age is somehow desperate. No. It's not. It's fucking nature. 
Not to brag, but Earlier today I found a cache of them that my cats have stolen. Now I’m living large and frivolously once more.
Three days. It’s so stretched out that I have to loop it around an extra time to get a good ponytail. It’s time is short
Dear diary its day ten...
It has started to rip, and I fear that soon everyone will see my wild mane. Its uncontrollable and worse it creates a thick blanket against my neck that causes unbearable heat. I can get momentary relief by using my hands but alas nothing can help me this summer but my last remaining hair tie. I must head to dollarama soon... that is if I can get off before the shop closes. Lord help me.
Holy shit, get out of my head!

I'm on my last unbroken claw clip. A tan one bought in a 3 pack for 8.79 at Walmart.

I would murder anyone who touches it.
I will buy a brand new package of hair ties that are almost gone within a week but the very last one always lasts me a month. 

I just hope that wherever my hair ties go, they're happy. That's all that matters.
I have 4 daughters ages 15-22 and myself using rubber bands in this house. I buy them by the 100’s and they just vanish. We should literally have them covering our floors but they are nowhere to be seen.
Over 2 weeks now. I keep telling myself to pick up another pack but I forget every time I am at the store 😂
Rations are low...
Morale is down.. 
I don't know how I'll keep going anymore...I am losing this fight...Every time I turn around, they keep disappearing. It's a fight between me and my frizzy hair while I try to solve the missing of the hair tie
It's been about 1.5 years since I noticed. They don't sell this kind or any kind I like here. I take it off with my jewellery when needed so I don't lose it. I take it off before a shower so it doesn't get wet. I say 'no' a little too aggressively when others ask to borrow it. Even in a pickle. I do not feel guilty. They don't get it. I don't care.
It’s been the last one for A few months now. If it’s not in my hair it’s on my wrist!
This is honestly the best question I've seen on this sub in a long time.

I chopped my hair all off so my hair ties are languishing away in a drawer in the bathroom.
What worked for me is one Christmas I relieved a small and charming cookie tin (somewhat bigger than a soda can, more wide and short, but I would guess close to the same volume). I wanted to keep it as decoration (it was not Christmas themed, had the colors in my room) and I got the idea to deposit my hair ties in there. It got very sad/ warped after a decade+ so I got a similar size decorative box from home goods with a very easy lid. 

Secondly, I have a little jeweler tray in the bathroom, where I also tend to put down my hair ties. 

Between these two I always have a stash. I buy replacements once every few years now when the elastic wears out.
I could literally buy a pack each week, end up losing them all / leaving them in my car or anywhere else just to cut my socks and use it as a hair tie till I buy another pack the following week. The struggle is real.
Almost all of my hair clips are broken  and I'm down to the last two, won't last for a week or two and I have to stock up on them. Luckily we are almost back to normal so I can go shopping.
I flicked my last one at my wife right after our wedding on Tuesday, decided to just accept my fate and look like a monster.
6 days. I’m down to a scrunchie. They’re harder to lose so this one is going strong.
I always think I have one, or none, but then I find a bunch all at once. 

I blame my cat, she likes to play with them, as wel as bobby pins so there's generally a stash under the couches or beds.
It's okay, I recently found 2 more in a box in my garage. Straight up made my day. I've now dedicated a drawer in my bathroom just for them. They sit quietly, patiently waiting their turn.
See, I have the exact opposite of this problem right now. I bought a bunch of hair ties in bulk because my cat steals them no matter how well I think they’re hidden. Except I forgot where I put them and bought even *more,* only to find my stash a day after lmao.
I have the hair of 3 people and I never have fewer than 2 goody basic black band strips at any time because they constantly snap on me (and those "thick hair" ones are bullshit)

ETA: when I say strip I mean a full set of 20
One pack lasted me two years, I’m so proud of myself. I think I took better care of them because my boyfriend purchased for me as a little surprise gift. I would complain about the hair ties I was using at the time would tug and rip out of my hair. It was such a small gift but it meant the world to me. 

Okay but anyways, lost them all recently and new pack will be arriving Sunday lol
I’m a guy but with long hair, it’s been three weeks and it’s not left my sight. Thanks for the reminder to buy hair ties
My sister has lived off of one single hair elastic for over a year now, I swear. When it's not in her hair, it's around her wrist (even when sleeping). 

I didn't fully realize this until I moved in with her and asked to borrow a hair tie... She truly had no others and no plans to buy more lol
I literally can't find the pack I just bought so I just went through all my purses and found about 6. I will guard these like a dragon with treasure.
I've been Curly Girl for a year now (lots of rules like scrunchies only). So I have about 30 unused hair ties stashed away. Wish I could give them to you all.
I'm down to 3. It's nerve wracking because I use 2 in my hair everyday.
Lol it never occurred to me this is how it really is. When I open the pack, I use each once. When I’m down to my last one, it will last for at least a week until get a new pack.
We've had an FFP2 mask mandate and an almost 7 month lockdown here in Vienna and I was down to my last hair tie _before_ any and all stores closed again. So I salvages the elastics from overused masks, knotted them to a loop and used that as makeshift hair ties for over half a year. I still cannot believe how well this works. Both my hair is black and so are my masks, so literally it was unnoticeable.
Not to brag... But I've been using the same hair tie for about 5 years now. I finally found the perfect ones, bought a few packs of them... And I've only pulled out 2 to use if I want to change up the color every so often.. And they're so magical, not only are they indestructible, but they are like magnetic I swear... At this point I feel like it's impossible to lose them. Even if one falls somewhere random, I somehow always manage to find it.. 

Please, no autographs..
My cats love my hair ties and it's so cute when they play with them that I can't bring myself to take them away. I found over a dozen ruined ones under the couch last week, and it's been months since I've felt the security of an extra hair tie.
I lost my last one this week. <cries in thick hair in Florida>. I'm a grown-up, but I always get them one at a time from a jar at my sister's house, lol. She's got a daughter and they've both got decently long(but not weirdly long) hair. Guess I need to go check in on the family this weekend.
*laughs in bald*
I don't use them anymore. My hair is shorter these days. I collected a big amount when my hair was long. The non-elastic ones. The elastic ones damage your hair. Gave most of them away to my niece. Kind of made a big deal out of it. Only thing missing from 'the giving away of the hair tie ceremony' that day was a dramatic background soundtrack.
There's no such thing as a 'last hair tie'. There are only  "available right now' hair ties and 'possibly available at some future time' hair ties, due to their naturally transient nature.
I mean, I have lost it already 💀
You ladies run out of hair ties? I keep magically rediscovering my lost scrunchies in my room 😂
I'm down to about....4. they are all precious.
Keeping on my wrist at all times!! “My precious!”
Seriously why is this a thing?!? Why am I like this? I have been down to my last two for months. And I hate the ones left too. Pinch my hair so bad.
on my last one. i started looking under the bed
for more 😭😭
I have an emergency backup stash under my bed, with my dust bunnies.
Partner “where’s the remote?”

Me “dunno” 

[_rummaging sounds_]

Partner “there was a hair tie in every crevice of this couch” 

Me “YESSSSSS”
Opposite of this problem:

I decided I prefer my hair short and no longer need hair ties but now I will randomly find them everywhere.
Reading this is insane. I’ve been using the same hair tie for almost a year, I remember specifically when I bought the package in August of last year. The hair of the women here must be incredibly voluminous to ruin hair ties so quickly, I’m a bit jealous. But I also recommend buying hair ties that aren’t glued together but are just made from the same piece of fabric, they last a bit longer.
Since covid, after my husband decided to grow out his hair, we have been fighting over a slowly dwindling pack of thick hair ties. So yes, the demand is high, supply is low.
This is never going to happen again. I have a trove of hair ties in the depths of my linen closet. If I run low on hair ties, I’ll dip into the stash and replenish it before it can get low. 

I’ve been burned before.
I finally got a pack of 5 yesterday! My husband hasn't had a haircut since Mar'20 so his hair has grown loooong. Both of us have been keeping a close watch on our individual scrunchie for several months.
2 months. Got a bit tied up with other things that I haven't got around to get new ones. It's tough out hair.
Can’t relate, I just bought a new pack not too long ago. But to those of you in that final hair tie stage, hang in there ❤️
Just picked up a new pack of 50. I’m loving large y’all
I cut up my old pantyhose and stockings, so I always have an abundant stock! Those are really kind on the hair as well.
A couple of weeks ago I bought a pack of 100, that came in a nice little zip up pouch.

Very rarely do I get to say this, but I stand by this life choice.
The feeling of needing to get your hair out of the way, like *really* needing it, and then going in to tie it only for the stupid thinks to bust on the last twist. 😭
I have a precious black one that came from a pack of 30. it broke last week but I tied it back together because I refuse to lose a good soldier.
Not a women, but tend to prefer my hair long and have started wearing it in a ponytail. 

Girlfriend keeps her hairties on her water bottle and phone popsocket, so I have been doing the same. I always have one or the other, so it seems to work well for keeping them safe. Cats will sometimes run off with stray ones, or they snap, so have to occassionally restock though
Omggg the CLAW CLIPS! I need this large, thick one that’s always sold out at Walmart and I know I have like 3 hiding around the house somewhere!!! Just had to buy another on Amazon lol
This morning. I was wearing a blue and black outfit and usually have one blue and one black scrunchie on my wrist, but I don’t know where the blue one has gone! Truly ruined my plans to look a little bit co-ordinated.
Male here. I'm always down to my last one, and so is my girlfriend. Who then, unscrupulously, proceeds to take it from me, pretending to be unaware of the hair tie drought. Eh, at the very least, this weather gives me fabulous curls
I have these special ones that I used to buy at target, but the major retailers no longer carry so i have to buy them on Amazon or eBay in overpriced three packs. The other day noticed I was down to 3, and didn’t want to risk running out so I made sure to submit an order. (To be fair, I bought my last 3 pack a few years ago, so my little hoard lasts me a while.)

By the time my order was delivered, all three of the remaining hair ties had snapped. I mean…what? Normally I can go weeks without one breaking? So to have them all go like that so quickly, it was like they had a death wish.

Damn hair ties. But at least I don’t have to worry about it for another few years now. 🥴
I can literally go through a hair tie a day when I have a fresh pack. Not intentionally, but they just grow legs. But when I’m down to my last one, I can make that one hair tie last me up to a month (yes it’s taken me that long to actually remember to buy them lol).
I actually have a bit of a hair tie journey. I used to never have a hair tie when I needed it because I hated how tight they were around my wrist, and the few that I would stretch out enough to not hurt to wear I inevitably lost. Then my husband picked me up a pack of those telephone cord hair ties when we were at the beach and I had forgotten to bring mine.

Those are a game changer. They aren't as tight as regular hair ties, but they are so much easier to pull out of a ponytail and they don't hurt to wear on your wrist! But, they are annoying to wear while writing or typing. Because of that I didn't have one when I needed it and ended up using a pencil to put my hair up and really liked the way it felt. 

THEN I bought some nice wooden hair sticks, looked up some youtube videos about putting your hair up with hair sticks and that's what I do every time now. So much more comfortable and often more secure than hair ties, and it looks really cute too! Have my hair up with a hair stick right now in fact!
I hated this so I learned how to use a pen to put up my hair! But then I also lose pens pretty quickly...
I'm the opposite. I'm the only one in this household with more than one hair tie BECAUSE I'M THE ONLY ONE WHO BUYS THEM. They need to stop stealing my ties!! I now have a special lil ring to keep them on that stays in my part of the house and the others will maybe, eventually get the hint that they need to buy their own.
I am very particular about the hair ties I like, they can't be too thick or too thin. I have straight and fine hair so it needs to have some grip, but it also needs to be super comfortable on my wrist. I use it until it dies or until my hair has been falling out of the ponytail every time I do an exercise class for a month and finally accept that it has betrayed me.
I collect them off the side walk after this person i let stay at my house seemed to have collected EVERY SINGLE ONE 😒 people drop/steal them allot for some reason
Lol I literally can’t cope without at least one “emergency” hidden hair bobble 🤣
[deleted]
I don’t have any at all, and my hair is just starting to be long enough to tie back, so i’m using a headband.
Sometimes I make a hair tie out of shoelace remnants
I switched to scrunchies about a year ago, bought a 12 pack. I've lost one, the elastic broke on 1, the stitching came out on one. But the rest remain functional and don't pull out my hair, plus they don't like yo hide the way hair ties do.
Dude mine doesn't even stretch anymore, cause I've used it for so long
When I moved in with my boyfriend I bought a pack of hair ties. This was three months ago. I now have none. It’s a tiny apartment. I’ve come to the conclusion he must be eating them.
My niece needed my last one when we are at the water park last weekend... I've been on edge ever since.
The struggle is real! I found these amazing hair ties at Ross. I loved them so much I would buy another pack every time I went to Ross. So now I have quite a few, but...... they no longer have them, haven't seen them in months! It's just a matter of time before my stockpile dwindles. It may take awhile, but it WILL happen and I WILL have a breakdown!
Amazing how one runs across things at exactly the right time (or so it seems).

After years of treasuring it, I recently broke one of the legs on my last octopus clip. I'm heartbroken, and I'm hoping the ones I found online are of the same 4 year quality.
I’ve found that I’ve been losing them a lot less since switching to scrunchies! Also a lot less breakage
I'm down to my Two Last hair ties. That are PERFECT for my curly hair but not for straightened hair. I'm with untied hair at 35°C because they are in plastic and they... Slide down. Too fast.

[this crap right here](https://www.amazon.it/dp/B089M9BN12/ref=cm_sw_r_cp_apa_glt_i_RH1P1B11M16P1TFPGNHY)
If your in a pinch, you can remove the elastic band from a disposable mask and tie ends together to form a loop and use as hair tie.
I just came for shopping because I have no more left. Last one snapped yesterday.
I'm in my mid twenties. I realized earlier this year I was down to my last hair tie... I'd never bought my own. I've been hoarding the same hair ties my mom bought me in high school. I finally bought some more recently though, haha.
Two months
I have to use two, and I’ve been on my last ones for about two months. They’re getting too stretched out and I keep forgetting to pick some up when I’m at the store.
I've been using the same to scrunchies for almost three years now! I've become very protective of them
It's either tied around my hair or my wrist!
Lmfao
I have not owned a hair tie my whole adult life. I'm 35.
How did you know?
been a while, i wear it like a bracelet 😅
I think scrunchies have made such comeback because they’re way harder to lose. I bought 5 and I still have three! How? I have no idea.
Hahaha, I dunno but yes
About 2 or 3 weeks now. It’s literally hanging on by a thread 🥴 where do they GO?!
Just bought a new pack the other day! I only ever use scrunches or small hair ties for braids anymore. Those small ones are so easy to lose. They always seem to break when I least expect it too.
So I know I’m late to the party but my 12 yr old daughter has decided that my favorite hair ties are her favorite too. But silently. So almost every day, we play this unspoken cat and mouse game of retrieving and hiding the “good” hair ties. Some days I’m up, some days, I am breaking into my emergency glove box stash. It’s exhausting. And so fun!
Look, now I know I’m not a woman, but I do have long hair and can relate on a very deep level. I’ve had 2 hair ties for probably the past 6 months or maybe even more. One is a green scrunchie and the other is a lil black elastic tie, and DAMN do I treasure them. They always go in the same place when I put them down, and I mildly panic when I don’t follow my own code and can’t seem to find one or the other.
I have this great trick of treating each one like it is the last one. I only pull one from the pack at a time, then put it on the cold water knob or my wrist if I'm not wearing it in my hair. If they get placed anywhere else in the house, the abyss claims them.
I started buying scrunchies for this very reason. Bigger and less easy to lose. Plus my cats favorite toys are hair ties.
I work with mostly men and the amount of times one of them has had a spare hair tie for me after my last one finally kicked it's last thread and died is phenomenal. They often have one in their pockets/van from partners that they give me. Those guys are great. Last time my supervisor went to the shop at break and bought me a large pack of multicoloured ones. I like to think he was just being sweet but it was probably because of the amount of times I kept running out
I gotta tell ya...

At the retailer nearest me, they will randomly put those black Goodie hair ties on sale, 90% off. I got 10 packs of 27 for $3.00 total. 270 hair ties...for $3. If I get down to a single one, I'll be so mad at myself.
“Last hair tie” girl I bought a 40 pack so that I’m never down to my last hair tie lol
This will never happen to me.  I keep some in my car, my bedroom and bathroom doorknob and a pack in my bathroom, plus some in my travel toiletry case.
Ever since I started using pens and pencils to hold my hair in a bun I no longer fear losing hair ties tbh.
Honestly, I don't remember, it's been a couple years since I switched to scrunchies. Apparantly scrunchies are a lot harder to lose. Highly recommend.
I was fine... until my partner grew their hair out during the pandemic. Now, I have to fight for the one remaining one that seems to be available at any given moment.
I put a picture of Suga in my hair tie jar. When I can see his :] I know its time to get more. I have long hair and 2 daughters. Sometimes I pay them nickles for each hair tie they find.
I have very thick and coarse hair, which might sound nice, but it is actually a pain in the ass when it comes to maintenance. 

One of the issues is with tying it up. Only a very long, wide, and highly elastic hair tie can tame a difficult ponytail for me. I haven’t been able to find new ones to buy in years and I’m down to my last one, and I’m freaking out lol.
This thread has blown my mind.  I have no less than a million at all times. A single hair tie lasts me months.
I almost never used to have this issue because I hoard them like a maniac. However my husband has started growing out his hair - started do to covid but then he (and I!) began to like it. He's reached a point where he can tie it up and does so recently because of the summer heat. NOW ALL MY HAIR TIES ARE GONE. Like, I get it, you are new to this and don't know the value. But still.........
My husband has been letting his hair grow and so he’s been needing some hair ties. I’ve only given him my back up supply, not my “good” ones. He keeps losing them. Now he understands why I get so frustrated when I can’t find my hair ties. They just go poof out of existence. We don’t have cats, so there must be a portal to another dimension where all the hair ties and left socks end up.
I wear at least one hairband on my wrist at all times, sometimes up to three. I am never without a hair tie, and let me tell you, women and men with long hair love me - I’ve always got you when you’re out.
For the past couple of days I’ve been desperately searching under couch cushions, pillows, furniture… it’s hot as hell out here and I need to get this black blanket un draped from me. I know I lose them but also my dog steals them and chews them apart. I had just bought two packs. They’re all gone. Not a single survivor.
I have the opposite problem. I think I'm running low and buy more (usually hair pins) and then I find out where I've been leaving all the other ones when I take them out whilst trying to sleep.
I have been living on my last hair tie for around... 2 years now I think? I will get murderous if anyone steals this from me. If it's not on my wrist it's in my hair. If I'm taking a bath it sits beside my glasses which I immediately put on after drying myself off. If I'm sleeping it's in my hair holding it on top of my head in a bun.

I. Will. Fight. To. The. Death. If. Someone. Steals. This. From. Me.

I didn't even buy this hairtie, I just picked it up from the ground while I was on a walk but it's so high quality and hasn't loosened after years of daily use. It holds my hair in a secure ponytail in three loops and a perfect bun in two. If I lose this ponytail I will seriously cry because it will be a huge loss.
Late to the game here, but I had been down to one for about a year now and I keep very close tabs on it.    


Yesterday after Dysoning my apartment yesterday, I turned around and saw what I thought was the world's biggest roach on my living room floor.  Imagine the range of emotions I went through from seeing it, having to kill it, and discovering it was actually a scrunchie the Dyson must have left behind.
Was down to one, found one of my kids frozen hair ties and we are back in business baby
I have short pixie cut hair and the freedom from the ties is *exhilarating*
I just lost my last one yesterday and I got so desperate in this heat that I tied those strands on the sides of my face mask to make a makeshift hair tie until I have time to go buy some. 

You never know the worth of some things until you lose them
It's like my birthday all over again when I find one under the seat of my car.
I always know there’s at least 2 under my bed at any given time so I’m good to go
Omg. I just noticed at this very moment the one in my head is probably my last. Thank you for you kind words I will go to Walmart later 😂
Hair ties, man. I have ONE that is a good snag but like 8 of these velvet ones that do sweet fa at properly holding my hair up longer than half an hour. I do often use them to sleep/do chores/messy jobs… I NEVER lose those ones. Why? Even if I drop one I always find it. The good snag ones? The aforementioned last one is last out of 10 pack I bought last week. Ehhhhh haha. I don’t understand haha.
Ever notice that the longer you use it the better it fits your ponytail? Like too tight when brand new?
Several months, I’m down to one last large satin scrunchie. I bought a replacement months ago but they were terrible for my thick hair, so I tried to track down the specific ones I bought but the seller took them off the marketplace. Pray for me, guys!
Mine snapped yesterday… so sad…
I wear it on my wrist. It's dear to me. I had 5 of them a couple weeks ago but my 15yr old neighbor has a POS mom who's in jail right now and the lil girl borrowed all my hair ties. 😜
You know what I love this question because hair ties have been on my mind lately lol. I keep breaking mine and I buy the hefty thick ones that have good stretch in them. Nothing gets you mildly infuriated in the morning rushing to get ready for work like your 1st, 2nd and 3rd hair tie snapping while you're trying to put your hair up....I switched over to those fluffy elastic ones, I do not know what they're called but last time I wore these is as a kid in the 90's when they were cool. I think they're back now and they're pretty cute I have a plain black one and when I put my hair up in this thing it does not fall out! It's also a big thing so hard to lose and easy to store. I recommend.
WHERE DO THEY ALL GO?
Never! But your question made me laugh. :-)
I went to a wedding. There were people getting ready all around me that would say, "I need a hair tie!" And I'd take mine off my wrist and hand it over. I don't know how or when I kept putting a new one on my wrist. But at the end of the night, when I was hot at the reception, I had run out 😔
Got a packet of bobbles in January, I return them all to my big box of make up and toiletries. Every so often when I sort through the box I pick up all the loose ones at the bottom and put them back in packet. It does feel good to have my life together lol
I have a drawer for them... and I'm always losing them anyway!
I have purchased at least three 6-packs of those little metal snap clips and they have all vanished. I’m desperate and have resorted to wearing my headphones as a headband even when I’m not listening to anything.
I bought a jumbo pack, but the issue for me is theyre not "the one." 

I lost that perfectly stretched one and sm still irritated
When I had long hair, I would always forget to pack extra hair ties any time I went away on holiday. Then my one hair tie would break on the first day every time. I never learnt.
I had 2 good ones left for several months. I shaved my head and have found about 5 of them since!
Me!!!! Terrified of stretching it out so wearing it very sporadically until I can buy more haha
I don't use hair ties.I don't like tying up my hair because that always cause headache.I wonder I have soft skull or something.LOL.I wear my hair up in a big claw clip when I'm at home. All other time I  just use a tiny claw clip and let my hair loose.
Mine goes from head to wrist, wrist to head. I wear the same one until the elastic starts to deteriorate. I’m on my third or so hair tie from a package bought last summer. I am finding that the brand new ones from the package aren’t even lasting long anymore because they’ve been stored so long. 

What do y’all do when you take out your ponytail?  Shoot them across the room and leave them where they fall?
dude with long hair here  
at first months.  
then i bought 100 of them and i have 25 in my car, 25 in my bag, 25 in my drawer, and 25 under couches and tables
Not to braaag but I've had the same 9 hair ties for over a year now. 3 of them are even older than that.

They're those coily ones like a phone cord.

Basically each one has a specific home. At the end of the day, any hair tie I'm using goes on the dresser. Then over the next day or two I'll put it away in its place.

I've got two in my purse, one in a dish on the side table, one in my night stand, one on my dresser, one in the bathroom cabinet, one in my travel toiletry bag, and two backups (unused so far) that I keep with my jewelry.

The secret to my success? I don't have a cat. :(

(I use a similar way of keeping track of my lip balms except they just immediately get put back in "their spot".)
I still have many but i'm onto my last good one and when the one before that broke i basically stopped using this one
I have a bunch but I FINALLY have one stretched out just the right amount, without it being in danger of breaking. Now THAT is the real accomplishment. So of course I’m sure I’ll lose it here soon.
I bought like 10 at one go.
I’d say i have under ten, by some miracle these ones don’t break and they are a different material, a type of stretchy fabric. I paid so little for them at ardenes but they’ve lasted a couple years.
I keep finding little hoards of them so it’s going pretty well. I’m on my 4th ‘last one’. We’ll see how far it goes. Also I tend to find a new one hours before I lose my current one so it’s kinda perfect. It’s been 2.5 weeks!
I have one gimme beauty thick hair tie left and I always keep an eye on it!
My last one, 2 months
I used to have long hair and just use my hair as a hair tie. 😅😂
You’re hilarious and I do the same thing. I try hard not to lose them and toss them when they wear out

I keep extra careful track of a few of my scrunchies 

Also I now kinda like those weird spiral ones
Since the beginning of the yr. im surprised it hasn’t snapped yet...
I think I've been using the same one for over four months. It's crazy how fast the rest of the pack goes quick and the soul survivor holds on. I might just fully switch to scrunchies since they're harder to lose 😝
I bought a pack of 250 of the nice knotted elastic ties from Amazon - in like, 2016. I spent maybe $15 and I have never bought another hair tie since. Not a single one.
So I used to have really long hair, but a few years ago I cut it short and no longer needed hairties. Except not my hair has grown out so much that I need to tie it back or it drives me crazy.... but is it worth it when I'm cutting it short again soon? (I did cave and buy some. No idea where the set is so I've been holding on to this one as if it's my last. It's so much harder to keep track of one that's too small to fit around your wrist!)
I squirrel them away EVERYWHERE! So I have never run out of a hair tie. I also have a history of them breaking on me (thick hair), so part of that is due to being paranoid that I'll break yet another one and not have a backup available.
I upgraded back to the scrunchie. Best trend to come back from the 90s.
About three months. It outlived its brethren and I’m not sure how much longer it can sustain holding my stupid-heavy hair.
We just had a trip away and needed to find a creative fix for something with just what we had with us.  My daughter had a spare hairband and that would have been perfect to save us but she refused to give it.  It wasn't even her last!
I have a ton of hair ties and still treasure 1 like its a rare diamond. It's just the right amount of stretchy lol
Lol! Since COVID lockdown last year I have been religiously picking up any stray ones on the floor and fighting my cats for them… I did a very good job and still had quite a stash when shops reopened! Then I bought another pack of them. You know, in case another lockdown. Feeling very luxurious.
Went into isolation with 3 hair ties. 6 Days in and I somehow have one left. I've scoured the flat but they really are lost forever, leading me to conclude that they have a use-by date after which they vanish in to thin air.
Oh God. This is embarrassing. I'm a curly head and I've been down to my last tie for over a year now, I believe. I just wear it on my wrist when my hair is down and I simply haven't gotten new ones. It's a part of my own body now.
I bough 10 last month, I used only one and lost all the others, I shall never lose this one. 

Also before i bought those I had one for like 2 years
Been over an year. Haven't bought any new hair ties since the pandemic. The one that I have now, I clutch it like Gollum.

It hasn't given up on me yet, surprisingly. This is the only hair tie that has chosen to not disappear.
I cant believe this is a thing. I thought it was just me lol.

Ties? Where are they? Was like my first thought this morning as I grabbed my second to last one and thoughts of "where did that one scrunchie go i found by accident in the laundry"?
The same one has been keeping me going for about 6 weeks, there is one emergency backup that isn't quite broken yet, but should probably be in the trash.... At this point I'm just seeing how long it will last.
I know I have more than one.... But where I stashed them I'm uncertain
Not to scare anyone, but if you have a cat and notice you’re missing a lot of hair ties you may have a bigger problem. Years ago my old roommate’s cat woke me up in the night vomiting up the biggest wad of elastic hair ties I’ve ever seen (no exaggeration, it must have been taking up most of his stomach), and he ended up needing surgery to remove two more that had migrated into his small intestine and got stuck. We think he’d been stealing them from us and eating them over a period of about three to four years which is why we didn’t notice sooner.

My hair ties stay securely in a drawer when I’m not wearing them now, so I have tons these days.
Not that I’m running low, but I’ve had the same hair tie on my wrist that I’ve been using for around half a year now. I really gotta find out what brand it is because, wow.
Ohhhh, time to brag. 

This previous lil gem is not on my wrist for over a month. At this point its no longer about not wanting to get another pack, it is about what we have been thru together.
I'm a guy with long hair..  i have been able to make a man bun for more than 9 years now.. 
i have been on one hair tie for alteast 10 months.. its so stretched out it goes around my wrist 3 times and its stil loose..
I have a hair tie I’ve been using for a couple months. It’s one of those plastic coated coil ones that look painful but are actually amazing. And when it stretches out, you just blast it with a hot hairdryer and it shrinks back to (almost) the original size.
What are the chances?! I just noticed about 2 minutes ago that I was down to my last hair tie and that I was going to need to guard it with my life.
I keep forgetting to buy more, been using my last surviving one for months, always have to make sure it’s safely next to me on my night Stand before I go to bed
So my hair is naturally dark blonde. It goes lighter in the summer and darker during winter. As such, I have “blonde” and “brown” hair ties. Problem is, the blonde ones are thicker and hold hair better and the brown ones stretch out too quickly. I was rummaging through my supply box and found about 3 full packs of brown ones and no blonde ones and I want to cry. I’m holding onto this blonde one for dear life because I can’t remember where I bought it from!
1 year, but now it's missing. I saw a hair tie on the sidewalk yesterday and seriously thought about picking it up.
LPT for men browsing this thread: wrap a little cash around a stack of credit cards and ID and hold it together with a hair tie. That's your wallet. Now wherever you go with your partner, you'll be the man with the backup hair tie.
I had an amazing hair tie (one of those telephone cord ones) and I almost cried when I thought I lost it.

Turns out my bf took it to work cuz he liked playing with it... Poor guy didn't know what he was doing.
Men here
I do this as well. I currently have had the same hairtie on my left wrist for over a month. It is the only one I have and when it is not on my wrist or in my hair I feel like I am missing something/ not complete.
Seriously where do they go? 

I did move my couch once and found about 5 but that still doesn’t justify the amount I lose!
I’ve been using the same hair tie for around a year, maybe more

It’s completely stretched out but it serves its purpose

No idea where I’d be able to find a replacement in my house so it’s well looked after (it has a specific place even I’m not using it)
A few years ago I ordered like hundreds on a Black Friday sale and somehow kept them for a really long time. Then a while back I discovered the spiral ones and got rid of most of the regular ones. Why did I do that??! You still need the regular ones for braids, which I only do once or twice a year but still. I’ve been on my last spiral one for a while and have even had resort to using a regular one a few times. I’ve gotta get to old navy to get more soon or I’m going to be in trouble. Random surprising fact: the old navy spirals are tougher than the other brands I’ve bought.
I double up now because nothing is more heart wrenching than going to fix your hair before going into the store only to have it snap. Then sweating your ass off because you have to walk around the store with your hair down...
I bought a set of silicon hair bands that were so lovely! My hair is thick so elastic ones stretch and snap quickly but these ones stay in place and don’t snap!

I bought 2 packets of them (20 in total) but the green one is my favourite and its on my wrist right now waiting for the moment when I tie my hair back. The precious will not leave my sight.
I always keep spares. If I see I'm running low I order more.
Just today. I realized today lol.
This is a thing? I thought I was the only one.
At least a few weeks, it’s amazing how long the thicker ones can hold out for

This thread has made me realize how many people let their cats play with hair ties. Guys please for the love of god don’t do this. Everyone thinks it won’t happen to them, then all of a sudden your cat stops shitting, needs thousands of dollars in emergency vet fees and surgery because it’s got a hair tie stuck in its intestines 

I can’t even count the times I’ve had cats come in to the office that have ingested hair ties. I know cats love them, but the risk is just not worth the reward. A laser pointer is $1 and requires even less work to play with
*I* keep fairly good track of my hair ties because I mostly use scrunchies and the loopy plastic ones that look like old phone cords. My *partner,* however, his hair is much longer than mine (mine is above my shoulders, his down to his waist), and he has officially lost all of his.

I only loan him my worst ones because they're as good as gone the moment they've been handed over...
CTFU oh, you got me good. 

i've been hunting for one since July 4th weekend when I lost my last one that id been holding onto for at least 3 months.

ive now resorted to only using my decent collection of scrunchies. bonus - theyre impossible to misplace

funniest part is ive gone to cvs twice & forgot to even buy any.
Oh man I thought I misplaced mine once and spent 3 days looking for it like a crazy person. I love my clip more than any of my other possessions
For those wondering where the hair ties are. Likely under the couch, bed  or wherever the cat  loses it’s toys if you have one.
Can't relate, I have them scattered everywhere throughout my life. Example, I was being lazy on the couch and wanted to put my hair up, felt around on the floor under the couch BAM hair tie.
I lost mine🥺
I bought this pack of matte grip Bobby pins that I'm obsessed with a year ago, and I can't for the life of me remember the brand or shop.

I lost them all, but every now and then one will turn up under a cushion or in a pocket, and when it does 🥴
Seriously: where are all my hair ties, clips, bows, ribbons??? WHERE ARE THEY??? I'm losing them for decades now! Is there a parallel universe filled up with lost hair accessories and socks and earphones?
I lost my last hair band and now I’m using the ear string of a face mask lol
My precious. I've it on me all the time. Either on my hair or on my wrist, I'm not letting it out of my sight.
Legitimately over a year. It’s a good one
Haha!! Its so true though!!!
over a week! 
I've been keeping it around the pop socket on my phone whenever I remove it after using.
It's a neat trick since my phone is always with me so I can take it out and put it back safely whenever I want to!

the other women in my house all have short hair so if I lose this one, I can't even borrow lol
I love you.
Reading this as a dude with no hair, I just want to go on Amazon and order a couple thousand of these and send them out to y'all like santa clause
About a month.... I just leave my hair loose nowadays bc I always forget to pick up a pack
If you buy a large spool of elastic from either Amazon or eBay, you can make them yourself, at whatever length you like, and you'll never run out! Any pantyhose laying around work too.
This is super random and but I'm hoping to find a person that lost thier phone. I saw a notification  that they posted in here. If you live in Winnipeg and you lost your phone last night, msg me.
At least eight months 👀
I bought a whole pack from Amazon a while ago. I am still clutching most of them closely.
Since my cats eat them I make sure to always have an ample supply - I also keep some back ups on my PRNDL (gear shift for an automatic car) just in case. If it’s getting close to my last one it lives on my wrist or in my hair until I can get more.
[removed]
I would not live life on the edge like that, you animal.
When I buy a new pack, I’m always careless at first. “Oh this hair tie has one single hair on it that I can easily untangle and it will be as good as new, but I am just going to get a new one instead” then when I am down to my last one, it’s completely stretched out with several little balls of hair wrapped around it and looks disgusting.
No because my mom uses my hair bands and she always misplaces them. I don't like to get it back most of my good bands get wasted by mom getting hair dye in them. The only one I have now is stolen by me from my friend
In response to the cats eating hair ties- I had to switch to plastic because the cloth-like ones were like crack to my cat. He would chew them out of my hair while I slept
I use scrunchies cause they're cute, but I dont need a hair tie to put up my hair. I just twirl it into a big knot and it stays up!!! It's good because I don't need to worry about it getting hairtie knots, and I dont need to throw my life away for a hair tie. When I found out I could do that, I never went back!
I had my hair tie for weeks, and I knew it was my last one on my wrist but I was just way too lazy to go into my drawer and get a new one. And I finally lost it when I took it off my wrist because it was annoying me, and my cat grabbed it, ran off w it, and I’ve never seen it again. Not sure if I’ll find the hair tie in the basement, or in my cats shit
🤣🤣🤣
🤣🤣🤣
I buy them in like 100 packs, I have them stashed everywhere. It's like I'm one of those people that are paranoid and have weapons stashed everywhere, but its hair ties. I dont have a problem. I can stop whenever I want.
Funny you ask, my hair has reached hair tie length for the first time in 5 years and I found one single orange (?!wtf?!) hair tie in the far reaches of my bathroom cabinet. 

Now it goes with me everywhere and is treasured beyond measure.

My SO suggested I just buy some but I’m hoping I never ever have to.
I legitimately can’t remember the last time I saw a hair tie. I have two scrunchies for a month now and protect them with my life
I can usually hold onto a hair tie for months, I NEVER take them off my wrist and my hair is always up in a bun. But now that I have a toddler they start disappearing more… Also I still have the one I wore when I gave birth over two years ago.
As a bald man, I find this discuss completely fascinating.
Came here to comment that my cat has stolen SO MANY hair ties.  I see I'm not alone in that.   
She doesn't swallow them, but she tosses them up in the air and then chases it.  I find them all over the house.
I'm pretty sure that the hair ties that disappear/ break almost immediately are the ones that are sacrificed in an unacknowledged eldritch ritual to give the last hair tie incredible lasting power. I swear this is true. More than once I have had a fresh pack of hair ties where every single one except the last snapped one after the other in the course of five minutes and then the last one lasted a good three months as my all day everyday hair tie. More than once this has happened! 

Also, anyone ever notice that if someone else gives you a hair tie it is somehow "better" than yours even when it's the exact same ones you get? just lasts longer, always on hand etc?
2 weeks already. had to use a normal rubberband for nearly a week before i found this one. i do not recommend it.
There are three of us with one hair bungee each,  we won’t put them down whilst we brush our hair in the morning. Sunday is hair TLC day and we need to get to Boots before then in case one of us has to cut precious out of our hair.
One time we have to use a sock and an elastic band to make a scrunchie, we don’t want that again.
I have very thick hair so hair ties break easily (even the ones that advertise they won’t). I bought this set from some random store and are the most durable and comfortable yet (can’t remember the brand name it wasn’t your typical brand like Goody). However, I can’t find any of them except for two of them.
My current hairtie is hanging on by a thread or two and currently rests beside my bathroom sink where she will lie dormant until she is called upon again. Sure I have other hair ties somewhere, but this one is The Chosen One and has been very faithful. I desire to see her to her last moments before mourning and eventually finding another hair tie that my rabbit has somehow gotten a hold of. She has been my Champion for like 2 weeks
Yes!!! It’s like finding treasure when I find them in random places!
The regular goody ones I have stashed in so many places I’m not sure I could ever have a last one. I usually buy a new pack when I see ooo new colors! I do have these awesome ones called SwirlyDos from Hawaii that are like phone cords. They’re way way stronger than invisibobble and I’ve only ever seen them in Hawaii at the ABC store. Once I found them at Uwajimaya in Seattle. I haven’t been to Hawaii since 2018 and it’s going to be a hot min before I can go again and I keep close track of my Swirlydos stash and heat them up with my hair dryer when they stretch too far. So far so good!
I'm down to the last not-stretched, not-torn-and-retied ponytail holder.

Its.. a struggle. Partly because it's lime green. 

I'm going shopping soon so ill buy another pack
My cat doesn't eat them, but they are her favorite toy. They're small and light so she can fling them all over the place and chase after it. Sometimes she leaves them in her water bowl. Also, my boyfriend has hair past his shoulders so he uses them too. I just buy packs of 20 at a time, so I can always find at least one.
My cat steals mine but doesn’t eat them, just plays fetch with them and stuff. I’m never down to my last one. If I’m missing one I just pick one up from the floor.
rubber bands it is!
So I stopped using cheap hairties and now only use hair scrunchies that I get online from a (somewhat) local shop. I've so far managed to hold onto all 7 that I've bought from there and it's been almost a year. They are a bit pricy and so I work extra hard to not lose them.

They are amazing quality scrunchies and some are made from antimicrobial material. They hold my hair in a bun tightly with just one loop over.  I cannot recommend them enough. [Check them out](https://chelseaking.shop/) They also have a frontline workers discount program that you can sign up for if you work in Emergency/Healthcare services.
I was down to one i had it on me 24/7 for like a week I went out of town for a couple days with my bf a few days ago n had a mini panic attack cause I couldn’t find it then found it on the floor and yelled out “my precious” hahaha we came back home I cleaned/organized my room and found a bunch now they are safely put away and I can live freely once again 😂😂
For me it's like my hangup of trying to never let my gas tank get below a quarter tank. If I see I only have 10 hair ties left, I buy at least 100 more. Lol
Every time I notice I only have a few left (5 or less) I immediately buy more.  But I’ve recently moved to scrunchies again.  I have a favorite one (it’s hot pink velvet material) and I guard it with my life. No one touches my scrunchie
I got so sick and tired of running out of stuff like that in highschool so now I always have a healthy supply
I recently bought a pack of 100 off amazon, I feel invincible
I am looking to invest in soft and girly scrunchies. I know, I know, I'm a wealthy woman. Meanwhile, thee elastic has a throne in my bathroom, and gets a special place in my suitcase during travels.
It's been about a month. It is either in my hair or on my wrist. No in between.
I actually have none left, and stole my mom's hair tie, so about 2 months now I've been treasuring it. I put my hair up when I take care of my horse. And I put my hair up after I shower. That's it. Otherwise it stays on my wrist or in the center console of my car
Been using just one for months now. It broke today :(
Ohh yeesh...the year was 2014, & believe it or not, it was the last year I ever went clubbing because of my damn last hair tie. 

We were @ a club called My Apartment & a few of my girls (3 to be exact) were the kind of girls who loved to walk into a club tipsy (pre gaming) in high 👠 & had to be carried out & looked after later...🤢🤮🚽🧻..if you catch my drift. All 3 of them had long hair and only 1 of them still had enough brain cells to carry a spare hair tie for herself in her clutch. 

However, this particular night was bad to begin with😖...it was one of the 3's birthday & she liked to go extra hard on the sauce. It's safe to assume we pre gamed at her house and she had already emptied 🤮 her tank before we left. Oddly enough clubbing was awesome and the night ended with us hauling the notorious 3 + a few back to the birthday girls house. Soon me and 4 other girls had our usual 3 + 1 in the birthday girls bathroom gearing up for a different kind of party 🤢😵🚽🧻🪣🚿🪠🧼. I got the birthday girl because she was my best friend and also because I could not get her to let go of me to save my life. My way of dealing with her was easy as long as I has her long and luscious hair under control with a hair tie. That night, I could not find a single one of hers (just kept finding decorative fru fru ones that won't replace a hair tie), which was weird. I knew the one around my wrist was my last one, so instead I took the one I was wearing (my hair was upto my shoulders only) & tied her hair with that. Thanks to My Maker I didn't let her hair go because as I was about to, I felt that hairtie snap underneath my grip on her hair & die. What transcribed in the next 3-5 seconds changed my life...

....I just leaned her head on my knee as I stood up to take my last hair tie from my list, I pulled the hair tie off my wrist in time to see her have another big 🤮, this time half her hair was in vomit 🤢 which I did not get a chance a flush. When she saw that, it caused her to 🤮🤮 much worse, on her hair, herself & me and then it happened..😱...she got on her knees and fringed all her hair back out of the toilet (like women do in open women, & it makes a beautiful photo) spraying the ceiling and ALL OF ME. My last hair tie broke as I tried to save my own hair from her chunks which even made it to my mouth 😖😵🤢🤮🤮😫😫😭😭😭. 

Since then I was done clubbing. ✔
Done drinking with my best friend. ✔
Found a more reliable hairtie. ✔
And have stashes of my precious hair ties (some hidden).✔
However, because I don't want to compromise on the quality of my stash, I make sure to use, replace, & replenish as needed 😁.
I have no idea where mine go. They just somehow disappear. The other day I noticed I only had 2 left, so the next time I went into town, I made sure I bought a pack of 20. In 6 months' time I'll probably have to buy another pack of 20 😅
So, I used to have this issue and then I started using Teleties and I have yet to lose one or break one. 1. They are too expensive and fancy to lose so I am more mindful of them. 2. They are tough AF. 3. They look cute ony wrist so I don't take them off or shove them in my black hole of a purse.  

I am not affiliated with them in any way, just bought some on a whim at a little boutique and they just solved all my hair tie problems. Also my bun game is strong now.
i have long hair and when i couldnt find any hairbands around the house i used a sock... :(  desperate times.
Once a month I find my cats stash of them so I never really “run out”
I bought a fresh pack 3 weeks ago and I'm still using the first one I took out. The elastic is showing. 

Now ask me where that whole pack is...
I thought I was down to my last scrunchie last week. I did eventually find three more. That didn't keep me from buying a new 12 pack. 

Freaking anxiety.
The longest I've gone is like a month. It doesn't leave my sight
It’s Bobby pins for me!! Had an entire pack of them and now I only have 2!
Have had the same one for 1.5 years. It’s so stretched out.
Also, *bobby pins*
I just go look in my daughters rooms. They always swear they don’t have any but just take them out and chuck them. I find them under their beds. They get a new one EVERYTIME. It drives me bananas lol
My inability to tell people no caused me to let my coworker borrow my last hair tie. I really hope I remember to ask for it back before she leaves 😂
I am wearing my last hair tie and am not taking it out.  I recently found where my cats are hiding my hair ties so I have a couple more now but they are all on their last elastic string.  Guess I need to go shopping for more eventually.  But not before I resort to holding my hair up with literal ballpoint pens.
I have 3 bobby pins left
My gawd must be months. All I could find where the ones that snap. I pathetically tried tying them vs buying more.
What a lazy POS
My boyfriend has very thick, curly hair down to the small of his back. Its luscious and I live vicariously through it. He has had the same XL super hair tie since before we started dating, nearly a year ago and counting. If its not in his hair, its on his wrist. He even sleeps with his hair in a pony tail. No mere average hair tie could stack up without snapping!
… see I’m one of those people. And it seems like every time I notice I’m down to that last precious one - it snaps. Just to remind me how fragile this whole life thing is.
I'm traveling rn and am down to one good hair tie and one hair pin 😭 those are stored very securely right now
Ever since I found myself waking up every morning and madly tossing my sheets and blankets about as I would desperately search for it. Or I'd find myself with my head hanging over the edge of my bed peeking hopefully under it at the dark corners where hair ties can hide. Now I keep it in its own special little pot. It is green with polka dots. Like a precious little snake.  Its the same with bobby pins. I will start of with a whole herd of them and in no time its down to a few stragglers found in random places.
when they break I tie the ends together to extend their expiration date...........
I bought three sets of 12 yesterday. I don't want to open them, because I know I'll loose 35 of them in the first week.
**Status: Locked** as this thread has run its course and most of the new comments have been rule-breaking. 

&#x200B;

**Please report any rule-breaking comments for review.**
Never again will I agree to additional roles with the promise of a salary increase without getting it in writing. Doubled my workload, didn't get paid a dime.
Take a laxative without drinking a bunch of water. I thought I was going to die
I love how almost all of these are dating/sex stories and I was just going to say staying up all night cramming for a test. Slept right through my alarm, missed the test.
Staying at a job for 18 years because I kept thinking it would get better eventually. 

I finally realized I was in an emotionally abusive relationship with my former employer. It wasn’t me. It was them. 

I moved on and am finally actively appreciated for my contributions. 
I’ll never beg anyone to stay ever again. If you don’t want to be in my life, I don’t want you here. 
One time I went tubing down a river in my small town and it turned into a day from hell.  

So I lived in a town of 900 population for a number of years up in northern Minnesota. There was a river in the town that didnt seem to get much tubing action.  Our family used to come up and we would go tubing down a river that was a hour away.  This year we decided to go local. So my FIL drove us there in nothing but swim suits.  We had no phones and no shoes.  He dropped us off at the bridge and drove 20 minutes away to where we would get out to wait for us. 

Well we jumped in and everything was going great.  The water was deep and moving slow but not bad.  As we were going a long, we came to a large bever dam. We had gone too far to turn back so we tried to crawl over it with our tubes. The other side was horrible. Muddy swallow water that smelt like poop.  Every step we took, we sank in about 2 feet of mud.  Finally the water was deeper, but the river had soo many trees down on it. We had to crawl over them.  By this time we were out for about a hour, with no end in sight. We kept going because we had no choice.  

It was about 80 degrees that day and dreadfully humid.  The horse flies came out and started attacking our heads. The guys got hit more that us girls, probably because of our hair. So as we float as a snail pace, the river starts geting more and more narrow. There are these bushes on either side hanging down into the water. As we start brushing up against them, HUGE SPIDERS start falling all over us.  We were all screaming trying not to touch the sides.  It was horrifying!! 

We get to an electric fence that is hovering over and across the stream at about 2 feet We can hear it buzzing so we knew it was on.  We slid into the water and pushed our tubes under it and prayed we didnt touch it.

Finally we get through the spiders about 2 hours in, we get too a large tree down over the river. We cant go over it because it's too big. So we all walk out about 30ft in waist high brush , barefoot and practically naked, to walk around this tree.  As we get back to the river, we are picking ticks off us...yes ticks. You would think it doesnt get any worse, but it does.  


So finally back in the river, and by this point we are all dying for this nightmare to be over.   Also it's getting late. It was as about 8pm but in northern Minnesota summer, its light until 10-11pm.  The mosquitos start to come out. So now we have mosquitoes, spiders, ticks and horseflies.   The river starts to become very S like and its taking forever to get to where ever the F we were going.  About 3 hours in we finally see his car.  We cant get to him though because of the curves of the river. So for 45 more minutes we can see him but keep going. We finally come wobbling out of the river soo thankful it was over. As we are getting out we realized that we were covered in leeches.  Yup. We pulled them off and we are all bleeding from scratches and covers in bug bites.

He laughed and said "I got a bit worried there!! You were gone for 3 hours!!  Thought you might be having too much fun!"

It was by far the most torturing experience of my life. Also I was terrified that we were going to have to spend the night out there.


Edit: just realized this thread is all about men.  Lol oops. Well it was my husband's idea to tube this river so NEVER AGAIN. Lol. 

Edit 2: eek my first Gold! Thanks guys!  

Edit 3: I dont want to say where I lived for privacy, but this is the river!

http://imgur.com/gallery/M8z6UDX
i baked a keto cake yesterday.
tasted the same like i imagine the smell of burnt tires.
Never gonna read into someone’s behavior to try to find a silver lining. People show who they are by what they do, it’s really *that* simple. 
[deleted]
Google my symptoms. Diagnosed myself with stage 4  lung cancer. Decided to die quietly at home. Eventually got dragged to an sctual Doctor had  embolisms in my heart and lungs. Lucky to survive that particular bout of idiocy!
Letting a guy pick me up for a first date. It forces you to stay even if you're uncomfortable, and lets the guy know where you live, which is a disadvantage if the date doesn't go well. I let a guy pick me up last month (something I never do) because my car wouldn't start and I wish I hadn't. 
Will never again accept someone's excuse for cheating. I'm monogamous, and if you can't be, boy... bye.
Never begging for someone’s love who puts 0 effort into the relationship.
Accept a pity date from someone I know I have zero interest in. It was awkward as fuck from start to finish and ended with him groping me.
I recently told this story but it's the one and only thing I can really think of: popsicles! I had to take a type of chemo (adriamycin) which required me to keep my mouth cold for the 7-8 minutes it took to administer. I never got the stereotypical "sick" that I expected but I couldn't stomach to see a popsicle after the 2nd round. I stuck with plain ice after that. I'll never have another one again.
Someone who repeats my own thoughts and jokes back to me as if they are their own original thoughts and jokes
Cold night, lamppost, tongue. Need I say more?
Giving birth. I love my daughter, but, not doing it again. Ever. Not for anything. I spent three weeks before in the hospital (got poked with so many needles that I lost count), and she spent three weeks in NICU after. My epidural failed and I wasn’t allowed to have pain meds. I still have nightmares about it. 

And people still ask me when I’m having the next baby. 🙃 
Walking my cat on a leash in the backyard.

She made this unearthly yowling noise while running in circles at the very end of the leash. Then she latched onto a chain-link fence and tried to climb into the neighbor’s yard. When I pulled her off of that, she latched onto my shoulder. At some point, possibly when I was pulling her off the fence, her little claw started bleeding so there’s blood on my shirt from her and I’m bleeding from her scratches and my boyfriend had to come save me.

She’s so energetic and I thought she would love to have a little romp outside. I came in and cried because she got hurt. Never again. She is an indoor bb.
Get back together with a cheater who was manipulative and didn't know what he wanted.
Vodka whole on antibiotics at an outdoor concert in June. Vodka on antibiotics in general. You know actually, just vodka.
Stay after the first “issue” with loyalty. Not necessarily cheating but just disrespecting you in general around other girls (lying, flirting, etc.). Even if you forgive him it sets a foundation of distrust in the relationship that will only deteriorate over time or even worse create resentment. Then you’re 4 years in wondering why the hell that ONE thing from 4 years ago bothered you and you just can’t let it go. Leave after the first lie. I heard it somewhere. It’s true ladies. 
This is not about men, I’m lucky enough to have an awesome hubby.
I will never let my work make me feel guilty about being ill again, don’t have cover for me? Not my problem. I like my job fine but to ask us to come in whilst unwell then make us feel bad if we don’t is just not right. 
I'm never getting pregnant and giving birth again. Most painful 9+ months of my life. 

Edit- I will say giving birth was the easiest part, pregnancy was 100x harder. 
Persuading myself my gut instinct was wrong about somebody. Sorry to say I did that more than once.
I feel like they are all self explanatory so let’s just list them off:

* Never dating someone who’s extremely prone to jealousy again. They stop at nothing to guilt trip you (read: gaslighting, emotional abuse)
* Never dating someone who literally lives in their parents’ basement again. What was I thinking? In trying to prove I wasn’t shallow, I proved I was an idiot. He was 30 btw.
* Never dating someone with a tragic “one that got away” story again. Will not waste my time being constantly compared to someone else ever again.
* Never dating someone who mentions at every opportunity that they were “raised by women”, “raised to respect women”, etc. EVER again. I learned the hard way that saying that shit more than once is a Nice Guy™️ Specialty.

None of these are even the same person. If I didn’t feel like it was my life goal to find my person, I would have given up by now.

Edit: ITT: #notallbasementdwellers & #notallwomenraised The amount of people offended by my personal choices as if it affects them is irritating. I’m turning off inbox replies now, I don’t care to defend my experiences anymore. If you’re personally bothered by #2 or #4, guess what? We (or me + your brother, SO, husband, father, other misc man in your life) are not a match! Crazy how that works!
my ex was fucking insane. he’d get mad at me for not being in the mood to have sex and then try to guilt trip me into it. he didn’t let me drink when I was out with my friends bc his mother was an alcoholic. he didn’t let me go out w my friends on weekends bc he wanted me to stay in with him, even if he had NO plans for us. if i went ANYWHERE i had to tell him where i was, who i was going with, and when i’d get back. yet he was allowed to go out and get high with his high-school dropout friends - sometimes he wouldn’t come home for 2 days straight and to top it all off, 99% of the time he didn’t even bother telling me where he was, and when i pointed out the hypocrisy, he’d call me a crazy bitch. he’d get mad at me over every little thing, he was by far the most overly-sensitive person I have EVER met and it was so annoying having to console him and apologize for shit I didn’t even do just so he’d stop being mad. I put up with this absolute bullshit for almost two full years. broke up with him the month before our 2nd anniversary and he was literally begging me to take him back, promising he’d change, and me being the idiot I was, did. 

one and a half weeks went by. nothing changed, and I dumped him again. he cried to me for hours while i was breaking up w him. I have not shed a single tear over that monster. fuck him.

I will never date a horribly controlling and forceful guy EVER again.
Never hold onto a relationship that isn’t working and definitely don’t stay because the person you’re with can’t financially take care of himself on his own. Cut your losses early ladies and don’t invest 5 years of your life in a man who isn’t the one. 
Not man-related: Hiking into the Grand Canyon from the rim. 

We got halfway down before it started to get dark and we had to go back up, the temperature dropped 20 degrees but it was AMAZING. There are seashells embedded in the rock walls - think about that - and getting out of the way for passing mules was neat, but I wanted to die for a solid 24 hours after. My knees were both shot, my ankles swollen, my leg muscles useless, and it was the hardest physical feat I'd been through before or since. Glad I did it. Never again.
Had a 3-way with a guy I was seeing in college and some random girl. I was a little tipsy but the two of them were very very drunk. She kept trying to stick toys in me which I didn't want... they were her toys... kind of gross. He bit my nipple so hard it was bleeding. I had no fun at all. I still have a tiny scar where the bite was. I broke up with him shortly after too. Don't think I would ever do it again.
Never ever waiting out tooth pain/dental work.  I ignored fillings for a while, was have minor sensitivity one day and 24 hours later it ballooned into a golf ball sized infection where I couldn’t talk because I was in so much constant pain.  Tooth pain is serious! 
Going on a date and hooking up with someone from tinder just to get my mind off of someone else. Didn’t work.  
Never will I have sex when I don't want it. It's so fucking shitty and traumatic. Fuck.
[deleted]
I will never try to be friends with an ex simply because we have “history” after years together. It ended with him being jealous because I moved on and spreading nasty malicious lies about me to our friends. Thankfully our friends aren’t idiots and know me, so none of his lies got spread around very well. The last time I saw him I didn’t even notice him until my sisters pointed him out.
Captain Morgan (the dark one) + coca cola = Captain Coke.

I rarely get hangovers and that was one of the few things that did. It gave me the worst hangover of my life and the sad part is I actually liked the mix a lot. My poor bf took care of me.
I kinda knew these 2 homeless dudes and invited them to stay with me for a little while, they ended up stealing a ton of my stuff that had a lot of sentimental value and some other exspensive hard to replace things. Now I'll never invite anyone to live with me just because I'm afraid of losing my stuff.
I will never beg anyone to stay again. If they don't want to be there, then fine. I'll make sure to keep my dignity and self respect intact.
Go to social events I don't want to go to. It's one thing if it's for work or a wedding, but if people can survive without me, I'm not doing it. I just decided I was adult and I didn't have to go places or do things that make me uncomfortable if I'm not getting anything out of it. 
One night stand. 

I’ve done it a few times and I’m not ashamed or anything like that. It’s just BAD every time. Like the guy doesn’t care about making me feel good or anything, it’s like they’re using my vagina as a masturbation tool. The last time I’m pretty sure the only part of my body he touched was the inside of my vagina. Like not even any nipple or clit action. Over it. 
Sleep with multiple coworkers/supervisors within the same job (only 3). We all know for the most part, humans can’t keep their mouths shut, so once it got out I slept with X, Y and Z at my job I had throughout college, i was gossiped about so much and called the “UPS slut” behind closed doors. To make matters slightly worse, the men i slept with were all supervisors, so you know they thought i only did it to advance in the job. My good friend who worked with me (didn’t sleep with him haha) showed me a group chat with the guys in our work section and showed all the hateful things said about me and one coworker even threatened to rape me if he made a move on me and I rejected him.

I didn’t quit , but after my friend showed me those messages, I stopped talking to virtually everyone at my job except him and I cut ties with the three I had relations with. I had to move my work area and everything.
Let this be a lesson, don’t sleep with people at your job (unless you are dating them), even if it is just a one night thing. Two of them were a one time thing, but one It was a mutual FWB. 
I am responsible for my actions and I’m not playing the victim at all, I was mostly disappointed at my one coworkers who said he’d rape me if I reject his advances.
Also, I did report him and he got fired. 
Wait in a line for an hour and a half during a bar crawl to only get two drinks before they have last call.
During my freshman year in college, one of my good friends (who was deep in the friend zone) told me he liked me and then asked if he could kiss me. I felt put on the spot, so I just let him do it because I felt bad and I was too much of a wuss to say no. 

Never. Ever. Again. 
[deleted]
Noting the signs of narcissism and ignoring them by counting on their better nature. Again and again. I'm done being a sap. 
I’ll never allow a man to make me feel worthless or less than what I am worth again. I was in an abusive relationship for 3 years and he almost killed me. Never again. I won’t even let a man raise his voice to me now. I deserve so much better. 
[deleted]
I binge-ate an entire pound of celery (with the strings in), and had terrible stomach pains for about three hours before having the densest bowel movement of my life.
I’ll never be with someone who doesn’t want to commit when I do. Seems obvious and cliche, but very true. Not at all opposed to FWBs or casual dating/sex, but I am so not interested in balking over the word “girlfriend.” 
* stay in any dependent relationship past my first "uh oh"

* olives

* running as anything other than a bear-escape plan

* working on a sick team

* skipping the hugs and kisses with my friends and family. ever 

* agreeing to do anything that makes me feel even remotely icky, no matter who asks

edit: ok, those aren't exactly "stories" but you might infer the stories from the endings 
[deleted]
Melatonin. Oh my god, the nightmares. The sleep paralysis. The demon fingernails on my neck.
[deleted]
Gas station sushi
[deleted]
Buying a live Christmas tree. 

My husband and I are newly married, in our new house, decide to get a Live Christmas tree as we have only had fake ones.

Cue us buying the saddest, lumpiest patchiest tree in the Marsh parking lot. We decorated her in purple and pink lights, stuck a bunch of weird Adventure Time and Nightmare Before Christmas ornaments, and wired a plastic seahorse to the top as the "star", because we didn't have one, nor find one that we liked. We lovingly named her Lumpy Space Princess due to her awkward and curvy shape. 

We also didn't ever water her, as again- we had NEVER had a live tree. 

When it came around in mid January that we had to get her giant ass out of our Living room, my husband, in his infinite wisdom, made a decision, that I would not endorse NOW or EVER, and dragged her dry, lumpy, tree-ass through not one, not *two,* BUT three doorways, and sent pine needles, dried to *knife-sharp* points- EVERYWHERE.  

They were in my washer, the closed doorway of the dryer, stuck in the carpets and in the clothes, under our bed that the tree was NOWHERE NEAR- just piles and piles of needles ALL OVER.

We clogged one hose of a shopvac and the tank of another, and to this day, I am still vaccuuming up pine needles from LSP. 

Ya'll, I laughed till I cried, and with every laugh, my husband got madder and madder, but it was just so ridiculous I couldn't stop. I am HOWLING and it was just insane how big of a mess it was. 

So yeah- fake trees for LIFE.

&#x200B;

&#x200B;
Never again will I l date a guy without a job, whose parents send him money for rent/food/bills whenever he’s running low. It’s impossible to teach someone like that personal responsibility and his failings were always someone else’s fault. 
Staying in contact after a break up. Give yourself time. If the ex was an idiot like mine was just block him forever. They'll try to contact you. Just stay strong- there is nothing new you can hear from them because you already know everything. Exes in general. 
Dating guys that were too prideful for self-care/mental health/therapy.

First was depression. Second was anxiety. Both are in medicine and were so engrossed in their value as a person being defined by their "image" and career.

I was patient and constantly encouraging them to be more kind and accepting toward themselves, because my sister had anxiety/depression and I understand the biopsychosocial model of mental health and I understand the medical field and toxic masculinity and whatnot. When they told me that they didn't want to work on themselves/their mood, then I knew it was time to go. It's not anybody's fault that they have mental health conditions, but it's how they choose to manifest their condition is important. A condition is an explanation and not an license to behave in cruel ways. 
I'll never try to force something to work with someone who is not willing to put the investment into a relationship. It happened once when I was younger and led to abuse and started happening again earlier this year when the guy went recluse. It doesn't matter if they were 'nice.' I rather have someone mad who actually cares then someone who loves me and won't engage or interact with me. That's not love. I walked away this time and i'm not regretful at all.
I'll never allow someone to treat me the way my old "best friend" treated me. I will not be gaslit or guilt tripped. I have a super low tolerance for that shit now. 
I'll never ignore red flags. Did that with two different guys. The first one, my head was ringing "this isn't right" and yet I kept pushing it to the side. Then I did it again with someone else 9 months later. They were both manipulative gaslighters, and I'm still fucked up mentally from both.

Never again.
Force my husband to befriend someone who is shitty because husband is a good influence. He ended up upset with me and SURPRISE! Shitty guy stayed shitty. 

A gal I knew S had mentioned to me her husband (B) was having a hard time with no good male influences in his life. I was like dude my husband is a great guy, moral compass off the charts! And forced husband to hang with B a few times. B eventually cheated on his wife again and husband & I both felt icky being around them. The entire group of friends S and I shared stopped hanging with me not long afterwards and husband finally shared with me that he was angry I pushed the friendship on him. This was when we started realizing that couples our age (20, 23) were generally not in healthy relationships and we stopped altogether trying to  make couple friends. 
Never again will I have sex in a hot tub. Worst UTI ever. 
Heroin. 
Experiment with pop rocks anywhere else but my mouth. 
Childbirth, for sure. Not much of a story though. I have two children. My pregnancies were okay. My deliveries were fine. My second child didn’t sleep for like three years, though, and there’s not a single fucking chance I’m doing *that* again. I don’t remember a whole lot about 2010-2013 and that’s an awful long time to forget about when you’re not an addict. Sleep deprivation can suck my ass. 

I’ll also never get another inner conch piercing. Hurt like a mother and didn’t heal completely in the couple of years I had it. I eventually took it out because it was still very painful years after the fact. 
Mix friends and finances
When I visited Australia, I slathered a bunch of Vegemite on a croissant and took a bite. Dear god.
I’ll never let a guy in my pants again just because he said he loved me. Equating sex with love is wrong and manipulative. 
Didn’t trust my instincts and was friendly to an extremely creepy Walmart employee who wouldn’t stop talking to me. He tried to grope me on my way out. Guess I’m never giving anyone the benefit of doubt again.
Never again will I put others before my happiness and never again will I let family get away with doing me wrong just because their family.
I lived in a house full of people (who I knew okay when I moved in but then they moved out and strangers moved in), we had shared kitchens and bathrooms but our own rooms and furniture/dishes/whatever. 

The roommates would often host parties at the last minute that went until the time I had to be awake for work. They also broke my furniture because they wanted to jump on the furniture and dance, and they didn't tell me. They ruined my pots and pans, ate my food, and left their food in the pan, on the stove, to rot for weeks. 

After only 6 months of living there, I thought "never again will I live with a bunch of strangers in a shared house". And I never did again, and I am much happier for it. 
Never try to fix things with somebody who cheated on you despite how much you love them.

It’s never the same afterwards.
Never again will I show a photo on my phone without checking the photos to the left and to the right.
Be a people pleaser. From now on my feelings and needs come first and I am allowed to say "No" with no explanation why
Trojan Fire & Ice.
-Let “love” persuade me to stay in an unhealthy relationship.

-Try to keep a relationship going after being cheated on because others (our friends and his family) love us together. If the love and respect were real, he’d have never cheated/started a relationship with another woman while living together. 

Pre and post relationship, these seem like a no brainer. It’s amazing what you’ll do when you’re actually in the situation. His mom and grandmother would call me his “future wife” during service while him and his new girlfriend sat in the back of the church. It truly was a toxic relationship.

-Also, will never buy a brand new vehicle again. 
I considered making a throwaway for this... 

When I got divorced from my husband of 15 years, I decided to just have some fun. I hadn't dated as an adult or anything, so it was all new to me. Met a guy on an online dating site and started having fun. It was purely casual and he was a little kinky. He actually convinced me to try "watersports". Me in the tub and him peeing on me. It was so gross. I almost puked. Lol... 

Never again. Nope. Once was enough to know that it is *NOT* for me. XD 
When I was 15, a guy I was friends with & had zero desire to date asked me out. But to add extra pressure to it, he emphasised how his mother was dying & he feels so alone & has no one, etc. it was a situation in which I felt I couldn’t say no. So yeah, I dated my first boyfriend for 8-11 months even though I really didn’t want to be with him at all.
Dating men who don't want the same lifestyle as me. 
3rd chances. If someone hurts you in the same way twice, let them go and wish them well. 

I gave my brother so, sooooooo many chances to get his shit together. I hope he gets better and stops fucking people over, but I dont want him in my life anymore after everything he has done. Every year or so, he begs for my forgiveness and swears he has changed. I always tell him the same thing "I forgive you, but I dont want you in my life anymore". A couple months after, I see the news article of his arrest for the same crimes he had committed probably over a hundred times. Every. Single. Time. 

I hope he changes. I really do. But I wont trust him again. 3rd chances rarely, if ever, are the chance people take to change. So I dont give people 3rd chances anymore. And you know what? My life has been so much better ever since!
Dating a guy that treated his mom like absolute shit and not seeing that as a red flag. 
Gin. Never again.  

Never will I allow a superior to sexually harass me and touch me and make me uncomfortable again.  Just because I’m female you think it is ok to tell me that the only way I will move up is if I suck your dick. Nope not going to happen. Then there was the time you pushed me down  and got on top of me and held me down while I tried to kick you off of me and get away.  Also why did I come back to this pace when you fired me before over 2 other employees getting mad at each other and me not stopping it when that is not my responsibility. And then you threatened that if you ever saw me again that you would smash my face into the sidewalk to the point that even my husband wouldn’t recognize me. I had to apologize to you? Why did I do that? Why why why!   Was working here the only option for me? Why did I go back? I ask myself this all the time. I’ve been away for years now and every time I think about it I regret and hate myself. Never will I put myself in this situation again. 8 years was enough. You are a piece of shit. 

Sorry had to get that off my chest. 
I'll never stay with someone out of pity or fear again.
Open my car window for a guy who looks homeless and in need. I was at a gas station and this guy walks up to me and motions that I roll down my window. I thought he was going to ask me for money and I was considering offering to buy him some food, but as soon as my window was down--and only half way, mind you--he immediately started aggressively hitting on me. No matter what I did or said, he just persisted. He basically leaned INTO MY CAR and his weight was pushing my window further down so I couldn't drive off without dragging him with me. After a half damn hour he finally gave up and left, and I sped out of there, terrified. I was 16 at the time.
Stay in a relationship with an alcoholic who insists that “this is the last time.” Found empty beer bottles he’d been chugging from in the bathroom. 
Never get into any kind of fwb relationship again. I have too many feelings and I don't know how to turn them off to avoid falling for someone. I was young and dumb when this happened, but being older now doesn't necessarily mean I know any better. He was always super nice to me. Told me he liked me. I fell hard. But he was in love with someone else and would only ever talk about her when I was with him. I kept coming back to him, though, whenever he asked. She wouldn't give him what he wanted, and there I was, ready to give anything to him. Later he moved away, and I never heard from him. Several years pass, and he tried to reconnect with me when a relationship he was in there failed. I noped outta that one super fast. 
Going shot for shot with someone who is almost twice my weight 
Accidentally bit into a fish oil pill
(Warning, I’m about to describe poop in great detail.) 

My never again is taking pain meds without a stool softener and lots of water. I had a major surgery and had a lot of pain afterwards, and they had me on Valium with the Percocet because they didn’t want me moving around. (Cervical spine fusion.) I happily ate Percocets and Valiums for several days and since everything was a blur, I didn’t notice that I hadn’t shit.  I had been eating, too. Not a lot, but I was definitely putting stuff in the pipeline. After a few days I slowed down the meds and started coming out of the funk, and I got uncomfortable. I thought it would work itself out, and I began drinking water and taking stool softeners. I don’t remember how many MORE days it was before I finally just had to shit.  Like, I was blocked up so bad.  It hurt. I tried unsuccessfully but..well there was a log creating a dam if you know what I mean. Finally decided I couldn’t take it anymore. I crammed an enema in and squeezed it in. My bowels began to move. Problem was I really did have a blockage, so when the enema stimulated everything to move, it was just backed up in me.  My God. I have never hurt like that. I was trembling, sweating, crying, on the verge of puking. I collapsed onto the bathroom floor, and as I pushed myself off the floor I heard myself mutter “mommy.”  Like, completely involuntarily called for my mommy. I was 33 or 34 years old at the time. So anyway I finally scraped enough shit out of the way that I was able to poop out the ducking softball sized stool that was holding up traffic, and things improved. I didn’t shit without wincing for a week. And if I take so much as one pain pill I eat stool softeners and water. Never again. 
I went to a concert and was in the pit, being pushed around by obnoxious people for almost 2 hours.
Sleep with a guy I like before we were even dating. He tells me he like me and wants a relationship later, but does respond to my messages most of the time (unless it’s like 1am)
I’ve been married and divorced twice- I’ll never marry again. I realize the mistake in my decisions and choices and have been through therapy - but at this point I see no reason and life changes sometimes so suddenly and unexpected why tie something so tight that it will be hard to get out of if need be? 
Give a manipulative, childish cheater a second chance. Lied about cheating the first time until he admitted it finally and I was a dumbass who basically begged him to stay and did everything to “work on things” on his terms. Cue an entire month of him lying to my face saying he loved me, didn’t want to give up on us, and the other woman was obsessive, a mistake, out of the picture, and a nonissue while he was with her the whole time. He blamed me, mocked me, tried to make me seem like I was crazy, and gaslit the fuck out of me. 

I really pity the other woman because she’s obviously unwell and has crippling insecurities to be with a man who kept her as a back up and second choice for months, and was ok with what he did. But never again will I put myself in that position. 
Date someone who asks me to stop being friends with people in my life. 
Overnight, caring for my dad unexpectedly fell into my lap. I knew it would be work but omfg. I'll never take care of anyone again.

I was spending hours a day caring for him and looking up products and services to care for him. It was fucking killing me. Here most people my age had parents helping them. My dad barely ever did anything but keep us in an abusive upbringing and burden us in his middle age years.  

My in-laws are going to be very disappointed.
Yesterday I left my house. Never again.
Heroin. Never again. 
Having sex with someone because it’s what they expect or because I think I owe it to them. For so long I’ve been afraid that the person I’m with will leave me if I don’t “put out” even though sex is hard for me. Now I’m realizing that if that’s all they want from me, they don’t deserve my time. I’m worth more than that. It’s still hard to say no and not feel awkward though.
Using a shitty ass driving instructor that completely destroyed my confidence. 
Having weed and then reacting terribly to it. 

I think my body just can’t tolerate weed, I spend about two hours feeling like shit, shaking uncontrollably and crying. Never again. 
Winning 40,000$ in one night in baccarat off 400$ at a local casino, then taking that 40,000 to 100k in cash. Then blowing it all in less than 9 months. Next time i’m using it more wisely.
- never staying in a relationship I'm not feeling, but hope it gets better (friendships included)
- never getting into a relationship where the guy pressures me to join his religion (sounds culty, but it was catholicism)
- never dating someone who makes excuses as to why his life is like this (wont quit his shitty job, cant move out of his parent's house)
- never dating a guy who wheres gloves when he drives (yeah...)
- not wasting my home made jerky on a shitty guy I've only been dating a few weeks
- never sitting through another meal with my abuser even though I was told he wasn't coming (I'll just leave)

Never ever going to get myself in debt for anyone, ever again.  Even if they're family.
Ignoring a UTI thinking it’ll go away naturally.

I was “too busy” to go to the doctor before leaving the country for the first time (study abroad for three weeks in Peru). 

Damn near killed me and my kidneys started to shut down. Had to go to a local pharmacy and get life-saving antibiotics, then bed rest for 2 of the 3 weeks I was there.

After returning home, got lots of tests done by my doc. She was very stern (You could have died without the antibiotics) but reminded me several times I was lucky to be alive and there was no permanent damage done.

Oh, to be 18 and stupid. 
Befriending or dating sketchy people to prove how non judgemental I am and how everyone has some good in them if given a shot. There's a reason they strike you as off and have no friends. They're not misunderstood. They're fucked up. 
Letting romantic feelings cloud my judgement of a person.

The last time I went on a date, it was with a guy from OKCupid who also turned out to have some DRASTICALLY different political views from mine...and by that I mean he was making some lowkey racist/transphobic comments throughout the evening and repeatedly mocked my feminist views. The problem is that this last date of mine was also my first date EVER, so the excitement of having actually been *asked out on a date by another human* kinda made me forget about how that person's opinions kinda suck. It took a couple days and a talk with my friends to really snap me out of it. 

I also think back to some guys I've had crushes on in the past and at best think "In hindsight we really wouldn't have been good for each other" and at worst think "What the HELL did I see in him!?" 
Staying too long in a job I don't like. The older I get, the more I treasure my time and the kind of people I spend my energy on.
Be in a relationship without really getting to know them first. 

Never expected to find out I’m dating a compulsive lier/drug dealer/borderline alcoholic. 
Never again will I eat an entire bag of sugar free cough drops in one sitting... Teenage me learned the hard way... 😳
[deleted]
Did coke for my 21st. Was super humid in my place so it got sticky.

Dealer said to use a hot plate to crush it. Heated it up in a glass cup with a lighter and gummed a gram.

Apparently heating up coke is almost like cooking crack minus one ingredient. Never again
[deleted]
Never again will I work a soul sucking job just because I'm scared to make a move. 
TMI but..offering sexual favors (oral sex) shortly after said partner had taken a crap

Also: putting up with cheating, dating grown men who don't know how to do laundry, and doing rounds of fireball shots

edit: just realized the "story" part but these are all pretty self-explanatory: poop smell in face, probably poop in mouth; losing my self respect; wasting a lot of time; getting horribly drunk and embarrassing myself
Butterscotch schnapps 
I’ll never have another baby. First one was premature and second was past due date. Both followed by PPD. It was misery.
White Castle in Kentucky. 

Literally only drove a two blocks tops before stopping on a highway and dropping a mud puddle while my brother projectile hurled five feet away. 

Never again. 
Build an Ikea dresser by myself. 6 hours and several cusswords later, never again. 
High School
Julie Andrews in every way 💕
Dame Maggie Smith!
Dolly Parton.
Slightly related to your question, I just think this is a good idea and loosely fits in to what you’re asking. 

In the UK a female comedian is leading a campaign for everybody to ‘adopt’ a female figure. She said on Wikipedia the amount of women featured is very few in comparison to men and if something isn’t done now in years to come there will be a generation with no idea what these women have done.

She’s asking people who ‘adopt’ the women to be responsible for ensuring their Wikipedia page is maintained and updated
betty white
Mariska Hargitay, she founded the Joyful Heart Foundation, for victims of sexual assault and domestic violence.  She has also been at the front of the campaign to end rape kit backlog and get them all tested.
Jane Goodall!
Nichelle Nichols (Star Trek: Original Series)

She's the Goddess of STEM inspiration and representation.

Edit: If ever one of my comments were to be my most upvoted. I'm happy that it's one about Nichelle Nichols. Thanks for the imaginary internet points, lovelies!
Maggie Smith and Judi Dench.
Angela Lansbury
Brene Brown <3
Malala Yousafzai. Literally shot in the head, but has never acted with hate or negativity (even though that would be totally justifiably). Instead she has been a tireless advocate for women and girls and is such a pure, sweet soul.
[deleted]
Carrie Fisher
Jane Goodall and Dolly Parton!
Maya Angelou
[deleted]
RBG YEAH YOU KNOW ME

(Ruth Bader Ginsburg)
Sally Field
Italy :

Maria montessori 

Rita levi montalcini 

Margherita hack 

And many more
[deleted]
Probably the Skyrim Granny (Shirley Curry is her name, I think)
Terri Irwin! She is just as wonderful as her husband. She continues the conservation efforts, runs Australia Zoo, and has raised two knowledgable, thoughtful children even after the tragic death of her husband.
Jameela Jamil and Kristen Bell
I've rarely heard anyone say anything bad about Michelle Obama, and nobody better even try.
As far as celebs, Kristen Bell for sure. She's like a real life fairy. Love her
Megan Rapinoe
Joan Cusack
Yeah I noticed that the beloved, wholesome, universally loved people (and I'll add Carl Sagan to the list) seem to be white men, and I'm curious why this happens.

For me the first women who come to mind are Betty White, Julia Child, Lucille Ball, and Malala Yousafzai.
Maria Bamford
Kate McKinnon - especially when [she talks about her cat](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=20Vr5pPso2E)
Representing the UK:

&#x200B;

Mary Berry

Judi Dench

Maggie Smith

and good old Queen Liz herself
i follow jenna fischer on instagram, she seems very positive 100% of the time
Sandra Bullock, Betty White, Michelle Obama, and Amy Poehler all seem like they are genuinely nice women!
Marie Kondo
Emma Watson, Lupita Nyong'o, Dolly Parton, Stevie Nicks.
Surprised to see no one mentioning **Rachel McAdams**. Genuinely such a nice and unproblematic person. I guess because she doesn't have a social media account, she's not really front of mind in general audiences at the moment. 

I also love **Michelle Yeoh**. What a fierce and well-spoken lady.
Tina Fey, she is a comedy legend and should be considered one of the greats.
Mindy Kaling!
The Bob Rosses of the world stand out for embodying what are mistakenly considered feminine traits- being soft spoken, kind, loving, nurturing, etc. We don't think of the "wholesome internet women" because 1) there are so many and 2) It's more of what we expect from women.
Maybe the LampChop's Play Along lady, she seemed really nice.
Jameela Jamil! Her "I Weigh" movement is the one of most wholesome things on the internet.
This question is really interesting bc I didn’t realize how different I value the women that inspire me vs. the men. 

For the men, they’re the opposite of toxic masculinity: kind, caring, value emotion, authenticity. They are soft but still strong.

For the women that inspire me, those same qualities don’t seem to impress me. I like women who are loud, a little bit angry. Those who are unapologetically caring, who see the value of emotion and can use it to persuade., in a very real way. And, women who celebrate their uniqueness as women. 

I’m realizing that I’m distrustful of the idea of a “wholesome” women bc it also can look like the bad side of being “feminine”.  Being soft, caring, kind and “nice” is expected in a way that is also oppressive.  

Anyone else getting tripped up by that?
Shari Lewis

Edit - I haven't seen many people mention these truly magnificent ladies.

Sally Ride

Mae Jemison 

Audrey Hepburn 

Marie Curie

Amelia Earhart 

Malala Yousafzai 

Emma Watson



2nd Edit:

Anna Maria Tremonti

Princess Diana
Jennifer Garner
Betty white all the way
Adriene from [Yoga with Adriene](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCFKE7WVJfvaHW5q283SxchA?&ab_channel=YogaWithAdriene)
Meryl Streep, Betty White, Oprah, Michele Obama, Kristen Bell, Amy Poehler, Sandra Bullock, Anne Hathaway, Cate Blanchett etc.
Julia Child. She's a boss.
Amy Sedaris is joyful and creative and is one of the best foils to David Letterman when he had his old show. She's beautiful and classy but gets to be really weird and silly at the same time. Her hospitality books are life changers.
Geena Davis, Lady Gaga, Angelina Jolie, Jada Pinkett Smith
I seriously think that some of you don’t know what the word “wholesome” means.
Laverne Cox
Julia Roberts! ❤️
Umm... MICHELLE OBAMA? Don't forget about that lovely lady who literally sold out football stadiums for a BOOK TOUR. And now the Obama Foundation!
suprised nobody mentioned Emilia Clarke
Winona Ryder.
Betty White!
Meryl Streep, Melissa McCarthy, Amal Clooney, Megan Markle, maybe Michele Obama
Jenna Marbles. Just a wholesome 32 year old lady doing her own thing with her dogs and her plants.
LINDA ELLERBEE.  CAN WE GET A LIKE IN THE CHAT FOR SPREADING NEWS TO CHILDREN?
Lisa Simpson.
I don't know enough about Cate Blanchett to know if she qualifies as wholesome but she sure qualifies as awesome.
Bea Arthur, not only for her role as Dorothy in Golden Girls, but also for her LGBTQ+ advocacy and her support of those who had no one.
The Barefoot Contessa

Edit: and Amy Poehler
Jameela Jamil
Jenna Marbles.
Chrissy tiegen and Betty White instantly spring to mind.
Emmymadeinjapan!
[deleted]
Jennifer Aniston, she's so pure and naturally beautiful. I feel like she's comparable to Keanu because they both have the "zen" vibe in interviews
Dolly Parton and Betty White and Audrey Hepburn.
MARY BERRY
I'm trying to get a tattoo of Bob Ross, Uncle Iroh, Mr. Rogers, Steve Irwin and Dolly Parton drinking tea and laughing together. I love Dolly to the end of the world. I feel bad that she's the only lady but she's the only one who came to mind. On that note actually, if anyone is good with drawing and could make that sketch I'd be happy to buy it from them!!
I love Tom Hanks, but I think the four horsemen of wholesomeness are Bob Ross, Steve Irwin, Mr. Rogers, and Keanu Reeves. 


Picking from the great recommendations in this thread, the four horsewomen of wholesomeness are Betty White, Maya Angelou, Dolly Pardon, and Julia Child.
Emma Thompson anyone?
Dr. Ruth.
I'm surprised no one has mentioned Emilia Clarke yet.

She suffered two brain aneurysms during GOT but continued filming despite recovery (and decided to keep quiet about it to not cause a stir), opened up a charity after her second brain surgery, and is just generally a sweetheart. Such a bright, positive, and incredibly humble person in her interviews and on social media.
I'm super late to this game. Looked but didn't see Sue Johansson. She was a no nonsense sex educator who wasn't afraid to be real and actually talked about pleasure for ladies not just the importance of condoms etc.
Lady Gaga & Malala Youfszai
Jenna Fischer
Julie Andrews and I'm ashamed of you guys for not mentioning her till now.
Carol Channing man, she had never missed a show of Hello Dolly. The only time she was close to missing a show was when she had a cardiac episode. She still made it through til the intermission. Talk about a sweet, quirky woman with a strong work ethic.
Ellen DeGeneres, Viola Davis, Meryl Streep, the ladies from FRIENDS to name a few.
You all are naming a bunch of bad asses, not wholesome women. I love bad ass empowered women, but answer the question asked, yeah? In fact, it's hard to name wholesome women, they don't really make the front pages, ya know? Though, I will say Dolly is pretty damn wholesome! Anne Hathaway gets tons of shit for being as wholesome as she is, they say it's fake wholesomeness... I see a bit of a pattern, really.
Chrissy Teigen
Jane Goodall 🦍
Emma  Thompson?

The internet fun aunt
I scrolled a good bit and didn’t see her, so I nominate Lily Tomlin.  I realized when I heard her voice in Into The Spider-Verse that I am strangely comforted by her presence in a movie/show.
Fosho mila kunis, love that time she defended i think justin? From russian journalists
Natalie Portman. Great actress, yes. But an amazingly intelligent and compassionate woman in real life! ❤
Tig Notaro is a national treasure.
Natalie Portman
Ellen Paige
Emma Watson- young and wholesome 

Amy Poehler- modern day wholesome 

Betty white - peak wholesome  

Carrie Fisher- wholesome missed by many
Anne Hatheway
Shari Lewis! She did Lamb Chops!
Maya Angelou, Betty White, Julia Childs.
Jameela Jamil
Marie Kondo
Emilia Clarke and Gal Gadot.
Rosanna pansino!! The most wholesome woman!
Dame Judy Dench, Dame Maggie Smith, Miranda Hart to name a few.
Emma Thompson, Michelle Obama, Princess Di❤️
ohhhh this is a good question! Enjoying the responses.
Jennifer Garner. Her baking videos are SO CUTE
Julia Child
Cate Blanchlett!
Diane Keaton
Julia Child
Amy Adams
Betty White!
Betty White ❤
Gilda Radner.
Melinda Gates, who runs the world’s largest charitable organization, has a stable decades-long marriage to Bill, and seems to just want the best for everyone in the world. She seems very warm and genuine and humble, despite being one of the wealthiest people in the whole world.
RBG!
Betty White, she's not quite as wholesome as the 4 horse***men*** of wholesomeness but she's still pretty wholesome.  And you forgot Steve Irwin as one of the wholesome horsemen
Sally Field.
Dr Ruth!
jane goodall
Sister/Nurse Elizabeth Kenny - her treatment for polio before the vaccine saved countless, including my mother.
Terri Irwin!
my mum
jenna marbles! ❤️
Jane Goodall
I always find Kristen Bell to be such a cinnamon roll that must be protected at all cost!
Edit: spelling. I’m dumb.
Betty freaking white
I tell myself I have to do three productive things before it's couch time and I leave my phone in my purse until I'm done.  This usually ends up being 3 relatively quick things like water plants, clean cat litter, hang up coats, clear the kitchen table, pick up and throw out old receipts, put shoes back on the shoe rack etc.  Because once I take out my phone and sit down productivity ends. 
I keep my work clothes on, and I try not to sit down, especially not on the couch.

Once I change or sit, it's all over in terms of productivity.
[deleted]
Do not sit down. If I have things I have to get done, I do them immediately. Once I sit, I'm done. 
I am an ICU nurse who works 13 hr graveyard. I used to beat myself up over it. I thought  I could go to the gym or do a chore but honestly I’m just learning to allow myself to rest in the times needed there are some things that can wait. I am physically and mentally drained after work 
I pay shit tons of money for gym memberships and then sign up for classes right after work. I am too cheap to lose my money by skipping out. I want to get my money's worth, so once I spend it, I'm committed to showing up for the class. In one case (I have a gym membership and a dance studio membership), if you reserve a spot in the class and don't show up, they will charge you an extra $5 or $10. I love this policy. Makes me follow up and be careful about what I commit to. 

So I race home to get the dog walked, change in to the appropriate clothing for the activity and back out the door. Now, this kills my ability to get chores done through the week, because by the time I get home from the workout, make dinner, eat, and clean up, it's like an hour before bedtime. 

So put on the sweats, but then go for a run/walk or take a trip to the gym. Just don't sit down and don't turn on the TV. 
I lay down on the floor for a minute. It lets me relax all my muscles for a little while, while it’s not comfy enough or distracting enough that I end up staying there. No phone, just lay on your back on the floor and stare at the ceiling. Then I manage to talk myself into getting up and getting some shit done, before I get to relax for the rest of the evening. 
I’m the exact same, but what I did was pick up a hobby I could do. I started doing crochet about a year ago.
I still come home, change into my pj’s and sit on the sofa, but I sit on the sofa doing some crochet, so I feel like my time isn’t being totally wasted? 


After a long day of work, I deserve to rest. It's not lazy to take care of my needs. I'll get up early to get everything done. But after a long day of work, I deserve to rest. And so do you.
Depending on my day, I might sometimes let me dissolve into this puddle. And it may depend on the current level of busy I am at work.

But generally I have a routine. I get home, I wash my lunch dishes, I get changed into comfy clothes, I turn Netflix on my laptop while I cook dinner, then dishes, shower and then I read. 

If I have chores to do, I do them *before* I get home.
I don't, I embrace it. 

Comfy pants, no bra, a nice dinner and Jeopardy are the perfect way to end my weekday.
I don't sit down. The second my butt touches the couch I'm not getting up again until it's time for bed. 

I usually try to accomplish a few things at once. While I'm waiting for water to boil I empty the dishwasher. While something cooks, I wipe down all of the counters. While my shower is heating up, I remove all of the clutter from the sink and wipe it down. Stuff like that. 
80% of the time, it's goo. Pajamas, wire-free bra, comfy socks, dog-on-couch, make dinner with husband, Netflix, then goo. No shame!

On days where I don't want to be that person, I don't change my clothes and don't even go uptairs first. I hit the pile of dishes that surely needs to be done, tidy up the catch-all areas of the kitchen and living room, water my plants, etc., last night I wrapped some Christmas presents, every now and again I'll go up to my office and pay some bills. 

But mostly, it's goo.
I make a cup of tea and while I'm waiting for it, I'm standing in the kitchen anyway, so I start supper and empty the dishwasher (if there is time). Once food is going, I'm getting up to check on it anyway so I will carry something with me.

After dinner and clean up, it's all over though.
dont sit down! lol. I try and turn on an audiobook or podcast, and listen while i do chores around the house/prep dinner right after i walk in the door. But also, its not bad to just go home and veg once in a while. self care yo. its ok to relax after a long day:)
Funny that I'm reading this at home right after work, already changed and ready to watch some Netflix.  
When I need to not be lazy after work, I just keep my clothes on. While the bra is on, I can not rest.
Shouldn’t there be a bot that goes through all advice from the comments and lists them out as bullet points with a pretty little bow on top?  How can my lazy puddle of goo be too lazy and goo-like to make it through more than a third of the comments? 😩
Accept the goo. Enjoy the winter. Emerge in spring. 
Set ground rules - the TV doesn't come on until XX o'clock or until i've accomplished XX
I put on music or a podcast while I do chores or whatever else needs to get done 
I don't let myself sit down and relax until I'm finished everything. I get home, change my clothes and then get my shit done. The faster it's all done, the sooner I get to relax for the rest of the evening 
I love that you said "lazy puddle of goo" cause that is exactly what I feel like too! 

I plan to do something immediately after I get home - change into gym clothes, or start cleaning or call a friend/make plans. Don't even think about it, do it.

Social league sports are fun too!
I don’t know but I’m glad I’m not the only one with this problem. Sitting all day just sucks the energy out of me and makes me want to sit even more. Early death, here I come.
It’s imperative to keep the momentum going from a hard day of work. 
Walk in, and as soon as your feet hit the floor you slam the door behind you and yell loudly and cathartically, “THIS IS SPARTAAAAAAAA!!!”  Then kick whatever is close (child, cabinet, cat, etc.). 
The high you get will ensure you continue your energy. 
Can I suggest an app that’s changed my life?!

Its my first time living away from my parents. After 1.5 years of never having the energy to get shit done after work and it building up, I looked about for some apps. There’s a few different ones geared towards household chores, but I’m currently using Our Home. Tracks it with points, you can set reminders etc. 

Even if I don’t complete my list, I aim to do the things that annoy me the most before I sit down (washing up, folding the washing that’s taking up my living room... that sort of thing!).
Immediately start dinner, turn up the heat, and tidy up.
I don't. I get home, my pants fly off, a glass of wine appears in my hand, followed by a ps4 controller and a bong. Of course, this only really works because I get up ass early in the morning to get most of my chores done. I don't have a whole lot that I need to do in the evening aside from cooking dinner, which my partner has been doing the bulk of lately as she is not working. 
I shower. I feel super productive after showering because im clean. But what i love to do after showering is cleaning the house...
Sign up for exercise classes that you will get charged for if you late-cancel. Works like a charm!
You’re allowed to relax 
Do not fit down. Do not put pjs on. 
I don't! If I'm exhausted after work, I get in to my PJs and chill.
Why should I fight it? It's lovely that I can lounge and watch shitty shows. I can't do that at work.

I relax, maybe take a nap, then get productive, enough to tidy up a little, walk the dog at midnight. Sometimes just to drag my body over to the bed. Then a bit of chores in he morning too, basically between me and my husband sharing chores the household keeps afloat.
I don’t fight it. I cook my dinner as soon as I get home; while if cooks, I have a bath or just chill on the couch, and then I eat it in front of Netflix or reading or whatever. And then, if I’m tired, I rest. Sometimes I’ll do a quick chore like washing the toilet or changing the cats’ litter. It’s no use trying to be productive after a day of work. I do most of the house chores on weekends. But then, as a single woman without kids, I have it easier than many.
Why fight it!? We’re adults, we work hard, we’re entitled to collapsing on the couch after work.  I get up early, do all kinds of shit before I go to work, when I get home, I’m done!  And I deserve that. My house is clean, my kids are fed, my bills are paid. I can relax if I want. 
I make myself do one productive thing every time I get up. Even if it's small like taking dishes to the sink, picking up trash, or wiping down the table on the way to get water/go to the bathroom.

I walk in the door, put on my workout clothes and shoes, make dinner, then leave the house to go to the gym. I do not let myself have time to melt into a pile of goo because it makes me start to feel depressed. I have to continually remind myself that I don't want to feel that way, and that it would be better for my whole life if I just did something 
I feel you, though, what is it with this need of always being productive? One would think its ok to sometimes just be? Especially after the days work is done
I don't think I will see this question appear in Ask Men ever 😂
Its tough, you just have to find balance. Its ok to sit down and relax for a bit, but you have to give yourself a time frame. When that time is up, you have to turn off the tv, get up, and get stuff done. If that approach doesn't work, then give yourself a manageable list of things you need to get done before you can relax for the day, and do it as soon as you get home. Manageable is the key word there, don't give yourself so much to do that you end up doing chores until bedtime. 
I try to make sure that anything that requires me to leave the house after work is done either before work or before I get home from work.

If I haven't batch cooked for the week, before I even get home, I have a game plan for a 20-30 minute dinner.  My parking spot leads right to my kitchen, so I get in, set my bags down, and start cooking.  Usually, at the same time, I'm tidying up some things.  Nothing big, just putting things away, making sure the cat's have water and that the trash isn't at a ridiculous level.  During the final "warming" stages of dinner, I head up to change and continue my minor tidying along the way.

Once I'm in my jammie's though, I don't do ANYTHING.  I mean, I'll put leftovers in the fridge and load the dishwasher, but that's it. I figured I did some microtasks around the house, so now I deserve to be goo.

I do the bulk of my cleaning and errands on weekends, trying to finish up by Sunday evening so I can commence my goo-ing until Monday morning.
I don't
I take a nap. After that, I have more energy and can do stuff.
Well I usually do smaller chores like scooping the litter boxes, emptying the dishwasher, collecting recycling, etc. in the morning before I leave. When I get home at night, I try to keep moving to get things done. I’ll start supper, feed my pets, and do any small chores I couldn’t finish in the morning. As long as I keep moving, I’m usually alright. 
Well I kind of have to cook/eat, so that keeps me from it really. I dump my bags and head straight for the fridge. I refuse to let myself eat fast food or takeaways throughout the week, unless I'm with my bf/friends and it was part of the night's plans.

I usually read, tidy or put laundry on while stuff is cooking. I generally end up eating and chilling out about 8.30-9pm.
I set a timer. I just collapse on my bed for a while, cuddle my kitty, maybe read a book for an hour, then I get up and do things. Every once in a while this backfires and I end up reading until like 8pm then go heat up leftovers and just go back to bed haha. 
As soon as I get home I cook, get stuff ready for the next day, shower, and that’s it. I try to do everything while I’m still “wound up” from the day. This works best for me because my job is physically exhausting. (I walk about 6 miles a day) 

I set out all my work uniforms on Sunday after I do laundry. I try to workout before work and set my lunch/work stuff the night before. 

After all this I watch tv, call one of my friends, browse reddit, and then watch more shows. So I end up melting into a lazy puddle. I feel it’s justified after I get everything I need done. 
I have a planning for every evening. The days aren't fixed, but it generally goes so:
- two days are for working out
- one day is for grocery shopping
- one day is for small household chores so I don't need to do it all during the weekend
- one day of absolutely doing nothing as soon as I walk through my front door :)
Sometimes I do just melt into a lazy blob..but when I wasn’t knocked up I found that having something scheduled was key. I used to go to adult tumbling/gymnastics classes three times a week and bikram yoga twice...so since they started at a certain time i knew I had to keep myself moving or I’d miss class.

And I’d have a little pep after class to make dinner, finish the laundry, etc...
If I have shit to do then I will just come home and do it. If I sit down for "just 10 minutes' I am not getting back up to do anything. Besides, when you sit down that wall of tired just hits you in the face. 

But like 80% of the time I come home and veg. I don't have kids to feed/take care of and most of the things "I have to do" aren't going anywhere. And this time of year my mood takes a serious hit and I'm super busy and stressed so I try to get the rest I need as much as possible. 
Set a timer on your phone. I am on my feet all day at work so I need to sit & chill for a bit when I get home. Set a timer so you will then get up & get whatever you need accomplished. 
I like to get all my stuff prepared for the next morning- pick out tomorrow’s work clothes, figure out tomorrow’s lunch, have my keys ready at the front door. 


After that, anything goes, and I allow myself to do as much or as little as I want. But it takes the pressure off for the next morning at least. 
Once I sit down, its all over. 
Nothing. This is exactly what I do. 
I’m not a puddle of goo, I’m a human being who deserves to rest and watch TV. 
But I do groceries, go to the gym and meet friends right after work, and I don’t have kids.
When you’re leaving work, keep in mind that you’re going to do X activity. If you leave with the “I’m going home to chill” mentality, that is what you will do
I let myself have days where I do this. It helps a lot to plan and look forward to them. Then days I have to come home for a bit and then leave, or clean/whatever, I dont feel like "I never get to come home and just relax ugh!"

Also, often I do a lot of my outside stuff on the way home from work instead of going home first. 
It also helps to have children and a husband that will have nonstop demands until bedtime. 
I have to take my dog out as soon as I get home, so I think that helps, but I still end up relaxing for a couple hours before bed. But prior to that I've cooked dinner and cleaned up the kitchen. I take dinner leftovers for lunch so I don't have to worry about prepacking. My SO and I are generally neat people too so there's not really a whole lot that needs to get done after work I guess? Maybe laundry sometimes, which I'm not gonna lie usually sits in the dryer until I need the dryer for something else lol 
I try to stay in what I wore to work, which is luckily jeans, and get a specific set of tasks done. Things like cook dinner if needed, or start laundry before I sit on the couch. But I keep my To Do list as short as possible because evenings are still wind down time.
I change into work out clothes before I ever leave work. I have an audiobook or podcast I love ready to play that I can only listen to if I walk when I get home. It usually works and after the walk I have energy to finish the day strong. 
I make a mental list to check off before sitting down to relax, and to motivate myself I make the relaxing part super appealing in my head, "just load the dishwasher and then you can wear your pj's... No, not the basic pj's... Not today... Today you get the soft fleece pj's... With Pockets..."

I also do a "reset the room" everytime I leave/enter a room. Where I take two minutes to put everything back in place - clear any cups, plump cushions, fold blankets, wipe surfaces. I can't relax or sleep in a messy room as I feel like I'm physically going to suffocate. 
You've had a long day at work. So rest. If you've actually got shit to do, do it before you get comfortable. If you wanna hit the gym, go straight from work.
Dogs 
Literally on the train now having that dilemma. Knowing I want to clean the kitchen when I get home but also knowing I won’t do it. 
My husband used to wake up somewhat earlier than me for work (and wasn’t quiet about it 🙄). So instead of “going back to sleep” I’d attempt to get as much done as I could in the morning before I had to get ready and leave for work. Maybe get up an extra 30 minutes and do what you can before work. Then you come home to a semi clean place too! 
I literally just do not turn the TV on and get comfy. 

If I know I want to cook and workout before bed, I will immediately change into workout clothes and get ready to go. I'll start prepping food immediately after I workout. When I'm showered and have food ready and all done being productive I'll throw on pajamas and be lazy as a slug the rest of the night.
Why is this a problem? Is there something that's not getting done because you're watching TV? Otherwise, it makes sense that you'd want to relax after your workday. 
I make sure I have my "me time" and then I get up and do things. My fiancee gets home an hour and a half after I do so that makes it easier too. Right now I am failing. I'm sitting in my PJs on the couch with a glass of wine putting off starting dinner. 
I work less. I've had the privilege to be able to choose to work night shifts with a really nice schedual so I have a lot of free time, so I very rarely feel the need to melt into a puddle when I get home. I'm happy my work doesn't exhaust me and I think it's important to realize that perhaps you can aim for less work instead of magically more hours in a day or magically more energy.

(And yes, I know a lot of people can't choose.) 
I put tasks in my calendar. I have a weekly reminder to water plants, trim cats claws. I use my commute time in the morning to pop in my plan for that night's dinner, and any chores or activities I want to do when I get home. I tend to be thinking of them as I leave the house so I find that planning time makes sense for me and helps me feel like I've got it under control as I shift into work mode. I take advantage of cooking time to do other tasks. Water boiling? Tidy the kitchen. Baking something? do some stretching or put away laundry.
I don't. I am fully content with ditching the socks and throwing on some over-sized PJs, falling into supine satisfaction, and melting into a lazy puddle of flannel-covered goo while I eat warm cookies and watch a movie from the MCU. It's the essence of my 20-something soul.
Here are helpful suggestions I've taken from  this thread, feel free to add your own! 

1. Don't sit down once you get home. Have a plan/routine in place so you get what you want/need accomplished.

2. Stay dressed in work clothes, shoes, etc to stay productive. Let your leisure clothes be a reward for chores, etc. 

3. Keep a To Do list, chore list , etc so you know exactly what needs to be done. 

4. Get as much prep work done on the weekends, as possible so relaxing is a possibility on weeknights (laundry, cooking, cleaning, shopping, etc) 

5. Set a timer, listen to podcasts, whatever it takes to be productive during the time you deem productivity important. 

6. If you have an errand, need to go to the gym, etc, do it before you go home.

7. Don't turn on the TV, play on your phone, etc until you meet your goals around the house (chores, etc). 

8. Batch cook so you cut down on the time you spend cooking every day. 

9. Do what you can in the mornings before work


Tip for my northern friends that suffer from seasonal depression: Get some indoor plants. While loss of sun exposure is a factor, lack of greenery also plays a role. Get something like a Pothos or Lily or Wisteria plant and a light to shine on it. Not only will the greenery and sweet flower smell help, but having the routine of watering it will also.
I go to Zumba, THEN I go home.
I workout at 5am before going to my desk job. It really sets the tone for the whole day including after work. It’s not easy to do some days but its always worth it and once you get used to waking up so early, you begin to look forward to it. Just a great daily habit that I recommend to all ☺️
Step 1: change out of work clothes into jeans and a shirt that would require me to have a bra on if I need to go outside (run errands, walk the dog, etc) (I find this helpful because jeans are still not loungewear - especially by my standards so I don’t have an excuse to put off going to the store because I’m not in sweats!) 

Step 2: cook immediately after getting home. This makes it so I am forced to keep moving around and I eat healthier. I’m also more inclined to listen to music while cooking so that keeps the tv off. 

Step 3: have a high energy dog - no sitting down until she is mentally and physically tired. 
I just got home from work, and this is exactly what happened to me.  Guess I need to read all these comments!
I will always have some quiet time as soon as I get in from work, for me that is a cup of tea and reading my book. After I’ve had that time to decompress from the day I go about my evening chores. 
I make a list of the things I need to do in a week and designate a day to do it (so 2-3 chores a day). I think about it on the way home and know that if I miss this today, I’ll have more to do tomorrow, and if I don’t do any, my weekend won’t be free. I try not to do chores on the weekend and reserve that for going out or hobbies. 

I put on my headphones and put on music or a podcast and do 1-2 hours of chores. Netflix/Reddit at the end of the night. 
power shower. and im a bit opposite to most of comments, i get irritated if im still wearing my work clothes at home, bcz i feel more strongly that im "working" and that actually makes me annoyed and dont want to work. but if i come home and after a nice hot shower and put on my sleeping clothes ,makes me feel im chilling and im more calm and willing to work actually. 
Prevent?
Pour tequila and margarita mix and ice in blender.  Don't start the blender just let it sit in blender.

Eye the blender throughout this process:  Motivational

1. Then change clothes to sweats.  2.  Load/empty dishwasher  3.  Throw dinner in microwave.  4. Now you can start the blender.  Four things done:  Mission accomplished.  Relax/eat/drink :)
Last winter, I would walk in the door, walk my dog, change into gym clothes and go work out, come home shower,  then change and eat. I would make a rule for myself that I couldn’t watch tv or put on pjs until after I got home from the gym. In the beginning it was hard but once you start losing a couple pounds you really want to go to the gym every night. 
Not a woman, but I used to have a serious problem with this, and I don't think my gender should affect my input? So...guess I'll chime in.

There are a lot of ways people internally regulate. Some people are naturally motivated. Others are momentum based; as you say in your post, for a lot of people, once you relax then you've lost your momentum and it's hard to get productive again.

I'm a rules-based person. I create rules for myself and then I follow them. That makes things easier for me.

So, I typically get home at quarter to five. My rule is that I get home and take the dogs out before changing out of my work clothes. I let myself sit down to pet and cuddle my lovey dog for a minute or two, as she really wants to greet me when I get home, but pretty soon  her bladder takes over and it's time to head outside. So, that part's easy. The only rule is no taking my shoes off until the dogs are back inside. Rule number two is that dinner has to be started by quarter after five. I'll let myself change out of work clothes, but I have to get moving again. My wife and I have split our domestic chores based on the fact that she hates cooking and doing dishes, and I enjoy cooking and hate decluttering or organizing stuff, so I do the cooking every day, and likely always will. If I'm unable to leave work on time and will be unable to start dinner by quarter to five, I have a rule to let her know and see if we can order something.

I clean the kitchen while dinner is cooking, the other piece of my chores. If we order, I give myself the night off because I clearly had a busy day. As long as I don't do that two nights in a row, the plates aren't going to magically mold over for sitting in the sink for 24 hours. 

The biggest thing for me was learning to build those lapses into my rule set. Like, it's OK to need a break, just know how that break fits into your routine so it isn't breaking your routine. That's the key, for me. Knowing that the dishes sitting out last night was OK and my rules are still in full force keeps me from even really thinking about it when I get home the next day and get to work on my chores.
1. Yes to the seasonal depression, winter blues, etc. I have a SAD lamp which helps a bit and I take vitamin D supplements-- highly recommend! I also take B12 since I'm vegan, but many omnivores are also deficient in these vitamins, worth getting a blood test to make sure you're good.
2. I live alone and am proud of my space. Since it's all mine, I want it to reflect who I am and being in a clean, well-decorated home makes me happy. So in that regard, I kinda enjoy cleaning and tidying it up after a long day at work, because it makes me feel organized and in control of my place. I'd encourage cultivating this kind of mindset about your space too, cause it helps me want to keep it nice and clean :)
3. and then once I get home and tidy with the tv or a podcast on, I totally goo for the rest of the evening with a bowl and some dinner. Gotta relax and take care of yoself!
I work a laborious job on my feet for 8 hours s day. I get sweaty and dirty so when I get home the first thing I do is eat then shower. No need to work out bc my job is a work out. I’m usually beat so after my shower I just chill. I allow myself this time. Some days I’m motivated to clean or do laundry, but most of the time that gets pushed to the weekends. Which my weekends tend to fill up fast but it’s a balance!! 
I like to put on a record and see how much I can get done before I have to flip it. It's nice because I don't always make time to listen to music anymore these days and this way I'm singing and dancing while doing dishes.
I had to screen shot some of these because I needed help, here in WA we only get like 6 hours of sunlight IF the clouds even let it shine through at all, so my productivity and motivation is at an all time low and I feel so tired all day...
I take a bus and go to the gym 😄 if I have to go home, I  prepare food for next day and try to tide up my room and wash the bathroom 😍
I leave my shoes on.  Once my shoes come off, it's all over.
I have a routine. I don't let myself sit down or relax until most of the chores are done. I make dinner, I clean the house, I take a shower and I do other random chores before I let myself finally relax. 
Idrc. I actually like cooking and especially cleaning. Calms me down and makes me feel useful.
I just don't sit down. I'll change out of my work clothes, then I start on what I need to do. If I sit down, it's all over.
I change into workout clothes right after I get home. I'm still working on getting more done (chores/hobbies) after work, but at least going to the gym makes me feel somewhat productive. 
I do not sit down. I change out of my work clothes, start a load of laundry if it needs washed, tidy up the kitchen or take 10 minutes to clean the bathrooms. Pretty much I do some sort of cleaning for at least an hour before I turn on Netflix. That way I have less cleaning to do on the weekends. 
I immediately change into workout clothes. I have the benefit of taking public transportation, i.e. I have to walk from the train to my house, so I always feel a little bit energized when I walk in the door. 

Then I immediately do something active. Whether that is going for a walk (or taking the dog for a walk if you have one), going to the grocery story, cleaning, or actually going to the gym/doing a workout video. I don't sit on the couch until I've cooked dinner and am ready to settle in for the night. 
Go straight to the gym or workout in the am
I *hate* walking around my apartment with shoes on so what I'll do is just leave my shoes on, quickly do what I have to do at home, then leave to do my errands/work out/study/etc. Not allowing myself to take them off forces me to leave quickly.
I go to the gym on my way home so at least I did something lol
I work 12 hour shifts when I work. I'm okay with being a pile of goo. I DO change my clothes and take a shower first though because I work in a hospital...which is disgusting. 
I walk in and immediately do what needs to get done. Then I change into comfy clothes and park my ass. If I sit down for even a minute, nothing is getting done. 
I start my day with something productive that makes me feel like I accomplished something. 
I usually schedule therapy appointments in the morning to start everything off on the right note. If I dont have therapy I start my day, stay with me here, by leveling a character up in a video game (kingdom hearts is my poison of choice). It helps me calm down, wake up, and focus. Once Ive completed the objective I save and go about my day.
I go to my mma gym after uni/work. stops me feeling lethargic and lazy after a hard day 
Sign up for weekly activites after work. I think 2 activities for week days is great.

If you are planning to do productive things, you have got to have a goal and a deadline. I have found having an accountability partner really helps too.

This answer is mainly a reminder for myself, as that couch still gets me sometimes.
I watch a lot of old re-runs on antenna tv...which means lots of annoying psoriasis, baby powder ovarian cancer and/or mesothelioma commercials! So, during the commercials I am up doing something. So kind of a mix between a pile of goo and being a productive member of society :-)
I clean as I go. As I move from room to room I pick up and put away.
Have a task list prepared for when you come home. Even just a few small things will help you feel more accomplished. I totally feel you on this- all bets are off as soon as I put on my pjs and grab a glass of wine!
I have bones that don’t let me turn into pure jello. Other than that, NOTHING
r/me_irl
I avoid going home right after and work out instead. Then I have more energy when I get home to get some tidying, cooking, etc done.
This is a bizarre suggestion but what I have done is replaced my typical sweatpants and stained T-shirt ensemble for ahtleisure wear which is essentially nice yoga and fitness wear and sometimes I even complete it with a headband. Now I am in no way shape or form actually attending any yoga classes and I have not seen the inside of a gym in nearly two months but it does do something for me both mentally and physically. I feeeel as if I can accomplish more by taking the first step to an athletic accomplished and productive life. 
Very weird may only work for me 
Let me know and best luck
Currently in my goo, too tired to eat, trying to break out, great question 
Keep my pants on.  
You don’t! Make sure you have done everything you need to before you get home so when you do you can relax, that’s what home time is for. I find if I want to go to the gym I have to on the way home from work, if I go home first and sit down for abit I lose all motivation and it doesn’t end up happening haha. 
I usually don’t start work until noon or 1pm. So I get up and do all of the productive stuff before work. That way, when I come home, I don’t feel guilty melting into the couch for a bit before bedtime. 
For me, with plantar fasciitis and untreated possible arthritis, I look at whatever I need to do, then I sit down for a bit and don't take anything off, and look at Reddit for a bit. It gives me a moment to rest and get myself mentally prepared to do chores. I'll take my shoes off when I get up to do what's needed to be done. 
Guilt! I came home last night sat on the couch for 2 hours then realized I had done nothing the previous 2 hours and forced myself to do the dishes to make up for it! Lol
Reading this thread 2 hours after I got home from work. Currently lying in bed. It's cold out. I need ideas lol
I’m laying on the couch and thinking of the million things I need to be doing besides melting into a lazy puddle of goo and then I come across this post! So weird. After reading some comments I got my butt off the couch (stayed in my work clothes) and was super productive. 

Something I like to do is make lists of things I need to do when I get home. Lists help me a lot because I love crossing things off. Winter is so hard though. Most of the time I’m just lazy and take tons of bathes. 
Shower first
I get everything that involves moving done as soon as I get home. Start dinner, clean what I said I was going to clean, etc. After that it’s lazy puddle of goo time but without the guilt!
I try to keep the to do list short so I get stuff done but can then melt in a puddle. For example I may do one load of laundry or dishes and tidy up. I generally do this right when I get home then it's all about sweatpants. 
Lol! Answer: I don't.
I try my best to stay in work mode. I don't change into my sweats or even sit down. I tackle the washer first because I ways pre-load and then when I get home all I have to do is add detergent and start it. It makes me feel like I have already accomplished something just by turning a knob and it gives me a little motivation to go tackle the trash or dishes or whatever else is waiting for me. Before I know it I am finished. It makes it even sweeter when I do put my sweats on because there aren't any chores hanging over my head and I can truly relax.
I’m 48. I don’t. 
As soon as you think about something you don't want to do, do that thing. Do a few of those every day. Eventually that "gut feeling" when you don't want to do something, won't be so hostile to your mindset.
In colder weather, I walk the dog, and plan an "adventure" for him, since he's been alone all day. Usually we drive to a store for an item, or the bakery, or do an errand. The dog loves the ride, and everything is closeish to my house.

In warm weather, I stay outside as long as possible: dog walk, puttering in the yard. Sometimes just picking up twigs mindlessly. Nothing makes me happier than being with my pets in the yard.

And then yoga at night- I look for late classes, the later the better. I always sleep during savasana anyway bwahaha!
Look at this dreamer over here, thinking they can prevent the man from stealing their will to live. Poor, sweet child.
Drink an energy drink on the way home and make a list of tasks I want to accomplish.
By getting into something comfortable (style may vary depending on the expectation of company later on), make a pot of tea and drink the first cup of tea on the couch while I make a list of what has to be done by the evening. And then actually doing that. 

This usually works. Unless I’m on my period and cannot be bothered (with insignificant things) or already did everything that needed to be done. 
I keep my shoes on. As long as I don't take them off I stay productive because even though I can sit at the kitchen table, I can't lounge on the couch or get trapped by the bed.
Have neither couch nor cable tv. 

I have chores that must be done. I switch my clothes and get right to it. 

Hungry pets help , and the chores are all about their needs. 

I’m hungry for supper, too, but they get their first. 
I just...don’t sit down. Straight into my bedroom and change into gym gear. As soon as I sit it’s a done deal. 
I don't take any time to relax, just go straight to the tasks I want to get done. If I start to chill I'm usually gonna fail for the night.
Hmm, I greet my wife with a hug and a kiss.  I change into comfy clothes. I go back and spend time talking to her, maybe help with dinner (AKA stay out of the damn kitchen), do some odd chores, talk to my adult live-in daughter or call my son or mom.  

Sometimes I do come home, say hi, kiss, hug, and then go up and take a 30-60 minute nap. But rarely because then I won't want to go to sleep on time. 


Wait are not supposed to? 
Budget my time like people budget money. I have x number of hours after work and x number of things I have to do (e.g eat, gym, clean up after myself) which leaves x number of hours for being a lazy puddle of goo/watching tv/crafting/gaming etc... And choose not to feel bad about it if it's a puddle of goo day. 
I have a timer I use for cooking but when I need to be motivated I set it for 20 minutes. Usually when the alarm goes off I keep going for at least another 20 minutes. 
Why fight it?
Why fight it?
This was a great question! A question I didn’t even know I wanted the answer to  thanks man!
I don't relax very well and find it more comfortable to do things.  Plus, I'm a mom of a 3 year old.  I kinda envy my husband - he gets home from work, eats, sits on the couch until bedtime.   And he enjoys it.  I keep moving because I find it uncomfortable to sit for too long.
Drinking hot tea after lunch and having at least one thing on my To Do list when I go home
I have a routine - feed the dogs, change clothes, do a few quick chores, cook, then I sit and relax before doing a second small round of chores - dishes, trash out, laundry, pay bills, what have you. Then I relax again. I have blocks of time.  Even if I get home at 6 and go to bed at 11, I have plenty of time. 

It's the mental energy, having a desk job,  so I put on an audio book or music. It's not the internet or tv I want, it's the relaxation. I don't mind cooking or eating dishes, not really, not so long as I'm not bored. 
The fact that a shit ton of comments solutions say “don’t sit down” says a lot about how much time and energy our society puts into just working to live. 

Not a good or a bad thing, just something I’m thinking about. 
get you a man (or woman i dont judge) who will happily do the same and stop worrying ?
Sometimes I do, sometimes I don't.

Either way, when I get home I immediately shower and put on comfy clothes (but not pajamas). I live in a big city, take public transit, and I'm around a lot of people - even if I didn't get hot and sweaty or touch things on public transit or get enclosed in small spaces with coughing people, I just feel gross when I get home. So, first step is shower and then lounge clothes.

I'll usually then have dinner and watch netflix. If it's a lazy evening, that's about all there is to it, plus reading stuff online.

If I still need to get things done that day I'll allow myself some time to relax before moving on to school work or whatever else needs to get done. Having some downtime first is important
Lad, here. Stealing some of these if y’all don’t mind. 
Lol I don't 
Have children, you'll never sit down for long again!

Remove the temptation if possible.

Make it harder for you to turn on tv
DO NOT SIT DOWN, DO NOT TAKE TAKE YOUR PANTS OFF, DO NOT TAKE YOUR BRA OFF
ANXIETY!
I don't change my clothes, i immediately start doing the tasks i needed to do. 
I fear my girlfriend's hanger. It motivates me to cook really good dinners before she gets home, and I love the grateful look she gives me and the kisses I get when I clean the place up a bit and tidy away her snail trail.

I decided I don't enjoy chilling on the sofa without her legs resting across my own, so I don't approach the sofa until it's 9pm tea and cuddle time.
I just don’t sit down until I’ve got done whatever I need to get done when I come home. If I so much as sit down, I’m done for. I can’t even open the mail then
Also separate work from home. Once you walk out of work and that's it, leave work behind. Don't bring work home and don't take your home into work. 
a bm in the pm and a hot ass shower
I put on a timer and race to get as many things done before it goes off. Sometimes I set it for 20 minutes, sometimes 15 or 30. Once the timer goes off, I stop and relax. I can usually: unload and load the DW, put a load of laundry in the washer, sweep, pick up the living room. 
I found a unique dance fitness class with a great instructor and great people that meets three times a week in the evening. (It's kind of a hybrid Zumba/BollyBeats class.) As soon as I get home from work with the kiddo, I get dressed to go to the class and as soon as my husband gets home to watch the kiddo, I'm out. The exercise has to be FUN; it's more like going to a dance party than a workout.
The great thing about cooking dinner when I get home is that cooking leaves a lot of "in between" time. While the ground chuck is on a slow cook on the stove, I can feed the dog and take out the trash. When I get back, I can add the tomato juice and taco spices. While it's still cooking, I can empty the dishwasher, maybe even refill it with the dishes that were waiting their turn in the sink. Then I can assemble the tacos, sit with my husband for five minutes and catch up. While he's finishing eating (I'm a fast eater), I can go change the dog pads and put down new ones. By the time I'm finished with that, I can gather the dirty plates, toss them in the dishwasher, and set the load to be ready for me to unload tomorrow. Wipe down the counters, change my clothes, while I'm changing gather any stray clothes my husband left on the floor and dump them in the hamper. 

Then, if I've managed to come home from work on time, I try to find one more productive thing to do. Clean a toilet. Put the polishing stuff on the stove. Clean out the cat litter. Something small that will make my weekend cleaning easier and a less intimidating task.

Then, usually about an hour after I've gotten home, I can collapse into my goo puddle, and lazily toss a ball for the dog while I watch Netflix in bed.

In the end, all this usually accomplishes is maintaining the animals' sanity and cooking and cleaning up dinner, but that one small add-on task usually keeps things tolerable before I can tackle laundry/floor cleaning/bathroom cleaning on the weekend.
I have kids... Nobody else is going to feed them. It's not really a choice.
Currently 9 weeks pregnant.

Answer: I don't. So much goo.
I've noticed that what I do *before* leaving the house has the greatest impact on what I do when I get home.  If I come home to a cluttered, dirty apartment, I just feel stressed.  My brain goes into instant avoidance mode, and at that time of the day I don't have the willpower to say no to blobbing on the couch.  

When I return to a clean apartment, I'm instantly reminded of my earlier effort to create a nice environment for myself and feel more motivated.
I never stop moving. It's easy to fall into a routine. For example, I get home and immediately take out my lunch/coffee container and wash it. Then I move onto the next errand (emptying garbage, cleaning pet cage, etc). Once I finish the few things I wanted to do I change into pjs and relax. 
I put the harness on my dog, telling myself that I'm just gonna see if he wants to go for a walk. Who am I kidding, he always wants to go. Now I'm contractually obligated to take my dog for a walk. 
Reading this thread just makes me super sad at how little of us have a real work/life balance. 
I just jump right into chores and or change clothes and go straight to the gym.

If I start testing, it's over for the evening. 

I just had to train my brain that coming home does not mean my "day" is done. 
I used to goo right when I sat in my car and began to drive home 😩
You don't! Just go with the goo 😂
Discipline. If I’ve got things to do, I make sure I get them done before I allow myself to relax. I am naturally lazy, so without discipline, everything would go to hell. 
Live in Florida, don't go home after work and go straight to the gym every night, with my bag already packed. :)
I don’t. I just sit around, tired, and wish I had my life more together so I could figure out the answer to this. 

My theory is that if I focus on rebuilding my health and fitness, having better sleep hygiene, and doing some meditation daily, I will find it much easier. 

Anyone who has tried this, feel free to confirm or deny whether this works. 
4 kids.  Don't matter light or dark,  winter or summer. If one or 4are awake I've got no time to chill.  So that's my go to.  
I have a mental to do list to complete so i don’t have the option to get into bed
As I'm reading this in my bed with a thing of ice cream in my lap ....
I don’t. I’m useless after work, aside from making dinner.
I don't see the problem with melting after putting in a long day at work. 
Why not just relax though? I put in a full productive day at work and then I relax all evening on purpose. I spent many years trying to make myself productive in the evenings and constantly failing and beating myself up over it. I just don’t think we’re meant to be productive in the evenings.

I do a lot on the weekends too but then ensure I relax in the evenings.


I embrace the goo.
I go straight to the gym after work! Then I come home and melt into said puddle of goo....
I use the 15 minute rule when I have things to do around the house. Come home (don't sit), do chores or tend to anything that needs attention for 15 minutes, then goo. Dedicating 10-15 minutes per day seems like nothing at the time, but it really adds up throughout the week. 
I have to have a plan, a place I’m going, a meal I’m making, friends I’m meeting, work I’m going to do, the gym.  And I have to just keep moving and avoid the trap of comfy clothes.  The second I sit down and the bra comes off it’s all over.  
the compulsiveness in me makes me put all my work stuff away (lunch dishes, work clothes, walking shoes, etc) and then I usually have some minor chores that I can't let go like taking out the trash or watering the plants. by then, i allot myself some amount of time to sit and be on my phone as a reward. then i do a quick workout some days and start making dinner because if i don't, it won't happen otherwise. i guess i trick my brain into the routine. but it isn't easy.
I lay out my gym clothes on the bed and change into them immediately. I charge up my headphones to give myself a proper grace period to scroll and decompress for 20 minutes or so, then I immediately walk to the gym. It helps I don’t have to get into a car, but this method is what’s working for me right now. Once I’m working out, I’m fine no matter how tired I was when I walked through my door. 
Set a 10 minute timer when I get home. I tidy up and do quick chores until it goes off. Doesn’t solve all of my laziness, but it helps me keep the basics in order.
My dog is huge and very excited to see me. He’s not only physically imposing, but he’s super loving and I am a big pushover for him so whenever I see him and his excitement to see me… I cave in. Usually I take him to the kitchen for treats, and then outside to go potty, and then if the weather is alright we go for a walk.
As soon as the pets are fed and my dinner is started I absolutely let myself be lazy. On a typical day I wake up at 5am to go to a yoga class before work and then work from 8:30-4:45. Transit to work both ways amounts to about 2.5 hours a day so when I finally get home at 6pm I'm tiiiirred.

My trick to not feel guilty about being lazy at the end if the day is to get stuff like walking the dog or going to yoga etc done before the day really even starts. I walk to yoga year round and my S/O brings the dog and walks me there or in the summer we also go for a walk with her in the evening when it's light out
Don’t sit down. Once I do, I am stuck. 
I have responsibilities. The work isn't over just because I'm home. Dogs and Cats need to be fed, watered and the cat litter needs to be cleaned. Dishes will need to be swapped out the sink and the machine and the cabinet, the floor needs to be swept, there is laundry to do... and hey, the kids, and I, might like to eat some dinner.
[deleted]
I tell myself I can’t shower (and therefore relax) until I get the stuff done.  

I live in a lovely sunny tropical country and that shower is always a necessity. 

As other people said, I don’t sit down until the stuff is done. Cuz once I do, man I just do not move for a long time after. 
I prep before work. I work at 6 am. I get up to hours early, clean up, drink coffee and straitened up before I leave for the day. I often work 10 hour days standing with no break. As soon as I get home I'm eating and then crashing. I do the best I can to meal prep and do all major cleaning on my days off. The nice thing about taking care of chores in the am is that I don't even have to think about it when I get home. 
I don’t sit down until my to do list is finished. On gym days, I immediately but on my gym clothes and go. Then I change into sweats and sit down with dinner.
I keep my house relatively messy so I actively don't want to hang out in it. I walk in, put my work stuff down and walk back out the door. I basically come back to sleep only.

However my boyfriend recently moved in and he's a homebody and therefore has been wanting to have less clutter to make it more comfortable to stay in. Lol foiled!!!!

So I'm going to do an evening MBA. I am a super lazy person, which is why I keep myself busy on purpose.
I always have a list of things I need to do BEFORE I sit down i.e feeding the dogs, load of washing, making tea (dinner to Americans) And then putting on my pjs and sitting down is my reward. 
I don’t take my shoes off until I’m done with chores etc. 
if I have to do work/school work I sit at my kitchen table and knock that out. 
That way my cozy clothes, wine, and Netflix is a reward! 
My secret is, even if I have sweats on..I keep my shoes on! Or put shoes on. It makes me feel like I have somewhere to go and something to do. Thus, I am more productive. It’s some weird mind game my brain falls for every time. 

I also make promises to myself to do one chore or obligation - sometimes turns into me scrubbing the grout on my bathroom floor for 2 hours..*actually me today* 

I’m also fueled by the unfounded fear that I’m going to disappoint my other half if he comes home to a mess (he gets home after me). Doesn’t work for everyone but it does for me ¯\_(ツ)_/¯ 
I like to go to the gym after work and I usually give my self a time frame like ok I have 1 hour to chill and let my phone and headphones charge then I gotta get out the door, more often then not once my alarm goes off I’ll get up - preworkout is the main reason though lmao
I can only go straight into my pajamas if I'm changing out of my work clothes after 8 pm (it happens.)

The pajamas are like the ultimate signal that "I'm done" with the day, and nothing else productive will happen. 
It depends on what time I get home. Off work early and the sun is still out? Immediately hype the dog up so I’m basically guilted into taking him on an adventure. Off on time and it’s dark? Leave my shoes on and immediately start cooking dinner. Once dinner is cooked I’m allowed to do whatever I want. 
I just don’t sit down. Don’t take your work clothes off. Get all the chores done then switch to jammies. 
 I don't actually when I get home it's nap time and when I get up I wake up recharged with a second wind and ready to make dinner and get a few chores done. Then after that I plopped down in front of the TV LOL
Don't. Sit. Down. 

Also, turn on lights. I usually come home after dark and if there are lights on, I'm more productive.
Do ur house work before u sit down
Put on some preppy upbeat music, eat food, drink coffee and have fun :) maybe read a book or listen to an audiobook. Make plans for the evening. 
Don’t sit down, go straight away to the first thing you want to do after work
I mostly try to get things done before work. Like if I got washing to do, I put it on timer before I leave so it would have just finished when I get home.

I try to get things done as soon as I get home. But change into house clothes, dump my bag and get to it. Silence the phone and leave it in my bag. 

Once I've done everything I had to do of an afternoon/evening I reward myself with something I don't usually do. This could be a relaxing bath, hot chocolate, facial etc... I don't normally have time for these so it feels amazingly rewarding when I do, and especially after having a day at work.

Hope this helps :)

BTW, I love music and a upbeat tune always helps me get in a fun groove and enjoy the cleaning etc.

I live in a hot climate where cold is 19c. Even though I find that cold it's not hard to live with. You get used of the climate you live in. And life continues onward. 
Identify what needs to be done before you come home and when you come home, don't change until the thing you need to do is done. If nothing needs to be done and you don't want to sit down, set aside some work out clothes and work out for a bit.
Don’t sit down is a good one, also for anything I need to do that’s outside of the home (get groceries, gas, etc) I force myself to go directly there instead of stopping at home first. 
I change into my running clothes and go right away. If I wait, if I sit down, I know I won't make it out the door. 
I go straight to the gym instead of stopping at home first. Otherwise I’ll justify staying home.
Don't go home after work. 
Put on ear buds and listen to music. I guess it's a force of habit but I always listen to music while working so when I hear it, I feel productive
Literally don't sit down until you're done with all your chores. Sitting down is the reward. 
First you need to figure out what you want to do instead. Cook more meals at home? Do some yoga or a workout of some kind? Get some chores done? Start a new hobby? 

If you stop yourself from getting into comfy clothes and relaxing, but don't have a plan of action, it won't take long before you just say 'fuck it' and give up on forming those good habits.
I’ve developed a win-win daily routine and it has truly changed my life. I keep my house clean. That’s it. Floors are kept swept or vacuumed, with a weekly mopping. Bathroom cleaned top to bottom once a week. Bed made every day (even if I don’t make it until after work, which is more than half the time). Surfaces wiped, clutter cleared, all clothes and shoes in their place. Lay my clothes out for work (from gloves to socks) before bed. I’m a very messy person, so this takes constant effort for me. I do daily chores then one “bigger” chore after work every evening.  Then I go into the weekend with a clear mind. Living in an (almost) always clean space has done wonders for my mental health, gives me something to do, and gives me more energy for other activities like going to the gym or seeing a friend. Fight the winter madness!
I don't come home until I work out. Then I become a lazy puddle of goo with no guilt. 
I quit drinking coffee. The first like 2 weeks was extremely difficult, but I feel so energized all the time now. And when I have a late night or something I'll have a cup of coffee and it'll actually make me feel better 
I time my 1 cup of coffee for the day for about 6-7hrs before I want to be in bed. In the morning, it's easy to be productive and get things done while sleepy, as long as I keep going. But, when I get home and am confronted with TV, the couch, or bed, it's tougher if I'm even a BIT exhausted. The caffeine boost at the end of the day sets me in to overdrive, and I start burning off every last bit of mental and physical energy I have left. I get straight in to workout clothes and go for a run. After that I let myself relax, start to wind down, and do any small tasks that don't require going out and about. 
I save my real errands for days off.
Turning on upbeat music helps when you need a little push. I'll play it in the car on the way home.
I get into work at 6 AM and after I’m clocked in for my shift, I make a list of the things I need to get done when I go home at 2PM. When I get home, I’ll put on music or a podcast and try to challenge myself to get through the list (usually it’s house cleaning or paying bills, etc.)

IF I get through the list before the day is over, I usually reward myself for a job well done with lots of PS4 or Switch game time, phone time, Starbucks, or something like that. The promise of a reward can be super motivating and doesn’t always have to be of monetary value. 
My wife gets pissy and cranky and the whole house melts down if I do. 

Fucking hate my life. 
I don’t. It’s lazy season 
I just get up and do something. Anything. Clean, cook, gym, washing etc. Just anything that involves doing something. Then I get lazy and that's my reward for getting things done.
Go to the gym right after work so you can be a pile of goo afterward without feeling guilty :)
If the weather allows it, I drop my handbag at home, take my keys and head right back out for a walk with my phone and a podcast. 30 mins minimum, usually about an hour. I just get so much energy from that walk then it becomes easier to do things at home as well. 

If the weather doesn't allow it  (icy rain, sleet, horizontally raining snow) then I am out of options.
I have lots on the go. I go to the barn to see my horse every day after work or on weekends- usually about 1.5 hours.  Then if I have at least half hour to spare I get moving and get a good work out in (home gym) and then make dinner and THEN turn to goo.  Otherwise if I'm at home I'm generally in pyjamas either cleaning or crafting or being a generally sloth like human but I feel my productivity overall makes that ok lol  
It isn't easy but I find my passion of horses keeps me super disciplined in terms of keeping my routine.  
Crank some music. It makes the chores feel less daunting.
Immediately change into gym clothes to exercise after going to the bathroom and getting a snack. Then an hour later, I don't feel as bad for crashing on the couch for several hours.
i clean whatever i didnt clean that mornin and dont sit down until im done or i will never get back up 
Well, I cook because I'm hungry, but otherwise, if I intend to go out that evening, I just don't go home. Once I'm home, I'm doooone. 
The realization that regular/daily exercise lowers my chances of getting breast cancer. The only time I let myself take a break is the weekend. 
If I didn't go in the AM, I'll go work out at the gym. I keep my work clothes on. Find little things to do (like put the dishes away or tidy up a counter). Put on a podcast rather than TV. Read. 
It's all about inertia. I simply do not let myself sit down. I put my clothes away. I start prepping dinner/breakfast (I work nights lol). I get dressed for the gym. I just do not let myself sit down, and then it's easy. 
get home & take the dogs for a walk immediately. when we get back home, it’s time to feed them & during that time while they’re eating I’ll tidy up the house & put things away & start taking food out for dinner. If I sit down for a bit, I’ll set a reminder or alarm on my Echo to get up to start dinner , take the dogs out again, put the laundry away, wash my face, etc. I find having those reminders helps me with keeping on track or else I’d let time slip away & be lazy.  Maybe even writing down what needs to be done before you get home & tackle those as soon as you walk in the door. 
Have a plan, you will be lazy when you get home and exhausted. Have a plan of what you want to do for the night before you can relax, or else it’ll never get done! Left yourself relax for Maybe 10 minutes (or not at all if that helps) and then get to what you need to do. For me it’s working out- if I relax for an hour before I exercise, I will be way less likely to do it 
When I catch myself about to sit or scroll through apps, I’ll stop and ask myself “What can be done right now?” 

100% of the time I end up diving into tiny tasks that lead to several more and before I know it I’ve got a picked up living room, laundry started, a clean vanity and tomorrow’s meals packed! My productivity has improved ten fold since I’ve started this.
Try setting things up in the morning that will help make coming home easier- lay out a change of clothes, have a snack prepared, just anything that will ease your amount of tasks to complete when you come home so you'll feel less stressed.
Upvote for the edit. 
Work out! Right away after work. Every day I don't work out I am a total blob after work, but working out energizes me, and after I work out I have 10x more energy and get 10x more done than if I did nothing.
Like other said, don’t sit down or get comfortable until you have done what is needed, such as running errands, cleaning. 
I just go gym without even sitting down, it's way easier. 
[removed]
Drink a shit ton of coffee. 
I don’t sit down until I’m ready to be sitting for the evening. Also, if I have a lot of stuff to get done around the house, I’ll put headphones in and knock them out first thing. If I sit/lay down, I’m typically done for the evening. 
Usually my skeleton handles that for me.
I do the things I don't want to do first and keep saying to myself: "you can relax/shower after you just do this." 
It’s hard. 
This thread is full of awesome suggestions I too am going to take on board. Thanks OP for posting the question☺️☺️
Don't work.  Stay home. 
I go to the gym before I go home.  That way I don’t even give myself the lazy option.  Stop at the grocery store on the way home after that and grab something to MAKE for dinner; not just a quick fast fix.
Keep on moving- objects in motion tend to stay in motion. 
I work nights, it’s impossible. But I do take a hot shower when I get home before snuggling up.
Get in, don't get changed, play with dogs, empty dishwasher, hoover, take dogs for a walk, get changed into running gear, run, get back and shower, make food, eat, sleep. 
Go to the gym after work. 
Taking a nap is my nemesis...
Get kids...
I dont change into comfy clothes and shoes (just take my coat off), and get on with whatever I have to do at home, eg: cooking, washing up, etc.
Once I am ready to be a couch potato for the evening, I take my shoes off and change into comfy clothes.
bra off and comfy pants within moments of entering home - then a quick handful of food, then I look at the state of my apartment and choose one of two things to do before allowing myself to sit down, whether that be watering my plants, cleaning the kitchen a bit, doing the litter box, cleaning up my clothes on the floor, etc.  I will usually plan out supper and either start cooking asap or wait an hour. 
I start doing chores as soon as I get home. It’s the only way I’m getting anything done. My biggest problem is the need to shower when I get home (cycle commute = sweaty). 
I will get changed in the bathroom at work into my workout gear half an hour before I finish my shift so I can get straight to the gym ASAP after I knock off. It’s much harder to slack off if you’re already in the gear. Of course this strategy is only applicable to you if going to the gym is a part of your weekly routine. At least doing that twice an evening means the other 3 times I come home I can earn the pool on the couch lol. 
off course we need to relax , but don't watch TV.....

you wil automatically get ideas and reminder from your memory abt your pending personal tasks
I always think to myself "If I sit down I won't want to get up". So, I try to get everything done so I won't have to get up when I sit down.
Don't sit down usually works for me. When I walk in the door from work, I walk straight to the kitchen and start doing something. Sitting down is the WORST cause I know the second I do, I'll get lazy. I literally take off my coat, slap on a podcast and start loading the dishwasher or emptying the washing machine. I tell myself just do 30 mins. That's all. Then you have a whole evening to yourself. Or do chores as you cook dinner. When I have something on the stove that needs stirring, I leave it simmer, do the dishes, go back and stir it, go do something else. 
Once I sit down it’s all over. I walk through the door and immediately start working on whatever I want to get done. I’m one of those people that have a hard time sitting still though.
* Don't sit down
* Don't put comfy clothes on
* Do 1 quick chore (cat litter, unload dishwasher)
* Do 1 longer chore (vacuum, dust, wipe down counters/appliances)
Yin yoga poses! Restful and slows your breathing.
I skip home after work and do at least one activity for 1-2 hours then go goo myself into the couch with a beer.
In the summertime it’s easy. I don’t take off my work clothes and go straight into working in my yard. That’s easy for me because I work in a greenhouse so another layer of dirt and sweat is nothing. If I go inside and eat dinner I’m done. I’ll eat at 10pm when I come inside.

In the winter? I’m screwed. I can’t function once the sun is down. 
I don't let myself sit down until I've done everything... it's the only way.
I took everything but a spoon and a can of beans. 
He always spoke about how he hated his dad for cheating & lying to his mom, so when I find out he cheated on me with multiple women I went to his apartment and found a photo of us on his bedside table & wrote "Just like your daddy" on it. 
I also took all his toilet paper & hand soap because even though he was the 25 year old man with a job & I was a 19 year old college student he apparently couldn't buy his own shit & I had to buy it for him. So technically it was mine.
In 2010, I found out my fiancé had been having an affair with our neighbor (for the past six months), 2 weeks before our wedding. His best man broke down and told me.

For 8 years, I have been giving creepy dudes my ex’s phone number instead of mine. His sister always texts me his new phone number when he changes it. She also sends photos and video of him losing his mind angry when he gets a call from a dude looking for a hookup. 😂

His sister is the real MVP here, though.
[deleted]
When my ex husband left me for another woman in the Philippines, he did not stay to bother moving his stuff and expected me to do it. I put everything up for sale in a garage sale and left for another state myself knowing all the stuff he rented in his name like the tv, washer and dryer and other expensive items were still in the house. Three years later I get an angry message from him demanding to know why I didn’t bother calling the rental place because now he’s got a pending felony for the couple thousand dollars worth of unreturned property. 
He repeatedly cheated on me with multiple women so I had my pregnant roommate piss on a test and then just dropped it at his front door. No note, no way to know who it came from. The panic was real. 
My ex was super into the drift scene and loved cool cars but he was always super broke. He broke up with me on Christmas Day by gifting me a pair of socks and telling me it wasn’t working out after I had bought him a ton of nice Christmas gifts. The next week I took all my hard earned money I was saving up to by myself a new car and bought the exact one he talked about constantly but was too broke to buy himself. Made sure he saw it by driving through the parking garage he was working at as the ticket guy and it felt fucking good to see his face as he handed me that ticket. 
I let my ex keep our cat we got together (after he begged me) only to have him call me a month later saying he didn’t want the cat anymore. When I went to get the cat from our old house, I found that my ex hadn’t cleaned the cat litter since before I moved out! 
I was mostly mad for the kittens sake. Honestly I doubt my ex took care of him at all. A fight broke out after he refused to clean the litter up so I ended up dumping the whole litter box right on his living room floor. Then I stormed out with the litter box in one arm and the cat in the other. 

Side note - Kitten is 6 now. Found out my ex and his friends were awful to the poor little guy so I’m glad I took him when I did ☺️ 
I waited until fifteen minutes before the new season of game of thrones started to change the password on my hbo account that I knew he was still using.
My husband of 24 years was cheating on me. I figured it out about 2 months after it really started, but he kept the identity of the other woman a secret. A few weeks before our divorce, I decided I needed to know why it was such a mystery so I did some investigating. Turns out it was a co-worker who was also married.... so I went to their house and knocked on the door and told her husband. My ex had the nerve to call me and accuse me of ruining peoples lives. #teampetty 
I still use my exes phone number for his Walgreens card. He’s so stingy I know he’ll never redeem any of his points so I randomly get $5/$10 off at Walgreens. 
I hope I'm not too late to this, but I loosened the seams in all his pants and shorts so that as soon as he sat they'd rip open on him. It's been 10 years and that still makes me laugh
The Ex cheated on me after 12 years with someone he met at work. When that went sour he lost his job and ended up falling behind on his car payment. The repo company had my place as his last known address, so when they showed up here looking for the car I invited them in, used Facebook to get them as much info on The Ex and New Girlfriend as possible, gave them his parent's address and sent them on their way with a smile. 
A long time ago my ex cheated on me with a friend. So I went on Craigslist and put an ad up for cheap tickets to 98 degrees, who were coming to town. I put my ex's phone number on it and asked for people to call from 10pm on, because I "worked 3rd shit" 

I've grown up a but since then, but I still think it's funny.
After a messy breakup, my ex kept harassing me at home and at school by shouting awful things at me. I asked him to stop but he refused because it was “too fun.” So, in the spirit of “fun,” I posted a shirtless picture of him (which he posted on social media right after our breakup as another way to psychologically torment me) and his phone number on Craigslist’s men-seeking-men page. The headline? “Young guy looking for fun.”

Not only did he have to change his phone number, but he also never bothered me again.
Left all his consoles, took the wires. Left his hair clippers, took the length guards. 
I sent my ex a glitter bomb anonymously a few months ago >:}

Felt real good. It was an awful, awful breakup and I never want to speak to him again. This way, I didn't have to, and I still got to mildly inconvenience him! 
Was in a relationship for two years, two years too long. He was an abusive alcoholic that was lovingly manipulative when sober. 
Broke up with him after having to call the police on him after a rather rough night. Two weeks later and I'm staying strong, telling him he has to be sober for at least a year before I would ever consider giving him another chance. For the first time I stuck to my no, which was new for him and he very much so did not like it.
Que him then spilling that he had been cheating on me for two months anyways with a girl he had sworn he was just friends with. 
Two months later I'm going through a junk drawer of mine and I found I still had his spare car key. I am not an angry person day to day and I honestly don't even wish anything bad towards him.
 I did however move his car two blocks every morning for a week. And on the last day, after what I'm sure was a week of being late to work and feeling on the verge of insanity, I left his car where he had parked it. I did also though turn the volume to max and move everything movable slightly.
Do I think it was healthy? Not really but it did fucking feel great 
after blocking my ex-boyfriends number, I would give his number to every guy who asked for my number downtown. 
I went barhopping every weekend during that point in my life so it happened semi frequently. I’m sure it made his blood boil to have dudes texting his phone looking for me 
I went to a Panera bread after hours and acquired 3 trash bags of bagels and threw them at his house.
[removed]
This is my sisters story. 

Her shithead ex gifted her a pair of brand new white Nike Air trainers. After the breakup, he demanded them back. He had done enough to warrant an application for a Domestic Violence Order, so all four of us (me plus 3 sisters) went in on a team effort for this one. We dyed one side of each shoe, one red and one blue. Then we put them in the box, dye side down so you couldn't see it when you opened the box, and gave them back to him that way. As my sister didn't want to see him, I delivered the shoes to his mothers place. The abusive text messages all four of us got after he pulled them out of the box were read in mocking voices over glasses of wine. 
I put prawns in his curtain pole.
I had been seeing a man under the notion that he and his wife were split up, living in seperate houses, and beginning the process of divorce. After a couple of months, he told me that this wasn't the case and that they'd decided to move back in together and work things out.

At the same time, he also told me that he still wanted to keep seeing me and that he didn't love her (couldn't stand her to be precise) and just felt stuck with her. I told him to go to hell, then sent her screenshots of our entire conversation and noped out of their lives for good. Last I heard of them, she moved back in with her family out of state and he's a raging alcoholic.   

[deleted]
I spent our year together wearing flats because he was self conscious that he was slightly shorter than me. When we broke up, I bought the tallest, sexiest heels I could find and wore them to a mutual friend's party. The look on his face when I arrived towering over him was priceless. 
Oh this is my time to shine.   

I'll preface my description of my own behavior by saying I'd left an insanely abusive relationship where I was terrorized in my own home for longer than I should have allowed it to go on.   My ex was (is) a callous drunk, meaner with every round.

My last weekend in our shared home, I'd been in and out of the hospital for weeks with colitis, and was in my bed trying to rest. We'd broken up the week before (after he drank 24 beer and drove home to tell me I was shit) but were still sorting out living arrangements.  He called, clearly wasted, and said he was on his way home "with a crew" to watch football on our giant surround system.  I said no.  I needed rest.  I guess he wanted to look cool in front of his buds, because he threatened to kill me if I was there when he got home.  

It wasn't the first time, but I decided it was the last time.  So I left.  And I never went back.  I only packed one bag that day.  [Here I am with the contents](https://imgur.com/a/GVm4AOZ).  There would be no football.  And for about year after, long after we'd divided the property, he'd text asking about a remote.   

"Nope.  Haven't seen em.  Did you check in the couch???"

ETA this kind if blew up so I pulled my pic.  *(It was of me, with an armful of every remote in the house, and a little smirk on my face)*
After the bro I was dating gave me the silent treatment for a week (while we lived together) and then I found out he was cheating on me, I hid all his protein powder in his dirty laundry. He called the cops about three weeks later, who then showed up at my house asking about stolen protein powder. I informed them that no it wasn’t stolen and if he had done his laundry in the last three weeks he would have found it. One cop looked annoyed, but the other one burst out laughing. Wish I could have seen my ex’s face when the cops informed him he needed to do his laundry! 
cut the sleeve off of a dress shirt the other woman had bought him and put it back in the closet so only the good arm was showing. Got a text from him a couple weeks later that simply said 'are you fucking serious!?' ... Yes... Yes I am
I broke up with him after being treated badly for too long. He kept sending me vicious emails when I wouldn't answer his calls. I responded describing a fake new boyfriend who goes down on me at least 20 mins at a time, in Comic Sans font. 

He was a graphic designer and would rant about how bad that font is on occasion. He knew it was intentional. 
My ex had a mediocre wine collection that she was very proud of. Since both of our names were on the rental agreement, we were stuck there for a few months together. 
Right before I packed up - she was out of town for a trip - I took every bottle out of the wine fridge and placed each one in a pot of boiling water for a few minutes until they were nice and toasty. Then back in the fridge they went. 
Enjoy that Cabernet Sauvignon Vinegar ‘05. 
I returned the fancy expensive never worn dress shirt he left at my place and exchanged it for a fancy dress for myself.   
I logged into his Pokemon Go account and deleted his whole box.

I made a new account just for this.
We had Bronco tickets that I purchased. The week after we broke up, he asked me if he could have the tickets so he can take his friend without paying me for them. I ended up giving them to my sister and her BF, and told her to tag him in any and all Facebook posts she makes during that match, which she did. 
One of my old friend’s exes unexpectedly dumped her while they were sharing an apartment and a job she had landed him. They spent a few weeks living together broken up, and he wasted no time going on new dates.

My friend decided to rename the petty game. She began by cutting his sneaker laces slightly shorter and recapping them so that they seemed to have shrank. One morning, she hid all of his socks while he was running late for work. He became increasingly frustrated while searching the apartment, so she sent him to check the dryer while she placed ALL of his socks in the middle of the hamper he’d been checking for the past 20 mins. Needless to say he was dumbfounded when he found them later. Perhaps the most lethal troll was about two weeks after they’d broken up when she added Chardonnay to his dirty bong prior to him returning from his date. He immediately plopped down on the couch and took a huge rip when he got home and she just watched like an absolute savage as he repeatedly hit the bong, utterly confused as to why it was roasting his lungs. 
I signed my ex up for a bunch of crazy fetish porn using his work email. It’s been almost a decade and I still get a good chuckle about it. 
i still had access to his fams netflix so i would change the names to “cheater “ “ lying pos” “ i am garbage and treat women badly “


somone would just change it back and not log me out lmao so maybe his family felt bad for having such a shiftty kid and this was there way of showing it 
Penis pictures under mothers pillow:   
After finding out my then boyfriend of 2 years had cheated on me with multiple girls I was devastated. Without a blink I printed off 53 copies of his penis (from pictures he had sent me) and hid then around his house hiding them in boxes of Christmas decorations, under his mother’s pillow, inside of his fathers pill bottle. Just about anywhere I knew his youngest sister couldn’t get into. I was 16 and full of rage. Considering that his mother and father enabled the behavior of their son and called me for months after to forgive him because “it’s in the past” , I don’t regret a thing. 
I lived in an arts dorm in college and my ex was a musician. We wrote a song together using a miniature upright piano and a guitar. We lived on the same floor and one day I heard him singing it with some other girl so then I opened the door took the piano from under her hands and I still have it to this day. 

I literally can’t believe I did it, but I thought it was pretty shitty of him to share a love song we wrote together with someone else. And now that piano has a pretty great story attached. 
I searched his Reddit username and downvoted everything he’d ever posted lmao. 

So silly. 
[deleted]
He got another girl pregnant, so ofcourse I broke up with him and demanded he return all of my things, including anything I bought him. He asked for some money he had given me back. Instead I got on my computer and printed out "asshole dollars". I printed and cut them out and put them in a sealed envelope. He didn't realize until he got in the cab to go back home he had fake money. And no I never gave him back his real money. 
Story from a friend without Reddit: 

She cheated on him. She very much wanted the sofa set but he got it in the divorce. He knew which 2nd hand furniture shop she had been looking in, so sold it to them knowing she would buy it. 

But not before filling the Italian leather sofa cushions with catnip. 

The chap she left him for has 3 cats. 
I gave a stuffed bear he had given me to my dog to use as a chew toy. 
Oh another....when I moved out i took everything except i purposely left a box of magnum condoms half empty in one of the bathroom cabinets. He never could fit into such large protective gear. 
[deleted]
I'm still using his Hulu account. Almost 2 years after the fact. Once in a while, I'll play a few episodes of whatever show he/his gf are watching.
I found out a guy I’d dated for almost a year (and who wanted me to move in with him and wanted to get me pregnant?!) had been cheating with his ex nearly the whole relationship. He was very insecure about his little member’s size (emphasis on little). So after i confronted him about the cheating and he was begging forgiveness, i texted “oh don’t stress about it. Just means you’ve been disappointing 2 women in bed for the last year instead of just 1.” Super petty but quite effective as an immediate show-stopper. 
He cheated. I told his mother
[deleted]
I dated a guy 13 years older than me. (We didn’t realize the age gap was so big at first). He was possessive and obsessed with being healthy. Into anything natural or alternative. A bro of alternative health, if you will. 

For his 40th birthday, I gave him an expensive spa aromatherapy and acupuncture package.  
We broke up the day after he turned 40, when he pulled some last straw jealousy bs.

Two weeks later, I cashed in on the package and had a nice spa day to myself. 
I didn't wait for the breakup to get petty. I found out my boyfriend was cheating on me through his friend a couple days before my birthday. I told him not to mention anything to my boyfriend and I would take care of it. For my birthday, he took me shopping for a new outfit, got my hair and nails done, then took me to an expensive dinner and movie. 
At the end of the night, I asked that he take me home even though I normally spent my weekends at his house. When we got there, I got out the car, walked around to his side, had him roll down the window and said "I know you've been cheating on me with the ugly coworker of yours." I went inside, locked the door and changed my phone number. Seventeen year old me was a fucking savage. 
He broke a glass bottle on my face (broken nose, stitches) so when I left a week later I took almost every single piece of food out of the kitchen since I bought it all anyway. Left him a box of quinoa lmfao. bon appetit 
A couple years after the breakup, I turned on some old tablet I hadn't used in years and discovered it had her Netflix login saved.  Added a bunch of naruto to her watchlist and logged out.
I wrote a song, recorded it, and released it on Spotify, Apple Music, Pandora, etc

It’s a great song. Not gonna lie, it’s a pretty awesome song and was worth the crap I went through.

He’s a professional musician, I do music as a hobby. Lots of fragile ego at play.

Update: wow! Didn’t expect this response! Here’s a link :)

“Blue” is now available for streaming worldwide

Spotify:
https://open.spotify.com/track/1nllnzvVey0dkAC2Jr0YAh?si=YVMZANyeTdadTEMvLCrT-g

Apple Music:
https://itunes.apple.com/us/album/blue-single/1439001012

Amazon Music:
https://www.amazon.com/dp/B07JF7ZSXR/ref=cm_sw_r_cp_api_w9i3Bb3SVS268

YouTube:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kjcsBpTe49o

Thank you for listening!

Edit: WOW thank you for the gold!! The biggest compliment. What a wonderful way to kick off thanksgiving. Thank you thank you thank you!

Edit 2: This happened early March. Since then I’ve met a really wonderful person who I’m optimistic about. Was definitely scary getting into this new thing with all the crap that happened just 8 months ago, but I was very careful to make sure I don’t punish this new guy for what the old guy did. Happy to report a good outcome in the end of it all!

Edit 3: HOLY CRAP! I just looked at my Spotify page and nearly 2,000 streams? THANK YOU!! I released this song thinking like 12 people would listen to it. Thank you for streaming! I've made a whole $7 off of this song which is 7 more dollars than I expected to. Wow. I have no words. Thank you! 
Registered his phone number and primary email address with as many spam sites as I could find.
I had a psycho ex who was really into gardening. He was a pathological liar (lied about his job, his family, his age, who he voted for, etc) and he loved to grow pumpkins for halloween. Well... after I found out about all his lies, I ended shit and he agreed I could come get my stuff from his place while he was at work. This particular year, he only had one pumpkin that ended up doing well. So I ripped it out of the ground, smashed it to pieces, and put it under his covers like the godfather. Right on his side of the bed. Dirt and all.
My sister after her divorce went to pick up my nephews at her her ex’s new house and snooped around a bit. She noticed things he had bought for himself that she always wanted, like certain cookware he always said was too expensive. It was around Christmas and she noticed he had bought this massive super expensive nativity scene - so she stole the baby Jesus. (Returned with much laughter from all involved) To this day when any of us go a tad bit nutty  over something petty we call it “stealing the baby Jesus”
Stole all his toilet paper, paper towels and the box of tissues. You want to be shitty? I’ll leave you in a shitty situation 
My then bf of 4 years was cheating on me with a girl via Snapchat. He swore they were just friends. So when we broke up I logged on to his Snapchat and changed my name to her username. I then proceeded to message him as if I was her. Not my finest moment but I had to know the truth!
After almost a four year relationship(and "engagement" with no ring) ol' shitface was cheating on me with a girl he met for work that lived 1,285 miles away..I found out through texts on his phone and tried confronting him about it..he was drunk and hit me. It was a bad night. I flipped out and said leave(of course)..he stayed out drinking the next couple days and I couldn't/didn't see or talk to him. I go back to work like normal...
Then I come home from working all day, the day before Thanksgiving to find he's gone. (Talk about devastating) He packed all his things, and some of mine and left. But he did leave his bed(I assumed he didn't have a big enough truck to take it) and I never actually saw him again.
Anyway, Black Friday I decide I need a new bed. I go shopping and get one(for a great deal)..they deliver it that night. So as the delivery truck pulls out, I text him "your bed is ready to be picked up" with a picture of it leaning against the nasty dumpster in my apartments...in the rain. 

Ohhh he was mad, and it was glorious!
I was thankful for something that year after all. 
I ran a magnet over my ex's harddrive in 2005 to corrupt the data. This was before cloud storage, when a harddrive full of media was arguably the most valuable thing a teenager could have.

&#x200B;

I told him about it recently (we're still friends) and he found it funny (at the time he would have not taken it so well)
I was with a guy for 2.5 years who refused to get a driver's license.  I drove him everywhere to the point where the car died about a month after we broke up.  I did everything for him... he refused to grow up.  He was too dependant on me to end it so he cheated on me and gaslighted me when I asked about the girl he was constantly texting.  Finally he ended it (still denying the cheating... making me feel insane and like a "jealous girlfriend".)  When I got him to finally admit to it I took his deepest insecurity and confirmed it to him.  I told him he was right all along and I should have believed him when he said he was a shitty person and he hurts everyone that loves him.  Petty? Yes.  But it felt good and I don't regret it.
We were fighting but I already bought him a gift and decided to give it to him. I wrapped it with a newspaper article of a decaying beached whale. The pettiness may have been too subtle. 
He left a bunch of his things in my closet (presumably on purpose) and then rudely demanded I give them back. 

I left them on his lawn, definitely on purpose.

OMG that wasn’t the pettiest thing I’ve done...I just remembered.

My first boyfriend had shared nude photos of me with his friends, which I found out about (they got put on a photo sharing site, it was a whole thing and a long time ago so not as huge a deal as it would be if this happened now but still traumatizing). Anyway, I still had the spare key to his car and I considered doing lots of different things to him, but a friend suggested we put fish or something in the fabric of the seats of his car. I wasn’t interested in completely ruining his car so we ended up packaging some frozen baby shrimp like a present and her mother created a “voodoo doll” out of yarn to put in the gift box. We hid it under a blanket in the trunk of his car. To my understanding he didn’t find it for a really long time, which is crazy because it was summer and it was under a very heavy blanket, apparently one of his friends noticed the smell and told him he needed to figure out what it was. Compared to what sort of crazy shit people suggested I do...it could’ve been much pettier.
Literally just happened two days ago.

My ex moved away to college and she gave me this ukulele to remember her by. She never played this ukulele. Ever. But she had to pack all of her stuff up so she let me hold onto this ukulele for storage/memento reasons. 

Anyway, we’re off and on the last year or so. I flew out to her place over the summer to try and patch things up. We did. I accidentally left one of my favorite shirts there. We ended up breaking up again before I could get it back. 

So she texts me randomly this week saying she wants it back. Cool, fine by me. “Sure, I’ll ship it out this week. Can I get my shirt back?” “Aw sorry dude, I actually don’t have it anymore.” 

Sold the ukulele for $5 two hours after she told me that.
I ordered delivery of 2 large cheese pizzas from every pizza place in town to my ex's house, then watched from a car down the street as my ex answered the door to 5 different pizzas guys, one after another.  My ex's frustration level hilariously increased with each new delivery guy.  The best part is, the address was blacklisted from all of the pizza places from then on, so... no more delivery for you.
I lost weight, became "hot." 

I miss my 20s.
I found out my ex husband had been cheating on me with multiple women, one of them being my best friend (at the time) and was on Plenty of Fish. He was abusive emotionally and took a lot of pride in him being the bread winner and how good his credit is and how he was a “better human than me.” Whatever that means. 

He ever so graciously granted me his car in the divorce. To which I was suppose to switch it just in my name. Well, I purposely did not make a single car payment for 6 months. Absolutely destroying his credit. Finally took his name off the title, refinanced to help with the late fees, then paid off a month later. 

No regerts. 
Went to the public library and into the magazine section. Know those little cards you can fill out to get a free subscription? She got every single magazine. 

Edit: came from r/all, didn't see that this was r/askwomen 
This is a bit different but .. I saw my buddies truck outside a store and went to go talk to him.  As I approached the truck from the rear I saw his girlfriend was In The driver's seat and a guy was next to her(bench seat).  She was kissing him.  I opened the door and took the keys from the ignition.  I realized it was his roommate and they all loved together a few miles out of town.  I told them to get out and took the truck to his place.  By the time they walked there we had thrown all their shit out of the house.  It was fun.
Took his free sandwich from Safeway.
Donated everything he left at my apartment to Goodwill.  And no, I didn't ask for receipts.

...

To be fair, he was threatening to sue me over a tiny box TV and a basic knife set (he didn't like that I wasn't under his control anymore).  Not my fault he also left his entire winter wardrobe at my flat.  When the first freeze of the year came, I giggled through the day.
My ex in high school cheated on me with another girl, and she rubbed it in my face. I KNEW he was obviously at fault too, but the fact that she got joy out of it pissed me off. I continued sleeping with my ex in spite of her and one time messaged her on Facebook, "can you tell \_\_\_ he left his hat at my house last night? Thanks! :)"   


Teenage immaturity but I don't regret it.
I didn't do this, but it had it happen to me. My friend broke up with her boyfriend, and came to stay with me for awhile. Her ex called the cops on me four different times saying I kidnapped her. The fourth time they said they wouldn't be coming back to my house and was going to have a talk with him.

I was also dating his brother, and we broke up because I got a call from the sheriff's department saying he didn't want to talk to me anymore. I didn't even know you could breakup via police. They said, "He'll probably come back to you, but for right now he wants to break up and doesn't want to talk to you.". I wish I was joking.
Okay, so my ex tried to cheat on me with a mutual friend of ours. The ex I can at least respect to some extent for being honest about it, so I just treated him like he died, blocked on everything, refused to acknowledge his existence, he tried to come into my work when I used to bartend to talk to me and I just straight up ignored him until the bouncer came and kicked him out. The friend on the other hand refused to admit she did anything despite me having proof that she initiated the texting and brought up hooking up in the first place. So I waited a while to take my revenge out on her. A year later, I see via Instagram that she's dating a new guy. Gave it a few more months to make sure things were more than just a fling and then I started making it a point to stop in at bars by myself on the weekend for a drink. Guys would come up and hit on me and I'd give out my ex friend's name along with her phone number with the intention that her phone would be blowing up with "hey ___, this is Matt. We met at the bar a couple nights ago. How are you?" Not sure if this had anything to do with it or not, but she was single a month after I started handing out her number. 

Edit: I would also like to put it out there that I know what I did was wrong and I should be able to forgive and let things go and not try to ruin other people's lives by holding huge grudges until I feel they get what they "deserve." I see a psychologist every Monday morning and I have gotten much better at letting go of my anger and being more secure with myself and my relationships.
My ex (who lived in my apartment building) was cheating on me with a woman who also lived in my apartment building, right next door to me. I found out about it via Instagram. Broke up with him immediately and began dating his best friend and business partner. Broke up their company & friendship. 

A couple weeks later he decided to come by my place, begging for me back. Had the nerve to ask me if his friend’s dick was bigger than his. I said yes, because it’s true, friend’s dick was bigger. Ex bf couldn’t take it and I haven’t seen him since. Moved out almost immediately thereafter. Good riddance. Dude def deserved that. 
I went to his apartment and took (fine, stole) one of every shoe. I threw them out on the freeway as I backtracked the 12 hour drive I’d just made. 
We met in a parking lot to give back each other’s things after not talking for 2 months. He’s a car guy and he’d talk nonstop about them. In the middle of our Cold War he had the audacity to text me about the new car my dad had gotten, and not even ask me how I was doing, or anything that would help patch things up. Just inquiring about the car. It was a car he’d been talking about for months just before he broke up with me. When we met, I borrowed that  that car from my dad (my dad was behind me on this) just to throw a little salt in the wounds. He couldn’t take his eyes off this car the whole time and I wouldn’t let him sit in it. 🤷‍♀️ maybe you shouldn’t have been a jerk to me.
Went crying to the apartment office that he emotionally abused me (which was true) and that I needed out of my lease. She took me off the lease and since I made most of the income he was stuck with an apartment he couldn't afford ( with 10 months left on the lease.) He got evicted, and ruined his credit score. No regrets. 
I cancelled his extended warranty on a tv he bought a few weeks prior, used the extra money to buy all my coworkers candy (:
I told him “let’s be friends” and then went home and unfriended him on Facebook. 
I took hostage his $20 bong that he was somehow spiritually and emotionally attached to, and I took it because he was mentally addicted to weed, broke my iPod and cheated on me and I knew he loved that dumbass thing more than anything. He was so mad and kept calling my parent's house after I moved back home after the breakup (I was embarrassingly 19, I really cringe at this particular period of my life), and my stepdad got so annoyed at my level of petty teen bitchiness that he looked at me after one particularly stupid phone call, took the bong, went outside with a hammer and smashed it. We never talked about it again. My stepdad died last year and I always smile at this memory. He was a great sport
Ages ago I had a bf that was far wealthier than I and had a MA compared to my BA and never let me forget it.  I was young, with almost zero self esteem.  It was a mostly miserable relationship in which he bragged continually and cheated.  It was an adversarial relationship and I began to find my spine, and I broke up with him.  A couple of years or so later I was eating lunch with my new bf. This one was delightful.  Handsome, too.  I noticed that the ex-bf, david, was seated at a nearby booth with a bunch of buddies from his work.  He saw me, then I heard him say to them that I was his ex, that he had broken my heart, and he was going to make my day.  He did this sort of schmoozing walk to me, all smiles.  Before he said a word, I stopped him.  I told him that he had been a sorry excuse for a boyfriend, that he was the sloppiest kisser and the quickest comer in bed, a real loser as a lover.  that he was a selfish, conceited git and that he could just turn around and go finish his lunch.  I spoke clearly and loudly enough that his friends could hear every word.  A couple of them clapped for me.

Petty, I know, and from this distant point in time I can see I really had some anger issues.  But, still, it felt great. 
Not me, my boyfriend - pissed in her iron. The steam part where the water goes. 
When my ex and i broke up his card was still on my amazon account so i bought all the book series i wanted on my kindle
He was VERY abusive, and that week he had travelled back to his hometown for a holliday and was being so distant and was treating me so badly that I said I never wanted to see him again. I had the keys to his home so I went there to get my stuff back. Our best friend was pissed at him because of the way he used to treat me in front of everyone (he really treated me like shit). So, this BFF gave me a lift there since I had bought the douche a big TV and couldn't carry it alone (fuck yeah I took it back it was hella expansive).
I decided I wanted some revenge. I fucked our friend all around the house. And I cleaned many loads with his pillow case, bathing towel and clothes. 
Then I married this same friend. ❤ (4 years together now)

I got drunk, went into the city and bought a lottery ticket. Two weeks later the lottery company called, I should come to a TV show. I went there and won the jackpot (125k€). I arranged a setup where my ex was watching the show and saw me winning! That was really nice! 
My ex absolutely refused to "let" me get a tattoo, something I'd wanted to do for a long time. Maybe two weeks after the divorce was finalized, I got my tattoo.
After almost 3 years with a horrible man I finally found out he cheated on me and got the will to leave. Took the grocery store stamps we had accumulated. I had to pay all the bills and buy all the groceries anyways so why should he get future grocery discounts? Funny thing is he was actually really pissed about it and tried to get them back.
Had a gf with a massive ego, her ex husband left her for a younger girl despite how beautiful she was and it ate her up inside. Her ex husband was about to get remarried to a diff girl who looked like the 28 year old version of my 38 yo gf. I knew that weekend was gonna be rough for her. So I prepared to just be there for her and let her cry on my shoulder. But she insisted she wanted to be alone.  So I let her have her space. 3 days later I find out she met and slept with a 22 year old guy and that she's dumping me. And I was particularly pissed bc she's clearly taking out her angst over her ex but the only person that's getting hurt is me. So I made a fake facebook and catfished the kid she dumped me over for a few days. Then I contacted her through the catfish acct and shared the conversation with her as a concerned other girl. And she dumped him, and then figured out I did it, which only made me smile. 
I "accidentally " texted him really hot semi nude pics after I lost a bunch of weight and was fit. Drove him insane. 

Edit to add: he is seriously the worst. Very abusive in a lot of ways and a narcissist. The only thing that drive him insane was jealousy. We were separated not divorced yet. 
My ex needed a fridge after we broke up: my dad and I found a shitty one for $25, cleaned it pretty well,  then charged him $150.

I also preground my ex's weed with my grinder as a "service" and gave him mostly stems mixed with chamomile as I kept 100% of his kief in my kief catcher.

After 7 years of his emotional abuse while supporting his lazy ass with my income, it felt good to recoup some tiny losses and didn't harm him a bit.
After him and I broke up, my friend ‘accidentally’ sent a text to my ex saying, “YOU KISSED HIM?”

Then sent another text to my ex saying, “Oh sorry that was for killeroftherose” (Implying that I kissed another man)

He texted me later that say saying, “So you’re with someone else ?”

Then another time, I bought a teddy bear and chocolates for myself. Then posted it on Valentine’s Day on Snapchat saying, “Thanks babe :)” (acting like someone bought it for me)

And then my ex called me and asked about the Valentine’s Day gifts.

All of this was planned by me. Looking back, what I did was so unnecessary to be fair, I was just heartbroken over him.
We had a pretty big dvd collection. So I put each one of his dvds in the wrong case. 
I’ve had long hair my whole life. My boyfriend loved my hair. I cut it very short. Posh spice short. And flaunted it all over where my ex would be. 

Kind of dumb because it didn’t directly affect him... but boy did he care. If honestly worked at getting under his skin. 
After dumping him for cheating, I logged into his MySpace and changed all his profile info! Then changed the password and email so he couldn't change it back! 
When I was 19 I got myself out of a bad relationship with a very controlling, manipulative older guy. He had always talked about how he was suicidal and it was my fault, and when I left he texted me that he was killing himself, clearly staged in an attempt to get me to take him back. (Something he had a history of doing.) Well, I called his bluff and had him 5150'd. He was fucking pissed, mostly because of the ambulance and hospital charge he now was responsible for. Apparently the dumbass put my address on his hospital forms that night, even though I payed 100% of the rent and was the only one on the lease, and he obviously was not coming back. I didn't know this for several weeks, because I had lost my mailbox key and being a teenager with no need for snail mail, didn't do anything about it until it turned up. When it finally did, I found 3 or 4 letters addressed to him, and decided to do the amoral yet infinitely more satisfying thing of opening them. Well, they were ambulance bills, each one increasing with late charges. After my friend and I died laughing, I decided to wait for a few more letters before filling him in. Eventually my friend brought an unopened one into his work, handed it to him, and heard him screaming "FUCK" as she walked out the door. There was no follow up from him. (Thankfully, in retrospect that could have been a pretty dangerous thing to do.)
I sent a taxi service to pick up something she took accidentally. They couldn't find her. I told them her visual description and couldn't resist adding that she also has a qian bian face. It translates to "annoying to the point where it deserves a slap".  
  
They found her.   
   
I'm a jerk.   
Right before I left our shared apartment for the last time, after a terrible fight, I turned around and flashed him my boobs saying "SAY GOODBYE TO THEEESE!" (From Arrested Development)

We both started cracking up and laughed for about 5 minutes, then we hugged and I left. 
She used my Spotify, so I let her keep using it for a while and would change what she was listening to. I know she used it while taking baths and couldn’t fix it, so she’d be stuck listening to the most annoying/depressing songs possible. She never figured it out. 😂
The power was in my name, the day we broke up...she came home from work to a dark house.
I once read a twitter post about how a bisexual girl’s boyfriend cheated on her so she fucked his sister. 
I took all of the spoons and soap when I left. I took the washer and dryer, too. I also poured out of of his alcohol, since he was an abusive alcoholic working on his third DUI. 
Ripped apart this teddy bear that was given to me and threw it out of my car and into his front lawn. 

He would have me take pictures with this bear and one other thing of his request to prove I was where I said I was. He never believed me when I would say I was at home. Horrible relationship. 
A few weeks after I left my ex (for being an abusive drug addict), his newest girlfriend showed up to my work crying and asking for my help as he had basically started pulling the same shit with her. We teamed up and got extremely drunk and bought 3 cartons of eggs, we egged his house, his shop and his vehicles. It resulted in a high speed car chase and endless drama and threats, but it was worth it.
THIS IS MY JAM. My very first boyfriend broke my heart BAD and I was determined to make his life miserable because of it. He, of course, asked for his hoodie back after we split. We frequently  wrote notes to each other during school and passed them during hall time. I took each and every note that I had saved, ripped them into shreds and then stuffed the paper confetti into his meticulously folded hoodie. Gave him the hoodie back in between classes. My witness who had class with him the next hour said he was PISSED when he opened the hoodie to throw it on and confetti LIT UP the room. Score. 
He was an abusive asshole. So I decided to tell every girl he cheated on me about him (which included 3 years ago a 16 year old when he was nearly 20) and the fact that I existed which made *a lot* of other girls come forward to me about being with him (I was pretty popular on Tumblr at the time). That in turn made him lose his little harem of girl and I gained 2 on line friends that I'm still super close too. I'm so very indifferent to him but at the time I hated him and i wanted him to lose the only control he had left. I am so happy I did it tho 
Someone did something petty and extremely misguided on my behalf.

I had a 'thing' going with a guy in school for about 3 months, he acted really into me - romantic, attentive, all that. Story of old, I eventually slept with him, he put me as a notch on his bedpost, boasted to his friends and moved onto his next victim.

Or, so he planned. After me, he apparently met a girl he genuinely liked who had managed to really get his attention.

After he did what he did to me, I went off school sick long-term because of developing a health condition.

During this time I was off sick, and this guy had just gotten with his new girlfriend, a friend of mine thought she would get revenge for me. By telling his new girlfriend that this guy might have HIV, to put her off him. My lovely friend told the girlfriend she knew this FOR SURE... because it's why I had gone off sick. That **I** had HIV, and I had slept with him, so yeah.

When my friend proudly told me of the trouble she had caused for the guy because of how he treated me, I was just... what. Jaw dropped. I pointed out to my friend 'You know, you do realise you basically just spread a malicious rumour about me?'. She was all 'Oh fuck shit I didnt think about that, I just thought it made it more believable, Im so sorry, I meant her to think he had given it to you, blah blah'.

It was the most embarrassing thing in the world marching up to my ex-guy and his new girlfriend, and just blurting out 'Look, I don't have HIV. I never did. I don't know why so-so said that. It's complete bullshit'. Thankfully they were really nice about it, this new girlfriend must have been a good infleunce on him. They basically said yeah they figured it was bullshit, but were relieved to hear it confirmed, and that was that. The rumour didn't spread at all and nothing about my life was affected by it... as far as I know, anyway!
I took all the change in our mutual piggy bank, it amounted to 28 dollars
We were in the middle of moving when he broke up with me after cheating on me with multiple people. All his stuff was stored in my car/my house. Burned it all with a friend.  Lots of sentimental stuff and his birth certificate. And I kept his MTG cards for myself.

I was in high school. He was still logged into his spotify account from my laptop. 

We had a few classes together, so when I saw him put on headphones, I waited a minute, and then started playing “Fuck You” by Lily Allen. 

He didn’t think it was as funny as I did. 
[removed]
I had built his website for him. He was a freelance writer so his portfolio site was how he got jobs. After the breakup, I kept his homepage the same but redirected his writing sample links to blog posts on the NAMBLA website instead of links to his actual writing work. So it looked like he was writing exclusively about child abuse & pornography.

To support this, I also spent a small amount of money buying SEM so any search for his name would yield a few results confirming that he was into the whole NAMBLA thing before listing his website. 


It was a long time before he noticed, and according to GA, lots of potential clients saw it. 
We had been living together maybe 4 years? I told her at some point that she could take some photos off my computer because she asked. 

I didn’t think much of it; at some point I noticed there were a bunch of photos in my Dropbox. Many included the guy she left me for, and I flew into a fit of rage. I deleted the photos and added a password to my computer.
My ex was an abusive piece of shit.  When he discovered I got back together with my current husband/we were planning the wedding, he angrily asked me "Is it true?" And my response was, "Yes, I'm marrying -----. Here's my rock. Oh, even better is he never hit me like you did." Loud enough for my entire lunch group to hear. Zero regrets.
My ex and I were together 6 years and we had two cats..after our very physical breakup I took one cat and moved back home to Indiana from Arizona and he kept our other cat. I found out not long after that he had already moved the girl that he cheated on me with into the house and they were neglecting poor Morrison,leaving him outside on the balcony, dirty litterbox not feeding him regularly etc. Anyways getting to the petty part..our mutual friend (his best friend) was in az visiting him While my older sister happened to be in az at the same time visiting our mother..since I knew he had a crush on my sister over the next couple of days I orchestrated a get together between the two making sure my ex and his new gf would be working when she went over to his house to hangout..I had her pick up the cheapest shittiest 40oz beer(211 steal reserve)on her way there to leave for him as a gift from me.. she spotted Morrison in the first 5 min put the 40oz down on the table picked up momo and ran out.. I do feel bad for involving our mutual friend and using him that way but it was worth it to get my cat out of that shitty situation. So much satisfaction.
Many years ago, my fiancé (“changed his mind” and) broke off our engagement (the day before my final exams in university)... then he asked if I could return the ring. I was so hurt and shocked by the break-up, I refused to return the ring (it wasn’t an heirloom or anything like that). It was the last bit on control I had over the situation, and I wasn’t willing to make it easy for him. Petty, I know... not my proudest moment. 

Years later, when I met the love of my life, I opted not to have an engagement ring. I didn’t want a big ring, big wedding... I just wanted an awesome marriage. We’ve been married for almost twenty years, and they’ve been the happiest years of my life!
Made sure to personally befriend any girl he mentioned having feelings for and then intentionally telling them how awful he was to be in a relationship with so that he would look undesirable to other women
Some dude wouldn't stop badgering me for my number and I only knew my ex's by heart. Wrote it on a cocktail napkin and went on my way. A month later I bump into my ex, and he asked why I gave some guy in jail his number.

I never really heard much about it after that, but it gave me a chuckle. 
Rip out his pot plant and destroy it.
I got better at his sport than he is. 
One time a guy said he didn’t want a girlfriend and I said ok then I don’t want sex. We broke up and I started dating his roommate. 
I know his Reddit username so I check his profile from time to time and downvote anything new.

Pretty tame in terms of petty but I know his Facebook password so he should be grateful, if he knew.
My girlfriend and I broke up but we still had to live together for a bit. We had separate rooms. Her parents were coming to visit for Christmas and she tells me she never told them we broke up. She wanted to let them use my room. The petty pendulum started swinging. I opted for the less drama side of things. I went along with it but I was still petty about and it was going to cost her. I wound up with tons of gifts and gift cards from her and her parents. 
not a romantic breakup but I broke up with my shitty job so it kind of counts? there was one particular sociopath I worked with, and every time I would go to Canada to visit my girlfriend (now wife) she would BEG me to bring her all dressed chips. I always conveniently “forgot” but after I moved here for good I sent a care package to a coworker I actually liked (who also hated the sociopath) with a bag of all dressed chips and specific instructions to eat them at work and not share
I removed my likes from his Facebook 
Scrubbed his toothbrush in the toilet :)
I had an ex cheat on me while I was away for work. I couldn’t get to him right away so I put his number on Craigslist in the M4M section. Then I sued him. It was a beautiful day.
Texted my ex that she smelled like old granny panties when I found out she had been cheating on me.
I had a boyfriend in college. It was a dry campus, but if all the roommates were 21+ they could have alcohol. If there was someone underage in the room with alcohol present the owner of the alcohol would get written up, have to do an alcohol class online, and possibly lose points for their next year housing lottery.

When he broke up with me it was for a girl 3 years younger than us. When we broke up he was the only 21 year old in his dorm room. When we broke up my best friend was an RA in his building. Guess who repeatedly for alcohol write ups. And occasionally cockblocked by RA visits. 
Damn I'm so late to this but I just have to participate. I broke up with a guy for cheating on me, but before that we were working on his porn addiction. He let me set up software on his computer that would block certain sites, obviously it wouldn't get everything but we had hoped it would be a step in the right direction.

This guy wasn't necessarily savvy with technology,  so he didn't realize that I still had control over his access to stuff when we broke up. And you're absolutely right, I kept all that stuff blocked. It took him a year to figure out just resetting his computer would fix it. During that time I would periodically check to see if he was still getting blocked, he would try over 30 sites a day with no success. 
Used his spare key to unlock his truck and sprayed an entire brand new bottle of my perfume into his heater vents and all over of his upholstery/carpet. Oops. I  wasn't gonna let him forget about me for a good long while. 
My ex and I shared a cell plan before the break up. T-Mobile let’s you see all the numbers that a line is texting/calling. I put the girl’s number(she knew about me—my brother’s employee to boot), on Craigslist’s personal section. She had to change her number after the constant dick and vagina pics. Mind you, she’s a religious girl.
long story short after finding out about cheating for the millionth time (I knew I was an idiot after the third time but I stayed, IM STUPID I KNOW) anyway, night before his birthday he’s passed, I find shit in his phone he gave me the password to, ok.. Uber home in the middle of the night, when he texts me the next morning I tell him I lowkey knew he was cheating (I didn’t until that night) so I got tested a few weeks prior(again, I didn’t) BUT I told him he gave me STD’s and to have fun finding out which girl gave it to him! Evil and petty? CHECK. Bet he put a hold on his horses for at least a week. I really did get tested for real tho after finding out. Ladies and gents, take care of yourself! 
Not my ex but my partners. She came back after 3 years, cyber bullied me for getting my S/O to cheat on me with her, which caused me to have a stress induced miscarriage, then when confronted about it tried to play victim and say it was because she thought I was a bitch. She’s never met me nor talked to me. She targeted me. It was 3 years after they broke up. I think that’s the epitome of petty. 
I found out he was cheating on me after 10 years. I put a nice profile of him on don't date him girl.com.  I have no idea if it it's still around, but it felt great to get all of that out at the time. He ended up finding out about it because hiss friend saw it.... 
My ex was a real bad guy. I'll spare the details. But when he left me, he took off for 5 days and every day said he would be back the next. When he finally said he would come home, I drove 2 hours in the middle of the night to pick him up and he broke up with me the next morning and then left.

He was really OCD about how things were packed, and I decided it would be easier to do it myself. I made sure to pack his stuff in the most annoying way possible. I packed his playstation in a different box then the cables and the controllers in another, mixed the games with dishes and toiletries etc. nothing was damaged, it was all there, but it would have taken him forever for find anything. 
My ex knocked up his side chick. I mailed my engagement ring back to him and left a douche bag bouquet (douche, pads, tampons, midol, chocolate bars, and I think some preparation H) at his sister's for him. 
High School GF of 2 years who was saving herself, dumped me immediately after we graduated. As in standing outside auditorium taking pics and she dumps me. Cashes in her V card that night to a random dude in a hot tub at a party. 
Started dating her younger sister (1 grade younger) a week later. She wasn’t saving herself. It was a fun summer before college.
Long story short, I found out the guy I dated for a bit had indeed slipped me a date rape pill. Moving on to the good stuff...

My current boyfriend, his friend and I were at a big party that this prior guy and mutual friends were throwing, also this was where I found out about the pill. 
Told my boyfriend & friend about what I had found out and like any respectful real-men, they wanted to kill these guys. Obviously I didn’t want to make a big show out of any aspect of this so I thought “no, let’s be sneaky and ruin his party.”

It was around 11pm - ya know, prime party-time. There were three kegs left to drink and some beer. We sneakily put all the remaining cases of beer in my car and stole the one-and-only keg tap.

Fuck that guy, but damn that was a satisfying night. 
He sent me a whiny message about how me going vegan was thre reason we couldn't get back together...after I dumped him. So I kept his marine core graduation ring, which he had given me. I was gonna send it to him when he was back buuuut he blocked me and I didn't want to out in the effort. 
[deleted]
At school, my girlfriend used my computer login cos she forgot hers.  

After she cheated on me, I opened her English essay and added in random normal words, stuff like "carrot/wardrobe" etc, just normal words so they wouldn't be noticed unless it was thoroughly checked, which I knew she wouldn't but the teacher would. 

She got it back marked with a confused comment from the teacher about proof reading. She hunted me down, and threw it at me while screaming. I laughed. 

It wasn't worth anything towards her qualification so had no long term ramifications but she hated doing badly at school.
Many years ago I was involved with a rather emotionally abusive man who lied non stop. 
Eventually I found proof of him cheating on me. 

I was making websites at the time and months before hand he had gotten me to make a website for his sisters business which he took all credit for. 
(I wasn’t paid to make it either). 

When I found out he was cheating I photoshopped a picture of him into him wearing a pink tutu in full ballerina pose. Then I changed the entire website to show the picture of him and added a whole paragraph of text calling him out on his bs so all his family could see. 
Saw he was watching my Netflix still and changed my password. 
7 months after we broke up, I sent a card and cash with my friends to my best friend and my ex girlfriend's wedding to which I wasn't invited.  I wrote in the card, "I wish you both all the best.". 
Cut them off from my Plex server. 
This thread has been locked due to large amounts of rule-breaking. 

&#x200B;

Please feel free to report any rule-breaking comments for review.
“Im a self employed gynecologist”
Like we enjoy going to the gyno 🙄
Wyd me to death.
They are more concerned with my underwear than I am on any given day. 

“Whatchu wearing babe ;)”

“Uh a ratchet sports bra from when I was 15 and some granny panties because I’m on my period and don’t want to ruin the good stuff”

“Damn girl lemme see ;)”
My ex-stepbrother. All his Instagram pics are of him fresh out of the shower, towel wrapped low to show off the “deep V”, dirty bathroom mirror selfie with steam. He captions every pic with some rap lyrics. Lots of duck faces, painfully obvious smizing, a lot of them with his hand on his chin in the “thoughtful” pose with his index finger pointed up. 

He’s 21 and dates girls from the Highschool I teach at. 🤦🏼‍♀️
Waking up to his "thinking of you" dick pic text, sent at 2 A.M.
Anytime you say you’re doing something, they reply with “without me? 😏”. 
When you receive a flirty Snapchat that you know was sent out to 100 different girls. 
guy: wyd

girl: my aunt just died so i'm kinda sad

guy: oh sucks. what would u do if i was there? ;) ;)


Him: let’s play 20 questions. 

Me: Sure, what’s your favourite colour?

Him: black, so are you a virgin? 


'lets play truth or dare' 

&#x200B;
An overabundance of compliments and not a whiff of normal conversation to be found. 

Sad stories about his heartbreak or anything to garner sympathy for him. Generally very dramatic.

Any conversation steers towards the physical/sexual. "Innocent" comments and questions, hints mixed into what appears to be normal conversation but actually isn't.





* Only ever seems to contact you after 11 PM your time, and it's not like he works the night shift or something. 

* Requests or outright demands nudes, even though you just met. Bonus points if he sends a dick pic. 

* Tries to cyber right away.

* Whines about using a condom. 

* Tries to pressure or guilt you into sex or a particular kind of sex. 

* Admits he has a wife/girlfriend/fiancee, but that he's not happy with her. (Which he clearly isn't, if he's trolling for side chicks.) Promises you that he'll leave her for you one day, and yadda yadda yadda.

* Ghosts you after sex.

* Doesn't seem to want to do anything but make out or have sex when you're together. 

* He's clearly gotten all his sex ed from porn, and he doesn't pay attention to your needs. Foreplay? What's that? 

* Won't go down on you because "it's icky," but absolutely insists that you blow him. 

* Judges women/girls on the basis of "good girl" and "whore." Expects to marry a virgin someday, or at least someone whose "lucky number" isn't that high...but has had numerous partners himself. 

* If you don't have sex within the first two or three dates, he loses interest. 

* Tries to "neg" or "should" you into conforming to his turn-ons and preferences, lots of back-handed "compliments" even though he doesn't know you well or at all. 

* Strings you along with promises he doesn't keep, and doesn't intend to.

* Has no interest in meeting your friends and family. And doesn't introduce you to his. (As Chris Rock puts it, "If you've been dating a man for four months, and you haven't met *any* of his friends, *you are NOT his girlfriend!*") 

* Only ever seems to contact you when he's horny. 

* Seems averse to commitment. And when you bring up the future, or ask how he feels about being exclusive/marriage/kids/etc., he waffles, or changes the subject. 


Offering to pay for nudes, after I’ve already said no. Then telling me, “But it’s a compliment” once I’ve said that’s offensive. 
Inserting flirty comments into an explicitly non-sexual conversation. 

Him: WYD? 

Me: Just cleaning. One of the kids is sick...etc. 

Him: Aw that sucks. I bet you looking fine as hell though.

Just....why.
immediately using terms of endearment. if a guy calls me "babe" and we're not dating, boy *bye*
The head push - knowwhatimsayin?

Doesn’t reciprocate oral. Ugh. 

Will sleep with you (and with poor quality I might add) and won’t take you to the airport in the morning. I was bitter. 
The fuckboy who got me pulled a 180 by saying he was super into me and asked me on a date. Really made me feel like he liked me, then after we had sex, he said he wanted to be friends with benefits. Anytime I hear someone say that now, I know its just a fuckboy.

Edit: Forgot to mention what made it worse was after he pulled this, he started dating another girl, but still wanted me to be his FWB and cheat on her with me. His backstory was that his ex gf cheated on him and it drove him almost to suicide, too.
I’ll take “boys who flirt with you and your friends” for 500, please. 

Bonus points if it’s “different with you, though” 
[removed]
[deleted]
a guy who posts his selfie in the gym every fucking day
“Sorry, was just in the shower!”

...”where was my invite😏?” 

Stop, just stop. 
Too many compliments too quickly. 
When he just jackhammers you for 10 minutes straight and you have to show him how to properly use his penis 
If he makes Instagram stories ranting about how girls should be treated and how all women are beautiful, but when you actually talk to him he just wants nudes.
Begging for nudes 
Guys who have to tell you how nice they are and tear down other people to do it.  

&#x200B;

"I am so much better than those guys who do that.  You know that makes me a ***nice*** guy."

&#x200B;

Boy bye.
“heyy what’s up you should come over and watch Netflix :)” at 11:30pm or later

“You up?? :)” At 12:00am or later 

“Heyy I wanna show you something ;)” then sends dick pic
 
Also, the notorious: “hey you should send me a picture ;)”
Men who appear to be medically incapable of speaking to women like they're people. 
[deleted]
a guy who's trying to fix/cover his internal sense of inadequacy with hookups and treating women as disposable (or more inadequate) 
"haha and then what? ;)"
* [Pineapple haircut](https://akns--images-eonline-com.cdn.ampproject.org/i/s/akns-images.eonline.com/eol_images/Entire_Site/201559/rs_1024x759-150609192013-1024.Pineapple-Head.1.ms.060915.jpg?fit=inside%7C828:*&output-quality=90), or any other Justin Bieber-inspired fashion

* Posts subtly, but not blatantly, sexist memes

* Something something “crazy girls”/“crazy girl magnet”/“all my exes were crazy”

* “Females”

* Starts talking about sex before you even meet in person

* Suggests meeting at his house as the first date location — won’t even put in the effort to leave his house and buy a cup of coffee 

* Cancels on you whenever something better comes along 

* “20 questions? Lol”

* “What’s your bra size?” “Lol jk”

* “I prefer (insert physical trait that you clearly don’t have here)”

* “so, do you like butt stuff?” “Oh, I’m sure you’d like it with me ;)”

* Pines after an ex from several years ago, openly comparing her to you

* “I’m afraid of commitment”/“I don’t know what I want”/“I don’t believe in labels”/“I’m scared”/“I’m not looking for a relationship”/any flavor of this — bonus points if it’s after he’s fucked you and acted like he liked you

* Ghosting after sex

I could do this all damn day.
[deleted]
any apparel from The Buckle 
Hat backwards and those massive mirrored Oakley sun glasses with a chin “beard” that looks like he’s been trying to grow it for 12 years.
- only wants to fuck
- will not go out with you or on dates
- only talks to you when they want something or when they’re free
- doesn’t commit
- talking to other chicks and trying to get with them at the same time

All of the red flags I’ve done well at avoiding basically describe a fuck boy to me
[removed]
[deleted]
“Wow, I’ve never told that to anyone before”

Boy you ain’t foolin nobody... 
[deleted]
Would never commit to dating me but would call me at 2 am to pick him up from the club, wasted, threatening to drive drunk an hour to his house. Because he didn’t want to pay for an Uber and “I really miss you and just want to stay up talking all night.” 
affection and compliments up the wazoo when they first get to know you (most frequently before you have sex for the first time), and then shutting down, backtracking, and pushing you away when you start to develop feelings for them.  refusal to openly talk about their feelings under the guise of “needing space”
When he flips out at the smallest form of commitment. 

"Wanna hang out tomorrow?"

"Whoa, well lets not get ahead of ourselves now...😘😏"
Seeing this comment on a post, dm'ing me and trying to get nudes.. 
[deleted]
Basically, If he resembles 90's Vanilla Ice in any way, shape, or form.
He has a lot of female friends who all act like they're dating/fucking on the down low but they try to hide it because he's convinced them to be secret about their one-sided relationship(he just wants sex but he won't tell them that because they want a relationship and would stop sleeping with him if he was honest).

He also keeps adding more girls to the rotation.
Using the the word “females” constantly
1. talking to you on snapchat (or any other social media) vs actually texting/calling
2. shallow conversations
3. really sketchy about getting back to you when you call/text/want to make plans
4. incorporates sex or anything related into the conversation
5. cancels last minute 
6. makes you feel anything less than comfortable
7. Doesn't once text you to make sure you got home okay
[deleted]
Wow, apparently 20 questions is a seedy thing now, and not just a guessing game that starts with "is it smaller than a bread box?"
“my girlfriend just broke up with me :(“ 
-Doesn’t comment on your ig pics publicly but instead dm’s you a compliment on it

-Always trying to flirt with multiple girls at once and can never stick with just one girl

-Ignores you or doesn’t include you in conversations when he’s with his friends

-Doesn’t ever publicly show affection towards you because he doesn’t want other girls to think he’s taken
As a lesbian this post is hilarious. I know there are plenty of fuck girls out there too..but I have NEVER met a woman even remotely close to this shit. 
comparing you to an ex. FUCK. OFF. 
Weird work arounds and manipulating the conversation to find out if I have a boyfriend.
Too much cologne
Lots of smiley face emoji' s and ending every sentence with "lol" & "haha"
Texting after 10:30 pm
Calling me babe or sweety (when I just met him)
Mostly shirtless selfies on social media.
Knows the bartenders at every bar.
Sends dick pics.
Bumps loud af rap/EDM  music while rolling down the windows just enough and rolling slowing by a group of females. 
looks at his own reflection every chance he gets.
doesn't have a mind of his own beyond social settings. 
Can't carry a conversation. 
Etc...
Making you do his groceries but not giving you a key to his apartment
An oversized truck that they treat better than their girlfriend 
“I’m a nice guy and won’t use you for sex”

Bro if you were really so nice you wouldn’t go around saying it like that
Monkey emojis.
Using literally the weirdest things to steer the conversation so it *might* relate to one of his kinks to try and turn you on. 

One guy once told me about how his mum was making his dinner then proceeded to tell me that he wanted to fuck her. 

I’m not the only girl he tried that with either. 
[deleted]
When the dude tells you he’s had multiple ex-girlfriends “who turned out to be seriously mentally ill”.... 
When you are meeting for the first time and he says, "You are the most beautiful woman I have ever seen in my life." RUN when you hear this
He said on date #1, and I quote "I'm only going to let you play hard to get for so long" 

Only uses Snapchat to communicate.  
Doesn’t take care of their kids.
Constantly needs to borrow money.
Have a lot of “haters” and seems like they’re always the victim.
No ambition. 
When do have money, blow it.
When all their pictures have their shirts half way up and them pulling their pants down to see the "V" cut. 
SUPREME or OBEY merch
Tries to pressure women into sex on the first date but won’t date women who have sex on the first date.

Asks you how many sexual partners you have.

Never admits to dating anyone (ie: “nah, I never dated that girl” or “im not her boyfriend, we’re just ‘talking’”)
When he texts you every time he’s out drinking to either meet him out or go to his apartment, but when you run into each other at the same bar he doesn’t come over and talk to you in person
EA Sports. They’re the king of fuckbois.
[deleted]
Unsolicited DMs that just say, "Hey".  
"Hey Girl", "Hey Sexy", and something with just emojies are also an acceptable answer.
"Nice guys" who pretend to be nice, but are really certified assholes.

I had to. 
Emojis at the end of every gotdamn sentence
“hey gorgeous 😏”
Guy here serious question, would you consider someone a fuckboy if they are honest about their intentions? ONS, dating multiple women, flings, casual relationships?
When it's clearly a group text.. 
"Hey how's it going? Wyd?"
Modded sports car and vape.
"You're so special" or "You're not like other girls"
Me: I can't do anything, I'm on my period.
Him: *whips dick out anyway because the loophole is that I can't have vaginal sex but can do other things*

Also bragging about sex with your exes.
'let's play 20 questions'
'ok, sure' 
'would you do anal'
Guys who take selfies with no shirts on.
Doing that pouty/ squinty face with a snapback on in photos 
"Tbh I'm really horny right now 😫"
I feel like you could replace "Fuckboy" with "Narcissist" and this thread would still be accurate.
Has a child he never tries to see or support. Worse if he has multiple by different women who all hate him. 
I just realised my ex is a fuckgirl 
Starts sending his pictures too soon out of context

Asks to see you

Talks about sex too soon

Guilts you into talking to them
“You know you like it! ;)”
Every time you say you’re not interested, or not in the mood 
Is Hot and Cold with you meaning he’s friendly and we’re laughing then switches it up and is mean or could careless about you. 

Super into himself. 

Posts gym mirror selfies with a “arms came in just as summer ended ehh oh well”
I finally came across a guy who games in my area.

Convo was roughly like...

"So what games do you play beautiful?"

"(List of games)"

"Omg, i play this and this and that, youre so fucking hot"

"Thanks sweetie, youre not bad yourself."

"We should just game, then fuck our brains out and then go back to gaming. I never thought i find someone like you."

"Ok"

"And those lips and your breasts, you have a big ass dont you? Im totally going to fuck that when youre gaming."

*rolls eyes and starts yawning*

He eventually talked about our children and the problem we would have trying to game and raise them. I bounced when he insisted the 1st date should be him coming over to my house. He recently moved back in with parents (which isnt an issue), but never updated his profile (big issue as his profile claimed he had his own place).
Pidgeotto hair
If they feel the need to tell you that they aren’t a fuckboy. 

You up??
Nagged to be added to your Snapchat. Replying sure, but don’t expect dirty pics. Getting blocked.
Asking for nudes and then calling me a whore after I say no
"Im not wanting a relationship but if I did want one it would be with you..."
I showed you my penis, please respond
Some of these have been touched upon, here is my list:

- asking for nudes, never wanting to meet or hang out
- saying they are looking for a relationship, acts the opposite
- ghosting after sex
- saying working out for a date or hanging out is "a bit of a drive" for them 
- asks for me to bring money 
- trying to get me to cancel plans by saying "f x,y,z, come do ____ with me instead"
- last minute plans to meet (which are ok sometimes)

That being said, there are some cool people out there just few and far between. 
“Hey this thing you did was really upsetting can we talk about it?”

“Haha no”

“Well that’s really upsetting and kind of rude, I do that for you”

“Woooooooooooooooooooooooow”
*You look fine, you got a Snapchat?*
Oh man so much. Basically anything that screams low investment.

All dates are free. No food, no drinks, no activity. Fun free dates are okay like going to a museum. But anything that seems like it is meant to get you alone too early is a red flag.

Talking about sex way to early.

Being way too touchy freely. 

No real conversation just constantly spitting game. Note: game is fine but there has to be an invitation to get to know someone better.

Asking for nudes or selfies all the time. 

Basically anything that is sexual too early on. I’m not in HS or college anymore so I don’t play around with this stuff lol.


Years ago, an acquaintance of his told him he was a good dancer. Now he thinks he's goddammed Fred Astaire. He dances like a suburban white dad after one too many on Christmas Day. He dances at every available opportunity. Sometimes I wish I could track down that acquaintance and ask him if he's happy with what he's created.
[deleted]
My husband starts a conversation in his head but only speaks the last half out loud to me and I have no clue what he’s on about.  I get annoyed as he won’t explain but act like I’m the confused one until I point it out he’s done it again. 
Me:  Are you hungry?  I was gonna make randomDinnerFood for dinner.

Husband:  that sounds good but I'm not really hungry right now.  Can we eat a bit later?

Me: Yea, for sure.  When would you like to eat?

Husband: how about half an hour?  


My husband seems to think that dinner just appears in a flash.  
He's a shout-sneezer. My ears start ringing every time he sneezes.
[deleted]
He rips open boxes or bags that have a built in opening. 
leaves half-finished glasses of water around the house -- it's like living in the movie, *signs*.
The man does not sit down.

He eats standing up. He watches TV standing up. When he's working at his computer, he gets up every few minutes to pace.

It's not a big deal for the most part, but it makes me anxious.
He leaves a river on bathroom countertops. I can only figure that he fills both hands with water and pours it on the counter when he goes to get soap, like he's giving an offering to the soap dispenser. 🙏

I just started putting a towel down where the river usually is 🤷🏼‍♀️  It's not worth bringing up, he's wonderful.
He has giant lizard feet. I swear to God, I'm not making this up. His feet are entirely made up of dry ass lizard skin. And when we watch tv at night he always whips his socks off. Then he sits in his recliner and drags those devilish dipods back and forth over one another. Yes, there he crouches, perched menacingly on his branch.... Chair! I mean he SITS in his CHAIR.... moving his scaly lizard feet back and forth, baaaack and forth, baaaack and forth, creating a giant pile of dry skin in the floor. And that SOUND! Dear GOD the SOUND! It's like a dry tree branch on a cheese grater! SHUDDER!! 

BUT I'M FINE. EVERYTHING IS FINE. 
He leaves dishes to "soak" for so long and when I finally wash them, he acts like he wanted to do it. Annoys the shit out of me. 
Leaves toothpaste in the sink. Just wash it down man! Also leaves wrappers on end tables (candy, string cheese etc)

But he helps a lot in other ways so I just clean up after him with these two issues 
He does everything almost.... Violently. Sitting on the couch and wants a bottle of water? Jumps up and practically runs to the fridge, swings it open, then slams it shut. Hasn't been talking but suddenly has something to say? He talks loudly and quickly. Sometimes, its utterly hilarious... Other times, like when I just got home from work and I'm tired, it drives me up the wall. I think its just because he's a very high-energy person and when he decides to do something, he gets it done 10 seconds ago. 

Edit: Also, the way he puts away dishes. I have to silently tell myself, "I love him, at least he tries. I love him, at least he tries." I repeat it over and over while putting things where they actually go. Don't get me wrong, I very much appreciate coming home to a clean kitchen... But oh boy.... The mixing bowls do not go with the pots and pans.... 
He refuses to talk to store employees when he can't find something. He'd rather call me and ask what he can buy instead.
Leaving his beard clippings in the sink and knowing EXACTLY what I'm about to ask when I walk into the bathroom afterwards and say, "Hey, babe could you..." Him: "I'll clean up the beard hairs!" 

JUST CLEAN YOUR DAMN CLIPPINS BEFORE YOU LEAVE THE BATHROOM YOU HAIRY MAN BEAST 
He doesn’t throw something out when it is very clearly finished. Oh yeah, there’s 2 Cheerios in the bag, let’s put it back! There’s a minuscule scrape of cream cheese, back into the fridge it goes!! It kills me. 
Loses everything. Literally everything. Drives me mad. Wallet? In his other pants. Keys? Left them in the ignition so I have to get up at 6am to help him find them. Shoes? Who even knows anymore, probably under the couch though he just had them an hour ago. Glasses? Space. Or he left them on the bathroom counter while he showered and forgot to grab them. A couple times they were under the bed, or tangled in the blankets. I don't want to talk about his phone. I love the man, but come on.
He makes farting noises almost every time you bend down or squat. 
My husband loves to sing. The issue here is that he is tone deaf, and when he sings it sounds like a seagull is being strangled to death. He only does it when he's happy so I try to not grimace, but man he is truly terrible at singing. He also never knows the words to songs, so he'll just belt out some random note instead of a word he doesn't know. He's a total goof and I love him. 
Laundry takes him 4-6 hours every weekend. He monopolizes the washer/dryer from Saturday around 8 AM to Sunday evening.

It's a huge event that starts on Saturday where he does tons of small loads (each with different products, like bluing liquid for his white undershirts that no one even sees).  Sundays he then steams everything. (Not just his dress clothes, but also undershirts, casual t-shirts, and jeans. I have even seen him fucking lint-roll and steam socks). This requires a big standing steamer, a laundromat-style rolling cart with hangers, multiple laundry baskets, and a rolling hamper with different bins for whites/darks/colors/delicates. He takes up the whole living room with laundry draped on every piece of furniture while blasting Netflix. It takes so long Netflix will be like, "Are you still there?".

He is my soulmate and I adore him though. He values precision and has a PhD in engineering so he never does anything halfway. I wish I didn't have to experience the laundrypocalypse every weekend but I've learned to turn it into girl time and just stay away from the operation because it is frustrating to watch.
He makes this loud “CHYEAH!” sound, like Jay-Z at the beginning of Umbrella, and every time I hear it my brain shrivels in on itself. 

Update: since informing him that his exploits have led to one of my highest rated comments, he has doubled the rate of “CHYEAH”.

I am thrilled, as you can imagine. 
Inturrupts me when I talk. He just tries to finish my thought or add a story. I stop talking and stare at him till he realizes that he inturruped me. Then he apologizes and has to force himself not to talk. 
He likes to hold me at night with me facing him. Should be cute but I cannot breathe when my face is smushed against his chest/shoulder
Weird one. So when he gets something from the fridge that is in a ziplock baggie, he won’t squeeze the air out of the baggies when he puts it back. So our fridge will be full of puffed up baggies of sandwich meat and cheese. It drives me crazy. He also does it with the bread. 
My husband leaves his cereal bowl (with milk in it) in the sink, or next to the sink. When confronted about why he doesn’t at least dump the milk out and rinse the bowl, he gets a blank look on his face like he had an out of body experience and had no recollection of doing it. The most rage inducing part is that he honestly doesn’t do it on purpose and is generally a tidy guy- so I can’t even be mad!
He eats waffles by cutting it by the lines into 4 giant pieces. He then proceeds to stuff the giant piece in his mouth as a whole bite. He claims that’s what the lines are for but it just makes me feel slightly embarrassed that he can’t cut the waffle into smaller bites. I love him, but this is the one thing that always gets under my skin. 
He doesn't throw away empty containers in the recycle/trash bin. 
"Oh great, we still have milk!" And then I give a look into my imaginary Office camera as I swish around the one drop of milk left in the bottle.
He leaves toast crumbs in the butter.
Releasing the most toxic farts. Silently. 
He puts the full garbage bag on our bed while he’s tying the top strings. What if it gets a leak? Why do that???
He coughs, but it’s this baby, annoying, not even REAL cough and he does it c o n s t a n t l y.  It’s the kind of pity cough people do when playing sick. 

*edit misspelled constantly 
Rips into boxes (cereal, amazon packages, soda cases, crackers, etc...) like he’s a wild animal and cardboard is his prey. 
He says “you know what I mean?” or “you know what I’m saying?” at the end of every 3rd comment or ending talking point. Sometimes when I listen to him talk I can’t focus on what he’s saying, I can only wait for the inevitable. 
He eats so fast. Nothing like going out to eat and having your husband watch you eat because he inhaled his meal. I often ask him if he even tastes his food. 
[deleted]
Stands RIGHT in the way when I'm cooking! 
I used to get all pissed off when both my ex and my current husband would leave kitchen cabinet doors open. One day we were chatting about each other’s pet peeves, and I told him that the cabinet door thing really irked me. He started laughing, because... I was the one that kept doing it without ever realizing until he pointed it out. LOL 
He scratches his balls while he’s sleeping. I mean. I love him and I love his balls but I do not need the soundtrack of my night time loving embrace to be the noise of nails against ball sack. 
He wears his good polos to sleep. Never changes when he gets home. Even if we get freaky he will put it back on. Pisses me off. 
Leaves socks EVERYWHERE. 
[deleted]
[deleted]
Doesn't push his chair in after getting up from the table. Space in our dining room is pretty tight, and he just leaves the chair sitting out in the middle of the floor...

&#x200B;
He invites people over for dinner on a Sunday afternoon and I have nothing planned or prepped. 
He grinds his teeth in his sleep and it makes this awful sound but he is being stubborn about seeing a damn dentist because he doesn’t want to wear a mouth guard 
When I share my concerns with him or vent about anything he says " Dont Worry " 

DUDE THAT JUST ANNOYS ME MORE WHAT AM I SUPPOSED TO SAY NOW????
[deleted]
He sometimes leaves the cabinets slightly open 
He leaves his already worn but still wearable clothes on a pile on top of his dresser because he doesn't want them to mix with his clean clothes in his dresser. I even bought him a specific smaller set of drawers to fit them in but he still forgets to use it.

I can't stand clothes lying around!
He always leaves the dishwasher open.
Puts the toilet roll on backwards EVERY TIME.
Every once in a while he'll whistle a tune. I say nothing as it only surfaces when he's feeling lighthearted and at ease and I wouldn't want to interrupt that expression, but my god, there is little I hate more than the sound of whistling. 
Shrugs at everything. What shall we eat? Shrug. Want to play a game? Shrug. Would you rather watch A or B? Shrug. Did you like that new restaurant? Shrug.

SPEAK, BOY, SPEAK
He smooths out the top of the peanut butter in the jar after he uses it. It looks like a brand new bottle every time, except theres just less and less and less until its gone. I hate it. So much. Just leave it omg.
When he wakes up, he talks in "breathy whispers", letting me smell his *lovely* morning breath... I'm sensitive to odors so that disgusts me to no end...
I just turn around and tuck my nose in the sheets hahaha
My husband puts his dirty laundry on the floor right next to the hamper. Right next to it. He’s lucky he’s cute. 
Every time he yawns he makes a Chewbacca noise and I just can’t believe it. 
[deleted]
Doesn't pick up or open his mail. I'm constantly worried that something important will be sent and he'll miss it. I tend to open anything that looks more important for him, the rest I'll leave for him on his desk but it can be days before he gets around to reading it. 

He's the same way with like messages and notifications. He'll leave it for days before checking a message he gets or worse he'll forget. He does tend to respond to me promptly luckily otherwise it'd be super annoying.

I just don't get it. I'm the sort of person that has to do it right away otherwise I know I'll forget...
My partner leaves his socks under the covers at the end of the bed. I don't even want him to put them away somewhere neatly; I just want him to kick them out of the bed. I like to shuffle my feet as I fall asleep, and feeling his socks at the end of the bed drives me crazy for some reason. He thinks it's funny.
He refuses to acknowledge his naturally superior strength when we play fight or wrestle and never takes it easy on me. 

I just want him to let me win sometimes! 

It also low key scares me because it always reminds me how easily he could kill me with his bare hands if he wanted to.
If I ask a question suddenly I’m asking myself. Like goddamit what do you want to eat, I asked you first! 
Doesn't dry off all the way after showering and leaves puddles of water on the floor, which I discover after I step in!
He never realizes that his toenails have gotten very long until someone gets violently foot-clawed. Someone like me, for example. Blech.
[deleted]
Makes an absolutely pointless audible noise as he's yawning. Can't just open his mouth, take in air then breathe it out quietly. Has to attach the noise at the end -- you know that one I'm talking about.   


When he can't sleep at night and "yawns" 45 times, I want to murder him.
Spills a bit of water on the counter, doesn't wipe it up.
He leaves stuff on the counter from snacking the night before. 
He never closes drawers or cabinets all the way.  They are always hanging one or two inches open. I follow him around the kitchen while he cooks and close them. I don’t think he notices anymore. 
Mouths the words while watching a movie.

Mouths the words while watching a movie!
He keeps at least one toenail long and sharp. Calls it his “prison toenail” and drags it on the sheets, couches, my leg ... 
[deleted]
He saves like a mouthful of a drink and let's it hang in the fridge. If he gets a Snapple there's enough liquid to fill the bottom and saves it. Drives me bonkers 
His sneezes. I can hear the spit spray fill the room. It’s just disgusting. Even better, he knows I hate it, so he exaggerates his sneezes to the extreme. 

Edit: I should say that maybe “hate”’is too strong. I highly dislike his exaggerated sneezes.  It’s gross, but he’s not stabbing me in the heart by doing it.  Married life is silly. It’s a SMALL annoying thing.   We’re good, otherwise.  
When he is about to take the dogs out or do something else he “doesn’t wanna do” he starts to sigh repeatedly, and loudly. It is so annoying.
Also, he is the *loudest* chewer I’ve ever met. It drives me nuts, but I have never said anything bc I don’t want him to feel self conscious. 
My SO cooks some really amazing dishes and he loves to cook but he commits a lot of cross contamination. I’m a huge germaphobe and I’ve worked in kitchens so when I cook, I know I could pass a health inspection anytime. He’s not bad enough that we’ve ever gotten sick but if either of us had weakened immune systems it probably wouldn’t be great lol. He doesn’t really wash fresh veggies, he doesn’t wash everything that touches raw meat, he’ll use a fork to scoop out sour cream then put that same fork in the salsa container getting sour cream all mixed in with the salsa. I know I probably sound super anal and I definitely am but it bugs me a lot. I have to just stay out of the kitchen when he’s cooking because I can’t handle it. 
He puts my clothes/shoes “away” because he doesn’t like to see clutter. (I get up earlier than him and leave my clothes out so I can get dressed/find my clothes in the dark. He does this after I go to sleep. I don’t hesitate to wake him up when I don’t see my clothes). 

Conversely, I annoy him by not putting my stuff in the “proper” place as soon as I enter. 
My husband prefaces every time he asks me to do something with, "Can I ask you a favor?" And then he won't tell me what it is until I say yes. Even if it's something urgent, like, say, helping him catch something that is currently falling. 

It makes me laugh and I tell him he can just directly ask me for what he needs. He says that would be rude (what?)
He puts words in my mouth. If I say something he did wasn't the smartest thing to do he'll say I called him a complete idiot piece of shit. Is that small? It's annoying as shit
Literally does nothing around the house for days. I'm cleaning and complaining and he will come and work on the SAME thing I am. Like dude, the whole house needs cleaned, why do you have to be in my way?! 

Repeat every couple weeks. 
When a roll of toilet paper runs out, she takes a new roll of toilet paper, and *places it gently on top of the empty tube*.

Babe, I love you, but what are you doing on that toilet that is so important that you can't simultaneously *put the new roll on the holder*.
Chews SO loudly. When I tell him he’s doing it he starts chewing quietly... if you’re capable of chewing at a reasonable sound then why do you chose to chew like a freakin animal!!!
He leaves his used socks on the coffe table, bannister, etc
His farts smell like he is sickly 
He leaves his beard shavings in the sink 
He yells like hes been attacked when we get a red light while driving 

But I love the little sucker 
He puts drinks or food he hasn't finished back in the fridge uncovered.
Makes that sound where you’re going to hawk a loogie, but then just swallows it. He wakes up the baby doing that all the time. So gross! 
[deleted]
dirty qtips fucking everywhere. in the kitchen. on top of dressers. by the tv. on the floor. 
Never uses his change/coins. Only pays with notes. It’s like he’s embarrassed to use small change. I have bags and bags (I sort zip log bags, he just puts it in drawers and desktops...)full with random currencies, as he also travels a lot! Last year I spent one bag of random Euro coins on vacation. It was like 40sth Euros! 
He won’t put his dirty dishes in the dishwasher when the dishes in there are dirty.
He leaves the cupboards open. Not a biggest deal, but im short and hit my head on the doors sometimes.
He leaves his fingernails on the floor.  Like I don't know what's happening because he waits until he is alone to clip them, but one day I'll just see a few fingernails on the floor.  And the worst part is that he gets mad at me for blaming him.  Aside from the occasional guest from air bnb, it's just us living there.  And i clip my nails outside.  


I guess I get more mad that he gets defensive about shit that he knows he did.  I have to like lawyer up to get him to admit anything.
When my bf has had a few drinks he repeats this song lyric “TELL ME WHERE THE FREAKS AT” & does this little bobbing dance move thing all by himself ....  it sounds cute but when he does it multiple times per alcohol session and it happens every time we drink together it comes off almost like a tick and I’m like..... please stop!! It kills my buzz and he just TELLS ME WHERE THE FREAKS AT and can’t stop the chicken bob dance - it kills me.
[deleted]
[deleted]
She squeezes the toothpaste out of the tube like a barbarian. Squeeze from the bottom!
I have two towels in the kitchen: a soft one for drying your hands and a dish towel. My husband EXCLUSIVELY uses the hand towel to dry dishes and worse he WIPES THE KITCHEN COUNTER  THE DIRTY DIRTY KITCHEN COUNTER with it. Love that dude tho. 
Sometimes he censors himself when he says “fuck” and it’s so annoying. He sounds like a 14 year old boy trying to be edgy around his parents. Like “what the f___ are you doing?!” I try so hard to ignore it because he knows I hate it and therefore does it more. Lately I’ve been successful and he hasn’t done it so much. Ugh just describing it is annoying me. We’re adults in our own house, say fuck!! 


Also he re-organizes our house like every other day. I swear it’s like “hey I moved this here so we won’t forget where it is.” For the same item like 5x a month. You know what will help me remember where our shit is? Leaving it in the same spot. Sometimes I get really mad and I’m like “WHY IS NOTHING EVER WHERE I PUT IT?” And then I feel like a jerk because he’s just trying to help. But omg why can’t we just leave anything in the same spot for more than a few days!?? 
Her ability to sit quietly until whatever is on the tv gets interesting. As soon as it does, she tells some of the most meaningless stories anyone has ever told. 
He burps all the fucking time if were not in public. Proudly. If he has a glass of water he burps, if he had a handful of chips, burps, if he has a whole meal the burps just keep coming for the next 10mins. Its fucking nasty and he thinks I'm joking when I say that. I'm worried that actually sitting down with him and telling him its disgusting and immature at times will hurt his feelings. I'm not saying he can't ever burp but he does it as loud as he possibly can every time and then laughs. 
Puts used paper napkins, straw wrappers, any little bits of trash - on his dirty dishes and puts them in the sink. Instead of putting the trash in the trash can. So I’m pulling soaking wet paper towels out of things constantly when I clean the dishes. No matter how many times I show him how annoyed I get, it continues. The man is immaculate otherwise, it’s the strangest thing.
Constant noise and tapping. 

When he lies down on the bed, he slightly pulls out the bedside drawer and lets it roll back in for the sound effect, or he’ll sit watching youtube on his phone and slap his legs!! Or whack his own feet for the noise.

When I tell him to knock it off because all those sounds are the most irritating things ever, he pretends not to know what i’m talking about 🤬
He asks me what time it is. The stove, microwave, smartphones, tablets, car, and even home stereo are all set to the correct time. 
If someone says ‘hey what’s up?’ to my husband he ALWAYS says ‘good, and you?’

It drives me insane but I always laugh cuz it makes zero sense and he never even realizes that they didn’t say ‘hey man how are you?’
This is the dumbest thing. But when we get off the highway at this one exit and turn right- the left lane ends after only one block. The right lane continues. 

Every. Single. Day. He turns off of the exit into the left lane. Knowing. Knowing full well that the lane ends in one block. Why wouldn’t he just turn into the right lane? He knows he has to end up there in one block either way.  And it doesn’t matter which lane he is in coming off the exit. 

I have no explanation for this, but also it’s such a minor thing. I feel like asking him would be the dumbest most bizarre nitpicking thing to ask. Because it doesn’t actually matter and he’s done it for years. But omg it drives me up a wall. I feel bad even just typing this because it’s such a non-issue but it breaks my brain like every single day. 😂

Edit- I often tell myself that if this is the biggest problem in my marriage, I’m doing okay. 
My boyfriend would say that I get too excited when I see dogs and that I ask "what are you thinking" too often
Whenever he washes his hands, he somehow manages to flood the entire bathroom counter and sink. I don't know how. Wash more calmly, dude!!
[deleted]
Makes a slight noise as he pulls the glass away from his mouth if he’s drinking ANY kind of liquid.  His brother does it as well so I’ll never be able to change it.
Picks his nose...I know...I have to live with it now...
Not taking his medicine
He slurps noodles when he eats them. Doesn’t matter if he’s eating spaghetti or ramen, he’ll slurp every noodle. Just wrap them around your damn fork and eat it like a normal person! 

He also doesn’t let the air out of ziplock bags when he puts something away so food gets stale or dries out faster. Plus, it’s more difficult to store things when there’s little bags of air everywhere.

Other than those two things he’s fantastic, so whatever. 
He falls asleep after dinner on the couch at like 10-11pm. I try to wake him up and get him to go to bed but he insists he’s just “resting his eyes”. Then he wakes up at midnight and can’t fall asleep until 3 OR he falls into bed fully clothed without washing up or brushing his teeth. 

The latter drives me crazy because I have a very set nighttime routine of skincare and hygiene in general and I can’t stand the idea of going to bed the way he does.
He sleeps so wildly that he’s constantly trying to fuck me in his sleep. It’s aggravating to constantly wake to your breasts being massaged and ass being humped by a snoring freight train every single night. He doesn’t realize he’s doing it though.
I sigh sometimes. It feels good  I'm tired or I just take a deep breath with a little noise attached. He will immediately go "what's wrong?"....look man, I do this all the time! If something is wrong I'll be the first person to tell you! I just like the feeling of a good sigh
When I ask my boyfriend a trivial yes/no question, he always answers with a quick “yes” or “no.” Then I say are you sure? And 90% of the time he changes his mind.

Example: “I’m having a cookie, do you want one?” 
Him: “no”
Me: ok... you sure? *putting the package away”*
Him: “on second thought... ya I’ll have one”

You can pretty much guarantee that he will say the opposite of his original answer about ten seconds after it. 
Never lifts the seat. I beg him to either lift it or clean up the dribble, but he claims he just doesn't think about it. Ugh. So gross. I envy those who complain that their SO never puts the seat down.
Goes to bed with socks on and takes socks off in the middle of the night. By the end of the week when we change the bedsheets there are seven pairs of socks in the end of the bed.
Instead of putting dirty dishes in the sink, he puts them on the counter next to the sink.
Just an observation: it sounds like people in this thread are describing two different things. Some are describing an introvert's potential to be emotionally exhausted after big or long hangouts. Others are describing the feeling of 'withdrawal' that comes with suddenly being without someone that gives them an intense emotional high. I think it's also possible to combine the two for some people, where they are both emotionally exhausted and experiencing withdraw at the same time.
Yes! We call it the "fun hangover". My closest friends live a plane ride away and whenever we see each other, the following day is lonely and a little too quiet. The best way to fight it IMO is prevention-- keep in regular touch with people so your occasional contact isn't such an emotional roller coaster.
Yeah, I get this with my best friend. I combat this by recuperating afterwards with some alone time, journalling or drawing by listening to music. Honestly, I embrace the emotional hangover; it's like a burn after a good workout. I was just working out my emotions instead of my body, but I know it's a good thing!
Used to just get a few weekends with my SO who was a state away.  I'd always find something to treat myself after I left them, either a book or movie to fall into while in cozy clothes, or some pampering like walking with music to get bubble tea or ordering delivery of comfort food or even just a nice hot shower followed by a ton of lotion.

My friend got into an ldr and I passed along all this advice and she takes it to heart.  Now she calls me after he leaves as a bit of buffer to ease into being on her own again.  But not alone!
I get this after I leave my SO (even when I know I'm going to see him again in a day or so). 

One - reminding myself that this time is good/important. While it may not be fun, reality is I probably needed to go home, clean my room, do my laundry, work on my paper etc...

Two - take this time to enjoy being myself. Journal privately, be lazy/gross and watch my favorite show. Enjoying stuff I like to do by myself. 

Three - Allow myself to HAVE the feelings but not let them consume me. It's okay to realize I already miss the fun, or the closeness and it's okay to be sad/down about it. Acknowledge the feeling, even give into it for an hour or so but then allow myself to move past it. Instead of just trying to avoid the feeling altogether, acknowledging it helps.
This is A very common thing :-) when you are close with someone especially physically. The body released all sorts of hormones and endorphins into your blood stream which make you feel happy. Seratonin and dopamine being the bigguns'. When they are away your body has less triggers to produce these.


The best way to counter this is by filling your time apart with things that also release these things. Exercise is the biggest one. Followed by hobbies that you find interest.


This has the added bonus of making you a better healthier happier and more well rounded person.
Yes! I am so extroverted and the "comedown" after a really fun time or incredible stay with someone I love or a close friend is almost like a mini depression afterwards. I just want to go back and be with them. I remember my first time going away to summer camp for a week, and when I got home I went to my room and just cried and cried. My mom took it personally that I didn't want to be home or something, which was NOT the case, I just really missed the amazing experience that was camp and all the new friends I made. 

This still happens to me to a lesser degree.
I get this. Do you think this is interrelated to how introverted it extroverted an individual is?

Typically I’m always alone, but after hanging out with one person the whole entire day — you feel there’s this feeling similar to a “burn out”. Even though it was fun, you feel like all your mental health is pretty much drained from the constant interaction. When getting to know someone, the case is different (no burn outs). 

How I combat this? Unplug for 3-4 days, but I always make it clear with them that I enjoyed their time.....just in case they might suspect a different vibe. 

I find myself withdrawing from the person for a while, so typically I limit my hang out time with my closest friends to a few hours, then continue doing something else. With a healthy balance, it keeps my mind in a productive place I guess
Yes, so so yes. I actually realized it was a symptom of my undiagnosed and untreated depression. It’s still present but very different and not unbearable now.
I noticed this would happen after a weekend with my boyfriend and then we’d be doing our own thing during the week. I started keeping a journal of our times together. That helped me focus on the positive and not be sad about our time apart.
A week before I started self isolating My son and I had a play date with a mom and her two kids. They were over for four hours and it was one of the best mornings I had in a long time. But I spent the whole rest of the afternoon in a fog and trying to recover! 
Big introvert, so I think it was just a bit too much for me. But no regrets bc we had a blast 😊
The day after i come back from visiting my long distance boyfriend I'm a crying mess. I learned to dilute the feeling by doing lots of things: pre planned, which I cant escape after I organise them, otherwise I'm back to lying in fetal position on the ground. By filling the first 2-3 days with friends, an event to look forward to, but also work or exercise (the hardest for me in those days) the down is not as intense and the fall not so steep. (Even though it sucks anyway)
I get this way with my boyfriend. He is the closest person to me in my life and I love him way too much. I used to spend every day with him until this quarantine came in, and due to social distancing, we rarely see each other though I still keep in touch with him on Discord. When I see him for a split moment during this quarantine, I'm picking up something, he's dropping off something, etc. but I get this emotional high and excitement soars through me, that even for a small moment that I get to see him, I am immensely happy. Once we depart, I miss him even more.
I used to feel so horrible, depressed and numb after I came back home from spending time with a guy I loved so much but I couldn’t be with. He didn’t love me like how bat shit crazy I was about him but he did manipulate me into being in a weird Fwb relationship. 

We were very close. He had issues and had to deal with taking care of his kid and he had a baby mother who I think he still loves but didn’t want to talk about. We were work mates but I left after my contract was done. My god, I was so relieved when my contract got done. We still keep in touch. Well, he does. I do still have his number but I avoided his calls as much as I could until he stopped calling. I kept my texts to a minimum and still do. 

What helped was avoiding him. 

I think if you’re so hung up on someone, you either keep in close touch with them and have a real stable and good relationship or if you’re in my situation, just try to stay away and forget about them being a main character of your life, for your own mental sanity.
Yes. Just got done crying at work in the breakroom because I haven't seen any of the most important people in my life in ages. All of my local friends work crazy hours while going to college. Everyone else is hours away. Just talking on the phone or sending some texts will make me so happy, but later I feel so alone. I just want to share a cup of tea and get a goddamned hug. 

I think the "emotional hangover" comes from the fact that historically people were supposed to be around their family, friends, or tribe 24/7, and now I spent 60 hours a week banging my head against the keyboard with co-workers I openly despise. I don't really have a magic pill that will substitute for a group of supportive people who love and understand me. I wish I did.
I feel something like this. Like, if I go out with one of my good friends and have a really good time, I’ll feel super down afterward. Sometimes even on the train ride home, I’ll just be so sad and pessimistic. It’s like getting a happiness high, and then crashing hard to this super low point where I feel as depressed as I’ve ever been. Also happens after I just have a generally good day, or something good happens to me, like I’m being punished for being upbeat for a few hours. It sucks.
I do. I usually try to unplug for at least a couple days after whatever I did. However, I recently went back to my parent's and dealt with a car accident, funeral, high school reunion, a wedding and having to fly for the first time by myself in over ten years (I have really bad anxiety, nevermind flying). All in one weekend. Due to unforeseen delays I was barely to go home and shower before going back into work, even having weekends off I still don't feel recovered. I'm still struggling with concentrating and being "normal" .
I had this experience with a friend. We would spend at least one day together every week binge watching a show. I would spend 8AM to 3PM with her. When I got home, I was emotionally drained that I just had to nap. It also gave me a migraine. Napping was the only way to combat it.

I thought that if I spent more time with her, I would become more acclimated. But it never happened. I tried explaining to her but she got upset. I ended the friendship after that.

Looking back, whenever I spent time with her, I would always dread it. I would still go, hoping that I would enjoy this time. But that never came. I really don't know if she was toxic for me (deeply introverted) or if I was just a bad friend.
Last summer was the first time I experienced “emotional hangovers.” I was spending a lot of time with this guy who I really liked, and it was the first time I was genuinely interested in someone else. Unfortunately, he was really emotionally unavailable, so I felt anxious that I wouldn’t see him again or that he was losing interest after every time we were together. I was pretty unhealthy and coped with it by binge eating. Luckily I’m not in that situation anymore, but I’m trying to learn other ways to combat emotional hangovers. I like working on projects that put me into a flow state that will distract me from the emotions I’m feeling - for example, I really like photography, so I’ll spend some hours editing pics in photoshop or planning photoshoots.
Yes, all the time, I’m a super clingy person. My remedy is yoga and self care- have fun alone so that you can appreciate the difference and not feel so down afterwards.. Nowadays I find myself declining sleepovers and stuff so that I can relax in my own bed and watch my favourite shows, doing what I like! Also meditate and just appreciate the person you are, so that you won’t really feel lonely when you leave your loved ones. Make it a treat to get some alone time
Upon reading the comments, I feel so relieved that I am not the only one who feels that way. Back in the day, I often found myself going on a guilt trip because I felt emotionally hungover after spending a lot of time with my best friends for days in a row. I eventually resorted to ''social detoxing'' as a combatting mechanism. I go on a phone detox or a social detox for a day or two when I feel burnt out. I journal, workout, read novels, clean around, listen to music, sing along and do the things that I love doing in my lone time. It recharges my emotional batteries and then I get  back on with my social life again. It's an endless cycle. I identify as an ambivert, so doing so is extremely essential for my mental well-being. I value my relationships though and therefore, make sure that I let my friends know before I go into hibernation. I am not someone who would disappear on the ones who've been there for me when no one else was. So yes, that's how I tackle the hangovers.
Two things to look into: introversion (recommend taking the MBTI), and attachment style (you can find reliable and valid questionnaires online from psych today.)
Quite often, pretty much the only person I wouldn't get this with is my husband, it just takes so much energy to be "on" with people and navigate social stuff even when it's a lot of fun. Reading that description, it's probably the introvert exhaustion in my case. 

I usually just take some alone time to chill, watch tv or play some games, and it clears up pretty quickly. Gotta be careful with big extended events like road trips though, it's easy to pick fights when we're both feeling that way and stuck in a car.
I have this with my boyfriend!

When we sleep together (yes just staying over) in the Weekend I feel so sad when I or he has to leave. 

It's been four years and the empty feeling never leaves :(
I often withdraw from my friends if I have had too many outings and hangouts, same goes with a significant other,  I am an introvert with very extroverted tendencies.
I feel the need to take time for myself after feeling the ‘emotional hangover’ effect. It doesn’t always happen and I’ve definitely noticed the difference, depending on who I am hanging out with wether I actually end up feeling the need to withdraw, some people are better at building emotional support and giving enough distance when we are hanging out, I don’t like always having to feel “on” when I’m around people, it’s a very tough thing to find when someone can balance that feeling. 
I totally understand what you mean! It’s nice to know I’m not the only one who feels this way. I always feel like a bad friend or S/O for having this feeling.
I'm in an LDR and watching my boyfriend drive away while trying to give me as many air kisses as possible is always bittersweet. I let myself be sad in his absence for the rest of the day. Sometimes he'll put me up on voice chat for his 3 hour drive and it helps me ease into it. At the end of the day I tell him all about the sad and he gives me love and vice versa. The next day I wake up and it's just getting through another 2-3 weeks until the next time.
Like you feel like dying after hanging out with a group of people?  I get that.
I get really tired and always need a long nap.
I stopped hanging around toxic people and only surround myself with positive people.
I just try to get my mind off it, play an engaging game. Watch a movie
I have this with books! If I read a really good book, something I’m fully invested in, when I finish it I’m sort of glum for a few days. I find myself missing the characters or the world, and wishing I could go back to it. It’s not debilitating or anything, just a sort of longing to go back to something I really enjoyed. I even call them book hangovers. I usually combat this by doing something totally different that I also enjoy, like crocheting or baking or hiking, for a few days instead of reading.
I’m an introvert so enjoy my happy place and being alone. But I do feel an “emotional hangover” of sorts after speaking to specific people. 
They make me feel happy in their own right and sometimes I do feel a little sad when we have to part after a good day. I tend to just get down and do the things that make me happy. Music, books and hobbies.
My emotional hangover used to come from hanging out with my ex boyfriend while we were breaking up. We broke up, but would still see each other and hook up. Everytime he left and the day after i was exhausted and so sad. How i delt with it was finally telling him no. Emotional hangovers are the worst.
I have two moods. I either miss that person *sooo much* that I end up spending all of my time thinking about the next time I’m going to get to see them, hug them and watch them talk BUT sometimes I’m happy, content and recharged enough to last until our next meet. Today is the former :(
Yes when I go out , I spend a lot of time with friends, once I go back home I feel lonely and start having a lot of mood swings.    
 :/ 😥😳  I normally Just try to get it over with by planning an other time to be with them, ir I relax.
Yepp, I call it a social come down... I get it after long weekends with my SO where I just feel a bit low and useless. Normally helps if I just do some self care, bath/arty/crafty things. You’re not alone bb
I definitely do, mostly when it's someone that I don't see often. It's that excitement before you see them, then spending time together is so awesome, then at the end it's bittersweet and then the next day I can feel sad because I miss them. I combat it by chatting with a lot of my friends with voice notes so we get to listen to each other. It's so lovely to have a nice long voice note from  someone you love to listen to! And it takes off the pressure from each person to make time for a phone call etc..
Male here, but yes.  


(Is it rude for me to post here? I'm not sure about etiquette. Could someone inform me?)
I got pulled away for a family emergency and it’s the first time I haven’t been with my significant other in several years. I’m actually wanting to change the date of my flight to come home early and see him. I didn’t think I would miss him this much.
The only thing close to me is my dog and I feel an emptiness when I know shes not in the house or with me at all, so when I spend good quality time with her and I have to go back to my room (she like to mark her territory in my room) I feel sad knowing that one day she'll leave me forever and the only thing left will be her memory. So I just cry it out until I don't feel bad anymore.
i would usually do something outside but thats rather difficult atm
This happens to me every time I’m around my mother. She is 100 mph all the time and loves talking about all hot-button topics that are better left unsaid during polite conversation. We do not see eye-to-eye on most things, yet her opinion is gospel and she has no problem “telling it like it is.” Some things she has said have really upset me in ways she will never know. There is no changing her mind and science and reason are wasted on her, so I normally opt to grin and bear it when she is on one of her tangents. I find it incredibly exhausting and it usually takes me 1-2 days to recover. I love my mother and feel guilt over the way I feel after being around her which then makes me anxious and depressed. We were very poor growing up. She worked hard for us and put herself on the back burner to do it. She’s still incredibly generous and would give you the shirt from her back, overall has a great heart, but my personality type and hers don’t blend well unfortunately. I have flipped out on her twice when I’d had enough and that felt awful. So now, I see my mother in small doses because that is what’s best for my mental health. My mother has been through a lot and would likely benefit from therapy. She refuses to go for various reasons (excuses really). So that gets me upset on a different level because I love her and want her to be well and happy. So a very long winded way of saying yes I do experience this.
I need more context, is this question positive or negative in terms of emotional hangover
My boyfriend and I went to California and spent every second together for a week. The first morning back to work was torture for me. It was so odd as i’ve never felt like that before. It was like i’d never see him again, when I would see him when I got home!
Yes!  It takes a couple of days for it to lessen.  It’s almost like a “homesick-ness”
I think this is simply an introvert and extrovert battle. Introverts generally are exhausted from social interactions and extroverts are energized from them. I think that taking time to yourself is important and valuable; and nothing personal.
Oh yes. I feel this A LOT. 

When my best friend and I started meeting each other in real life after years of knowing each other online I always got super super down whenever she left. I used to cry when she’d leave and even hours or days before just because the thought of it made me so sad. She was equally as sad and we cried together. It was horrible because when she left or when I left her people would always notice I wasn’t myself. 

I would suggest you keep yourself busy. Do other things with people who can distract you so you don’t think about it too much. Also, if you have the opportunity - communicate with the person you’re missing. It really helped me. I used to call her when she was on the train or when she got home and that helped immensely.
Yes I totally feel this way! I get really sad after I visit close friends or family who don’t live near me. I’m sad they are not around all the time and that time spent with them is rare. I usually just let it run it’s course and I’m over it in a few days
One in particular, I get a massive drop in mood that lasts about a week after we've seen each other. Worth it, but goddamn that oxytocin comedown does not fuck around.
I get what I can best describe as emotional hangovers, it doesn't necessarily need to be because I spend a lot of time with someone close, some times its the exact opposite and its from spending a lot of time alone, but I generally like to watch shows that will make me feel sad or happy so I can just flush out all the emotion in a few days.
I used to get this come-down after hanging out with my boyfriend (now fiancé) for days at a time. we'd spend an entire weekend together, then when it came time for me to leave and go back to "real life" on Sunday nights, I would get sooo down - to the point where I'd sometimes cry on the train ride back to my apartment. I don't think I really had a way to combat that feeling other than to try and adjust back to my regular home life as quickly as possible and wait for the next time I could see him 😂
Omg i didn't think it happened to other people, I one was with a vary close friend of mine and she's also my crush and after few hours with her I went home and felt like that, "emotional hangover" is a really good name for this feeling
Not sure if this is what you mean but the question reminded me of when I was seeing a friend with benefits who from the beginning made it clear that's all it would ever be so not his fault at all, I agreed to it needed the release and he was someone I could trust but we lived about an hour and a half from eachother so being more than that would definitely had been difficult. I say all this now though in hindsight but at the time I started getting in my head about wanting some emotional intimacy as well and I felt like whenever we were together I was just dying for that closeness, the casual cuddles after sex or even just some sweet conversation which he was very careful to withhold so that he wouldn't lead me on (i realize this now also) so after every encounter we had idv crash emotionally sometimes to the point where I would cry on my way home or after he left, it was just such an emotional high being in the moment but then realizing I was still missing the intimacy I was so craving. Realized later I'm just not cut out for being FWB I guess, seeing someone now who I'm actually dating and it's so fulfilling. for me dealing with it meant basically just getting out of the situation id put myself in
About to experience this. I just spent the last few days with a guy I'm head over heels for and today I'm going home. Anyone ever get home from something and just flop over thinking "what now?" Doing things alone just aren't as colorful without your person. Don't get me wrong, I enjoy alone time, but things just feel more joyful with him around.
For a lot of people on this thread: It sounds like the majority of you are true empaths, which everyone probably knows about themselves at this point, but for those who don’t empaths are people who are so intensely empathetic and intuitive when it comes to other people, whether they are close or complete strangers, that it physically and emotionally affects them so intensely that sometimes they literally need a break to recover from the emotional load of being around people. Definitely research it, it’s a wonderful thing to be! Empaths unfortunately often fall into relationships with narcissists as well and are often taken advantage of by people close to them, so if that all sounds like you, you aren’t alone. X
This happens to me (M28) , usually on Sundays when I have nothing to do...

I'm monitoring this thread!
Yah the thinking involved with socialization is utterly exhausting. I’m good at socializing but have really grown to love being alone. Unless you have to live with the person you love. In my opinion, that’s like trying to do what you love, for work. The monotony and excessive time spent doing it, sometimes makes it less enjoyable. I think this applies to a lot of things in life.

Solution: Just spend less time with them. Spend more time with your self. Covid style.
Yep. My bf has been deployed for almost 6 months. Back in January I got to go visit him for a whole week, just the two of us. I cried basically the whole 11 hours home because I felt so much emotional withdrawal knowing I wouldn’t see him again for another 3 months. Honestly, there’s really no combatting it. It’s a perfectly valid emotion and your best bet is to let it all out for a contained amount of time - cry, eat junk food, journal, vent to friends, whatever helps - then after the period say “Ok, I have felt these feelings and they are valid, but they do not serve me going forward and I would like to put them in the past.”

Doesn’t mean you won’t still get sad but after a certain period of time and processing it really is best not to dwell on uncontrollable emotions too long.
immediately after spending time w someone i care deeply about, i kind of take a bit to wind down and reflect on the good moments that just passed. like replaying the events in my head so i don’t forget them. focusing on the fun i just had helps me to kind of transition into being apart from them, rather than thinking about how our time together has ended and being away from them. communication w that person also helps, like some reassurance and faith from them that the time until the next interaction will pass quickly.

it’s still hard, i’ve been trying to adjust bc i’ve recently moved to a different state so now i’m going thru the experience of a long distance relationship, as well as friendships. so now that visits are so few and far between, these emotional hangovers last a lot longer than before. but, constant facetime calls and texts help a lot(:
People that go to conventions call it “con drop”.  You’re surrounded by people who share your interests and you’re faced with the dilemma of too many things you want to do. Then it’s suddenly back to work.
I’m diagnosed with severe depression and am prone to high emotional intensity - highs and lows. When I have a really good few weeks, or I’m anticipating something I’m excited for and then the happy time is over, I experience what we call in our house a “happy hangover”.
Yes this has been me my whole life. I love spending time people I love of course. But I get so exhausted. Like even the urge to talk after they leave is gone. I just scroll through the phone, watch a movie, or fall asleep. 
Sometimes I don’t like it because I’m literally always home, I don’t go out at all pretty much. And I crave that social connection. But I can only deal with it for a day every two weeks. 
I really enjoy spending time alone. I love having quiet time. And being this way makes me so anxious and nervous for the future, moving in with my boyfriend, and my plans to have 4 kids total. I don’t know how the heck I’m gonna manage. I told him (my bf) that I need a room in the house some where to be alone.
Yes unfortunately I do experience hangovers like the ones you’ve mentioned and it’s not fun it kills my day kills my motivation makes me very lazy... so the way I combat is by watching YouTube videos or cleaning my room
Yes I absolutely hate it.  Haven't found a cure yet.
Probably not helpful at the moment but this is exactly why I’m on therapy.
I’m having this at the moment. My boyfriend and I haven’t seen each other in about two weeks and normally we’re together 4/7 days at least. I feel so sad and empty and alone
Not a woman and not an answer. But thank you so much for this thread. I can't see my SO due to isolation and she's not much of a talker online, so this thread has given me lots to work with.
I will either watch something on one of my streaming services or try to sleep. We constantly communicate all day and night. He is 5 hours ahead of me, so it's just while he is asleep. It can really kill me sometimes when I can't tell him something but it's never for very long. He makes himself available to me every minute he is awake which I really appreciate
Ugh yes. Everytime I drive an hour and a half down to see my in laws without my husband and they suggest I spend the night I almost cant handle it. I hate the feeling of not having our pillow talk, sleeping alone, and not being able to walk into another room to see him. It's awful. I'm totally fine during the day, it's really just the bedtime part that is so hard for me
I limit time with them. Yu have to. I find that their energy lingers an i impose it on others. Its not fair to the others in my life so limiting them in a space of time is the best thing i could come up with. I guess yu could call it love distancing lol
I only get to see my bf once a week and every time he leaves I feel like someone stabbed through the heart. Is that what you mean?
some people are just emotional vampires. had a friend who was very extroverted but would not respect other's boundaries, so would do things like throw a literal temper tantrum if you said you wanted to go home after hanging out. so you feel obligated to continue to hang out at your own expense. make sure the person you are with is not a person like this.
I started getting this when I began dating someone new. I had such an exhilarating experience when we were together, then the next day I felt like shit. It's like taking drugs that boost your serotonin levels and then the next day you have that high hangover.  These people you are with give you those boosts naturally so then the next day, you're depleted and worn out. I didn't realize this was a thing until talking to my therapist.
I make sure I have things to look forward to that don't involve the other person. Something as simply as a good book, or having time to engage with a hobby.
And trying to feel grateful you've found someone you love enough that it hurts when they aren't there - and that this feeling will end :)
I have  been getting this a lot since isolation. I am really struggling with the constant stream of memes about the CV that people are sending me. People are wanting to stay sane and stay in touch with one another; I completely get and appreciate that. But it drains me. I have been getting really bad headaches and I think that's the reason.
I always called it a “social hangover” but yes, definitely.
Yes! I get really anxious to the point of tears. I call him and tell him how I’m feeling. Communication makes me feel better I guess.
So what you are referring to could be a few different things. I think it depends on your definition of “feeling down.”

You’ve probably seen a lot of comments already about how introverts deal with spending time with other people. I’ve definitely had the experience of feeling mentally exhausted and needing to rest and be alone after spending time with a lot of people, or even with just a few very overwhelming people. It does not make me feel sad, angry, depressed, or anything like that - just tired. If I weren’t able to rest and had to keep being around people, the tiredness might make me a little irritable. I’ve learned with age how to express my own limits and stick to them, now. 

I’ve also had experiences with specific people who always made me feel stressed or depressed after spending time with them, and I’ve come to discover that those people are what most people mean when they say someone is “toxic.” I had a friend/roommate who would constantly make hateful comments about anything or anyone while we spent time together and afterwards I would feel sad and drained. I had another acquaintance who would only ever talk about her illnesses and would always bring the conversation back to the topic of how sick she was - also draining and depressing. When I chose not to spend time with those people anymore (and spent time with more uplifting people instead), I was much happier.
Emotional hangover is now my new favorite term!
This happens whenever I have any sort of significantly happy thing happen! I've begun to expect it. 

Someone described it as noticing the absence of the emotional baseline you'd been at recently.
This happens with my SO. We're in separate houses at the moment so we were only seeing each other a couple times during the week and a few hours on the weekend. Now with the quarantine, we've only really spent a few hours together after 2 weeks. I described this feeling to him like coming off of a high from opiates. When I'm with him, especially during sex, I feel like an entirely different person. But when I come home, I feel weighed down, upset, and unstable. It's definitely not a fun time coming down, but I like the advice from everyone!
More when I don’t know someone well and am In the process of getting close to them. I think it’s the commitment/loyalty aspect of it. because I hung out with them “that one time” I feel obligated to keep their trust and that feels like too much responsibility. Don’t really know how to combat it, so I’m interested in hearing what other people have to say.
i literally just . . . Reddit my life away, i guess

i saw my friend today bc we both needed to grab our stuff from school, and it was great, but now i'm at home and i just feel Nope. that's literally the only way i can describe it.
Learn to be comfortable with your own company.
Just reading your post reminds me of how I feel with one specific person in my life. this guy that I’ve been hooking up / causally seeing for about two years now. No matter how much I hate this fact, he’s my favourite guy to see and to sleep with and to spend time with. (Not that I have that many guys in my dating life at all lol) every time we spend time together and he stays the night and we talk a lot, I feel so happy to be in his presence and the next morning when he leaves, I just feel so empty and hollow and well just.. sad. This happens literally every time. So with time and experience I kind of brace myself for it. I journal about my feelings. I go out into the city and shop get food hangout with other friends to distract myself and feel less alone and empty. And just to remind myself I have a ton of other amazing friendships in my life. It sucks a lot though, and I always wonder if he feels the same emotional hangover. Hang in there xx
I am always exhausted after visiting my parents & older sister. (She lives with them). They always are talk over one another & speak very loudly to the point of yelling.
As an introvert I experience this quiet often. I think that empaths go through this feeling as well, but they don't necessarily need to engage in the conversation or situation for a long time and/or with a rather close person.
I usually want to isolate myself if I spend too much time with the same person. I get pissed off and run away to be alone. Idk how to describe it but I just become super sensitive..
I only live with my mom, i didnt see anyone since a long time, family and friends. I was everyday with her in the same room but even until a point i had to go back to mine. Tho im basically like a sim with the socialisation on red.
I think it says a lot about my relationships that my immediate thought went to spending time around family that make you feel like shit, and then feeling the effects of negative energy (having a "hangover") for a while after.
I do miss the time I was able to combat this. After a having a child, there is no concept of me time. Ugh. I doubt I'll get some me time until she grows up :( Its fun and all but being around someone especially a child and my husband 24x7 is exhausting
I've not put much thought into this until now but for me it depends on the amount of people and what we do. If I meet a friend for coffee and it's a super chill time. I just feel love and happiness afterwards, maybe even upbeat. If I meet up with a group of people, especially those I haven't seen in a while, then it seems to be more of a party so later I'm exhausted and depressed. It's not that I'm not excited to hang out with just one friend, it just takes less energy. So, less time to replenish I guess.
Take a break from them.

The process starts with me hanging out with people I seem to have a common ground with. After days or hours of hanging out with them, I take a break. For example, I hang out for almost 1 day with my colleagues and I also took 1 day to hang out with myself. 

It's all about balance. Too much for me isn't good.
Practicing independence, it is hard but it helps. Try understand that each person is individual as it is and has their own life and you just get some moments in life to share experience together. And the best thing to do if you really enjoy the company try to leave them with best memories of yourself.
[removed]
I have since I was a teen experienced this when my Dad comes. He lives about 8 hours away and I opted to live with my mom when I was 14. I am so excited to see him and I miss him so much that when he is here it’s like a constant high. Then he leaves and it sucks when I was younger I was able to sort of take time to be sad and then get over it and restart until the next time. Now that I am older and have two kids and a busy house I find the fall out occurs several days later when I am not expecting it.
I get exhausted after talking to people for prolonged periods of time (anywhere from an hour to a month depending on how things are) or helping a lot of people (I'm the mum friend and I don't like saying no to helping others since I like to help I just don't know when to quit) and it's like I just feel tired of people normally get fed up of texting and everything so I just deal with it by chilling without people like watching TV or YouTube or playing video games (my favourites are things like the sims where I'm in control) so yeah i just shut off socially until I feel less burnt out.
When I can't shut out people I tend to be a lot less fun to be around and respond quite quick and short and get easily annoyed which isn't great cause I'm quite quick witted and rude when I'm annoyed but my friends are used to it they know my moods are a mess and not to take it seriously 😂
After having argued with someone. The kind of unhealthy screaming match where neither party is heard or understood. 

It's less a euphoric feeling and mostly that kind of negative residue that hangs on your heart. Your mind feels clouded, not with anger or sadness but confusion as to how to handle the next more calm interactions after having your sadness/anger/resentment/etc. spill over in that way. I get sick to my stomach knowing that screaming crying mess in my memory was me just less than 10 min. ago. Shits wild man.
Yes i get this i usually come down by doing self care like face masks or watching a film
Sometimes I can be with someone I love and enjoy...and I’ll just look at them and feel disgusted. And just feel the need to leave the room. I don’t feel disgusted at them...but I’m obviously feeling this disgusted feeling from them. And I just feel like I need to be away from them for a minute.
I sleep
Actually I get the opposite. My triumvirate of besties only gets together physically about once a year. My husband used to gripe about the girl's week, when I would go visit them. But he noticed that after girl's week, his wife was kinder, more patient and just generally happier for months afterwards. He encourages time with them now, he is the beneficiary.
Yeah, you just need to take a moment to relax.
Mines more of like just feeling drained and exhausted after long social interactions. I really just have to embrace being alone for a good while. And if I’m not home alone the way I do this is staying in bed a little later in the morning, sitting in the bathroom a little longer than normal etc. just to really speak in that bit of alone time.
I am a loner most times. Being biolar I know that spending time with someone means they will see it. How I feel abt them can never matter but being seen always does. When spending time with someone close I am wanting them go and when they are gone I want them to come back. Dont know wht to call that..lol! Emotional hangover..yes I do experience them. I've  no tool to handle it. Not even sure I would if it meant them seeing my bipolar sides.
You don’t combat it.  You honor it, and let it shape future encounters.
I video chat sometimes. It reminds me that these people still exist and that they miss me too.
Absolutely. When myself and my partner were in a long distance relationship and we’d see each other on weekends, Sunday evenings alone again were always super difficult and I often got this feeling
I’m pretty introverted, and I need a lot of designated time and space for myself.  I love hanging out with people I like, but if I’m roped into doing it for a long time I feel exhausted and restless all at once (no matter how much I like the person).  I sometimes catch myself feeling embarrassed about it, but I shouldn’t be.  It’s a kind of self care and there isn’t anything wrong with it.  Some people feel like they need to be around people a lot, and some people feel like they need to be alone a lot.  Some people are a bit of both and it just needs to be balanced. 

If you’re worried about their feelings being hurt I would just explain it to them.  I think most people can empathize with that now.
I ghost them. I'm protective of my feelings like that.
I do quite often, I am naturally very introverted and while I have a great social life if I’m with people for a long time I can definitely get irritated and almost cranky? Usually I just push through until I can be alone and I stay in until I am “recharged”.
i did too experience that,  best thing i did to deal w it was kept myself busy.. work, new hobby, plus i had medical rx adderrall helped a lot
Yeah it feels like a migraine sort of, but it’s basically feeling overloaded with emotion. I experience this only with groups of people, but some people get this even with close friends. 
I read recently that emotional overload is part of being an “empath”. Look it up.
As a man, I relate to much with this
Yes I do, but it’s mainly because it feels “empty” once I’m by myself again. Usually I just admit those feelings and talk about it if necessary. Otherwise, I’ll just go and watch some Netflix.
I’ve definitely experienced this many times and still currently battle to deal with it. I may have a different experience but I am a huge empath and any social events (either with close friends, family, or work) drain me emotionally that it makes it unbearable to continue with my day. I’ve learned some techniques that help me cope and most of them involve being alone for a bit. For example, taking a nap helps my mind reset, meditating, a hot bath with salts and/or essential oils, and/or taking a walk. You might just need a small reset and creating that space for you is helpful and important!

I realize many people on this thread seemed confused about the OP and I might be one of them, but these are my suggestions based on my understanding! Hope it helps and you feel better!! :)
year 4, still miss my army friends and i still dunno how to handle it
I'm an introvert- as part of my class perks, I have a passive immunity to this active at all times in my active effects.

Like Nord's passive resistance to Cold in Skyrim. Same idea.

However, I do experience a stamina drain when surrounded by or interacted with by large groups of people for long periods of time.

I'm also highly resistant to social distancing negative effects.
Ahh I do. I makes me so sad, I just focus on different things and immerse myself into it like Painting.
Nothing I dont miss anybody unless your actually important to me
I feel this way with my mom. I love her more than anything, but she’s so negative. After being her sounding board and reassuring her when we hang out, I need a moment of peace and quiet to focus on happy thoughts and bring myself out of the negative funk that she surrounds herself with. 

I love her and will never regret time spent with her, even when she hurts/drains me, I’m thankful that she’s alive and well. It’s still just... draining. 

To combat, I love on my husband and my baby, I watch my favorite comedy series, I do something selfless, or take a block of time for introspection to remind myself of all the positivity in my life. It never takes long, I always snap back. But it’s too easy to become enveloped in a negative outlook/attitude. Mom focuses on her negatives before counting her blessings. I’m the opposite. 

In an odd twist of fate, she’s actually created a blind optimist lol.
I've cut those people out of my life. Life is wayyyyyy too short.
[removed]
Military girl dating a military man for a year now. I'm home every weekend, he comes home once-twice a month. With the COVID-19 crisis, it's been 22 out of 56 days without seeing him. Honestly, I've never gotten used to it. The times he's home are super intense, as it can be for 2-3 days at most each time, and all that time alone afterwards to process it sucks. Sometimes it's been so long that we're starting to feel these hangovers even when we're still together.

Our way of coping with it is planning out our time together so we can achieve the most with the limited fraction of time we have together, and we make personal goals for the weeks without each other personal/relationship gain. These downs after being so excited are the worst, and we spend a lot of time talking about them, but that time to work on ourselves is important. I try not to be all alone after he leaves, talk to a friend or hang out with people from the base (Corona times break my routines though) and remember it's only temporary and that I'll see him again soon.
[removed]
I really love to travel by myself. When I do, I meet a lot of different people and I become close to them pretty fast because we spend so much time together.
But when I have to go home or go to another country, I have to say goodbye to them and that freakin' hurts.  It's the only part of traveling I really don't like.
People always say they'll be in touch, but that's never really possible because at the end of the day, everyone has their own life in their own country.
This made me realize I shouldn't become so attached to people anymore whilst traveling. Of course I can have a good time with them and have fun and share a lot of great stories, but I'll protect myself from getting too emotionally attached to someone. To protect myself from being emotionally hungover.
I cry a lot and feel sad and melancholy.
Then I overthink the entire blissful visit and start panicking about whether I was good company and fun or not.
After a good night's sleep or two it passes and I'm feeling much better.
But that's just me. I'm dysfunctional in almost all situations ; )
Lots of alone time, doing stuff I like
Didn't have a name for this before, but yeah, I've definitely felt it after leaving a friend's house or going home after visiting my cousins :(
Try to keep in touch: send each other postcards, wrote text messages, video call.
Sometimes, yes. I can get really tired and sick not knowing what I want to do and sometimes cry, sleep, or drink water. They're cliche i know i couldn't think of anything else at those times
THC cookies and candies, Even my wife becomes fun to talk to,
Absolutely!  My parents live in another state, it's an 11+ hour drive to go visit them.  I'm always blue for a few days after seeing them, and it usually lasts longer the more time I got to spend with them.  It sucks, but it's always worth it.
For sure I'm involved with my ex's family and my brother is too. We come over there everynight and often I'm exhausted of putting a happy face on for him.
God yes. I've never been able to articulate this feeling or identify why I'm having it. Emotional hangover, you are so right this is a thing! I typically just try and ride out this feeling similar to a regular hangover.
Test
I'd like to focus on my hobby during this time.
I just kind of let myself ease out of it. It might take time, but that's really the only way I've been able to combat this.
Oh wow. This really got put into words, huh? 
I personally combat this by not speaking and listening to music. 
Admitedly, this only happens to me when I have to talk to someone who isn't around me every day, so people I lived with were never the cause. (Yes, you can be close to people without seeing them every day. Duh.)
I think it is you wanting to look exceptional. If the relationship becomes extremely comfortable, this should go away. It's a good way to determine how close you are to someone.
I met someone on New Year's Eve. We started dating, exclusively, and saw each other twice a week, for a day and night or two. We were on the brink of being girlfriend/boyfriend. Then covid happened and his roommates don't want me over and he doesn't want to leave his apartment. 

The first week was hard. It's been 2.5 weeks now and I think this relationship will not recover. My love language happens to be physical touch.
Teach yourself not to rely on anyone for your own happiness.
i think thats called catharsis
Im a guy, sorry i normally would never do this, but i have never heard of such a thing or felt such a thing, can you expand on this?
A friend of mine owned a motel and she was really proud to be doing this at her establishment...until she started having to call plumbers all the time because curious men (and sometimes women) would try them out and flush them down the toilet. So she stopped offering them in the rooms and they are now only on request at the front desk. So perhaps the complex answer is liability.
I worked at hotels for almost 15 years and we had them at the desk if you asked. Like toothbrushes, toothpastes and sewing kits. All you have to do is ask! :)
Used to work in hospitality - most hotels do have them, just ask!  They just aren't typically put in the room because it's not something every guest is going to need (unlike shampoo/conditioner/etc.) Different hotels will carry different toiletries, and quality is not going to be the same as something you'd buy for yourself, typically, but they are available.

The hotel I worked at was a budget hotel, and we carried razors, shaving cream, soap bars, sewing kits, shampoo, conditioner, tampons, pads, and even little travel deodorant sticks.
I've stayed in a few hotels where these sorts of products are free if you ask the concierge for them, like with razors, but mostly you have to buy them from the "market" if you can get them on-site at all. Society tends to view these sorts of items as optional and/or a luxury, which is, uh, weird.
I stayed at a hotel last night and they have makeup remover wipes but not complimentary pads/tampons. I was wondering the same thing.
[deleted]
It’s interesting to me that people are worried about these products being “stolen” when you essentially pay for them with your room charge, and I highly doubt a single hotel room is going to have insane amounts of stock, just like they don’t usually have full-size shampoo etc. 

I think having one or two pads sitting in the room in small sealed bags is wonderful, it would be enough to tide someone over so they can get their own stock of their preferred brands. If someone is “stealing” them they’re likely to be taking all the other complimentary things too, or they just need them.
I think it would make sense to offer a complimentary pad, at the very least.
They do ( at least the ones I've worked with), you just have to ask for them, they do not put them in all rooms to save money basically.
Worked in hospitality for two years and we did! This poor lady came down one night and said her friend was sitting on the toilet completely unprepared for her period and her flow was super heavy. I gave her all the tampons we had at the time and said I had a few of my own if she needed them. The shuttle driver had left for the night otherwise we would have taken her to the drugstore.
Some hotels do ! I worked at one that did in the public bathroom and it was stolen allll the time
I used to work front desk/night audit at a hotel. We had them at the desk, all guests had to do was ask. We even had extras of the shampoos, etc. so no one would have to steal from a housekeeping cart. Hell, one time I even gave a woman a condom because she asked if we sold them but I had a spare one in my purse. Nothing is ever too embarrassing for front desk agents, just ask. :)
My work provides them free in the women's bathroom! It rocks! Nice to learn from this thread that lots of hotels have them if you ask!
I wouldn't be comfortable using a tampon or pad that's been sitting in a hotel room where any previous guest could touch it. Might not be totally logical but I'd just rather not.
Why are tampons,pads not complimentary in general. I did let ask to be born a women who bleeds every month
I've stayed at hotels that actually had two or three complimentary sanitary pads in the bathroom. It actually helped out in one emergency I had, so I appreciated that a lot.

But in my experience it's really rare, maybe 1 out of 10 hotels do it, and usually only the more expensive ones.
We do you just have to ask.
I worked at a hotel from 2015-2017 and we offered pads and tampons at the front desk for free. just have to ask and we’d give you the hookup. (:
I just stayed in a hotel in Spain which had a "feminine kit" in the bathroom along with shampoos etc.
Why do you have to say “gay guy here” lol just say guy?
You asking and thinking about this is so heartwarming. Thank you.
They probably don't think about it or don't realize how important those are. You gotta remember, most companies, corporations, businesses whatever, are run by men. They don't even consider what women need when running a business.
Depends on the hotel. Tampons/pads are available for request along with razors, extra toiletries, whatever. Shampoo, soap, coffee are basic things most people use on the daily. You would have to be quite unprepared to need tampons/pads on a whim. Most women are familiar about when to expect a monthly visit so are usually better equipped. However it does happen though and some hotels can provide that for you. 

On the Marriott Bonvoy app, you can request service extras and you can see what kind of extra toiletries are available upon request. I’m sure other chains offer similar.
I spend a lot of nights in hotels.  If you call the front desk they usually have some.  Most of the big hotels can usually also help if you have forgotten something like a razor, toothbrush/toothpaste, comb, etc.  A few brands like Sherton (pre-Marriott but idk know) even have hair straighteners and curling irons that they will let you borrow.  
Treat the front desk staff well because they can literally help solve most normal travel issues.
I’d ask the same thing about school or college public bathrooms, it’s quite disappointing.
I mean, to be fair, there's a 1/4 (ish) chance you're on your period. There's a 100% chance you should have a shower.

Not disagreeing that they should be FREE though, but it would be wasteful, IMO, to have them just put out for everyone. Yes, I also think it's kind of wasteful to put out the shampoo and conditioner, because a lot of people bring their own anyways.
Doesn't apply to every guest, which leads to the real reason...

A significant enough portion of male guests would feel uncomfortable because even though it's unused a tampon is still "gross" and we could *never* leave men feeling uncomfortable!

^^^^/s
I work at a hotel and we have them! Honestly we use them more for employees than for guests, but we do always keep them in stock just in case. I feel like there are more women who would be less inclined to ask rather then just go buy some.
Ah I had them more than once in turkish hotels in  antalya
Honestly I would only use provided ones in an emergency - I have my brand and type of choice. But emergencies do arise so in that sense it’s probably a good idea!
I think tampons and pads are still somewhat stigmatized by society and sort of a private thing. It might just be a cost thing too.
They did offer them in a cute little box in the bathroom in Nara (Japan). It was a love hotel so maybe they're more likely to offer them there? Can't remember if the other hotels had them though
We have them in the women's bathroom in the lobby.
Probably because most women know when they’re getting that shit and prepare accordingly. Or if they’re like me, have irregular cycles and stuff 20 maxi pads into the side of their suitcase any time they travel.
I was recently in this exact situation.  Was at a average 3 star hotel, got soap, shampoo,  and lotion. 2nd night of my stay,  my period starts a few days early. I didn't have extras on me (ughh) and nothing nearby was open at 1 am. Asked girl at the front desk, they don't stock any pads or liners or tampons. She asked the other woman on staff, nothing. 


Ended up having to make a 45 minute trip to a 24 hour 7 11 because a toilet paper diaper wasn't going to work.
We can’t have nice things because people always find a way to take advantage. Tampons and pads are a lot more expensive and I can guarantee people will steal them unless they lock them away and monitor the usage. Pads/tampons also aren’t one size fits all. Some women like them thicker, some thin, long or short, winged or not winged. It’s just a lot of variety and a big expensive that won’t generate them any money and you know businesses aren’t going to do anything that doesn’t generate them money.
Because periods are considered too taboo and “and better not mentioned” even in that capacity
patriarchy :)
They usually cost like ten bucks a box. Women tax strikes again!
They do at least at a decent hotel, you just might need to ask the front desk
The hotel I worked at did in fact have pads and tampons behind the front desk. Mind you it was a 4 star hotel. In my 4 years of working there I only had one guest ask.
I actually stayed in a hotel which had them in the bathroom beside the shower cap
Most hotels have them on request, along with toothpaste and sewing kits
Usually at the front desk if you ask :)
Hotel goer here. Use the complimentary bible pages
because the default human is assumed to be male--pretty much every woman would LOVE something like this
Agreed. Tipping the front desk staff is a great investment.
I saw them once in a gas station toilet and I was soooooo relieved.

 Honestly even if people will flush them, just put a sign. The benefit outweighs the cost
Honestly, I’d be happy to have one of those tampon/pad vending dispensers in my rooms bathroom even if I had to put a coin in to get one. Nothing worse than your period coming early on vaycay and not knowing where the closest store is.
There was a time when I worked in a building where there was array of hygiene products in the bathrooms, including tampons, pads, etc. very much the vibe that you’d get an a really nice club in DTLA. 

I’ve been in some high end hotels that also provide the same. I’m not sure you’d find it in a motel 6 or even like a holiday. Pay upwards of $1k for a night, and you’ll find it sparingly.
"It would make the male guests uncomfortable."

-random sexist manager
Laydees should handle their issues themselves. Silently. Without tipping anyone off. It’s just laydee-like ok? /s 

In all seriousness, the expectation that women handle this shit themselves in silence is bullshit. Periods are a natural thing not some gross process. We should stand in our power. We make goddamn human beings. We deserve to not have to suffer in silence and be ignored.
Because men might have to think about or acknowledge peroids if they were just there. And then that might lead to men thinking that there are other things that might go into vaginas other than their penises. It's like reverse penis envy. Perhaps we should call it misappropriative vaginal syndrome, or something else suitably Freudian. 

And the argument against supply that it's due to women all have different preferences about type or brand is nonsense. In an emergency, we'll take whatever's going. I'm more particular about my shampoo and conditioner and would never use the stuff provided by a hotel.

I mean, I do take all those hotel minis to donate to women's shelters...
Is it because sexism? They provide toilet paper, soap, etc. why not a way for people to manage their periods?
Because women’s rights aren’t human rights apparently
They do...
[removed]
This should be on r/AskHotels
https://i.kym-cdn.com/photos/images/original/001/482/545/826.jpg
some do?
I’m starting to see a lot of hotels have complimentary ones in their restrooms.
They do if you ask for them
Ask the front desk. Most hotels have them.
I actually stayed at a hotel in Sweden where they gave two tampons along with some other toiletries.... I thought that was a really nice touch! Just wanted to share my experience lol
I love you lol
As a girl, I think it’s embarrassing and people don’t think about it. I usually put it in pads in my purse but every girl has a different period flow. Some girls are light while other girls are heavy.

But I like your idea. Hotels should have tampons and pads even if they aren’t fancy.
Because men don’t have something that’s similar.
I think they just put universally used stuff. like stuff a man, woman, and child(?) would need
Why don't they put a hand soap pump in there so I don't have to open that little box of soap.
I'm guessing because they're costly.
it's probably because every girl has a different preference but it's a good question.
I was just at a fancy hotel and instead of a pad/tampon, they had a little bag to put it in to keep things "sanitary" and not let the gross gross blood be anywhere near their precious trash can /s
I work at a hotel and tbh the same reason we don’t change the loo roll unless it’s almost gone; it’ll be too pricey for the company
I had this same very thought exactly 4 days ago when I checked in a five star hotel coinciding with my first. I just came to this new country can’t I have everything essential here. Tampons seem to me like towels, shampoo, etc.
I currently work in a hotel and we have a ton of tampons AND pads, and even keep a basket full of them in the women's restroom in the lobby. Maybe not "all hotels", but the Hampton Inn does :-)
Most front desks do. You just have to call down and ask. I’d guess that they aren’t in every room because they’re gender specific.
[removed]
I never use the things hotels provide but I agree, sometimes it would be a great alternative if you don't have your stuff with you. I lost my suitcase once and had to buy everything. I wished the hotel would have provided these things.
**They do**
I work at a hotel, and we def have them, we keep them in the restroom and at the desk in case anyone needs them. mgmt talked for a while about stopping that, but all the women on staff threw a fit and... we still have them. :)
You have to ask.
My MIL definitely would.
Personally I've never seen complimentary sanity products ANYWHERE let alone at hotels
probably because not everyone's a woman. Like, how everyone needs to take a bath, they have a shower. Like everyone needs to poo, there's something for that too. But then, not everyone has periods. If everyone did, god knows what the world would be like
Probably because people don’t stay for long, or they can just get their supplies from home. Plus, you could ask a staff.
It is very easy to see if a tampon has been tampered with, just as easy as to see as complimentary soaps in plastic. So I don’t think that is right
Most hotels do. You just have to ask for them like you would a toothbrush.
They are usually available upon request. 
Technically, after a guest leaves all of the complimentary things are supposed to be thrown away even if they look unused. So to automatically put something in a room that will more often than not just get thrown away would be expensive and wasteful.
Actually I know some pubs and cafés where are pads and tampons at bathroom for free. I call them blessed places... But there isn't many...
Hell some hotels even have condoms (usually European) but I have yet to see menstrual products, they’re so taboo for very little reason
Why don’t they give complimentary condoms? I have had to take the pill too many times because of it
It was this very moment that I too ask myself this...
Am I right ladies, give me those thumbs ups sisters xD
Let me ask you this does anyone use the shampoo,soap, coffee
Money.
I guess people are a little apathetic towards women's lives and problems. I can't tell you how many times the emergency pad in the bag helped me and even other women out. It should be common but it isn't.
I think it is because mostly men don't see it as a sanitary item. In Australia they actually tried to put an extra 10% tax on female products relating to tampons and pads.
Huh that wouldn't be an odd idea, never thought about it
Probably because 
1. The hotel can’t predict a woman’s preferences for products
2. The hotel is worried about up-tight customers’ reactions
3. Society as a whole seems to think periods are some silly thing women do to get attention or something, or that we should be able to control the flow of blood (seriously, I’ve had folks ask me why I don’t just hold it...my answer is always “Next time you get a cut, you should try holding it”), so sanitary products are seen as luxuries (in the worst cases, tampons are misrepresented as sex toys).
This is a pretty good question. Like, maybe a little basket in each room with a handful of regular tampons and pads just in case someone forgets their supply. Even ladies that need heavy duty stuff, something like that is better than nothing until they can get a better supply. It might be because its still considered more of a "taboo" topic for some and they just dont want to run the risk of insulting those with the most fragile of egos.
They're too expensive.
Gender specific.
[deleted]
I'd think if they were placed in every room they'd be wasted by curious/childish men or kids with ladies in the family who aren't ragging. Could also possibly be tampered with.
Yes and maybe condoms too...? 
Provided at front desk (if asked for) or in bathroom drawer.
Never had that problem but im guessing that if you ask, they might have it. I always make sure im not on the month during my vacay, but also i always stay at the cheapest but still nice places, so im just glad if they have gel soap or extra pillows. One thing though i wish my workplace would hold them in the emergency kit or at the nursery, one time one of my coworkers had to buy them at the pharmacy (we work at the airport) and it was double the price you usually pay for and the nursery didnt had any, they didnt even wanted to give out a paracetamol pill either, its not the first time one of us starts the month and doesnt have any around or any one has one.
Judging from the comments i guess you ask at the front desk. Until this point I had no idea girls  could even do this. I always just got my own from home. Mostly because I'm 16 and since i still live under her roof i live by what she says. 

This meaning that if i go somewhere i MUST bring pads/tampons with me because i "never know what could happen" 🙄 

She sometimes annoys the blood out of me but usually she is write about somethings.
Female here, I don’t know what I would do if I walked into a hotel room that had them sitting beside the soap, etc.  I had a hysterectomy in my 20’s, so I might find it a bit too much.  I prefer not to see them at all.  That’s just me.
The patriarchy.
Why would they? Everyone needs soap and coffee/tea, it's just too specific. They offer tampons but someone wants pads. They offer the cardboard but they prefer plastic...etc. I'm sure you can get a tampon from the front desk, or even in the vending in the bathroom. We're in a world where we can't have straws but you want free tampons.
I think statistically, there's probably a low chance of a customer needing one during their stay at the hotel. 

I haven't done the math, but let's say about 50% of their customers are female. Let's say a female only needs the product for 25% of the days in a month. And the let's say most customers spend only 2-5 days at the hotel. The probability of this stay coinciding with the 25% days of need is then approximately 2.5%. Divided by half, since only 50% customers need them... It's 1.25%. 

That number is unbelievably low, I don't even know if my math is right here. But if it's anything close to that, it wouldn't make financial sense for them. It would however be nice to have them at the desk or counter.
No one wants to walk into a hotel room they've just paid money for and be instantly reminded of someones period
[deleted]
Maybe they should have deodorant, toothpaste, dental floss, and condoms too. Another reason is that every woman that stayed in the room would be on her "period", IOW theft. This is exactly why my gym no longer has these items in the women's bathroom.
Easiest way would be to leave a few out similar to soap than add those costs into the price if it's that common to take them.

Companies probably assume that it's up to you to sort that out.
I guess they should keep condoms as well
I think you just waddle down to the front desk and ask the nice man.
If you can afford a hotel room, you can afford your own pads.
That’s a nice idea, but I’m assuming they expect you to take care of that yourself
Not trolling or hating, promise. 

But, this is something that only half the population uses. Half the population that happens to be between about 14-50. And only a few days a month. It’s a specific need for specific people at specific times. Does that really warrant providing for all hotel rooms?
I’d guess it’s due to cost and also due to the fact that not an overwhelming percentage of guests will need them on a daily basis - not kids, men, older women, etc. Not even all women, because of course it only comes once a month. So it doesn’t really make it worth the cost
Why don't more women get with the times and get menstral cups of period proof panties rather than burn money and make plastic trash?
